# General editor's foreword This series of books is principally about the history of objects. When put so bluntly, there seems to be a certain absurdity in the suggestion that there might be a need for such an enterprise. After all, is that not what various other disciplines are providing? The answer to this question is no. The History of Design, Material Culture or Decorative Arts, as it is variously understood, usually begins where others end. Many disciplines have objects of one kind or another at their core, but the history we are concerned with here stands alone in its analysis of the wide range of genres which fill people's lives. The furnishings, utensils, adornments, decorations, graphic materials, vessels, mechanised products and clothing give form and meaning to the cultures within which they reside. Of all these genres, clothes are perhaps the most potent and prominent. They fulfil the relatively straightforward function of providing the body with a protective layer. But they are also the basic material of fashion, and it is through the mediating power of fashion that they have become one of the most important elements of the designed world. Fashion is simultaneously an intensely personal and a mass phenomenon, particular styles having the ability to generate deep resonances in the lives of individuals, and to become movements on a global scale. By analysing the symbolic meaning of the clothing of others, it is possible to extract an extraordinary range of information: educational background, political allegiance, religion, sexual preference, sporting interests and, perhaps most emphatically, class background. Much of this information is surrendered unwittingly. In this pioneering study, Christopher Breward moves through six centuries of fashion with the explicit aim of exposing the meanings behind the garments which people wore. He reveals the extent to which clothing moves beyond its role as a screen for the body to become a gathering of information and symbols for communal consumption. ## Introduction Adornment, especially clothing, has, like the applied arts, the advantage of touching on a wide range of quotidian functions and of embodying a relatively uncomplicated partnership of function and style that permits the isolation and study of style. The potency of this material as cultural evidence can be tested by the simple act of criticising someone's clothes; the reaction is much more intense than that aroused by comparable criticism of a house, a car, or a television set. Criticism of clothing is taken more personally, suggesting a high correlation between clothing and personal identity and values. Although personal adornment promises to be a particularly rich vein for material culture studies, to date little significant work has been done with it.¹ The history of fashion has become a rich area of research and interpretation within the past thirty years (possibly longer, if the discipline is traced back to the publication of antiquarian studies of medieval and classical dress from the 1830s). Formerly the province of museum curators and theatrical designers, the subject has been opened up by a variety of disciplines, each using the source material of clothing and its wider representation in paint, print and film, from academic and practical positions that generally have some sort of vested interest in the very wide possibilities that the study of dress can offer. The first serious use to which research in historical costume was applied lay in the area of art historical studies. The careful dating of clothing in paintings was seen as a useful tool in processes of authentication and general connoisseurship. The emphasis on the creation of chronologies and a rational progression of styles that art historical directions dictated at the time has to some extent influenced the nature of much fashion history writing. The discipline has often been criticised for producing hemline histories that neglect considerations of context and meaning for the seemingly less enlightened concerns of provenance and influence. This is perhaps unfair and denies the worth of a huge body of very useful empirical and descriptive work which traces a history of cut and decoration, and is helpful in providing a base against which more critical methods can be applied. Various approaches have subsequently been adopted in an effort to rectify those accusations of elitism and dilettantism that have been thrown in the direction of traditional fashion history. Moves towards a self-conscious 'new art history' in the late 1970s, in which social and political contexts were prioritised over older concerns of authorship and appreciation, challenged those assumptions which had underpinned the serious study of fashion in the first place. Indeed many of the defining aspects of new art historical approaches, which drew on ideas from Marxism, feminism, psychoanalysis and structuralism, encouraged a fresh prominence for debates incorporating problems of identity, the body, gender and appearance, central to any definition of 'fashion'. Rees and Borzello use examples which have broad implications for the status of fashion history itself in their definition of the scope of new art historical approaches: 'When an article analyzes the images of women in paintings rather than the qualities of the brushwork, or when a gallery lecturer ignores the sheen of the Virgin Mary's robe for the Church's use of religious art in the Counter-Reformation, the new art history is casting its shadow."² Design history, a relatively young discipline, compared to the history of art, has been able to take on board the complexities of social considerations, economic implications and cultural problems, in a less self-conscious manner. The relationship between production, consumption and the designed object, which has always been central to any definition of the discipline, demands an investigation of context, and is well suited to the study of historical and contemporary clothing. As Josephine Miller states: This is a multi-faceted subject and in some ways can be seen to relate to almost every area of design and many aspects of the fine arts. It needs to be placed firmly within a cultural context, against a background of technological and industrial change, literary and aesthetic ideas. In the post-industrial period, the marketing and retail outlets, together with developments in advertising and publishing techniques, have brought a new set of considerations with them. Moreover, the study of dress and its production cannot be separated from women's history.³ However, despite its fitness for design history methods of approach, the study of dress and fashion remains marginal to wider design history concerns. The most recent encyclopaedia of design and designers, for example, does not include any significant mention of fashion or fashion designers. This perhaps reflects the discipline's roots in Modernist design practice. A theoretical and inspirational aid to students of industrial and graphic design, design history as originally taught in art and design colleges has tended to prioritise production in the professional 'masculine'sphere, re-enforcing notions of a subordinate 'feminine' area of interest into which fashion is generally relegated. Related disciplines, including cultural studies and media studies, have taken the politics of identity and appearance closer to their core, but tend to concentrate on contemporary issues and confine themselves mainly to the study of representation and promotion, using social anthropology and semiotics as tools to define meaning. Broader historical contexts remain beyond their concern. It is perhaps not surprising then, in the face of a potentially confusing and contradictory conflict of interests, that this book has aimed to incorporate the positive elements of all three approaches, art historical, design historical and cultural in its attempt to present a coherent introduction to the history and interpretation of fashionable form. Rather than prioritise the benefits of one direction over another, it would seem to be more helpful if they could be used together to provide a more rigorous but essentially fluid framework for the study of fashion in its own right. These differing methods can also be set within a broader debate concerning the nature of cultural history generally that has occurred over the past ten years, which has fostered concepts of diversity rather than prescriptive or narrowly defined readings of historical phenomena. Roger Chartier outlines the problems in his discussion of the concepts of 'popular' and 'high' culture, an area especially pertinent to the history of fashionable clothing: First and foremost, it no longer seems tenable to try and establish strict correspondences between cultural cleavages and social hierarchies, creating simplistic relationships between particular cultural objects or forms and specific social groups. On the contrary, it is necessary to recognise the fluid circulation and shared practices that cross social boundaries . . . Second, it does not seem possible to identify the absolute difference and the radical specificity of popular culture on the basis of its own texts, beliefs or codes. The materials that convey the practices and thoughts of ordinary people are always mixed, blending forms and themes, invention and tradition, literate culture and folklore. Finally, the macroscopic opposition between 'popular' and 'high' culture has lost its pertinence. An inventory of the multiple divisions that fragment the social body is preferable to this massive partition . . . Their ordering follows several principles that make manifest the divergences or oppositions between men and women, townspeople and rural folk, Protestants and Catholics, but also between generations, occupations and neighbourhoods.⁶ It is the central contention of this book that fashion has played a defining but largely uncredited role in the formulation of such differences, and therefore requires a method of analysis that takes account of multiple meanings and interpretations. Reductive connections between social influences and fashionable appearance have dogged much fashion history; the new cultural history presents a more questioning framework which allows for explanations which are multilayered and open-ended. Melling and Barry have also presented a model which acknowledges difference and tensions between new historical approaches, suggesting a more positive use for the harnessing of divergent directions: It would be misleading to present all these changes as moving in harmony and in a single intellectual direction. For example, there is a clear tension between the emphasis laid by some, notably literary critics, ori the autonomous power of the text and language, compared to the interest of others in recovering the intentions of historical actors. Put crudely, the former are seeking to deconstruct the identity and rationality of historical actors, while the latter strive to reconstruct them. To some extent we are seeing, within the concept of 'culture' as a basis of historical explanation, a revival of the standard sociological debate between 'structure' and 'action'. Should culture be conceived of as a given system or structure within which past actors are predestined to operate? Or does the emphasis on culture place higher priority on human creativity, on self-conscious action by the individual or society to change their condition? It would be ironic should this false dichotomy become too well entrenched, since the notion of culture has in many ways been invoked precisely to avoid the need to choose between structure and action, but the danger remains, if concealed by the inherent ambiguity of'culture'as an explanation.7 In essence, then, I hope to present an introductory guide to the cultural significance of fashion, from its emergence in the mid-fourteenth century to its final explosion in the midtwentieth century that locates itself within these broader historical debates. In terms of method, each chapter incorporates a chronological narrative of changing form, using the analytical approaches pioneered by traditional art historical fashion history. This narrative is then both problematised and substantiated by an engagement with critical debates drawn mainly from recent cultural histories, but also including comment from economic, design and art history and literary theory. As the main purpose of the book is to broaden the parameters of fashion history by engaging with other disciplines, the text uses direct quotations as a way of exposing the student to the possibilities and uses of a wide variety of historical discourses. In constructing such a huge historical range it is impossible to make any claims for comprehensive coverage. As the title suggests, the cultural and social significance of fashionable clothing and its representation is prioritised. A description of the construction and production of dress and textiles is generally left for others, and geographically study is confined mainly to England, though the influence of continental and transatlantic interpretations of style in formulating notions of Englishness is also taken into account. Fashion is taken to mean clothing designed primarily for its expressive and decorative qualities, related closely to the current short-term dictates of the market, rather than for work or ceremonial functions. This does not presuppose that fashionable dressing is the preserve of a social elite, and much of the work focuses on constructions of fashionability across social divides. Chapters are arranged so that each concentrates on a specific historical problem or debate. Thus the medieval chapter concerns itself with the problems of archaeological approaches and their implications for a reconstruction of the beginnings of an organised fashion system that takes into account the whole spectrum of medieval society. The Renaissance chapter isolates the use of fashion as a symbol of status and wealth and its potential for undermining such structures, whilst the chapter on the seventeenth century places the concept of sartorial display in the context of cultural conflict and moral uncertainty. The chapters on the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries both deal with the emergence of revitalised production and consumption systems, the earlier chapter concentrating on the problems of 'revolution'as a defining historical construct, and the later chapter examining the implications of new technology in clothing production for attitudes towards gender and class. The early twentieth-century chapter places the increased or 'mass' consumption of fashionable dress within the sphere of fashion promotion and advertising, tracing a path towards unlimited and potentially unquantifiable diversification. In this way the book can be used in two ways, as a chronological unfolding of changing forms, and as a critique or analysis of wider cultural and social influences and their historical interpretation. ## Notes 1 R. B. St George, Material Life in America 1600–1860, Boston, 1988, p. 30. 2 A. L. Rees and F. Borzello, The New Art History, London, 1986, p. 2. 3 J. Miller, 'The Study of Dress and Textiles' in H. Conway, ed., Design History – a students' handbook, London, 1987, p. 15. 4 G. Julier, Encyclopaedia of Twentieth Century Design and Designers, London, 1993. 5 D. Miller, Material, Culture and Mass Consumption, Oxford, 1987. 6 R. Chartier, 'Texts, Printings, Readings' in L. Hunt, ed., The New Cultural History, Los Angeles, 1989, p. 168. 7 J. Melling and J. Barry, Culture in History: Production, Consumption and Values in historical perspective, Exeter, 1992, p. 5.