question of favouring innovation and short-term economic gain over long-term scope of conservation of knowledge, it is to argue that the two are linked, that creative innovation frequently depends upon the exploration of that which is not close at hand. This also reminds us that, in the long term, ideas which contemporary scholars regard as failures and judge obsolete often re-emerge at later points in history. In the long term we need a sense of the traditions of knowledge around the world if we are to build an effective global archive for humanity, which would become a sort of global database, acting as a potential reservoir for generating new theories, new concepts and classification of knowledge. Such an archive would make problematic existing scholarly classifications, and usher in a de-classificatory mood. The question arises whether we are at a particular historical juncture at which the speed of knowledge delivery systems through digitalization is extending the de-classificatory attitude, or whether we are merely turning over the raw material from which new classifications emerge. At the same time, however much some would argue that we are being propelled into a world in which generative structures, flows and flux outpace classifications and our old typological mode of theorizing and require more contingent processual knowledge forms, the process of education itself demands learning processes which work off maps and classifications. Historically, when there has been the sense that the world itself is being remade and that too much new knowledge is emerging at a pace too difficult to assimilate, there has been the need for practical handbooks, with encyclopaedias one of the most successful forms.

So, the new encyclopaedia today has the potential to be both archive and a device for classifying and de-classifying knowledges and objects of the world. The new technologies mean that greater fluidity can be introduced in the process of searching databases, enabling the forging of new pathways in reading transversally across disciplines and types of data. This would connect with new research methods that make greater use of serendipity and are less circumscribed within disciplinary boundaries. There are implications in these arguments for a new form of archival hospitality, subversive of disciplinary and access restrictions, and new strategies for learning, and thus new educational processes that need to be invented and taught.

Yet neither an encyclopaedia nor an archive simply appears: an immense labour, largely invisible in the background, yields the data in a storable form, whether in the form of writing or computer storage systems. A central problem about memory arises here: what should we consider worth preserving or passing on, and in what forms can this inheritance be best preserved? Not everything can be digitized. Here we think of performance and music, the rituals of everyday living, that is, everything that has embodied and spatial density which varies in its performative enactment. Furthermore, the book still remains the cheapest, most accessible and most versatile resource for learning and thinking, especially when one considers that the production and operation of computers requires vast amounts of raw materials, resources that poorer countries cannot easily afford. These issues are made more complicated today because of the tie-up between problems of storage and access with questions of intellectual property rights and digital rights management that result in new restrictions and inequalities of access. The problematization of knowledge cannot avoid these wider and longer-term issues that bring to the fore questions of responsibility and ethics.

## Encyclopaedias and Classification

The term encyclopaedia is generally thought of as indicating a device which systematically organizes knowledge of a known, or knowable world. The extensiveness and comprehensiveness of the phenomena classified can be seen to legitimate the world: because the multifarious aspects of the world have been documented and summarized, then the world can be taken to exist. An encyclopaedia is a flexible type of ordering somewhere between a system and a list. Many of the entries refer to each other in a coherent way and could be extracted to reconstruct a systematic disciplinary order, such as, for example, the discipline of physics. Indeed, this was one of the features and selling points of early popular encyclopaedias, such as Chambers Cyclopaedia. Encyclopaedias, in short, are devices for concisely assembling, classifying and indexing vast amounts of knowledge about the known world. They have a long history and can be found throughout the world in many cultural and civilizational traditions. Islam had a long history of encyclopaedias, with the Arab encyclopaedia tradition going back at least as far as the 10th century to the work of Ibn Qutayba.<sup>2</sup> The Chinese encyclopaedia tradition is particularly interesting in terms both of the scope of some of the massive projects and the nature of the classification systems involved.<sup>3</sup> Leishu, or Chinese encyclopaedias, have enjoyed a central position within Chinese literature and raise many questions not only about the exhaustiveness of the compilations, but also the extent to which the translation of Leishu as encyclopaedia is adequate for the very different pedagogic system with its mode of knowledge construction and transfer (Hahn, 2000; Kaderas, 1996).

In the western tradition<sup>4</sup> perhaps the most famous encyclopaedia has been the Encyclopédie ou Dictionnaire raisonné des Sciences, des Arts, et des Métiers (1751–65), edited by Diderot and D’Alembert. Indeed it was sought as the key book of the Enlightenment. This and earlier encyclopaedias, such as Ephraim Chambers’ Cyclopaedia (1728), were addressed to a burgeoning literary public who looked for some authoritative and clear statements of the new expanding field of scientific and practical knowledge.<sup>5</sup> Indeed, in France the Encyclopédie came to be regarded as a rallying point for the more cosmopolitan philosophes against the academies sponsored by the King. The new forms of communication helped to begin to bind together a scattered readership into ‘a republic of letters’. Diderot envisaged a voluntary association of individuals responsible for the production of the encyclopaedia, which also suggests a wide public readership. Eighteenth-century encyclopaedias were aimed at a public without geographical or denominational limits. This was a cosmopolitan ideal which informed much of European Enlightenment culture: the ideal of transportable knowledge across national boundaries, with individuals of whatever social status able to participate in a universal conversation (Yeo, 2001: 56).

The Encyclopédie not only became a bestseller in France, but helped to generate a large public interest elsewhere in Europe, demonstrating the appeal of the Enlightenment to the upper and middle classes (Darnton, 1979: 528). It contained contributions from many eminent scholars and scientists of the day (including Condorcet, d’Holbach, Montesquieu, Necker, Rousseau, Turgot and Voltaire) and was built around the idea of an exhaustive classification, ordering and connection of human knowledge. It is something which it was assumed would produce benefits for humanity, with social and human engineering potentially following scientific description and classification.

Diderot and the philosophes, then, had the dream of recording all knowledge; Diderot remarked that he wanted:

to collect all knowledge scattered over the face of the earth, to present its general outlines and structure to the men with whom we live, and to transmit this to those who will come after us, so that the work of the past centuries may be useful to the following centuries, that our children, by becoming more educated, may at the same time become more virtuous and happier, and that we may not die without having deserved well of the human race.

Yet Diderot was also aware that the Encyclopédie was a response to a period of intellectual ferment and that the attempt to provide a sort of ‘counter-academy’ which would provide a resource for generations to come ran up against the problem of time, as it sought to cope with the explosion of new knowledge (Rosenberg, 2001). Important here is not just the use of the encyclopaedia as a dictionary of new scientific terms, a forum for new theories, often unorthodox or challenging, or a reference manual or handbook of modernity, but also the way in which the availability of this information and its initial piecemeal subscription format helped stimulate public discussion and dialogue. So the encyclopaedia could be used by the public to provide information, to update people on some new technique, scientific discovery or newly discovered and classified flora or fauna. At the same time it appealed to a public discovering its appetite for public education, the potential to express and discuss new knowledge in an informed and critical manner. In short the Encyclopédie can be seen as an important intervention in the establishment of a European civil society in which free discussion, dialogue, tolerance and questions of cultural rights became emergent. Also important was the public/market synthesis of the project and the ways in which this tradition tried to resist monopolization and authoritarian control, through the appeal to and invention of an informed public. Significantly, it became the target of censorship.

The cosmopolitan intentions of the encyclopaedists gave way to the construction of encyclopaedias within the cultural policies and national projects of nation-states, with first the appearance of Britannica in the late 18th century. The focus on biography and history in Britannica meant that it not only functioned as a dictionary of arts and sciences, as did earlier encyclopaedias, but it aligned encyclopaedias as one of the new devices for the invention of national culture and traditions. Thus, with the emergent re-figuration of European nations as nation-states, which rapidly became locked into a series of intensifying struggles in the 19th and 20th centuries, the role of encyclopaedias expanded from the selection and presentation of valued knowledge to help in the constitution of national imaginaries. With the independence of colonies in the second half of the 20th century, several new nation-states engaged in their own version of this process and developed their own encyclopaedias. Yet one of the aporias was that often the intention was to retain the modernizing potential and include scientific and technological content, while seeking to embed it within a different cultural framework. There were prototypes in those countries which had escaped European colonization and had modernized more on their own terms, such as Meiji Japan in which the Japanese encyclopaedia became a systematic handbook of state-led modernization and invented tradition.<sup>6</sup> Independent ex-colonial states such as India regarded encyclopaedias as practical handbooks for modernity, a guide to the expanding world of science and technological developments, juxtaposed with attempts to reinvent traditions and develop a new national culture.<sup>7</sup> This was also the case with the Soviet Union and The People’s Republic of China, as they sought to widen the scope for practical everyday scientific, technical and civil knowledge, presented in the form of an alternative world, albeit a world to come. The end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union were accompanied by a wave of new encyclopaedia building. The recent publication of encyclopaedias in Eastern Europe and Russia confirms again the importance of the encyclopaedia as a sign of sovereignty and independence at the beginning of a new wave of democratization and the assertion of national identity.

While many post-Second World War nation-states are still engaged in a process of state formation and invention of national cultures, this process has become more difficult to sustain in the face of the current phase of globalization over the last two decades. This has not only resulted in the opening up of markets and the emergence of packaged global education, it has also seen significant shifts in intellectual and academic life, especially in the social sciences and humanities (postmodernism and postcolonialsm being symptoms of this shift). As we have noted, there has been an increasing interrogation of the largely European-based conceptual armoury and classification system of knowledge and much of its content, along with a renewed interest in cosmopolitan forms of knowledge. In the light of the recognition of cultures as fundamentally hybrid and syncretic assemblages, shaped by the diasporic movements of peoples, knowledges, technologies and everyday practices, there has also been a contestation of the presentation of cultures as integrated, located and bounded entities. These shifts inside the academy have been bolstered by the movements towards greater global integration through communications technologies such as the Internet and the emergence of a nascent global civil society (via the activities of international non-governmental organizations and internationally organized protests against economic globalization which have brought into being the World Social Forum and other bodies). They have significant implications for how one is to reconstitute the encyclopaedia today, and how it would function in relation to this emergent global ‘public sphere’.

## Anti-encyclopaedias: Encyclopaedias Are Good to Think with . . .

It is clear from our arguments that encyclopaedias are devices for ordering the world in a particular way; this is because the way in which they seek to provide an exhaustive listing of every relevant phenomenon in the known world and show the way they are linked together assumes, as well as institutes, an underlying order. Classification is at the heart of this enterprise of order-giving and sustaining. Yet every classification system is haunted by its exclusions, separations and forced hierarchies, its conversion of fluid emergent processes and events into stable categories. This has proved to be fascinating for those in the arts: what better way to show the absurdity and contingency of our world order than to provide an alternative classification.

One of the oft-cited examples of this arbitrariness is Jorge Luis Borges’ discussion of ‘a certain Chinese encyclopaedia’ entitled the ‘Celestial Empire of Benevolent Knowledge’. He tells us that

In its remote pages it is written that the animals are divided into: (a) belonging to the emperor, (b) embalmed, (c) tame, (d) sucking pigs, (e) sirens, (f) fabulous, (g) stray dogs, (h) included in the present classification, (i) frenzied, (j) innumerable, (k) drawn with a very fine camelhair brush, (1) et cetera, (m) having just broken the water pitcher, (n) that from a long way off look like flies.

Borges’ Chinese encyclopaedia is bewildering and disturbing in its capacity to challenge us to ‘try and think the world in terms of this if you can’. Yet as we see in the discussion of actual Chinese encyclopaedias (see note 3), the example Borges cites can be seen as only stretching the classifications actually used in Chinese history. His classifications may well seem bizarre and strange from the perspective of modern scientized culture, which tends to see the world in terms of categories such as viruses, bacteria, insects, reptiles, fish, mammals, primates, humans, etc. This is because Borges questions all the various constructs and interpretations we impose upon reality: the ordering of the universe will continue to escape us because the classification systems we use cannot help but be shot through with contingency and arbitrariness and derive from customary practice. This perspective is very much in tune with that of the later Wittgenstein who abandoned his earlier search for a prepositional language in which the logic of terms could be shown to accurately correspond to or picture reality, in favour of the view that language is the fabric of our world (see Johnson, 1997). But Borges goes further in the destabilization of our world by suggesting in his fictions the way ‘the world out there’ is shot through with other strange worlds, which operate on very different metaphysical principles. He does so in a form which crosses between, on the one hand, a short story with its authorial narrative and, on the other, an essay in which there is some attempt to make sense and marshal an argument to deal logically with a series of strange occurrences and phenomena which invade and disturb our categories through the glimpses they provide of the very different order of the fabulous other world. One of the most powerful statements of the glimpses of such an alternative world is provided through a fictional encyclopaedia, The First Encyclopaedia of Tlön, discussed in Borges’ (1999a) fictional essay ‘Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius’.<sup>8</sup>

As both Roy Boyne and Maria Esther Maciel emphasize in their pieces on classification in this issue, another important literary figure to be fascinated by the act of classification was Georges Perec, who developed a number of amusing systems of classification to illustrate the great temptation inscribed in the idea of viewing the whole world in terms of a single code, although at the same time we know that this doesn’t work and will never work.<sup>9</sup> The challenge to ‘think the world’ through an improbable set of categories is also central to Georges Bataille, Michel Leiris, Marcel Griaule, Carl Einstein and Robert Desnos’ (1995) Encyclopaedia Acephalica. This ‘headless encyclopaedia’, an encyclopaedia produced without an ordering principle or classificatory hierarchies, was put together largely in Paris in the 1930s and 1940s by writers associated with the Acéphale and Surrealist groups, including people from the College de Sociologie.<sup>10</sup> This attempt to produce an encyclopaedia of heterology, with its love of the formless, and heteronomy, produced many amusing and astonishing formulations. The encyclopaedia (a compilation from a Critical Dictionary edited by Bataille and related texts, which runs to just over 140 pages and includes numerous full-page photographs and images)