included entries on: Big Toe, Civilization, Eye, Formless, Gunshot, Hygiene, Ju-Ju, Man, Mouth, Nightingale, Reptiles, Skyscraper, Slaughterhouse and Spittle. Another contemporary example is the ‘encyclopaedic cinema’ of Peter Greenaway who remarks that he loves to create his own systems in the form of lists and found the categories of the Borges Chinese encyclopaedia ‘healthy’ (Maciel, forthcoming 2006). This move away from narrative form to a list, series or catalogue plays with continuity and discontinuity.

The encyclopaedia, then, for many, is the epitome of order, a classificatory device which relies on the alphabetical list to pull together entries that substantiate a world, entries which can be linked together into various subject areas such as disciplines to provide a systematic introduction to a topic. Yet this principle of orderly disciplinary reconstruction belies a number of features of the encyclopaedia which make it less of a clear and visible tree of knowledge and more of a subterranean rhizome. This feature has been seized on by recent antiencyclopaedists who seek to subvert the enterprise of worlding and show its contingency, arbitrariness and limitlessness. This is a point made by Umberto Eco who, remarking on the ‘unlimited semiosis’ of the encyclopaedia, even compared it to Deleuze’s rhizome, in which every point connects with any other.

According to Eco, the encyclopaedia, contrary to the intentions of Enlightenment thinkers, does not reflect an ordered universe in a univocal and rational way, but supplies rules which are generally myopic and only agree with some provisional criterion of order. In effect, encyclopaedias attempt to give meaning to a disordered world whose criteria of order escape us (Eco, 1999: 337; Maciel, forthcoming 2006).<sup>11</sup> This contrasts with the type of order produced by the dictionary, which works to register the properties of words in a succinct manner. Encyclopaedic competence, on the contrary, excludes the possibility of hierarchizing the semantic marks, the linguistic properties and the semes in a single, uncontroversial way in its endeavour to map the life of a culture as a system of inter-semiotic systems.

If we consider the encyclopaedia form as having the potential to pull towards ordered taxonomy, but also towards the opposite pole of incompleteness, then it is a form which becomes relevant for our age. It is consistent with the view that challenges the drive to construct a permanent order of culture in which one is sure of what to put in and what to leave out, and sure of the boundaries between cultures. It could be argued that hypertext has the potential to deliver this mobility into the middle of the encyclopaedia enterprise. Indeed, the links at the end of entries, the various charts on how to read and join-up entries to make introductory textbooks etc. – the ordering impulse – is at the same time a potentially disordering impulse, threatening to take the reader off into the delights of serendipity. It is this dual characteristic of encyclopaedias, of ordering and disordering knowledge and the world, of limiting connections as well as multiplying them, which interests us in this issue and in the larger project.

## Emergent Publics, Information and the Archive

These concerns resonate with the longer-term interests we have had in Theory, Culture & Society to theorize emergent social and cultural change, manifest in the attention we have given over the last 20 years to: postmodernism, global culture, reflexive modernization, complexity theory, vitalism, and so on. As Karin Knorr Cetina (2005) remarks, both the new global terrorism and the global markets challenge our habitual modes of social science analysis and can best be understood via complexity theory with its emphasis on the major imbalances between cause and effect, unpredictable outcomes, and self-organizing, emergent structures. This contrasts with the earlier dreams of social science to produce general explanations and the achievement of expert control. The management of uncertainty, task predictability and orderly performances were much easier to facilitate in the ‘relatively complex’ organizations of modern industrial societies. It can be added that it seemed far easier to understand the latter in terms of modes of classification derived from the natural sciences. The emphasis upon a spatial arrangement where stability was thought to reside in fixed categories and traditions, relatively separated and distantiated from one another, favoured the use of stable social science classifications and the spatial arrangement of knowledge based upon the model of natural history, as noted by Foucault (1970) and others. The interest of the modern form of governance on normalization and regulation within fixed boundaries of social order pre-disposed social scientific knowledge to focus on the orderable and to neglect everything else as noise or incidental. Today’s emphasis upon flows, flux, speed and the movement of things into a global far-fromequilibrium state of affairs clearly produces difficulties for any practical ordering of knowledge. This is the world of non-linear dynamics we referred to earlier, mentioned by Ulrich Beck (2002) with his plea for a rethinking of social epistemology to produce a cosmopolitan social science in response to the changes in the ontology of the social based on the emergence of the global. Yet although many share his sense of unease with the inappropriateness of continuing to draw on the conceptual armoury of existing social science categories, not everyone shares his optimism that a new cosmopolitan social science can be constructed.

This also translates into a tension between the educative impulse, which puts a premium on the need to provide some sense of rudimentary conceptual order and clarity in order to teach social science today, and the theoretical impulse, directed towards the theorization of the implications of the emergent global and technological tendencies. Yet, as we have argued, the encyclopaedia form is well suited for tackling these different aims and prospective audiences for re-thinking global knowledge. At the same time, this potential to experiment with the encyclopaedic form has not been evident in the expansion of the numbers of encyclopaedias produced in recent years.<sup>12</sup> One of the most ambitious academic encyclopaedias has been the recent 26-volume Elsevier International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences (2001) which contains over 4000 articles commissioned by 52 section editors.<sup>13</sup> Organizationally, the encyclopaedia seems to have adopted a conventional pyramid structure with commissioning editors appointed to oversee traditional disciplinary domains: sociology, economics, political science, law, anthropology, etc., who in turn commission contributors. Entry writers tend to have been seen as authorities, experts who could put their ‘stamp’ of validity on to knowledge. The large number of editors and advisors listed were drawn primarily from the United States and Europe, with a small sprinkling of non-western scholars.

A diametric contrast would be Wikipedia, a free Internet encyclopaedia in which entries can be written by anyone who so wishes. This openness and de-authorization of the cult of experts is coupled with an open editing system: anyone can over-write an entry. While there is a clear gain in open public participation and dialogue about entries, with the Wikipedia conceived as an open site constantly being built, re-built and dismantled, the minimal central editing and open invitation to rewrite is burdened with problems of validity. The need to validate a trustworthy source can be seen as part of a more general problem about the knowledge people take from the Internet. Yet, like the Elsevier encyclopaedia, Wikipedia is low on inter-disciplinarity and innovation, since it follows traditional disciplinary divisions which tend to favour the reproduction of knowledge. A key question, then, is how to encourage greater flexibility in the evaluation process whilst resisting existing patronage networks, knowledge monopolies and the reproduction of established classifications. We need to find practical ways to avoid one-way flows of global knowledge in the form of ‘theory’ from dominant centres, which franchise sub-centres and representatives around the world. Important here is the encouragement of innovation and the incorporation of knowledge which doesn’t fit existing classifications. From our perspective, as we contemplate the construction of digital archives, with hypertext links and speed of search and access, the challenge is to understand the medium. That is, we cannot assume the Internet or a notional global digital encyclopaedia to be a neutral content delivery system.<sup>14</sup>

In addition to the need to theorize the emergent global public sphere, with the clashing of different knowledges and cultures along with all the difficulties that analysts of multiculturalism and the formation of an appropriate education for global citizens have alluded to, there is the question of how far a public sphere grounded in a shared common stock of knowledge available in digitalized form is possible. It can be assumed that this would be a long way from the type of bourgeois public sphere identified by Jürgen Habermas (1989). In the Habermasian model of the public sphere, the pull is towards the communicative rationality of the ideal speech situation in which rhetoric, affect and body aesthetics are meant to be filtered out to allow the force of the better argument to become recognized. If a public involves selforganizing open communication amongst strangers, then there may be many emergent forms of public life (Calhoun, 2002). Rather than the model of the global public sphere, it can be argued that it would be more appropriate to think of ‘global public life’, with the displacement of the term ‘sphere’ by the term ‘life’ suggesting the difficulty of separating politics and aesthetics, and cognition and affect. The accent on life, furthermore, points to the potential for information to be conceived as alive, as an autopoietic system, or as a complex multiplicity which does not necessarily behave and act as a docile tool but rather is worlding, inventive and generative. A different notion of information is at stake here, in opposition to the conventional view of its neutrality and factuality. Rather, information can be conceptualized as puissance, that is, as extensor or producer of capabilities, so that it is relocated within an ontology that regards human beings as prosthetic, technical beings inhabiting informational worlds.

One could thus say that people don’t just use digital archives, rather they increasingly inhabit a different informational society which is a digital archive (Brouwer and Mulder, 2003). The digital databases have the capacity to operate in ways which go beyond the ordered grids, knowledge-trees and hierarchies of traditional means of accessing information in libraries and archives. In principle at least, digital archives offer new levels of flexibility and instability and a non-linearity which favours unexpected transversal connections and hypertext jumps which have the potential to offer creative insights and inventions. The New Encyclopaedia Project aims to both investigate and take advantage of this potential for producing creative informational networks, though this requires an education or apprenticeship into new ways of thinking and being, and the provision of new knowledges and critical perspectives, an issue we discuss in the final section.

If we think less of global public sphere and more of global public life, then a key dimension of this life works through digital systems such as the Internet. Increasingly the Internet offers not only new layout and graphics for text along with mobility between sites, but also images, pop-ups and video-clips. It must be admitted that educational activity on the Internet is but a tiny percentage compared to the use of sites that provide trading, pornography, gambling, and chatting or blogging, and downloading music. Additionally, the commodification of knowledge restricts what knowledge can belong to the public domain. Nevertheless an expanding part of the learning experience of a new generation of students is being filtered through this new media form, although relatively few academics have shown an interest in theorizing and thinking through the implications of this process. In this context, we need to take seriously the arguments of those like Maurizio Lazzarato (forthcoming) who seek to investigate the affective and aesthetic character of immaterial labour and the ways in which this is associated with the centrality of visual and informational innovation and invention in contemporary capitalism. Lazzarato argues that video registers this new form of informational digital capitalism most clearly and focuses on the way in which it produces subjectivity not primarily in language, but rather in duration and the body. His argument is that video has the capacity to affect the brain without necessarily passing through explicit forms of representation. According to his theory, video technologies work in real time on perception through delaying, contracting, accelerating, to translate fluxes inaccessible to human perception into images to provide access to a new aesthetic dimension. The editable and reconstitutable video-image points to a shift from representation to the constitution of the world, to the generation of aesthetic assemblages which suggest video and digital technologies take us beyond simulational television culture to reveal new possibilities for invention (see discussion in Toscano, forthcoming). This means, for Lazzarato, that capital has freed time from the repetition of the present (habit/custom) and from the repetition of the past (memory/tradition) to produce a new ontology of time and power, a multiple time of creation and invention.

Whilst there are many problems with this attempt to re-think the relationship of production, technology, time and being post-Marx and post-Gutenberg, it puts on the agenda the

## 12 Theory, Culture & Society 23(2–3)

mobility of this relationship and draws attention to what is emergent in present conditions with the shift to ‘immaterial labour’ and to the different functioning of affect in corporate global capitalism and the new, de-centred and de-territorialized, and in some sense virtual apparatus of rule which characterizes Empire. For Negri (2003), the key move in Marx’s theory of ‘the real subsumption of labour by capital’ – and thus in his theory of value – is the theorization of technology within the conceptual limits of labour power, and thus ultimately within the purview of exchange value within capitalism. This approach neglects the understanding of being as both technical-being and as being-in-time, an understanding that at one level relates technics to time (Stiegler, 1998) and at another level relates cognition to affect. If Lazzarato is correct about contemporary capital’s freeing of time from the repetition of the past, one must then take seriously the implication that this short-circuiting of time by capital abolishes the time of the collective and allows the veil of visuality to obscure the collaborative and cumulative nature of work, preventing its coming-into-view, as Arendt might say. A problem then arises as to the process of liberation – the time to come of the creation of a new being out of the productive cooperation of the multitude, in Negri’s (2003) and Lazzarato’s analyses. For Negri the break with the pre-Einsteinian, and Marxist, concept of time and its relation to production and value implies that ‘time cannot be presented as measure, but must rather be presented as the global phenomenological fabric, as base, substance and flow of production in its entirety’ (2003: 29). In his development of an alternative view, one which conceptualizes time as multiplicity and as linked to collectivity (Negri notes this view in the Chinese tradition) and as what ‘changes the past into the future’ (Borges cited in Negri, 2003: 31), he argues for an ontological paradigm of time, namely, as ‘the fabric of the whole of being’ (2003: 34), and being as temporal being (the reference to Heidegger is explicit in Negri). So the move is towards an idea of constitution and becoming, of decay and invention.

Whilst Negri works through the problems of futurity through the analysis of antagonism – and there are other analytics of the relation of technology, time and the production and mutability of life (for example, Grosz, 2004; Massumi, 2002) – we would like to highlight the point of view of anticipation and orientation in considering the within-timeness of being, that is, the attention to historicity that considers that our past does not so much ‘follow along’ as ‘go ahead’ in its tending-towards (Heidegger, 1987: 41). One implication – following still the standpoint of being as a becoming – is that what has been is operative, as equipment, as memory, as tradition, as trace, in the present. Globalization introduces a new scale in this process, involving knowledge and its accumulation as memory and potentiality on a world scale. This suggests the enlargement of the archive to include marginalized or dissident knowledges, along with its continual incorporation and reactivation in the search for new ways of being.

The statement that ‘behind all scholarly research stands the archive’ now encounters the fact that the archive in question is becoming the global archive. It is also becoming a digitalized archive, one in which the past records and artefacts are not only subject to digitalization but one in which life is ‘lived under the gaze of the digital will to archive’ (a sort of complicit Truman Show existence). Yet one of the interfaces for the archive is the encyclopaedia. In this special issue we are not just seeking to problematize global knowledge but arguing that the relationship between the archive and the encyclopaedia is also unstable and that the space between the archive and the encyclopaedia is worthy of investigation.

## Encyclopaedic Explorations

In thinking through the structure of the current special issue and the project at large there are a number of key issues which have emerged.

## The New Encyclopaedia Project

The first is the scope and boundaries of the volume and the larger project. The usual way to make an encyclopaedia is to appoint senior editors to gather together discipline editors who make lists based upon the classifications which are seen as relevant. The encyclopaedic device of A–Z listing allows for an expandable series in which material which does not fit the usual