of enumeration one finds in The Guinness Book of Records, exemplified by Perec with Walter Cavanagh’s 1003 valid credit cards, are classifications. His musings suggest family resemblances, and one other thing – perhaps some of the classifications we take for granted and use are at root mere collections whose contents could be otherwise. This might be true of dictionaries of biography, but also of the rules of grammar (not Perec’s example, which is of an algorithm for creating aphorisms, created by Marcel Benabou). This is indeed Perec’s provisional conclusion, ‘that the response to the question of classification is both completely obvious and utterly obscure, that it has to do with trial and error, suspicion, chance and coincidence’ (1989: 173).

What conclusion can be drawn if the classificatory process is so aleatory? Perec sought the limits of self-determination by hypothesizing a complex and rewarding life that would not engage in the arbitrary game of re-classification. It is possible to think that this was a rejection of the illusions of both sociology and politics. This rejection is to be found in Perec’s masterpiece, La vie mode d’emploi, a 700 page written pictorialization of the inhabitants – both animate and inanimate – of the 10-level house at 11, rue Simon-Crubellier. The fulcrum is Bartlebooth’s grand project, the devotion of his life to a discrete task, sufficiently arduous to be compelling, but both capable of completion and sufficiently self-contained and selfcancelling in its completion to have no pretence at contributing to any sense or hope of social significance. In 1925, Bartlebooth will take one lesson a day for 10 years in the practice of watercolour painting. Between 1935 and 1955, he will travel to 500 seaports across the world, producing one watercolour of each port. After each is done he will send them, one by one, to a master craftsman, Gaspard Winckler. Winckler will turn each watercolour into a wooden jigsaw puzzle of 750 pieces. From 1955 to 1975, Bartlebooth will complete the puzzles at the same rate as they were painted. As each puzzle is completed, ‘the seascape would be “retexturized” so that it could be removed from its backing, returned to the place where it had been painted – twenty years before – and dipped in a detergent solution whence would emerge a clean and unmarked sheet . . .’ (1978: 119). This work of vanishing labour is without hope or energy for an outside – which in all its detail is re-presented in the form of descriptions of the lives of those who live in the house, extending in giddying fashion into the decorative, physical and architectural themes running through every room/story of the house/novel, so that the work is more akin to a super-complex narrative Sudoku than perhaps anything else (see Perec, 1979; Levy, 2004; Motte and Poucel, 2004: passim).

Perec, explaining his own construction methods, along with Levy, Magné and others, point out that 42 categories are used in each chapter, one of which is highlighted in some way, with the other 41 being subject to variations, 10 in all, from room to room, with every chapter including two quotes drawn from two lists of authors and a single allusion to one of a list of 10 works. Perec and Bartlebooth appear to be strategically opposite, with the former laying out his methods for all to see, and ruminating on what epistemological structures could underlie his work, while Bartlebooth’s plan is to be consumed in his systematic life but leave no trace of it. In both cases there does seem to be willed submission to an arduous regime of production. Bartlebooth’s all-consuming, logistically exhausting and ultimately traceless exercise cannot be completed, since otherwise we would not now be considering it as a part of the history of classification. What Perec’s work brings us to is the difference between making and using classifications, and thus perhaps the two basic approaches to the history of classification, which is – uncomfortably – already to make and operate a classification system.

## References

Bellos, D. (1993) Georges Perec: A Life in Words. London: Harvill.

Boyne, R. (1991) ‘Sociological Theory and the Ethical Project’, Polish Sociological Bulletin 3: 40–9.

Boyne, R. (2000) ‘Structuralism’, in Bryan Turner (ed.) The Blackwell Companion to Social Theory, 2nd edn. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Boyne, R. (2001) Subject, Society and Culture. London: Sage.

Coxon, A.H. (1986) The Fragments of Parmenides: A Critical Text with Introduction, Translation, the Ancient Testimonia and a Commentary. Assen: Van Gorcum & Co.

Cottingham, J., R. Stoothoff and D. Murdoch (eds) (1984) The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Descartes, R. (1968) The Discourse on Method. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

Durkheim, E. and M. Mauss (1969) Primitive Classification. London: Routledge.

Heidegger, M. (1975) Early Greek Thinking. New York: Harper and Row.

Heidegger, M. (1992) Parmenides. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.

Jack, I. (2004) ‘Remembrance of Meals Past’, The Guardian 24 April.

Lévi-Strauss, C. (1962) The Savage Mind. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Levy, S. (2004) ‘Emergence in Georges Perec’, pp. 36–55 in W. Motte and J.-J. Poucel (eds) , Yale French Studies No. 105.

Magné, B. (2004) ‘Georges Perec on the Index’, pp. 72–88 in W. Motte and J.-J. Poucel (eds) , Yale French Studies No. 105.

Motte, W. and J.-J. Poucel (eds) (2004) ‘Pereckonings: Reading Georges Perec’, Yale French Studies No. 105.

Murdoch, I. (1977) The Fire and the Sun: Why Plato Banished the Artists. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Perec, G. (1965) Les Choses. Paris: Julliard.

Perec, G. (1978) La Vie mode d’emploi. Paris: Hachette.

Perec, G. (1979) ‘Quatre figures pour La Vie mode d’emploi’, L’Arc 76: 50–3.

Perec, G. (1989) ‘Penser/classer’, pp. 151–177 in Penser/Classer. Paris: Hachette.

Plato (1970) The Laws. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

Plato (1997) Complete Works. Ed. John M. Cooper. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett

Plato (n.d.) The Sophist. Trans. Benjamin Jowett. Available at: http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/sophist.html

Robinson, R. and J.D. Denniston (1971) ‘Plato’, pp. 7–15 in Gregory Vlastos (ed.) Plato: Metaphysics and Epistemology. New York: Doubleday Anchor.

Roy Boyne is Principal of St. Cuthbert’s Society and Professor of Sociology at the University of Durham. He has published books on French philosophy, art cinema and cultures of risk. He is currently working on the theory and practice of cultural strategy.

# Scientific Classification

John Dupré

Keywords classification, gene, genome, natural kind, species, taxonomy

t is often supposed that one of the goods delivered by successful science is the right way of classifying the things in the world. Surely there is something right about this: any body of scientific knowledge will include ways of classifying, and will not serve its intended aims unless the classifications it embodies reflect real differences and similarities in the world. The standard paradigm for such a successful scientific classification is the periodic table of the elements.

However, there is also much potentially wrong with the supposition just mentioned. Most importantly, there is a highly questionable implication of there being some uniquely best classification. Classifications are good or bad for particular purposes, and different purposes will motivate different classifications. It may be that there is such an ideal classification for chemistry, but if so it is because of the specific aims implicit in the history of that discipline. Chemistry aims at the structural analysis of matter and if, as appears to be the case, all matter is composed of a small number of structural elements, a classification based on those elements will be best suited to these purposes. It is also often the case that chemical structure will be the best guide to the properties of kinds of matter, but not necessarily. Two quite distinct chemicals are referred to as ‘jade’ and, despite some serious debates on the issue, Chinese jade carvers have decided that both are real jade (LaPorte, 2004).

This illustrates the general point, which becomes much more obvious when we move from chemistry to biology, that classifications devised for different goals can be cross-cutting and overlapping (Dupré, 1993: part 1). There remains among many biologists and philosophers the hope of finding the ultimate and uniquely best classification of organisms, most recently conceived in terms of the speciation processes of Darwinian evolution (e.g. De Queiroz, 1999). However, it is at the same time becoming clearer that there is very likely no such ideal classification. There is no reason why a classification that reflects the origins of the things classified should coincide exactly with one aimed at the ecological relations of those things, and it is increasingly perceived that these can and do diverge (Dupré, 2002: chs 3–4). This possibility becomes even clearer in view of the difficulties that are emerging in the project of evolutionary-based classification. Speciation was once seen as an all or nothing affair leading to complete isolation of one group from another. It is now clear that for micro-organisms, in particular, there is very little such isolation, and genetic material moves in many ways from one kind of organism to another. In fact it has become common to conceive of the genome of an ecosystem (the soil of an area, or a body of water) rather than the privatized genome of an individual organism (e.g. Venter et al., 2004). The classical picture of speciation applies quite well to some of the most complex multi-celled organisms, such as mammals and birds, though much less well to plants. An important movement in biology is to transcend the anthropocentrism that takes the peculiarities of our own corner of the living world as the model for all.

The recognition that even within science there is no objectively given classificatory order allows the realization that there is nothing inherently inferior about the biological classifications developed by non-scientific folk for non-scientific purposes. This point has been obscured for philosophers by the highly influential proposal by Hilary Putnam (1975) that ordinary language terms for naturally occurring kinds of thing or stuff were primitive attempts to refer to the kinds that science would eventually delineate more accurately. My own view is that science is generally quite unable to do this, and that ordinary language terms are generally just fine as they are for the purposes for which they have been developed (Dupré, 2002: chs 1–2).

A graphic illustration of what I have in mind here can be gained from reflection on the wisdom taught to all young children that science has discovered that whales are not fish. No doubt this wisdom long antedates Putnam’s proposal, and shows that such intuitions about the achievements of science are widespread. Nonetheless it is very difficult to provide a convincing rationale for the ‘discovery’ that whales are not fish. ‘Whale’ in ordinary language refers to all the members of one branch of the family

Cetacea (the baleen whales) and the larger members of the other branch (the toothed whales). The smaller members of the latter group, dolphins and porpoises, are not generally referred to as whales. Large cetacean is not a concept that has any great biological significance. ‘Fish’ is much worse. Even assuming it does not encompass shellfish or jellyfish, there are three groups of aquatic vertebrates generally thought of as fish, but groups that have diverged for hundreds of millions of years. In fact a lungfish, being part of the aquatic lineage from which terrestrial vertebrates evolved, is more closely related by descent to a whale (or, for that matter, a human) than it is to a salmon or tuna. In short, since these are not significant scientific terms it is impossible to see how science can have discovered facts about their reference.

A final problem with scientific classification, raised by the formulation with which this note began, is that ‘things’ are often distinguishable only after classification, rather than presenting themselves to be classified in full-fledged thingness. So, for example, it is obvious to common sense that a tree is an individual thing. But from one biological perspective a copse of elm trees, all suckers from the same root system, should be seen as a single individual. A more interesting example is the recent development of the concept of a gene. The more science finds out about the workings of DNA inside living cells, the harder it is to find principled ways of dividing the DNA into components suitable for classification into anything related to the historical meaning of ‘gene’ (Dupré, 2004; Moss, 2003; Stotz et al., 2004). Of course this is not normally a problem for molecular biologists in the context of their professional lives, but it can lead to serious misunderstanding of many things they say.

## References

De Queiroz, K. (1999) ‘The General Lineage Concept of Species and the Defining Property of the Species Category’, in R.A. Wilson (ed.) Species: New Interdisciplinary Essays. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.

Dupré, J. (1993) The Disorder of Things: Metaphysical Foundations of the Disunity of Science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Dupré, J. (2002) Humans and Other Animals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Dupré, J. (2004) ‘Understanding Contemporary Genomics’, Perspectives on Science 12: 320–38.

LaPorte, J. (2004) Natural Kinds and Conceptual Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Moss, L. (2003) What Genes Can’t Do. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.

Putnam, H. (1975) ‘The Meaning of “Meaning”’, in Mind, Language and Reality: Philosophical Papers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Stotz, K., P.E. Griffiths and R.D. Knight (2004) ‘How Scientists Conceptualise Genes: An Empirical Study’, Studies in History & Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 5: 647–73.

Venter, J.C. et al. (2004) ‘Environmental

Genome Shotgun Sequencing of the Sargasso Sea’, Science 304(5667): 66–74.

John Dupré is Professor of Philosophy of Science at the University of Exeter, and Director of the ESRC Centre for Genomics in Society. His publications include The Disorder of Things: Metaphysical Foundations of the Disunity of Science (Harvard, 1993); Human Nature and the Limits of Science (Oxford, 2001); Humans and Other Animals (Oxford, 2002); and Darwin’s Legacy: What Evolution Means Today (Oxford, 2003).

# Generative Classifications

Luciana Parisi

Keywords antigeneaology, microvariations, rhizome, self-organization, symbiotic sex, turbulence

W <sup>ith</sup> <sup>Darwin’s</sup> <sup>(1993)</sup> <sup>The</sup> <sup>Origin</sup> <sup>of</sup>Species, historical processes of individu- Species, historical processes of individuation challenged Linnaeus’s 17th- and 18th-century taxonomic practices of classifications, in which time played no role. In the Linnaeus classification system, the movement of time was subordinated to the fixed and hierarchical order of nature predicated on types or essences (Plato’s transcendent essence and Aristotle’s natural kinds). In other words, the classification of types, ordered according to principles of resemblance, identity, analogy and opposition, defined continuity and fixity in nature (Deleuze, 1994) resting on a congealed version of time – an eternal becoming the same – where no variation can happen.

Darwin’s theory of evolution marks a breaking point in taxonomic classifications as it inserts historical events back in the formation of kinds highlighting that movement or change in time defines variations in species. In other words, species, far from being fixed types, are individuals composed of unique features statistically accumulating over time in relation to the population or collectivities (e.g. reproductive collectivities) of which they are part. In this sense, individuals are the results of accidents in history, of movement in time. Darwin’s theory of evolution opens up the classification of types to processes of speciation where variations in populations and between populations define the genealogical evolution of the individual. Thus species are the result of variations in the movement of time. By bringing back variations in individual species, Darwin brings back difference in genealogical classification. By opening types to variations in populations, Darwin also exposes the idea of degree of perfection, or hierarchical order in nature, to relations between rates of change. Rates of acceleration and deceleration vary from species to species according to divergent territories, nutrient sources, births, deaths, migrations and so on. Thus, movement in time is reintroduced by accounting for the relation between populations and between their velocities of variation. In other words, the Darwinian ‘descent with modification’ introduces variations in practices of classification and thus suggests the construction of a genealogy of the individual accounting for its collective formation in the movement of time.

However, there are at least two important yet problematic aspects of Darwinian evolution that explain the process of speciation and its genealogical classification. On the one hand, the action of sorting the ill- from the best-fitted adaptation performed by natural selection and, on the other, the centrality of sexual reproduction, which guarantees the isolation of the gene pool of a species from external genetic influences. In a sense, Darwinian descent with modification relies on an entropic notion of time whereby the threat of increasing accumulation of variation marks the tendency towards disorder in nature, which is, however, constantly re-balanced by natural selection through the elimination of the unfitted. Such entropic notion of evolution ensuring speciation by regulating variations indirectly coincides with the centrality of sexual reproduction, which ensures the isolation of one gene pool from the rest. In other words, constant regulation and filiative reproduction define the genealogical classification of variation (read difference).

Whereas genealogical classification does account for variations in evolution, it still subjects variations to natural selection as a sort of reactive device against their disordered proliferation and to sexual reproduction that constantly redirects variations in a filiative genealogy. Here the range and scope of variations is not determined in advance. For Darwin, variations occur randomly. Yet, there are limits to sustainable variations depending on their viability and reproductive success. In other words, variations that attain some evolutionary advantage defined by natural selection and their endurance in sexual transmission will not be lost in evolution. The relations between populations and their diverse rates of change and between species and territories then remain somewhat limited to a predetermined notion of difference as always already actualized in an individuated phylum and lineage.

Genealogical classification in Darwin’s evolution then seems to miss out the capacity of difference to generate difference. This is a point of contention between Henri Bergson’s ‘creative evolution’ and Darwin’s emphasis on natural selection and adaptation. For Bergson (1983), natural selection acts as an external force that negates the self-differentiating capacities of adaptation in the individual. In other words, in Darwin’s evolution difference is always already given, actualized or predeterminate by a negative force of selection. Bergson rather argues that difference is the result of continual processes of self-differentiation – i.e. of the capacity of the organism to differentiate itself from itself under certain pressures and conditions. Hence, adaptation is never passive but is the outcome of the virtual actions of the environment on the organism whereby the latter unleashes unprecedented potentials of differentiation. Variation in evolution does not derive from a tendency towards accumulation regulated by natural selection. Rather variations are imbued with potentials to generate new variations. Far from a tendency towards collapse (disorder or entropy), evolution for Bergson is a tendency towards the continual regeneration of variations linking together the past with the future in a continual splitting of time. Each present variation emerges from the double yet coexistent tendencies of time towards the past and the future. Here the generative capacities of variations entail that evolution far from deriving difference from filiative genealogy – i.e. from already actualized differences linearly transmitted from parents to offspring – rather exposes difference to duration outlining its heterogeneous composition and virtual differentiation. In this sense all variations – and thus not just the best fitted ones – are motors of evolution. The process of speciation here entails a notion of difference that is open to its own becoming in duration or non-linear continuity, rather than linear development, between the past and the future. Thus, difference in duration brings into question filiative genealogy. It points at the anti-genealogy of difference: difference is always collective and always under construction in relation to a field of potential variations in nonlinear evolution. Difference between species and between members of the same species therefore always already partakes of a heterogeneous plane that virtually links all differences. In this sense, the classification of difference is confronted by the continual generation of novel variations by means of intensive self-differentiation.

This notion of self-differentiation can also be explained through the notion of autopoiesis – or self-making – as used by Maturana and Varela (1980). Maturana and Varela argue that autopoiesis precedes evolution and reproduction. Autopoiesis defines the circular interactions of heterogeneous elements, which are at the core of the organization of life. The notion of recursivity or circularity indicates preservation by repetition, defining the way autopoiesis is conserved at every point as organisms evolve. Even if structures change – defining what Maturana and Varela call ‘structural drift’ – organization is conserved. In this sense, self-organization cuts across the scale of evolution from single cells to cellular aggregates, whereas structure relates to the specific order of cellular organization. This process of self-organization explains the emergence of novel variations beyond natural selection and passive adaptation.

For example, Stuart Kauffman’s (1993) biophysical study of evolution highlights how autopoietic – autocatalytic – genetic networks generate novel variations at the edge between order and chaos. Autopoietic organization explains the emergence of novel patterns of variation in non-linear dynamics of evolution. Rather than explaining novel variations in evolution as the result of natural selection sorting best from illfitted accumulating variations, non-linear dynamics points out that the momentum of bifurcation or declination from linear trajectory is the source of emergence of new variations in evolution. Prigogine and Stengers (1984) define this momentum as turbulence. They draw on Lucretius’s notion of the clinamen, the slightest movement in the angle of declination of a laminar flow initiating turbulence (Deleuze and Guattari, 1987; Lucretius, 1994; Serres, 1982).

Kauffman’s analysis of non-linear dynamics of evolution argues that rates of variation accelerate at bifurcation points (critical threshold of change), challenging the assumption that natural selection sets order on the gradual accumulation of variations. In contemporary evolutionary biology the role of acceleration and deceleration in evolutionary rates has become crucial to understand variations within the same population. Difference here entails differential speeds. The velocities of variation have also indicated the phenomena of long jump adaptations ‘where genetic alterations jump beyond the correlation length of the landscape’ or beyond the margins of territorialization to produce new variations (Kauffman, 1993: 117). Thus, variations are not the outcome of natural selection, but emerge through the parallel network of self-organization between populations and territories poised at the edge of a phase transition from one state to another. Kauffman compares these points of transmission values to singular zones of intensity existing at the phase transition between gaseous and solid states (too little and too much chaos or order). He argues that ecosystems (composed of populations and territories) may need to be poised at the edge in order to maximize their emergent computational capacities (1993: 237).

Far-from-equilibrium dynamics in self-organizing genetic networks expose the co-evolution and co-adaptation of organism and environment. These non-linear dynamics explain ecosystems as composites that are themselves connected to one another through the molecular velocities of evolutionary rates. Selection does not impose an order of fitness to these networked systems. Rather, it is immanent to their regulatory circuits as it acts at singular degrees of order. Kauffman suggests that at the heart of a living system is a network of channels that is able to catalyse its own reproduction. Hence, the genome, rather than a small aggregate of individual genes directly selected by a superior order, is a complex adaptive system composed of networks of genes and their production that interact with one another in regulatory circuitry. The network dynamics of genetic organization also challenges Dawkins’s model of evolution based on the unit of selection, the genetic material acted upon by natural selection. This dynamics reveals that even a single cell is a cooperative colony that is not independent of the environment, and does not emerge from a gradual accumulation of variations.

Thus, structures, forms or individuals are the indeterminate results of self-organizing networks of microvariations. Macro forms of life are generative to the extent that they are imbued with potentials triggered from the turbulent dynamics of molecular self-organization. This implies no linear correspondence between micro and macro levels of process and vital activity. Only indeterminate differentiation can account for the generative process of individuation. Individuals are generative macro forms of life that do exhaust but intensify molecular potentials to differentiate. Hence what changes is not just the micro-organization of macro forms of life. The latter are open to turbulent variations too. In this sense, the structure is itself generative, open to transformation.

Generative individuation entails not only selforganization and co-evolution (or structural coupling) between organisms and environments, but also what lies in-between, in the middle of species, lineages and phyla. A generative sense of classification also implies variations stemming from the symbiotic connection or parasitic relations across bodies from distinct evolutionary kingdoms. This is more than highlighting the existence of hybrids in evolution. Symbiotic variations point to a contagious plane of evolution whose individual outcomes never resemble the kingdoms they were derived from. Deleuze and Guattari (1987) define this symbiotic alliance as a ‘machinic phylum’: a transversal evolution linking kingdoms by means of contagion, a source of generative variations or becomings where each species results from thousand of symbiotic combinations. Hence individual classification can only imply a multiplicity of layers whose singular connection generates an individual. In other words, a machinic phylum explains generative evolution in terms of a networked architecture open to change according to the movement of microvariations composing it through their transversal symbiotic alliances. Symbiosis shows that the distinction between environment and individual is violated by the intersection of widely divergent species that have no genetic relation and that do not simply co-operate but combine, merge for long periods and generate novel metabolic systems. Symbiosis as a source of novel individuation occurs at many levels of scale enmeshing two or more heterogeneous populations followed by the eventual co-evolution of the partners.

Lynn Margulis (1971) re-elaborated the theory of endosymbiosis in the 1970s to argue that the motor of variation and novelty in evolution is placed in far from equilibrium bacterial networks of communication that connect species, lineages and phyla. Bacteria have no species and are not individuals. They are colonies of open communication ready to re-engineer themselves under certain pressures. Their reproduction bypasses the genealogical tree of sexual mating. Rather, for bacteria a quick contact is enough to send and receive information across the entire bacterial genome. Margulis defines this transmission as bacterial sex. Bacterial sex lays out a machinic