Lyotard, J.-F. (1991) Phenomenology. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

Rosanvallon, P. (2004) Le modèle politique français. Paris: Ed. du Seuil.

Derek Robbins is Professor of International Social Theory at the University of East London. His On Bourdieu, Education and Society is due to be published in 2006.

# Rubbish, the Remnant, Etcetera

Couze Venn

Keywords biopolitics, classification, compossibility, difference, error, noise

## The Differential Machine

Every system of classification works on the basis of rules of inclusion and exclusion. Whether these be pragmatic, e.g. the classification of snow by the Inuit, or theoretical, e.g. the periodic table, they operate on and constitute differences, they establish boundaries, and ground judgement and action. Yet although the process of inclusion necessarily implicates rules of exclusion, hardly any system of classification is founded on an explicit theory of difference. Differences proliferate from already existing processes of differentiation (say, in phylogenesis) and of the ordering of the objects of the world. Their redistribution and grouping in taxonomies is correlated to a scale of importance and visibility, say, human beings according to a notion of superior and inferior ‘races’, so that the need to categorize inscribes a normalizing thrust and a system of value. Of course, in the course of this ordering of the world, even more objects are simply consigned to the heap of the unimportant or irrelevant; they fill up the category marked ‘the rest’, in short, they become rubbish.

As a concept, rubbish trails in its wake a number of other categories that metonymically resonate with it, namely, those of the remnant, the remainder, the marginal, noise, etcetera. The common ground linking this metonymic chain is the implication that the norms of the normal, and the criteria that determine the canonical, function to consign all objects that do not fit these norms to the domain of the abnormal, the untypical, the pathological, the surplus. These resemblances allow us to glimpse only the semblance of rubbish for, as movement, rubbish is dissembled in the trace where it endures. Rubbish, as one knows, is difficult to get rid of, it accumulates, even if kept out of sight: in attics, dumps, silos, the seabed, camps. This happens not just with ‘spent’ nuclear material, or the cast out detritus of consumer culture, or carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere; it happens with weeds invading the ecological artifice of the modern garden and with the multiplication of germs dissipated through points of their accumulation like hospitals. The process of producing rubbish is endemic, and its accumulation awaits the ‘accident’. At some point it becomes excessive, and it then emerges as a challenge to the whole system, the disavowed trace that erupts to put into perspective the calculations that have ordered its dissimulation

Today rubbish has taken a new dimension, for, the production of obsolescence that Benjamin thought characteristic of the consumer culture has become intensified because of the accelerated speed at which the must-have objects of desire must be discarded as the signifiers of yesterday’s fashion, and the degree to which identity and worth have become locked into this machinery for constituting the signs of desirable identities. Consumer goods carry news of difference that we have become attuned to hear, sensitized by the language of advertising that assigns value to these objects according to the arbitrary scales of fashion and the self-referential process of creating the distinctions of taste. An economy of abjection drives this consumerist apparatus for recognition whereby those who have must display their wealth through the obsessive acquisition of the (sometimes admittedly exquisite) trinkets that confer provisional prestige and worth, while the have-nots can only window-shop and fantasize ownership of what would bring them into visibility, at least from the point of view of the gaze constituted by the operation of teletechnologies. A new imaginary is being created, grounded in the hyperreal world of teletechnologies and the mass that they constitute, mediating the affective relation between the subjective and the social and public, and so correlating that relationship with the process of recognition. This imaginary functions as relay for the new machinery of desire that produces objects for it and for consumption. This is of course far from the little that most people need: ‘all we want is to be able to live in dignity’, as a supporter of Subcommandante Marcos once put it. The tragedy of corporate capitalism is that untold misery is inflicted on millions globally as an integral part of a system for producing consumers with large disposable incomes who can then pig out on disposable goods to feed the existential need for recognition, generating even more rubbish. The problem, then, is to theorize rubbish in a way that enables one to rethink the fact of difference – of class, gender, race, culture – alongside the fact of co-dependence and thus to bring into visibility the constitutive relation between the visible and the invisible.

## The Point of View of Error

This relation reappears in a different form in the case of the constitution of knowledge. Every category, we know, involves a process of abstraction whereby variations that do not alter a function or that contravene the rules of belonging are discounted. For instance, in deciding what is or is not a chair, one may apply a simple rule, for example, that of objects that have been made for one to sit on, though one may then have to add other conditions for the sake of precision, say, to distinguish between chairs and beds. What seems particularly challenging is not this kind of problem about categories and classification, but the fact that what escapes categorization and taxonomies often betrays one’s ignorance and challenges existing theories. Thus, the Genome project has revealed that there are far fewer genes for explaining the characteristics and behaviour of humans than expected by positive science and its assumption of univocal causality. It was thought that each biological characteristic and every personality trait would have ‘its’ gene, a neat correspondence that would have satisfied the demands of discrete functions prescribed by positivism. The discovery cuts the ground under the advocates of simple explanatory models of life and adds weight to the theories that emphasize complexity, compossibility and a ‘flat ontology’. An interesting aspect of the new knowledge is the fact that there seems to be a lot of surplus genetic material present – 95 percent of the genomic material – seemingly serving no purpose, and thus conforming to what existing models of life understand as noise. This ‘noncoding’ or ‘conserved’ DNA, symptomatically called junk DNA, now appears to contain a wealth of information and functions essential for the working of the coding DNA (that codes for amino acids, and thus for protein production), for example, it seems to regulate the process of development and differentiation by switching on and off particular genetic activity.

Explanations that simply invoke lack of information and the provisionality of scientific knowledge miss the deeper level of the epistemological issue. For instance, if instead of the assumption of the individualism of the gene in genetics, an assumption in solidarity with a whole world view sustaining an egocentric ontology and an instrumentalist idea of nature, theory proceeded from the standpoint of the inseparability of ‘individual’ entities from the ‘surrounding’, that is, if it assumed the primacy of the relational character of being and life, theory would recognize the imbrication of human beings, and the knowing mind, in the world, implying also the impossibility of an omniscient knowledge (Prigogine and Stengers, 1979). A similar point can be made about what is called dark matter, namely, matter that calculations determined by astro-physical theories tell us must exist in the universe, yet that no theory can explain and no instrument can detect so far. What was supposed to be empty space is now thought to be filled by this recalcitrant stuff; is it rubbish or is it the signifier of the insufficiency of current theories, or indeed the evidence that the whole conceptual framing of science so far needs to be recast? It may well be that, given appropriate transformation in the bigger epistemological picture, junk DNA will turn out to be the equivalent of dark matter concerning the process of formation of life and world. The problem is not only that the dominant model of knowledge assumes that the way existing theories cut up the world reveals an underlying essential reality, it also implicates an ontological difference between what a particular knowledge makes visible and what it casts into the shadow, granting ontological priority to the former.

The point is that when one pays attention to the reality of the process whereby knowledge is produced, one finds that a history of errors is far more enlightening than the narrative of an untroubled rationality motivating the machinery of the progressive accumulation of knowledge. As Bachelard and Canguilhem have demonstrated, the history of errors, that is to say the history of the failures, the wrong hunches, the theories that did not convince, the obstacles that provoked new thinking, the paradigms that have become limiting rather than innovative, reveals much more about the indeterminate, collective, constructed, ludic character of the process than the authorized history of knowledge that deliberately casts them into the oubliette of errors, to be forgotten in the clutter of neglected archives. Error in science is not rubbish, it is productive, both as a necessary aspect of the process of constituting new knowledge as well as from the point of view of an epistemological history of the sciences. Error is democratic: it opens towards heterogeneity; it allows newness to come into the world.

## The Standpoint of the Relation to the Other

Another set of issues, this time relating ontology to ethics, appears when one considers other terms in the metonymic chain. Agamben (1999), in The Remnants of Auschwitz, examines the ontological and discursive status of the human subject reduced to bare life in the concentration camps. The prisoners, already denied a name and any kind of dignity, were so systematically dehumanized and brutalized by the Nazi regime of terror that the weakest had become the living dead, the müselmann, the speechless and thoughtless non-men, who no longer cared what happened to them. For the SS men these barely alive beings had become ‘garbage’, while for other prisoners they had become the figure of abjection, for they embodied both the disposable subhumans of fascist biopolitics, as well as the dread of the death beyond death of what possibly awaited every Jew in the camp. No one could bear to gaze upon them. Agamben discusses the paradox of this existence to which no one can properly bear witness yet that must remain as testimony. The müselmann, he says (1999: 48), is the ‘complete witness’, occupying the non-place and threshold between man and non-man; she/he/it is ‘an indefinite being in whom not only humanity and non-humanity, but also vegetative existence and relation, physiology and ethics, medicine and politics, and life and death continuously pass through each other’. It can be argued that this being functions as the exception, the point where the question of ethics begins, that is, the point at which one is obliged to ask what it means to be human at all. But this is not an abstract philosophical question, for it is triggered by the shame that the witness has for retaining any dignity at the sight of those who have been stripped of all dignity, ‘the shame of the survivors in the face of the drowned’, as Agamben’s (1999: 63) reference to Primo Levi’s testimony shows. And now, Guantanamo Bay and Abu Ghraib have become the latest in a long series of instances of what Arendt has called the ‘banality of evil’; they oblige us to decide whether the culture and the calculations that are capable of inflicting this suffering can still qualify as human – bearing in mind that the inhuman, as Lyotard (1991) has shown, inhabits the human. I will argue that ethics begins here for two reasons, first, because it intensifies the question of what living with dignity means, and second, because it insists that one must respond to the plight of the drowned, by bearing witness to the suffering of the other, that is, it challenges us as to the question of our responsibility for our fellows, particularly when one poses the question from the point of view of the constitutive relationality of being.

The principle of security that drives the current militarization of the social in the name of a ‘war on terrorism’ is producing its own regimes of terror, invested in a biopolitics that has allocated to itself the right to give life and to give death, that is, to produce new remnants. This strategy dispenses with frontiers and international laws in its post-Clauswitzian militarist logic of a total war on whoever and whatever does not conform to the norms of socialities founded on fundamentalist certitudes. The watchword seems to be: assimilation or extermination. Today, the names of the drowned and the remnant have multiplied and spread across the globe: the stranger, the refugee, the asylum-seeker, the deportee, the ethnic other, the destitute thrown out of her land or deprived of a livelihood by the advances of neoliberal privatization and marketization. It is another army of the human surplus or ‘rubbish’ which global governance plans to discipline and regulate, or else disperse into the invisibility of non-places like camps, bidonvilles, favelas.

## References

Agamben, Giorgio (1999) Remnants of Auschwitz. The Witness and the Archive. Trans. Daniel Heller-Roazen. New York: Zone Books.

Lyotard, Jean-François (1991) The Inhuman. Cambridge: Polity.

Prigogine, Ilya and Isabelle Stengers (1979) La nouvelle alliance. Metamorphose de la science. Paris: Editions Gallimard.

# The Unclassifiable

Maria Esther Maciel

Keywords Atopia, classification, encyclopaedia

A <sup>ccording</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>dictionaries,</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>word</sup>‘unclassifiable’ means what cannot be included within a class or category; what cannot be precisely defined or qualified. It has therefore an intrinsic affinity with the Greek word atopos (!-"#\$#s), which, besides referring to that which is not fixed in any place, also characterizes what is strange, extraordinary, inopportune (Bailly, 1950: 303).

Roland Barthes (1990: 34), in A Lover’s Discourse: Fragments, uses the word atopos to designate ‘the unclassifiable, of a ceaselessly unforeseen originality’. For this purpose, he explores the double sense of the word topos, which in Greek means both place and discourse. By the force of the negative prefix a-, atopos would therefore mean not only what cannot be confined in a single place, but also what ‘resists description, definition, language, which is maya, classification of Names (of Faults)’ (Barthes, 1990: 35). And to this he adds the idea that the atopos is always the unqualifiable, as it is very difficult or even impossible to speak of it or about it.

In The Pleasure of the Text, Barthes (1973) returns to the word atopos, now converted into a working concept, in order to discuss what he calls the ‘texte de jouissance’, that is, the text that defies the doxa and veers away from the arrangements of language. To articulate this concept, he starts from the idea that language is regulated by a ruthless topos that always makes it come from some place, from a space delimited by the laws of grammar and the dictionaries. Texte de jouissance would be, in this sense, that which proclaims the fallacy of this topos, that which destroys or even contradicts its own discursive category, its genre, defying the canonical structures of language itself. In opposition to the texts connected to a comfortable practice of reading, the a-topical (or unclassifiable) text would potentially make the reader uncomfortable and shake his/her foundations. It is from these considerations that Barthes formulates his concept of écriture.

Paradoxically, the unclassifiable can also be associated with the idea of heteropia, since we can also use the word unclassifiable to designate what may be included (even if provisionally) in several places at once, given the often contradictory diversity of its parts. In this case, all the categories in which it might be included are insufficient to accommodate it. In each category it maintains its troublesome difference, its explicit alterity. In this sense, since it moves among various topoi, it does not allow itself to be enclosed in a single one.

But would not the unclassifiable leave open the possibility of the creation of new categories that could include it, since the taxonomic systems themselves are not definitive? We might argue that the unclassifiable exists because the available and legitimated systems of classification are insufficient and are not able to contain the complex diversity and multiplicity of the world, since they obey above all the principles of similarity. As Foucault (2000: 14) said in The Order of Things, ‘the history of the order imposed on things would be the history of the Same – of that which, for a given culture, is both dispersed and related, therefore to be distinguished by kinds and to be collected together into identities’. In other words, every taxonomy requires the principle of the least possible difference among things to sustain itself. Still, thanks to that which resists the laws of taxonomy, that is to say, difference, such systems are always in the process of reformulation, revealing their insufficiency and precariousness.

Georges Perec (1999: 139–205), in Penser/ Classer, develops an amusing theory of systems of classification – as Roy Boyne shows in detail in the entry Classification – evincing how tempting the idea of distributing the whole world ‘in terms of a single code’ is, although we know that ‘unfortunately, this does not work, has never even begun to work, will never work’ (Perec, 1999: 190). In other words, he recognizes the fascination of the act of classifying at the same time that he proclaims its instability. But he believes that admitting the precariousness of the criteria of classification ‘won’t stop us continuing for a long time to come to categorize this animal or that according to whether it has an odd number of toes or hollow horns’ (Perec, 1999: 190). It is the consciousness of this paradox that leads him to adopt humour and irony in order to, as Boyne states, ‘emancipate classification from its functions for social utility, freeing it for the creation of serendipitous wonderment’.

In one of the essays of this book, Perec even makes an inventory of possible taxonomical criteria (some of which are quite absurd) to organize his library. But he ends up admitting that ‘nearly three-quarters of the books have never really been classified’ (Perec, 1999: 153–4), because they are difficult to put in order or impossible to classify. From this circumstance arises the need to create a new category for them, that of the etcetera, which is in fact a category used by Borges in his famous essay ‘The Analytical Language of John Wilkins’ (Borges, 1999: 229– 32), which is also mentioned by Boyne in the Classification entry along with some critical references to Foucault’s interpretation of the Borgesian text. In this essay, as it is known, the Argentinian writer, to describe the ambiguities, redundancies, arbitrary nature and deficiencies of the Wilkinian linguistic system, evokes an apocryphal Chinese encyclopaedia that classifies animals in a dozen unusual categories, listed in alphabetical order. The etcetera is inserted precisely in the L category.

The fact that Borges’s etcetera comes not at the end of the list, as would be expected, but before the last two categories, inevitably grants it a more solid status within the whole, which creates even more surprise in the reader and breaks with the predictability of the very classificatory logic of conventional systems. Whence the questions: would this etcetera be the topos par excellence of the ‘unclassifiable’, and, by extension, the category that is lacking in all the taxonomic systems in general? By combining the rules of classification with the parodic laws of fiction in the same discursive space, would not Borges be showing that a classification of the universe or of knowledge that is not arbitrary, provisional, and conjectural is not possible, since all surveys/orderings tend, in their limits, to reveal the character of what is naturally uncontrollable and unlimited?

We might mention, as an example of this insufficiency of taxonomic systems, the fact that Linnaeus – who established in the second half of the 18th century not only the bases of modern taxonomy but also a binomial system of nomenclature in the field of Natural History – himself repeatedly revised and enlarged his Systema Naturae (1735), to the extent that his contemporaries complained of the ‘volatility’ of his model, which changed with each edition, in the face of the proliferating diversity of the animal world and consequently the discovery of new zoological differences that would not fit into the categories already defined (cf. Ritvo, 1997: 15).

We might also recall the frisson that the discovery, in Australia, 1799, of the platypus caused in British scientific circles right at a time when taxonomy was enjoying enormous prestige and was rigorously supported by the laws of triumphant rationality. Considered a puzzling animal, the platypus caused perplexity in the naturalists of the time by being a hybrid creature of about 50 cm, with no neck, with webbed toes, a beaver-like tail, a duck-beak, a flat body covered with a darkbrown coat, and posterior limbs equipped with poisonous spurs. The females lay eggs but feed their young by internal nipples. Thomas Bewick, a British naturalist of the time, observed: ‘the platypus is an animal sui generis: it appears to possess a threefold nature, that of a fish, a bird and a quadruped’ (Ritvo, 1997: 3). We could add that it is an a-topical animal par excellence: unclassifiable, strange, extraordinary, original and inconvenient – a challenge therefore to the zoological canon and systems of classification.

Harriet Ritvo (1997), in The Platypus and the Mermaid – and Other Figments of the Classifying Imagination, says that this animal was first described as a mammal, which triggered a controversial taxonomic debate in scientific circles. Dissected by anatomists, it was even included in the class of amphibians, although many scientists saw in it an ‘astonishing union of the characteristic distinctions of all the classes’ (Ritvo, 1997: 3), a union that, centuries later, would continue to stimulate the thought and imagination of theorists of taxonomy such as Umberto Eco, who in 1997 adopted the animal as the ‘hero’ of his book Kant and the Platypus. He even argued that, contrary to what was thought, the platypus was not made from an amalgam of all animals, but all animals were made from a part of the platypus. He asks:

How could one reconcile the beak and webbed feet with the fur and the beaver tail, or the Idea of beaver with the Idea of an oviparous animal; how could one see a bird where there was a quadruped? Kant would have found himself in the same situation as Aristotle when, after drawing up all possible rules for distinguishing ruminants from the other animals, no matter which way he turned, he never managed to find a place for the camel, which eluded all definition by genus and differentia. Had Aristotle tried to make one fit, he should have had to chase another ruminant, the ox, out of its own definitory space. (Eco, 1997: 81)

Here, Eco shows that due to the lack of sufficient criteria for classification, the definition of an unknown phenomenon often ends up by being formulated through analogical approximation, which leads us to claim that the imagination comes in where classification fails. In the lack of criteria to precisely define an unknown object, one has to invent new forms – metaphorical or not – to describe and specify it.

In this aspect, the fantastic descriptions of the fauna of the so-called New World made by the 16th-century European travellers are exemplary