an opening demands a mode of questioning that does not seek:

. . . to determine the reply as soon as possible, to seize and exhibit some object which will count as the cause of the phenomenon in question, but to be and remain questioned by it, to stay through meditation responsive to it, without neutralizing by explanation its power of disquiet. (1991: 74)

It is precisely through this power of disquiet that the command ‘Be Just’ works; it disturbs and disrupts our numerous attempts to make it the object of social science, or render it commensurate to a description of a just society, and hence to a procedural model.

In keeping with Kant’s division between practical and theoretical reason, and inspired by Wittgenstein’s analysis of the particularity of language games, Lyotard argues that the law is prescriptive and cannot be reduced to any particular description of it. As prescription the law is the practical condition whereby we are first and foremost addressed. The law, then, is this condition of being held (as an addressee). It is the duty of a response, as well as the responsibility for the manner of that response. The law, however, because it is irreducible to knowledge, does not signify what is to be done and remains indeterminate in this regard. As a consequence there is a diversity of possible responses to its address; a diversity that permits Lyotard to speak of ‘the constitutive withdrawal of the law’ (1988: 12). There is, then, a summons to respond and explore, but we do not know what this law commands for ‘the law is only prescription as such’ (1988: 10). In talking of the constitutive withdrawal of the law, or the prescript of being held as an addressee, Lyotard is attempting to resist what he calls a ‘problematic of the Platonic type’, where justice is seen as compliance with a pre-established definition, or conformity to the signification of some philosopher’s or politician’s discourse. Numerous political models, including liberalism, operate according to the equation that if the discourse is correct the practice that agrees with it will be just. A logical analysis given by Lyotard in Just Gaming represents this as; ‘If (if P then Q) then R’ (Lyotard and Thébaud, 1985), which Lyotard calls a meta-ordering. The bracketed ‘if, then proposition means ‘if a given distribution obtains, then justice obtains’, and is the conclusion of theoretical discourse; the larger ‘if, then’ is prescriptive in that it proposes actions that ought to be taken in order to achieve justice in practice. The problem with this meta-ordering is that, despite its commonsense appeal, it is in fact unintelligible because of the differend that exists between the two phrase regimes from which the ‘if, then’ propositions are taken.

The lack of fit between the prescriptive phrase ‘Be Just’ and, for example, the descriptive phrase ‘Autonomy is just’, comes about because each sets in play a phrase universe with its own set of rules for its formation. One is imperative, the other is predicative; one focuses on the pole of the addressee while the other focuses on the addresser. The phrase ‘Be Just’ posits a referent to be found, while ‘Autonomy is just’ posits a referent assumed to be known. Any translation of phrases necessitates a refiguration of the phrase universes and this invariably undermines the specificity of the translated phrase. If the prescriptive phrase ‘Be Just’ is taken over by a descriptive in which justice is to be worked out, authority is no longer the withdrawn law but the word of a philosopher/politician. What is more it is as if the particularity of the prescriptive phrase ‘Be Just’ was never felt as a command, but only as an interrogative: ‘What is justice?’ By driving a wedge between prescriptives and descriptives, Lyotard saves justice from the critique that truth is open to. Thus, when critical philosophies and innovative natural sciences overturn assumed notions of truth, the just is not also left scattered and ineffective. Claiming that justice is resistant to knowledge or calling for thinking justice without criteria is not, therefore, a version of epistemological and moral relativism, but rather its opposite: the maintenance of the law in an age of uncertainty.

## References

Kant, Immanuel (1951) Critique of Judgment. New York: Hafner.

Kant, Immanuel (1956) Critique of Practical Reason. New York: Macmillan.

Kant, Immanuel (1964) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals. New York: Harper and Row.

Lyotard, Jean-François (1988) Peregrinations: Law, Form, Event. New York: Columbia University Press.

Lyotard, Jean-François (1991) The Inhuman. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Lyotard, Jean-François and Jean-Loup Thébaud (1985) Just Gaming. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Neal Curtis is Senior Lecturer in the School of Arts, Communication and Culture at Nottingham Trent University. He is the author of War and Social Theory: World, Value and Identity (Palgrave, 2005).

# Modernity

Couze Venn and Mike Featherstone

Abstract Whilst presenting a number of features that have been put forward to characterize modernity as a way of life and a social system, this entry suggests a dissident genealogy that reveals a hidden history of continuities and alternatives. It thereby problematizes the norms about periodization and the assumptions about the elaboration of a logos that underlie the concept of the modern. This approach to modernity as a complex of processes, institutions, subjectivities, and technologies challenges the more familiar history of linear temporalities and progressive transformations. The fruitfulness of seeing modernity, as much as other historical periods, as hybrid assemblages in a state of flux is that it draws attention to the heterogeneity and processual nature of cultures and feeds into the possibility of the critique of the present.

Keywords capitalism, dissident genealogy, modernism, public sphere, religion, technocratic reason, tradition

atour’s (1993) claim that we have never been modern is particularly provocative for those who are comforted by the progressive value attached to modernity, and for those who take it for granted that we know what modernity is. His intervention came after a period of often irate polemics around the loose concept of the postmodern that had started to appear from the 1960s, especially with regard to the changing relation of the arts to the project of the ‘emancipation of humanity’, and in relation to the perception of a crisis of legitimation, forcefully signalled in the work of Habermas and Lyotard from the late 1970s. His emphasis on modernity as a hybrid assemblage – constituted in, and constitutive of, ‘social needs and natural reality, meanings and mechanisms, signs and things’ (1993: 35) – that a certain discourse of modernity disassociates and makes invisible, calls up the contrasting problematization initiated by Foucault in The Order of Things. That pivotal work in the contemporary understanding of modernity identified a new, if enigmatic, object of knowledge, ‘Man’, as the central figure constituted through the dynamic but unstable intersection of three new fields of enquiry and domains of practice, namely, language, life, labour. Whilst Latour argued against the purification of an episteme as a discursive strategy in the constitution of modernity as different from preceding epochs, Foucault claims that modernity is announced in the shift from the system of representation that pertains to the classical age towards the new logos, centered on the epistemic subject, inscribed in the human sciences. It should be noted, however, that Foucault is careful to temper the claim of epistemic break with the proviso of conditions of possibility and thus the possibility that ‘man’ may well be erased ‘like a face drawn in sand at the edge of the sea’ (1966: 398). The point of highlighting the problematic status of modernity is to put into context the new form of purification at work today which is seeking to bring about through a renewed modernization the age of the market and of the economic subject as its calculating agent. Much is at stake, therefore, concerning a critique of the present, in one’s interpretation of modernity as a period.

Though explicitly or implicitly present in a great deal of the literature in the arts and philosophy from the 19th century, the concept of modernity has not always enjoyed the current prominence in the conceptual landscape of the social sciences. In the postwar era, up until the mid 1970s in sociology, it was capitalism which was the dominant term. The influential Introduction to the History of Sociology (Barnes, 1966) has no place for modernity in the index, although it had a large number of references to capitalism. Anthony Giddens’ (1973) key early work Capitalism and Modern Social Theory clearly indicates the emphasis by foregrounding capitalism, which is prominent in the index, whereas there is no place for modern or modernity. Yet by the early 1990s the focus for Giddens was more directly on spelling out the contours of modernity in books with titles such as The Consequences of Modernity and Modernity and Identity. In cultural studies, it may well be possible to chart a similar shift with Stuart Hall and his associates producing the influential Open University volume Formation of Modernity in 1992. When terminology shifts it is possible to see this renaming process as a strategic move in the field of academic and intellectual cultural production (Bourdieu). Our task is to examine what is at stake in such shifts.

Our approach is to bring into view a longer and more diffracted history of the modern, so that the break with classical antiquity from the 16th century and the quarrel of the ancients and the moderns in the 17th century appear as part of the landscape. A literature has emerged that regards developments in the European Renaissance as announcing an early modernity, and here one could refer to Dante, da Vinci, Luther, Cervantes, Augustine’s reflections on time, memory and the self, Arabic science and medicine, the Copernican revolution, the emergence of the New World as significant markers of the shifts in the imagination and the gaze that prepare the ground for the later reorganization of knowledge that one associates with modernity. Foucault strikingly began his study of these shifts with Velasquez’s painting ‘Las Meninas’ (1656) to bring to light the re-centring and de-centring of the gaze that fractures the ideal of classical representation, and betrays the lack at the heart of its episteme. The more familiar meaning of the term began to appear from the 18th century when the verb ‘to modernize’ first appears in the English language, introduced to denote alterations to buildings, language and fashions. From the mid-19th century in Europe the modern acquires the connotation of improvement and efficiency that persists in the common usage, a meaning that has acquired the force of dogma in the current largely neoliberal strategy of an injunction to ‘modernize or disappear.

A different line of interrogation of modernity, and a different periodization, is indicated by Todorov (1992[1982]), who identifies 1492 as the birthmark of modernity, arguing that the linking of knowledge with dispossession and subjugation triggered by the colonization of the Americas must be seen as a central feature of modern reason. Serres (1982) similarly noted the association of reason with subjugating power that follows when the reason/reasoning of the mightiest comes to be always identified with the ‘best reason’. Thus, from the beginning, the tensions in the modern reorganization of knowledge are bound up, on the one hand, with the effects of power and with the form of economy and governmentality emerging at the time; on the other hand, they attest to the alternative visions and trajectories side-lined when modernity acquires the force of a project of worlding a world according to a singular vision and temporalization of history.

Alongside these developments one finds certain themes that echo with the ambivalences and paradoxes signalled in Latour’s claim and in the debates about the postmodern, specifically, regarding the claim that the modern effects a break with tradition or community, as in Tonnies’ dichotomy of Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft, the notion of disenchantment that Weber detects in the privilege of instrumental rationality, and the idea of alienation and evanescence expressed in Marx, and explored in different registers from Baudelaire to Benjamin and Marshall Berman (1983). They are themes that surface in different forms in the history of modernity, expressing the enigmatic quality that, following Buci-Glucksmann (1994), one could refer to as ‘baroque reason’, that is, a reason that opens up the heterogeneous and inassimilable zone where the affinity between thought and affect and ‘the infinite materiality of bodies and images’ (1994: 139) are played out in visions of the uncanny, the horrifying, the ‘strange beauty’ and ‘swift joys’ explored in the modern aesthetics (Venn, 2000). At the worst of times, such as in the wake of Fascism, the violence latent in these themes has been embodied in the destructive figure of the ‘angel of progress’ as depicted in Benjamin’s vision of modernity as the ceaseless production of the new on the ruins of the old. It is important to note that in the post-Enlightenment period these ambivalences and misgivings about the modern have been amply elaborated or refigured in dissident works and thoughts in movements like Romanticism (see Bowie, 1990) and in conceptualizations of life and the living – in Leibnizian science as well as in early vitalist discourse – at odds with Mechanism and Newtonian natural philosophy that were becoming hegemonic from the 18th century. Of course works like Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein and Goethe’s Faust were themselves exemplarily modern. One should add to this problematization the effects of oppositional politics in Europe and the colonies that drew on the emancipatory and critical elements within Enlightenment discourse in support of resistance to the advances of capitalism and emergent imperial governmentality. They reveal a genealogy of counter and alternative modernities, of ‘the insurrection of subjugated knowledges’ (Foucault, 1984: 42) that we shall address below, focusing on a number of features that have come to be thought central to modernity.

A persistent feature of the discourse of modernity is the fact that in its emergence it has instigated a dichotomy between modern and traditional societies, that is, between processes of legitimation and the inscription of meaning based in rational calculations and institutions, in legal contract and individual volition as opposed to custom, religion and communal forms of wealth. Whilst clearly modernity has seen the emergence of state and non-state institutions that have not existed before, and whilst one can understand the logic of difference at work in this discursive constitution of modernity, analyses of modern culture too often forget the reality of the vestiges and mutations of older values, beliefs and ways of being, for instance regarding feudalism, monarchism, and ‘traditional’ forms of sovereignty and power that coexist with secular state institutions. For example, for a long time in Europe and in many colonized states, family law remained the prerogative of the church or religion and ‘tradition’. In any case, the values that secular law inscribes often have a foundation in religious and traditional belief systems. Indeed a dissident genealogy of modernity would restore, amongst other things, the central place that non-conformist beliefs like Unitarianism and Deism continued to have in shaping the transformations in society that have made the world as modern – in education, in legislation, in the opposition to slavery, in the history of socialism and even the development of the Enlightenment. In its making of difference, the discourse of modernity has reconstructed a view of preceding periods and a sense of its own coherence that simply does not accord with the historical reality. The operation of this systemic discursive distortion has been equally at work in the understanding of concepts of civilization, of nation, of the Orient and the ‘Other’, and of science itself.

Conventionally, in the social sciences, a series of terms like secularism, democracy, technology, the nation-state, citizenship, industrialization, urbanization comes to mind to qualify what one means by modernity. One may even add to that list ideas of the epistemological superiority of science, the autonomy of reason and the law, the existence of a public sphere, human rights, a number of fundamental freedoms, individual ownership of property and individualism. But as soon as one starts to make such a check-list of the characteristics or the criteria that one would use to distinguish a modern society from a non-modern one, or to categorize modernity as a period, one begins to encounter difficulties. Not only is it the case that many states that take their modernity for granted do not display many of the key features that social theory ascribes to modernity; the point is that all these terms are open to problematization. In fact if one were to imagine the ideal-type of modern state, almost no existing state qualifies. For instance the political institutions of the USA may in principle be secular, but religion, although technically a separate sphere from the state, continues to occupy a central place both symbolically and at the level of legitimation. Indeed, appeal to a transcendent domain in the institution of modernity and in the authorization of everyday practices in conditions of modernity is deeply ingrained. The effect of the neglect of belief systems in the history of modernity is yet to be properly established; it will completely alter our view of modern cultures. Similarly, arguments that point to the emergence of a ‘society of control’ and ‘Empire’ undermine faith in the existence of democracy even in the so-called ‘advanced’ states. Latour’s claim in a sense draws attention to counter-discourses that open the way for a questioning not only of modernity as a period, but of the system of classification and periodization that have been taken as paradigmatic for a considerable time.

The notion of a break with ‘tradition’ and with the old, central to the modern imaginary, has its exemplary instantiation in Descartes’ gesture of tabula rasa, that is, of brushing aside from the table of knowledge the authority of ancient texts; it is the gesture whereby the clean slate of reason and evidence is made to replace appeal to an ultimately transcendent authority. Older knowledges may be readmitted but subject to the critical and sceptical judgement of a rational method, uncluttered by faith and dogmas. This gesture also installs the epistemic subject in the place of the logos or principle guaranteeing rational thought, and so inaugurates a privilege of cognitivism, and the ‘forgetting’ of metaphysics that remain symptomatic well into so-called postmodern times. One encounters it today in the models of artificial intelligence that assume a unitary, autonomous, rational, self-sufficient mind or brain. This assumption about a singular author of truth runs counter to the collaborative and inter-subjective reality of the process of production and validation of knowledge, then and now, as the social studies of science have established; it is to be hoped that new information technologies like the Internet and digitalization will undermine such assumptions, though they too will have to change, for the hold of logocentrism runs deep in the conceptual and technical apparatus of modernity and postmodernity.

Another instance of a construction by the social sciences that casts into invisibility features central to the institution of modern societies concerns the question of the emergence of a public sphere which, since the early studies by Habermas (1983 [1980]), has been thought intrinsic to modernity. The argument is that in democratic societies new public spaces have emerged for the formation of public opinion about matters concerning the good order of the state; they facilitate the free exchange of information and rational debate, and thus help to constitute an informed public capable of making rational choices about issues relating to group and national interests. Yet the dichotomous framing of modernity has meant that liberal as well as many radical accounts of this element of the democratic polity have tended to neglect the role both of traditional sites – the marketplace, the church – and dissident forums located in local or communal settings. The history of resistance demonstrates the extent to which mechanisms were invented that served the goals of dissident publics in the modern period. This includes a large number of societies and associations, such as syndicalist organizations or ‘combinations’, mutual help associations, salons and societies like the Lunar Society, as well as non-conformist sects, such as the Quakers, or the Unitarian Church. Such new elements of the public spheres emerging in response to bourgeois institutions and spaces, and thus themselves belonging to modernity, nevertheless relied on values and socialities that reconstituted older social relations and ways of being or constituted new publics that one should describe as hybrid.

Thus, Linebaugh and Rediker (2000) show the extent to which sailors, slaves, and commoners constituted a kind of ‘many-headed hydra’ forging new alliances and fomenting rebellion. This process is even clearer when one considers the history of slave and colonial resistance. For instance, Genovese (1974) shows the importance of ambulant preachers and religious gatherings, the role of the Book alongside mutations in music and songs and ways of storytelling in forming opinion and coordinating action that sustained rebellion (something Toni Morrison has dramatized and analysed in her writings). Similarly, the Subaltern Studies Group has shown the extent to which new emergent forms of organization and knowledges and older ‘traditional’ institutions and sites combined to determine the form and modalities of resistance to subjugation in India, for instance about the Santal, Basarat, and Sepoy uprisings, or jute workers organization (studies by Guha, Pandey, and Chakrabarty in Guha and Spivak, 1988). Whilst print technology was important in these activities, the interesting issue is both the emergence of non-bourgeois publics and spheres and the process of circulation of ideas through the network of dissident groups that has tended to remain mostly invisible in accounts of modernity. Whilst it can be argued that these forms of resistance are modern, it is also the case that continuities existed, say about religious sites and the role of religious ideas, which the conventional account of modernity neglects because of the dichotomies inscribed in its systems of classification.

In opposition to the neat break which conventional social science descriptions assume, our interrogation underlines the hybrid, cosmopolitan, heterogeneous or creolized character of the institutions, organizations and subjectivities that construct the modern period in Europe and elsewhere. For example, Viswanathan’s (1989) study of the introduction of English in India in the 19th century to constitute a cadre of functionaries for the machinery of imperial governmentality shows the importance of the discussions about the constitution of an appropriate literary canon and the place of religion in the curriculum that had effects for the modernization process in both the colonies and in England. A more pertinent case for the reconstruction of knowledge today is that of the formation of a cosmopolitan corps of intellectuals and artists spread across the continents who were involved in exchanges and networks and collaborations that increasingly determined the content and destiny of movements like modernism and socialism. For instance, the ‘1922 Generation’ of D’Andrate and others in Brazil, the Harlem Renaissance movement in the USA involving poets, novelists, musicians, activists, modernism in India, China, Japan from the 1920s were not only central in the transformation of the culture and landscape outside Europe, but had effects on artists and intellectuals in the ‘metropolitan’ centres of empire, in terms of subject matter and influence – indicatively: jazz, African art and cubism, a novel like Forster’s A Passage to India. The history of modernism would have been utterly different without these diasporic fusions, which have since become commonplace, if ignored in conventional accounts of modernity. At the level of politics, one can note the emergence, from the late 19th century but particularly after the First World War, of political parties and movements for decolonizations and vernacular alternative modernities in China, India, Latin America, Africa, Japan, Turkey that have altered the landscape of modernity worldwide.

This standpoint about the hybrid or composite character of much of what one recognizes as modern is in keeping with the recognition of several conjoined processes: the slow and uneven pace of change of social institutions as understood within the framework of the longue durée; the heterogeneous character of all cultures, resulting from the borrowings, admixtures, grafts, cross-cultural exchanges of all kinds that work in pragmatic ways rather than according to the rationalist re-descriptions generated by the discourse of modern governance; the relative stability of the mechanisms, values, beliefs and sensibilities that participate in the formation of subjectivities and of inter-subjective worlds. Such worlds, constitutive of socialities, operate alongside as well as outside institutions subject to more direct state regulatory and disciplinary devices; indeed the latter often rely on the existence of the former for their own mechanisms of control to have a purchase. The point is to draw attention to the multiplicity, specificity and mobility of the assemblages that sustain real communities and ways of life, put into place or emerging as part of the practices of everyday life, and thus ubiquitous even if more visible in communities associated with small-scale farming or mining. Equally, they provide spaces and resources for alternative socialities and for resistance to hegemonic forces (Escobar and Alvarez, 1992). Interestingly, neo-liberal interventions in the domain of the social threaten to homogenize such mechanisms in their effort to make them amenable to economic calculations and governance, and thus open to the forces of domestication.

So, underneath the paradoxes of modernity lies a history that a dominant view of modernity, promoted or encouraged by the social sciences, has managed to make invisible. Critiques developed from the standpoint of feminist and postcolonial theory, and interrogations pursued in the social studies of the technosciences or instigated in the light of deconstruction, have challenged the ‘history of the victors’ as well as the authorized framing of knowledge within the occidentalist purview of modernity. And here one needs to bear in mind, as Foucault has argued, that critique itself and its apparatus, especially in the sense of ‘the permanent critique of our era’ that ‘simultaneously problematizes man’s relation to the present, man’s historical mode of being, and the constitution of the self as an autonomous subject’, is part of the