‘philosophical ethos’ of modernity (1984: 42). The co-articulation of capitalism, the European form of colonialism and technocratic and phallogocentric reason in the elaboration of modernity has over-determined the privilege of instrumental rationality and the narrative of progress-as-domination and increasing efficiency; it has encouraged the counter-emancipatory tendencies latent in the discourse of modernity and hastened the postmodern ‘end of history and its fundamentalist dangers.

## The Postmodern

The prefix ‘post’ points to something after the modern, albeit with a certain hesitancy and sense of semantic inadequacy, suggesting something emergent and derivative, yet to be clearly delineated and formulated as a positive term in its own right. The postmodern, like its affiliate terms postmodernism, postmodernity and postmodernization, takes its impetus from modernity. The modern can be seen as the generic term which generates the set. Adding the term ‘post’ to the modern suggests some failure of the modern. This ‘postmodern condition’ means the loss of confidence in metanarratives, the ‘big stories’ of progress, science, human rights and citizenship which came out of the Western Enlightenment of the 18th century and posited both a linear direction to history and an expanding horizon of possibilities (Lyotard, 1984). The modern, as we noted, identifies itself with its differentiation from its own past: to be modern is to continually anticipate or produce the new and different. The postmodern challenged this modern capacity and suggested the end of the new and of originality: the end of art, the end of the subject, the end of history.

The family of terms deriving from the postmodern gained its impetus from the popularity of the term ‘postmodernism’ in the 1960s, seen as a reaction to artistic modernism. In the United States in particular, young writers, artists and critics such as Burroughs, Barthelme, Rauschenberg, Cage, Fiedler, Hassan and Sontag portrayed modernism as exhausted, as institutionalized into high culture in the museum and academy. Postmodernism pointed to the collapse of the hierarchical distinction between high and mass culture, the mixing of codes and stylistic eclecticism, the loss of the distinction between art and everyday life and the end of the originality of the artist, for instance in the debates about Warhol and Pop Art. This entailed a positive attitude towards everyday consumer culture and a rejection of the central (high) cultural values of modernity. It was this challenging critical aspect, with its suspicion of totalizing reason and value hierarchies, which proved attractive to some intellectuals and academics. In the 1970s and 1980s a number of high profile debates ensued, as the term was batted back and forth between Europe and the United States and a range of major figures were involved or invoked such as Bell, Baudrillard, Deleuze, Derrida, Foucault, Habermas, Jameson, Lyotard and Vattimo. As the term postmodern was seized upon by critics and commentators and used in a variety of imprecise ways, the more dramatic epochal associations came to the fore, linked to French poststructuralist theorists such as Deleuze and Foucault (later Baudrillard), despite regular denials. The dramatic contrast was made between Foucault’s provocative remark at the end of The Order of Things about the possible disappearance of ‘man’ and Habermas’s assertion that modernity was an unfinished project.

Other themes are opened up here, particularly in relation to temporality/historicality, as for example in Jameson’s work, and to a critique of technics. Jameson’s (1991) intervention in the debate arises from the widespread concern about the effects of developments that were beginning to become definite: the ‘legitimation crisis’ to which Habermas and others had drawn attention, the emergence of the ‘society of the spectacle’ (Debord, 1977), shifts in the relation of culture and the economy that were thought in terms of consumer culture (Featherstone, 1991); the transformations in science and technology, not just in the wake of cybernetics, but in relation to an uncoupling of science from critique and from a certain mode of questioning that had nourished the Enlightenment idea of modernity as a project. It is implicated for example in his reference to the erosion of the distinction between high and mass culture and the radicalizing role that the avant-garde was supposed to have. He targets problems of pastiche, of the fragmentation of experience and subjectivity, the flattening of time and the erasure of history, and the self-referentiality of mass culture. These have become familiar issues in the debate about postmodernism. However, his analytical apparatus relies on his ideas of a political unconscious and the logic of consumer capitalism, ideas that are fraught with assumptions and misunderstandings about so-called ‘post-structuralist’ critiques, though they provide a purchase for the analysis of the culture of modernity.

It is important to contrast the stakes in this debate with the vibrant and hopeful output of modernist work coming out of postcolonizing countries after the Second World War. It would require several books to redress this balance, for artists, writers, architects in the ‘Third World’ were busy producing works that engaged with the project of decolonization and the experience of colonialism, and that forged the imagination of hybrid, diasporic worlds. Because of their subject matter, their attachments to vernacular cultural forms and their political commitments, they do not easily fit into the categories of ‘avant-garde’ though technically they belong to modernism; besides, the critiques levelled at the culture industry or the dichotomy of high versus popular culture do not apply to the same extent. An indicative list of this output would note, for example, The Progressive Artists Group in India, writers and artists like Achebe, Soyinka, Empahlele, wa’Thiongo, Okeke in Africa, Brazilia as icon of modernity in Latin America, alongside artists and writers like Wilfredo Lam, Neruda, Marquez, Allende, Kahlo. This output, whilst being modern and contributing to the culture and history of modernity, is not burdened by the obsessions of modish Euro-American postmodernism. Today the contrast in meaning and concern is exemplified in the difference between the work of, say, Damien Hirst and a Palestinian artist like Khaled Hourani; it is repeated in the kind of corpus of work represented in the Documenta series of exhibitions (Enwesor et al., 2003) and artistic activities discussed in many journals, e.g. Small Axe. Other elements of a ‘minoritarian (post)modernity come into view here; they are an integral aspect of the dissident genealogy of modernity that we are outlining.

Curiously, one starting point for theorizing this alternative account is Lyotard’s (1984[1979]) much cited and misunderstood analysis of the postmodern condition. Although the impact of this text has focused on the question of the postmodern, the underlying issue, as the subtitle, ‘Report on Knowledge’, indicates, is about foundation, namely of truth, of the good society or the ethical community, of living well, of their inter-relationships and their grounding. It is also about the impossibility of foundation, its slippery character, and its secret or veiled existence. Truth, the good society, ethics refer to a transcendent domain; they operate according to the logic of the promise, a ‘to-come’ that asks that one trust in a virtual or ungrounded ground. Premodern societies took this world for granted, in which the virtual and the actual interpenetrated in a magical or miraculous domain, inhabited by spirits and intangibles entities. The grand narratives circumscribing the spatio-temporal field of this imaginary in which the ‘to-come’ and the ‘having-been’ encompass ‘the totality of life within the same unity of time’ (Lyotard, 1988) work according to the mythical organization of time, whereby the beginning and the end refer to each other. Modernity invents linearity, and thus inscribes the repetitive erasure of preceding moments. This gesture of tabula rasa must be ceaselessly re-enacted, and its costs worked through. For Lyotard, it recalls the repetition-compulsion that drives the search for the lost object of desire. A forgetting of foundation ensues, and thus its dissimulation into an absent-present metaphysics – the trace of which Nietzsche, Heidegger and Derrida have deconstructed in their different ways. There is also the temptation to refigure the desire for an emancipation into a technique or an art of bringing forth, a techne. Lyotard (1988) discusses this avenue in order to make visible the relation to an ethics and an aesthetics, as well as to argue for the work of anamnesis that needs to be part of the process of (a problematic and interminable) emancipation. It is in that context that he says:

Postmodernity is not a new age, it is the rewriting of some features to which modernity has laid claim, and to begin with, of its claim to found its legitimacy on a project of the emancipation of the whole of humanity by means of science and technics. But this rewriting, as I said, has been at work for a long time already within modernity itself. (Lyotard, 1988: 202)

The implication about the work of memory that is called for to avoid compulsionrepetition is also for Lyotard a way of resisting the erasing of duration immanent in the overwriting and overcoding of modernity in the self-referential imaginary of new communication technologies. It is important to point out that this analysis of foundation is consistent with the arguments about the elimination of the emancipatory goals of the Enlightenment, inscribed in the idea of modernity as a project, brought about by the prioritizing of the criteria of technical efficiency and of productivity. This shift, as we noted earlier, is consistent with the privilege of ‘purposive-rational’ (Habermas) or technocratic rationality over ethical and aesthetic considerations that thinkers of the Frankfurt School as well as Habermas have underlined in their critique of post-Enlightenment reason and capitalism.

The thrust of the entry has been to problematize modernity as a period. A number of final reflections will enable us to point towards more fruitful grounds for the critique of founding principles and the context of globalization and its problems. They relate to the need to rethink the relation between life/the living, technology, socialities and projects of becoming that pursue the emancipatory ideals that had motivated the radical side of Enlightenment and modernity. Stiegler (1998), in his analysis of the relation of technics to time in the history of being, points to the arguments about the separation of tekhne and episteme that appeared in the history of Western philosophy. This distinction was not made in Homeric times, and we should add, in philosophies from South Asia and Egypt that fed into ancient Greek thought. This separation, he argues, arose as part of the instrumentalization of logos that readied it as an instrument of power, through rhetoric; it led to the renunciation of knowledge. Technics thereby became the unthought in the theorization of being, a forgetting with profound consequences if one thinks of the history of being as ‘nothing but its inscription in technicity’ (Stiegler, 1998: 4). Stiegler’s exploration notes the complex genealogy of this splitting of knowledge, passing through Lamarck’s distinction between organic and inorganic life and the effects of industrialization in the technicization of science, the instrumentalizing effects of which Habermas highlighted, as we saw. For Stiegler, the overthrowing of the order of knowledge and of social organization as a consequence of 19th-century industrialization meant that,

. . . philosophical reflection was now faced with such a widespread technical expansion that all forms of knowledge were mobilized by, and brought closer to, the field of instrumentality, to which science, with its ends determined by the imperatives of the economy and war, and its epistemic status shifting accordingly, became more and more subject. (Stiegler, 1998: 2)

We have noted the extent to which capitalism and the European form of colonialism were determining in this shift; their critique remains central. But Stiegler highlights an aspect of the privilege of instrumental rationality and goals that open up an additional avenue for a critique of modernity as a period, namely, the argument that ‘the technicization of science constitutes its eidetic blinding [and] the ensuing displacement of meaning leads to an elaboration of method that is metaphysical’ (1998: 3). Furthermore, technicization, Stiegler tells us, produces loss of memory whilst calculation comes to determine the essence of modernity. The process of technicization through calculation,

. . . drives Western knowledge down a path that leads to a forgetting of its origin, which is also a forgetting of its truth. This is the ‘crisis of the European sciences’. Without a refoundation of rational philosophy, science . . . leads, it is argued, to the technicization of the world. (Stiegler, 1998: 3)

This interrogation of modernity, focusing on the questioning of technics and technical being, is part of the longer genealogy that we have tried to signal by returning to a number of moments in the mutations and departures that have renewed the critique of the present and still today provide resources for the struggle against ‘the return of the worst’ that Derrida (Derrida and Stiegler, 2002) argued was motivation for his commitment to the liberatory and critical ideals of the Enlightenment. It puts on the agenda the problem of rethinking the history of being in terms of the diverse histories, in different cultures and periods, of the constitutive interrelationship between foundational narratives, technology, and the goals of society, that is, the interrelationships of metaphysics and religion, ethics, and projects of emancipation such as modernity. The analysis of this complex history of modernity encompasses spatialities and temporalities that stretch well beyond the European and Western purview of the becoming of being. The context of ‘global knowledge’ and its dangers is the backdrop against which we argue for dissident genealogies of this history.

## References

Barnes, H.E. (ed.) (1966) Introduction to the History of Sociology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Berman, M. (1983) All That Is Solid Melts into Air. London: Verso.

Bowie, A. (1990) Aesthetics and Subjectivity: From Kant to Nietzsche. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Buci-Glucksmann, C. (1994) Baroque Reason. The Aesthetics of Modernity, trans. P. Camiller. London: Sage.

Debord, G. (1977) The Society of the Spectacle. Detroit, MI: Black and Red.

Derrida, J. and B. Stiegler (2002) Echographies of Television, trans. J. Banorek. Cambridge: Polity.

Enwesor, O. et al. (eds) (2003) Creolite and Creolization (Documanta 11–3). Hatje-Cantz: Ostfildern-Ruit.

Escobar, A. and S. Alvarez (1992) The Making of Social Movements in Latin America. Boulder: Westview Press.

Featherstone, M. (1991) Consumer Culture and Postmodernism. London: Sage.

Foucault, M. (1966) Les mots et les choses. Paris: Editions Gallimard. [English version (1970) The Order of Things. London: Tavistock]

Foucault, M. (1984) ‘What is Enlightenment?’, in P. Rabinow (ed.) The Foucault Reader. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

Genovese, E. (1974) Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made. New York: Random House.

Giddens, A. (1973a) Capitalism and Modern Social Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Giddens, A. (1973b) The Class Structure of Advanced Societies. London: Hutchinson.

Guha, R. and G. Spivak (eds) (1988) Selected Subaltern Studies. Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Habermas, J. (1983[1980]) The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity. Twelve Lectures, trans. F. Lawrence. Cambridge: Polity.

Jameson, F. (1991) Postmodernism or the Cultural Logic of Capitalism. London: Verso.

Latour, B. (1993) We Have Never Been Modern, trans. C. Porter. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Linebaugh, P. and M. Rediker (2000) The Many-Headed Hydra: Sailors, Slaves, Commoners, and the Hidden History of the Revolutionary Atlantic. Boston: Beacon Press.

Lyotard, J.-F. (1984[1979]) The Postmodern Condition. A Report on Knowledge, trans. G. Bennington and B. Massumi. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Lyotard, J.-F. (1988) ‘Reecrire la modernite’, Cahiers de Philosophie 5: 193–203.

Serres, M. (1982) Hermes: Literature, Science, Philosophy. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Stiegler, B. (1998) Technics and Time, trans. R. Beardsworth and G. Collins. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Todorov, T. (1992[1982]) The Conquest of America, trans. R. Howard. New York: Harper-Perennial.

Venn, C. (2000) Occidentalism. Modernity and Subjectivity. London: Sage.

Viswanathan, G. (1989) Masks of Conquest. London: Faber and Faber.

Couze Venn is Professor of Cultural Theory, Nottingham Trent University. His latest book is The Postcolonial Challenge (Sage, 2005).

Mike Featherstone is Editor of Theory, Culture & Society. His recent publications include Automobilities (edited with N. Thrift and J. Urry, Sage, 2005) and Consumer Culture and Postmodernism (second edition forthcoming from Sage, 2006).