political advantage and to stay in power. Consequently, the economic modernization has been spectacularly successful but political modernization, in terms of democratization, has been arrested (Chua, 1994).

The modern nation-state of Singapore also exacts costs in the cultural sphere. Through its emphasis on the economic importance of the English language, which was adopted as the language of public administration and commerce since political independence, and the primary language of instruction in state-run schools in 1974, each successive generation of Singaporeans has become progressively cut off from flows of cultural influences from the PRC, India, Indonesia and Malaysia, for want of linguistic competence. Furthermore, the new nation-state demands the inscription and primacy of a national identity on every individual citizen, over and above all other identities. Through the teaching of a ‘national’ history that casts the ‘left’ as the enemy which was defeated by the current regime, the nascent political modernity of the first half of the 20th century has been progressive displaced by the hegemonic narrative of the existing regime.

In an ironic twist of trajectory, the adoption of English as the ‘utilitarian’ language has unavoidably led to it becoming the dominant language of everyday life of Singaporeans, which consequently leaves them open to influences from the Englishspeaking West, particularly the United States, through its powerful popular culture industries. The fear of American-style liberalism has led to yet another ideological turn. Without a local indigenous cultural past to excavate for a national culture, the existing regime reaches far back into the deep past of the three component ethnic populations for resources to ‘refashion’ as national culture in the name of ‘Asian Values’. These were meant to be distilled from Sinic-Confucian civilization, Hindu civilization of South Asia and Islamic civilization of the Malays (Chua, 1999). The core of these ‘Asian Values’ is a strong version of ‘communitarianism’ in which collective interests are privileged over individual interests, in contrast to weak versions of communitarianism which sees the need to preserve a concept of the social as a balancing act against the tendency of liberalism towards libertarianism (Chua, 2004).

This move towards ‘Asian Values’ is fraught with difficulties. Take the case of the Islamic civilizational root – the state is now faced with the need to confront Islamic fundamentalism within the nation (Kadir, 2004). The Confucian route poses more promise in view of the intellectual interest in the larger North East Asia to fashion a ‘new’ Confucianism that is appropriate to our times. However, as mentioned earlier, contemporary Singaporeans are poorly schooled in Confucianism as a way of life, apart from its translation into a set of routine family practices. In the final analysis, Singapore would still have to wait for intellectual development in North East Asia for the next turn of its cultural modernity.

## References

Chua, B.-H. (1994) ‘Arrested Development: Democratization in Singapore’, Third World Quarterly 15: 655–68.

Chua, B.-H. (1999) ‘“Asian Values” Discourse and the Resurrection of the Social’, positions: east asian cultural critique 7: 573–92.

Chua, B.-H. (2004) ‘Communitarianism without Competitive Politics in Singapore’ in B.-H. Chua (ed.) Communitarian Politics in Asia, pp. 78–101. London and New York: RoutledgeCurzon.

Clutterbuck, R. (1985) Conflict and Violence in Singapore and Malaysia 1945–1983. Singapore: Graham Brash.

Kadir, S. (2004) ‘Islam, State and Society in Singapore’, Inter-Asia Cultural Studies 5: 357–71.

Miksic, J. and C.-A. Low (2004) Early Singapore: 1300–1918. Singapore: Singapore History Museum.

Scott, J. (1998) Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Yong, M.C. (2003) The Indonesian Revolution and the Singapore Connection, 1945–1949. Leiden and Singapore: KITLV and Singapore University Press.

Chua Beng Huat is concurrently Professor at Asia Research Institute and Department of Sociology, National University of Singapore. He is co-executive editor of Inter-Asia Cultural Studies.

# The Body and Modernity in China

Li Shiqiao

Keywords China, modernity, the combatant body

M<sup>odernity</sup> <sup>in</sup> <sup>China</sup> <sup>seems</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>invoke</sup> <sup>an</sup>endless set of questions about both endless set of questions about both modernity as a meaningful cognitive framework and the ways in which modernity manifested in the Chinese cultural and political context. This, on the other hand, probably contributed to the fact that studies on modern China have become one of the fastest growing areas of scholarship in the past two decades. The account of modernization in China, until recently, had been relatively straightforward; encounters with the modern West beginning with the mid-19th century led to institutional tensions between new ideas and traditions, leading to a series of peaceful and violent revolutions marking the conflicts – the Opium War (1839–42), the Boxer Rebellion (1900), the May Fourth Movement (1919), etc. This account of the ‘key moments of rapture’ of modernization in China substantiated both the revolutionary hegemonic views of ‘stages’ of revolution and the metanarratives of freedom and progress mapped in a linear and universal pattern. As China’s archives opened up for research, and as intellectual inquiries shift from the Weberian interpretation of institutional changes, more nuanced studies are now possible from a multitude of spaces and views, generating new research questions and reframing old ones. As both a critique of modernity and a reconstitution of the Chinese modern, the new research traces shifting formations, always already hybridized and eclectic, of fractured and contested grounds between heterogeneous traditions and practices.

One useful point of entry into an understanding of modernization in China is through the reconstitutions of the body in the Chinese cultural and political context. When, in 1793 during his famous mission to China, Lord Macartney resisted the bodily movement of kowtow to the dismay of his Chinese hosts, he brought the cultural worlds constructed around the body into sharp relief. At the start of the first major violent encounter between China and the West during the Opium War, the Qing (1644–1911) court considered the body of the imprisoned site of opium-induced pleasures as undermining its normative functions as a site of moral rectitude in the Confucian tradition, in which to establish your body (lishen) commanded a central importance. On the other hand, China’s defeat in this war and a series of other encounters with Western powers set forth a rethinking of the body beyond the conventional understanding of the body framed through the duality of pleasure and moral conduct. Both pleasure and morality were reconstituted to include the ‘combatant body’ – the strong and dexterous body sustained through sports and competitions in the Hellenistic formulation, and codified in the representations of the body since the Renaissance in the West. In China, the combatant body had been understood traditionally as something to be gradually overcome through the civilizing power of ritualized moral conduct or spiritual enlightenment. Vestiges of the combatant body remain through the metaphor of battle frequently used in Chinese erotic literature. Major reform thinkers and revolutionaries in China in the early 20th century paid extraordinary attention to the remaking of the body in a multiplicity of discursive formations. The Renaissance ideal of bringing together active life (vita activa) and contemplative life (vita contemplativa) became a new paradigm to be injected into the traditional role of intellectuals focused on literary and artistic activities. Education reforms in the early 20th century emphasized physical exercises, as shown by Wen-hsin Yeh in Alienated Academy (1990). Liang Qichao (1873–1929) stressed the central importance of the new Chinese person (the new citizen or xinmin) to the renewal of Chinese culture and society in the modern world. This understanding influenced a generation of Chinese reformers and revolutionaries: Mao Zedong, for instance, named his student organization the New Citizens’ Society (Xinmin xueshe), and he engineered a high visibility for his rigorous exercise regimes – a central theme of revolutionary propaganda in post-1949 China. China’s first participation in the modern Olympics in 1984 and its hosting of the 2008 event can be seen as symbolic manifestations of the reconstituted body advocated by successive political regimes in the 20th century, displayed in the international arena. Despite all these changes, the traditional body, seen in its speech (and the absence of it), memory, movement essential to the ever-present power hierarchy, has never ceased to be a significant layer in the process of its hybridization with the new combatant body.

‘The debating mind’ as the counterpart of the combatant body demanded remaking of knowledge underlined with principles of precision and conciseness; this formed the main modern reform agenda for leading intellectuals such as Yan Fu and Liang Qichao as they introduced Western scholarship into China. The embodied knowledge of the traditional hegemonic power hierarchy of Confucianism was contested by the new hegemony of logo-centric knowledge. The new mind must now be sufficiently nimble to employ notions of global space and time (geography and history in the Hegelian sense), and to renew and recreate Chinese scholarship in this new framework. Developing this agenda, scholars such as Hu Shi (1891–1962) and Lu Xun (1881–1936) experimented with a new way of writing Chinese (baihua) which moved away, in form and content, from Chinese tradition symbolized by the dense scholarly language fostered by the traditional examination system. This distance between the new language and the traditional language became an important measure through which renewal and recreation of the Chinese culture in the modern context could be considered possible.

The prosthetic extension of the combatant body through technology was particularly receptive in the Chinese context. This may be attributed to the ease with which the notion of technology could be rephrased in the existing vocabulary in the Chinese scholarly tradition, albeit with technology now playing a reversed role. The conceptual framework for technology was traditionally framed as one side of the binary opposition of the dao and the qi. The dao (the contemplation of universal principles) and the qi (the making of things) were understood as separate endeavours, and the pursuit of the dao was seen to be a superior form of intellectual life. This concept can be found in early classics such as Zhouyi (The Book of Changes), compiled in the late Zhou dynasty (770–256 BCE). As China encountered the Baconian notion of use/power of technology, it sought to rethink its tradition of science and invention which, as Joseph Needham demonstrated in his monumental Science and Civilization in China, had always been a key component in traditional Chinese society. From the 1840s onwards, a number of capable Qing officials such as Zeng Guofan (1811–1872), Zuo Zongtang (1812–1885), and Li Hongzhang (1823–1901), who rose to prominence as commanders of armies suppressing various rebellions (Taiping, Nian, and Muslim) which plagued the Qing Empire in the late 19th century, built shipyards, arsenals, and railways. They revived a historical phrase of self-strengthening (ziqiang) to underscore the Chineseness of their endeavor. They wanted to overcome the ‘shame of labor’ of the Chinese literati, an effort which paralleled the medieval exultation of manual labor in the Benedictine monasteries described by Lewis Mumford in The City in History (1961). While the technological modernization of the Qing court in the late 19th century was undermined by incessant foreign hostility and conservative courtiers, Deng Xiaoping’s pragmatic modernization program from the 1980s has been much more effective in restoring a modernizing agenda sidelined by political and ideological demands in the early 20th century.

The female body in the Chinese cultural and political context presents a uniquely complex question in China’s modernization. The abolition of the female bound feet, a central fetish at the heart of the patriarchal pleasure/morality, became the first indication of a process of reconstitution of the female body. The May Fourth Movement championed the ideal of the Chinese woman through equality and freedom, an ideal that continued to gain currency in post-1949 China. Mao’s impassioned writings in 1919 on the tragedy of Miss Zhao, a young woman who committed suicide as she refused an arranged marriage, reflected this ideal. The Norwegian dramatist Henrik Ibsen’s A Doll’s House, in which the heroine Nora left her husband as she revolted against bourgeois hypocrisy and oppression, was translated and printed in the journal of the new culture, New Youth, in 1918; it was received with great enthusiasm by China’s youth. As much as the cultural iconoclasm in the 1910s demanded the liberation of the female body, nationalism in the 1920s and 1930s exerted a counter-claim on it in the form of a return of the patriarchal authority, as Prasenjit Duara demonstrates in Rescuing History from the Nation (1995) and in ‘Of Authenticity and Woman’ (2000). The earlier representation of anti-Confucian and anti-familial women became a liability for nationalism, and was replaced by one of traditional virtues bound by the domestic space off limits to Western influences, playing a central part in the construction of the nationalist ideology. Within the 20th century, the female body in the Chinese cultural and political context was, and continues to be, the site of violence, oppression, and liberation in the multifarious formations of patriarchal authority, cultural iconoclasm, revolutionary hegemony, and nationalism with heightened intensity.

## References

Duara, P. (1995) Rescuing History from the Nation. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Duara, P. (2000) ‘Of Authenticity and Woman: Personal Narratives of Middle-Class Women in Modern China’, in W. Yeh (ed.) Becoming Chinese: Passages to Modernity and Beyond, pp. 342–64. Berkeley, LA and London: University of California Press.

Featherstone, M., M. Hepworth and B.S. Turner (eds) (1991) The Body: Social Process and Cultural Theory. London: Sage.

Li, S. (2003) ‘Reconstituting Chinese Building Tradition: The Yingzao Fashi in the Early Twentieth Century’, Journal of Society of Architectural Historians 62(4): 470–89.

Mumford, L. (1961) The City in History, its Origins, its Transformations, and its Prospects. New York: Harcourt Brace.

Sennett, S. (1994) Flesh and Stone: The Body and the City in Western Civilization. New York and London: W. W. Norton & Company.

Tang, X. (1996) Global Space and the Nationalist Discourse of Modernity: The Historical Thinking of Liang Qichao. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Turner, B.S. (1996) The Body and Society, Explorations in Social Theory, 2nd edn. London: Sage.

Yeh, W. (1990) Alienated Academy: Culture and Politics in Republican China, 1919–1937. Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Asia Centre.

Li Shiqiao is Associate Professor in the Department of Architecture, Chinese University of Hong Kong. He has published on architecture and modernity in China and England, and has won architectural design awards.

# Anthropology and Japanese Modernity

Kaori Sugishita

Keywords imperialism, modernity, postmodernism, westernization

A lthough the discipline of anthropology is<sub>embedded</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>different</sub> <sub>socio-cultural</sub> entities, the West remains the primary ‘we/here’ that produces knowledge about ‘others/ there’, thanks to its political, economic and academic dominance. Hence it is worth investigating the development of anthropology in the non-West with regard to different manifestations of ‘modernity’, which was originally a self-image of the West, a state of rationality and civilization that the dominant entity attributed to itself. Japan, a non-Western nation, has engaged with modernity as such in relentless pursuit of Western power, wealth and knowledge. The operation of anthropology in this process is twofold; on the one hand, Japan as ‘others/there’ has been scrutinized by the dominant West, while, on the other, it has joined the West, as ‘we/here’, in subjecting ‘others/there to the same scrutiny. In fact, Japan has become a locus of anthropology comparable to the West in terms of ethnographic and theoretical range. However, Japanese anthropology lacks critical perspectives on itself, as illustrated by its constant failure to objectify Japanese modernity, the particular conditions under which it has developed.

Japan’s engagement with modernity traces back to the restoration of imperial rule (1868); with the feudalistic regime of shogunate and its policy of national isolation abolished, Japan set out to catch up with the West in the name of ‘enlightenment’. Anthropology was introduced to Japan in this course for modernization, mediated by Western investigation into the origins of the Japanese. Brought to a ‘shocking realization’ that they were observed by Westerners (Shimizu, 1998: 115), the Japanese vigorously produced knowledge about their origins, differentiating ‘we/here’ from ‘others/there’ in the North and the South. Such scholarship contributed to the modern attempt of Japan to forge its unity as a ‘nation-state’, which unfolded against a backdrop of the emergent world order centred on the West (Askew, 2003: 138). In search of a national identity with which to arm itself, Japan desired to join the West as dominant entity, thereby keeping distance from Asia, the subordinate entity of which it hitherto formed a part. This led on to the development of imperialism in Japan, affecting anthropology therein; ‘we/here’ increasingly considered itself superior to ‘others/there’, even with regard to the West, let alone vis á vis Asia (Askew, 2003: 136–7).

Japan embarked on imperialist ventures with the Sino-Japanese war (1894–95), which resulted in the annexation of Taiwan. Following the Russo-Japanese war (1904–05), Korea and Micronesia were also added to the Empire. Correspondingly, Japanese anthropologists started to conduct research abroad, like their Western counterparts, assuming the power-based prerogative to observe ‘others/there’ (Shimizu, 1998: 117). Given its concern with the origins of ‘we/here’, anthropology served, in effect, to justify the Empire by establishing a prehistoric relationship between the colonizer and the colonized (Askew, 2003: 143). As it became more oriented towards contemporary ‘others/there’, the discipline meshed with imperialism at its height. In the 1930s and throughout the Second World War, the government was eager for the information that could be utilized in colonial administration and military operation (Nakao, 2000: 32). While imperialism did not entirely co-opt anthropology, the former facilitated the latter by not only securing access to ‘others/there’ but also providing a rationale for overseas research. As a matter of record, the Empire envisaged itself as a ‘Great Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere’, based on a self-righteous cause that Japan shall release Asia-Pacific regions from Western colonial rule.

Japan thus attempted to dominate the Asia-Pacific region under the guise of an egalitarian crusade against Western dominion over the world. Importantly, this attempt was connected with the nation’s aspiration to go beyond the modernity that had been achieved through ‘westernization’. Under such circumstances, many Japanese intellectuals endorsed the war, seeing it as a watershed in the national struggle to overcome the modern/the Western. It is fair to say that they were obliged to make a compromise between ‘imperial consciousness’ and ‘critical consciousness’ in reflecting on Japan’s modern experience, as social scientists in particular were (Barshay, 1996: 222). However, it is not evident that anthropologists had a critical perspective on Japanese modernity; they were disengaged from the discussions over the issue, while involving themselves in the war effort throughout the Empire. Apparently, anthropologists were so absorbed in ‘others/there’ that they failed to problematize ‘we/here’, particularly its modernization/westernization, of which their scholarship was a byproduct (Yamaguchi, 1966: 23–4). As it turned out, this largely remained a feature of anthropology in postwar Japan.

Defeated in the war over the Asia-Pacific against the West, Japan immediately transformed itself into a ‘democratic’ and ‘pacifist’ nation under American supervision (1945–52). Accordingly, Japanese intellectuals questioned the wartime proposition of overcoming the modern/the Western; the majority considered that Japan was yet to achieve modernity as a positive Western ideal, failing to produce, for instance, the kind of individuals that ‘democratization’ requires (McCormack and Sugimoto, 1988: 2). Meanwhile, anthropologists continued to ignore the question of Japanese modernity, despite focusing on ‘we/here’, having lost access to ‘others/there’. Refreshing their old interest in the origins of the Japanese, anthropologists overlooked modern determinants of Japanese society, such as absolutism, capitalism and land ownership (Yamaguchi, 1966: 26–7). Hence their scholarship was not as relevant to the postwar reconceptualization of Japan as it could have been. More importantly, anthropology failed to engage in self-criticism with regard to its wartime operation; the discipline was implicated in imperialism, the most repugnant problem of Japanese modernity.

With a renewed impetus for modernization/ westernization, Japan pushed forward with the postwar reconstruction. By the end of the 1970s, the nation turned out to be a non-Western economic superpower, outperforming most Western nations. Hence the national agenda of overcoming the modern/the Western resurfaced, coinciding with the emergence of postmodernism, the West’s self-doubt in modernity. The new current inclined Japanese intellectuals to argue that Japan had gone or was going beyond modernity, surpassing the West, with an emphasis placed on the socio-cultural ‘uniqueness’ of the nation. This kind of argument inevitably brought back the ‘fateful decision’ of Japan to transform itself in the image of the West (Miyoshi and Harootunian, 1988: 397), thereby inviting further probing into Japanese modernity. Anthropologists, on the other hand, barely participated in such debates; yet again they were busy exploring ‘others/there’, with ‘we/here’ reduced to a relatively minor field of interest. While postmodernism started to impinge on Japanese anthropologists in the 1990s, it did not necessarily lead them to reflection on Japan and its (post?)modernity.

Postmodern anthropology centred on the West’s attempt to redress the imbalance between subject and object of representation, which arose in part from the official end of colonialism. Modern/colonial anthropology indeed took the form of ‘epistemological dictatorship’ (Fabian, 1983: 140), drawing on the power inequality between ‘we/here’ and ‘others/there’. Japan, albeit a non-Western nation, was not only the object but also the subject in this dictatorship,