given its attempt to dominate the Asia-Pacific in place of the West. Hence postmodern/postcolonial currents encouraged Japanese anthropologists to investigate their past implication in imperialism, as well as to challenge the ‘Western academic hegemony’ (Kuwayama, 2004). However, earlier than this, they entertained postmodernism from a purely epistemological perspective, overlooking its political implications for the postcolonial world and specifically Japan as the periphery of the West (Ota, 1998: 175–246). Even now, Japanese anthropologists rarely make an issue of Japan as a particular locus of knowledge production, which not only adds to the Western hegemony but also hinders self-criticism on Japanese modernity.

Japan is possibly the sole instance of a non-Western nation wherein anthropology developed alongside imperialism and colonialism. At the core of this development is Japan’s desire for the West, the main characteristic of Japanese modernity. It is difficult to say if contemporary Japan has overcome modernity; the nation seems to have been modernized/westernized to such an extent that it almost identifies itself with the West, neither coveting nor contesting the modern/the Western. Japan has indeed become an honorary member of the West, thanks to its success in international politics and its economy, including a huge investment in the ‘Third World’. This has enabled Japanese anthropologists to explore ‘others/there in almost every corner of the world, a privilege that was originally limited to their Western counterparts. Given that, they ought to reflect on Japan as ‘we/here’, instead of uncritically identifying it with the West, the dominant ‘we/here’. Japanese modernity is the starting point for such reflections.

## References

Askew, David (2003) ‘Empire and the Anthropologist: Torii Ryu¯zo¯ and Early Japanese Anthropology’, Japanese Review of Cultural Anthropology 4: 133–54.

Barshay, Andrew E. (1996) ‘Toward a History of the Social Sciences in Japan’, Positions 4(2): 217–51.

Fabian, Johannes (1983) Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes its Object. New York: Columbia University Press.

Kuwayama, Takami (2004) Native Anthropology: The Japanese Challenge to Western Academic Hegemony. Melbourne: Trans Pacific Press.

McCormack, Gavan and Yoshio Sugimoto (1988) ‘Introduction: Modernization and Beyond’, in G. McCormack and Y. Sugimoto (eds) The Japanese Trajectory: Modernization and Beyond, pp. 1–14. Cambridge, New York and Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.

Miyoshi, Masao and H.D. Harootunian (1988) ‘Introduction’ [editorial introduction to feature articles on ‘Postmodernism and Japan’], South Atlantic Quarterly 87(3): 387–99.

Nakao, Katsumi (2000) ‘Joron: Shokuminchi jinruigaku no shatei’ [Introduction: The Scope of Colonial Anthropology] in K. Nakao (ed.) Shokuminchi Jinruigaku no Tenbo¯ [A Prospect of Colonial Athropology], pp. 15–44. Tokyo: Fukyo-sha.

Ota, Yoshinobu (1998) Transposition no Shiso¯: Bunka Jinruigaku no Sai-So¯zo¯ [Transposition: Reconceptualization of Cultural Anthropology]. Kyoto: Sekaishiso¯-sha.

Shimizu, Akitoshi (1998) ‘Nihon no jinruigaku’ [Japanese Anthropology] in T. Funabiki (ed.) Bunka Jinruigaku no Susume [An Encouragement of Cultural Anthropology], pp. 111–133. Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo¯.

Yamaguchi, Masao (1966) ‘Jinruigakuteki ninshiki no sho-zentei: Sengo nihon jinruigaku no shiso¯ jo¯kyo¯’ [Conditions of Anthropological Perception: Anthropological Thoughts in Postwar Japan], Shiso¯ [Thought] 508: 21–33.

Kaori Sugishita studied anthropology in Japan and England. After completing her PhD in England, she spent two years in South Africa as a postdoctoral fellow. She is currently based in Japan as a part-time lecturer.

# The Enlightenment

Couze Venn

Abstract For different reasons, and with different political goals at stake, the fundamental principles advocated by the Enlightenment are being challenged by both the left and the right. This entry sets out to clear a critical space for examining what is at stake in the present in interrogating its legacy as discourse for imagining alternative transmodern and transcolonial futures. A re-evaluation of the Enlightenment by reference to concepts of equality, liberty, emancipation, justice and becoming(s) is central to that task.

Keywords counter-Enlightenment, emancipation, evolution, informationalization, project, reason, transmodernity

## The Enlightenment

In 1984, on the occasion of the 200th anniversary of Kant’s essay ‘What is Enlightenment?’, Foucault wrote an essay of the same title in order to examine its legacy for the present. His claim that this event ‘has determined, at least in part, what we are, what we think, what we do today’ (1984: 32) triggers many questions and suggests an inheritance that needs to be interrogated, and not only in relation to the modern discourse of philosophy that Foucault’s rhetorical ‘we’ is meant to signal. To begin with, the invocation of a communal ‘we’ in the context of a supposedly postmodern age, while harbouring the spirit of the cosmopolitan universalism that the Enlightenment championed, comes up against the evidence of increasing and systematic inequalities and differences at all levels that obliges one to consider who is the addressee of the statement. Furthermore, inheritance today is bound up with a notion of inhabitance that directs attention to the reality of diasporic and contested places and spaces that trails the whole history of modernity with it. It is necessary therefore to make visible not only the broader epistemic and cultural context of the Enlightenment as a grand narrative, but also to question it regarding the purchase it may have now in the current moment of a world re-ordering which is set on countering its convictions about equality, liberty, fundamental rights and the promise of emancipation.

Kant, of course, did not invent the Enlightenment, though his reflections on the topic have given us key passages about the essential role of reason and critique in the progress or ‘maturity of humanity’, as he saw it, that have indeed come to encapsulate for many the salient features of Enlightenment as a project. Foucault’s own discourse, by focusing on Kant, refigures this project in terms of a particular trajectory towards ‘a critical ontology of ourselves’ that, unfortunately, obscures its more explicitly political dimension. For these reasons, I want to present here a different reading of the Enlightenment, not in order to engage in some futile critique of Foucault or Kant – since their essays are in fact both still productive from the point of view of an interrogation of the present – but in order to re-examine the stakes in posing the problem from the point of view of knowledge today and against a background of emergent socialities and great turbulences in the world that remind one of the conditions of emergence of the Enlightenment.

When conceptualized as a project, the Enlightenment invariably calls up, and merges into, the concept of modernity as a project. At the theoretical level, Habermas would be the figure that one associates with this convergence, both in his critique of the subversion of its radical potential because of the privileging of instrumental rationality in the historical elaboration of the project, and in his enduring faith in the possibility of the completion of its emancipatory goals. Lyotard counterposes a different perspective when he argues that the distinguishing trait of modernity is precisely that it presents itself in the form of a universal project, that is, as an Idea to be realized. According to him, its main goals expressed in the metanarratives of modernity are ‘the progressive emancipation of reason and of freedom, the progressive or catastrophic emancipation of labour (source of alienated value in capitalism), the enhancement of the whole of humanity through the development of capitalist technoscience’ (Lyotard, 1988: 31). To contextualize this idea of project, I will point to the fact that emancipatory discourses, or at least discourses that promise the possibility of escape from a presumed initial imperfection of the human being, have existed in all cultures, grounded in the idea of redemption or salvation or maturity, necessitating sacrifice and a process of self-reflection and discovery. This is often expressed in the idea of a journey towards something like the purification of the soul, a liberation from all-too-human defects through the acquiring of wisdom. These narratives of emancipation require that we free ourselves from the hold of the desires that keep us in a state of dependency or immaturity; the ‘pilgrim’ is counselled to seek out instead the knowledges that are meant to have a liberatory and transformative effect. Before modernity, such narratives referred to a religious discourse and inscribed their own grand or master narratives, so that the promise of the salvation or perfectibility of souls, and what that meant from the point of view of being saved from the abyss of finitude, cycles of rebirth, or the state of fallenness, was guaranteed by a transcendental realm or force to which it was imperative for the believer to submit. This foundation in religion is far from the notion of the history of emancipation that aligns it with the linear and progressive unfolding of humanity’s destiny that one encounters in the discourse of modernity; instead one encounters different temporalities where it is a matter of fixed trajectories and returns, of obedience and sacrifice, of listening to the proper.

By contrast, the master narratives of the Enlightenment insist on the secular foundation of its emancipatory enterprise, and on linear temporality. It distinguishes itself from other stories of human becoming by placing itself under the banner of reason and in the directing hand of the autonomous subject rather than that of religious doctrine and a divine being or purpose. The discourse of modernity, in breaking with previous systems of thought, refuses ideas that refer emancipation to a transcendent authority: God or fate/Karma. It claims to owe nothing to anyone except the effort of rational subjects and agency. It becomes its own authority. From the Enlightenment onwards, this authority is vested in Science. One needs to bear in mind the metaphysics of presence (Derrida, 1982) which this episteme covers over, though I shall draw attention rather to the break with the relation of faith to knowledge that this implies; it is something to which I will return presently, for it relates to conditions supporting contemporary servitudes. Today, as Lyotard (1993) notes, the idea that one has to labour and wait for emancipation is erased in the postmodern condition that not only desires to shorten the delay, but to instrumentalize the project of emancipation in the idea of development, and I would add, the equation of the latter with the notion of modernization itself.

I think it is important to highlight yet another feature which I will argue is determining, and that opens up the question of the political, namely, the idea of revolution. Kant locates its centrality for progress, and Lyotard has explained the extent to which it is precisely the ‘enthusiasm for revolution’, that is, the desire for a sociality yet to come, rather than specific advances in knowledge or progress in some aspect of society, which itself functions as the sign that attests to the ‘maturity of humanity’ (Lyotard, 1983: 244, 245). What I am thinking about here is the willingness to imagine and seek through action an unprecedented world, guided by nothing more than this idea of a possible or alternative world, brought about through human action. The readiness or disposition to contemplate such revolutionary change, inspired by the Enlightenment thought, is one of the key marks of modernity. It finds its initial instantiation in the French and American Revolutions, exemplary gestures of starting anew that have been repeated many times since. It could be pointed out that religions too have explicitly sought to effect such total transformations, for example, in the case of Judaism, Christianity, Islam, which explicitly condemned the previous system of beliefs and values against which they defined themselves and advocated an entirely new form of sociality. The difference, however, is that religious revolutions do not imagine their own disappearance or mutation as an integral part of the process; indeed quite the opposite, for, in rejecting the previous world, they propose a new order that would forever be founded on the new unchanging and unquestionable doctrines and principles – the commandments of God, the Book, the scared texts – (though schisms abound). Buddhism, interestingly, does not quite fit any of these models. By contrast, modernity posits a process of becoming. It brings the command of temporality itself within the perimeter of human agency, no doubt an excessive ambition with its own totalizing and totalitarian temptations. In this it differs from all other projects of emancipation or salvation.

It could, of course, be argued that other periods have known ambitious universalizing projects that similarly sought to establish a social order with a global, imperial reach, for example, in China at various points and with regard to Islamic expansion that stretched from the Balkans to Indonesia and central Africa. In relation to modernity’s expansionary enterprise, one could point to the emergence of vernacular modernities, and counter-modernities, in response to colonial subjugation and capitalist exploitation, and indeed to modernity’s own subjugating grasp (Gilroy, 1993). A brief look at the ideas that motivated the Enlightenment will bring to light the specificities of its discourse that enable one to judge competing projects of emancipation, as well as to rethink the narratives that continue to be both the stakes in the legacy of the Enlightenment and the inspiration for imagining different futures.

Central to the politics of Enlightenment thinkers was the rejection of the deep-seated belief that inequality and poverty were inevitable and reflected the natural state of human societies. This situation – of fixed social ranks, including gender relations, legitimated and essentialized on the basis of an idea of natural order or an idea of divine law, coupled to the claim of the divine authority of sovereigns – prevailed not only in Europe but in all other cultures (except perhaps small tribal communities). By contrast, people like Voltaire, Condorcet, Rousseau, or Diderot blamed existing social arrangements, and what they called civilization, for the unjust systems that had appeared everywhere. They thought change necessitated the rejection of the doctrines and values, including religious ones, that sustained such ‘imperfect’ systems, and that rational knowledge would be the means to put an end to them and bring about the ‘perfectibility of human kind’. Emancipation therefore meant precisely this break with the old, mostly feudal and ‘traditional’ societies, with their fixed relations of power and religious ideologies and restrictions. It is a fundamental shift, especially when one reflects that today new forms and doctrines of naturalizing inequalities have emerged, for example in socio-biology and neoliberalism, supported by large sections of the press, while older religious doctrines continue to be used to underwrite inequalities of gender throughout the world. Enlightenment thought therefore still presents a challenge to such common sense and the dogmas they inscribe.

Condorcet, for example, believed that the new ‘social art’ based on rational knowledge would abolish the inequalities that existed within nations as well as between nations; it would bring about equality between men and women and among the ‘races’. He argued that a system of social insurance rather than charity should be established, and ‘free trade’ instituted (though this was proposed in opposition to the prevailing trade monopolies and the licensing and restrictions of trade enforced by the state). He, like many of the encyclopaedists, advocated the abolition of slavery and the independence of the colonies, while he thought that the Enlightenment would help free Asia and Africa from ‘our trade monopolies, our treachery, our murderous contempt for men of another colour or creed, the insolence of our usurpations’ (in the Sketch, 1795). Paradoxically, the same Condorcet talked about the ignorance of ‘Savages’ and described Africans as barbarous, therefore needing the West’s helping hand, or ‘aid’ in today’s terminology – a familiar scenario. Kant, of course, expressed it in terms of Europe’s responsibility and destiny to ‘give laws’ to the ‘less advanced’ regions of the world, as Derrida (1997)

points out in his discussion of the cosmopolitical. This paradox reveals the tension that existed between, on the one hand, the ethical and political goals of the Enlightenment as a project and, on the other, its instrumental purposive thrust, in alliance with capitalism and colonialism, which increasingly became dominant, especially with Liberalism and in the mechanical and scientistic version of Marxism; thus, it is possible to argue that elements of a counter-Enlightenment were latent inside Enlightenment thought.

Other elements need to be added to give a firmer purchase on conditions today, and on the debate about contemporary counter-Enlightenment. I would underline Montesquieu’s farreaching argument that the separation and balancing of powers, between the executive, the judiciary and the administrative elements of state power – a principle enshrined in the American Constitution, but threatened almost everywhere by recent strategies seeking to secure the ‘society of control’ – were absolutely essential to guarantee democracy and to avoid despotism. Diderot, similarly, in arguing against the foundation of sovereignty in religious dogma, warned that there was but ‘one step’ from ‘fanaticism to barbarism’ and the curtailment of liberty. Interestingly, given contemporary developments in neurological and life sciences, in complexity theory and particle physics, he also supported the view of the interconnections between mind and matter and living and inorganic matter. One must note that the basis for his support for a flat ontology rested in the materialism prevailing among radical intellectuals at the time, though a different basis was proposed by Emilie du Châtelet – mathematician and translator of Newton, Voltaire’s lover and collaborator – who belatedly came to favour the Leibnizian standpoint and defended vitalism, after her earlier support for the prevailing Newtonian world-view. If one were to add the birth and disputes about political economy, principally as developed by Turgot, whom Adam Smith visited and learned from, and about natural history, say, the differences between Buffon and Linnaeus regarding taxonomy, and the views about speciation developed by Cuvier and Lamarck, we would have many of the key areas and questions that have now resurfaced as part of the critique of modern regimes of truth.

These then radical ideas, debated for years by Enlightenment intellectuals, translated into a project of social change based on planned progress and development for which education, social contract and social insurance were central. The Encyclopédie, edited by Diderot and D’Alembert from 1751, not only promoted these positions, but was itself seen as the vehicle for the gathering of knowledges from across the world and their diffusion to all parts of the world. By the time of Kant’s essay on the Enlightenment in 1784, knowledge was equated with what we now understand as science, and reason was allied with the view of freedom as the unconstrained use of one’s reason in the critique of prevailing conditions and ideas; this, he asserted, was a necessary condition to achieve the ‘maturity of humanity’. Let me add that these revolutionary principles were widely supported, evidenced in the French and American Revolutions and the principles they defended, such as liberty, equality, fraternity, enshrined in slogans and in the American Constitution, though fraternity, as we know, did not in practice include non-white people; Tom Paine’s Rights of Man notably sold 250,000 copies in 1793.

I am going to propose that we regard Darwin’s idea of evolution through ‘natural selection as the exemplary product of the Enlightenment, although it came a little later, initially in the Notebooks of 1837–40, the Sketch of 1842 and the Essay of 1844. The early arguments in Darwin’s writings, bearing revealing titles like ‘Man, Mind and Materialism’ (1838), ‘Essay on Theology and Natural Selection’ (1838), the Transmutation Notebooks (from 1837), systematically addressed the issues and positions as formulated by many of the key thinkers of the Enlightenment, rehearsing the arguments about Creationism, about taxonomy and speciation (Buffon, Cuvier, Lamarck, Linnaeus, Herder), about rational necessity, the naturalization of reason, and so on, citing many of the authors who contributed to the Encyclopédie and referring to all the key debates (Venn, 1982). Evolution inaugurates the break with Creationism and the idea of divine intervention, and with accounts of nature and the place of human species in it that tried to preserve the thesis of a divine order in nature, specifically in the theories of Natural Theology (that rationalized nature) and Design (that conflated purpose and necessity in nature), and the notion of the Great Chain of Being. Today one associates the theory of