evolution with the linear temporality and the eschatology that supports the standpoint of progress and development, markers of modernity. Clearly, the Darwinian problematic of speciation could not have been put together without the theories established in the age of the Enlightenment; correlatively, it re-inscribes all the ambivalences that one finds in the discourses constructing its episteme, correlating history, life, causality, subjectivity, and emancipation. Thus, on the epistemological and ontological side, the theory of evolution supports the central pillars of Enlightenment discourse yet lends a hand to positivism by adding scientific weight to the identity: rational = scientific = natural = lawful that began to be formulated with the Enlightenment; one finds this epistemology at work in the sciences of the social and in the emergent biopolitics of the 19th century (see Venn, 1982, for a detailed analysis). On the political side, the shifts it encouraged feed into the radical movements for fundamental change in society, inscribing a loose alliance between the ‘dangerous classes’ and dangerous ideas.

Furthermore, one is struck by the way in which the positions in dispute split along political lines in the 19th century, with those supporting Design and a providential cosmology opting for a politically conservative status quo while the materialists and evolutionists aligned against them and for a secular and radical political philosophy of progress directed by human intentions. One must emphasize that the correspondence between theory and politics is far from the neat and straightforward relationship one might imagine, for evolution has nourished both radical and conservative politics, depending on context, e.g. invoked in support of women’s suffrage in the 19th century, as well as in support of the later eugenics movement, sociobiology, and racism. In radical re-readings today, it is aligned with the recognition that difference, chance, variation, multiplicity and the processual are immanent to temporal becomings (Grosz, 2004).

We need to bear in mind also that the 18th-century context of the elaboration of the Enlightenment saw a major transformation in Europe as a military, colonial, economic and technological power, so that by the mid-19th century China, Japan, and the Arab world that had so far paid little attention to Europe, convinced that it was merely an insignificant part of an underdeveloped and ignorant backwater of the world, suddenly realized they had a major power to contend with. The turn to Europe and to the ‘West’ from that time to seek out their knowledge and their way of doing things, and the shift in power relations that accompanied the post-Enlightenment period, is well known and has shaped the process of modernization. The relation of knowledge to social change played out differently outside Euro-America, for instance, in the view about an Asian project of modernity proposed by Fukuzawa Yukichi and others in Japan from the 1860s, and Tagore and Gandhi in India from the 1920s, according to which (what they understood as) Asian knowledge and values would combine with Western technologies and science to serve different, non-Western modernizations. In the Arab world it was both a matter of accommodating the new ascendant modern spirit, for example, with regard to the foundation of the state, and of the reconfiguration of Islam (in the work of S.H. Nasr and I. al-Faruqi, for example) as part of countering the Enlightenment’s epistemology that asserted an opposition between religion and science, faith and reason.

## The Long Counter-Enlightenment

What does it mean for the present? First, I’d like to point to the instrumentalization of the project of the Enlightenment, discussed by Habermas and the Frankfurt School. I have shown in Occidentalism (2000) that the privilege of instrumental or technocratic rationality is historically and conceptually tied to the co-articulation of colonialism and capitalism in the unfolding of modernity. Furthermore, technocratic rationality is affiliated to key elements of Enlightenment epistemology such as logocentricsm, mechanism, rationalism; it rhymes with the world-view of history as linear progression and its hierarchization and homogenization of cultures.

One must also note the postmodern and postcolonial critique of modernity’s grand narratives, especially concerning the Eurocentric privilege in the discourse of humanism and its claims about the greater good of society that the modern project was meant to deliver. Lyotard’s The Postmodern Condition (1984) is the text that brings the different elements of this critique together, pointing to two key developments: first, the bankruptcy of the claims of the master narratives in the light of Auschwitz as sign of the failure of modernity’s project at the ethical level – one should add in this context the violences and pauperizations caused by European colonialism and capitalist imperialism, often under cover of the liberal-humanist ‘civilizing mission’ as Frantz Fanon noted nearly 50 years ago.

Second, the elimination of the critical dimension central to any project of emancipation through the operationalization of knowledge in the performative criteria of efficiency and productivity. Drawing attention to the transformations occurring since the Second World War, for example, in linguistics, informatics, cybernetics and intelligent machines, in problems of computers and their languages and the effects of information-processing machines, Lyotard says:

The nature of knowledge cannot survive unchanged within this context of general transformation. It can fit into the new channels, and become operational, only if learning is translated into quantities of information . . . The old principle that the acquisition of knowledge is indissociable from the training (Bildung) of minds, or even of individuals, is becoming obsolete and will become even more so . . . Knowledge is and will be produced in order to be sold, it is and will be consumed in order to be valorised in a new production: in both cases, the goal is exchange. Knowledge ceases to be an end in itself, it loses its ‘use-value’ . . . Knowledge in the form of an informational commodity indispensable to productive power is already, and will continue to be, a major – perhaps the major – stake in the worldwide competition for power. (1984: 4, 5)

There is much more in the text that I must leave aside. My aim here is simply to highlight the altered role of knowledge in the wake of the mutation of instrumental rationality into the ‘tele-techno-media-scientific, capitalistic and politico-economic’ figures of truth, to use Derrida’s (2002) terminology. It is important to underline that the opposition between religion and science, which a ‘certain tradition of the Enlightenment’ decreed, dissolves the relationship between faith and knowledge and erases the distinction between the two that alerts critique to be vigilant about the ‘theologico-political heritage’ of claims to truth and trust that religion and science both make (Derrida, 2002: 63–6). The Enlightenment’s absolute opposition to religion replaced the monotheism of divine order with the monotheism of reason, and allowed the monolingualism of positivist science to speak the truth of being. Thus, without this recognition of a relationship between faith and knowledge at the level of foundation, and without the recognition of what cannot be presented or translated – from one faith to another, from one experience to another, from one episteme to another – it is tempting for either religion or science to constitute itself as a self-referential system that maps into itself, so that visions of alternatives are erased through the kind of informationalization analysed by Lyotard. What is erased in the process is the domain of the ethical itself, and thus the promise of justice or liberation from oppressions and iniquities that are the ultimate ends of emancipation. Fertile grounds for fanaticism and fundamentalism are opened up, cultivated in contemporary counter-Enlightenment conditions.

My second point about the relation of knowledge to a project of emancipation relates to the mutation of the modern imaginary of modernity into the postmodern problematic of development. The latter retains the idea of linear temporal sequence whereby what come later is seen as always better than what had preceded, with the implication that this earlier stage must be rejected to allow the new to emerge. However, this newness is not judged by reference to a project of emancipation as understood within the Enlightenment’s vision of increasing equality and liberty and ethical maturity, but within the scope of efficiency and productivity. Thus, not only does this problematic of development re-inscribe and naturalize the colonial and evolutionary classification of nations in terms of a hierarchy of development, a model which is still powerful in political economy and that dictates that ‘developing’ states will always have to play ‘catching up’. It eliminates the grounds for imagining alternative forms of sociality and alternative polities consistent with the Enlightenment ideals of historical becoming as emancipatory. Thus it ensures that development can only be understood within the conceptual frame of a (re-)modernization equated with neoliberal ‘structural adjustments and ‘liberalization’ programmes and the sufferings they inflict. Knowledge, instrumentalized and informationalized, has come to operate as counter-Enlightenment. It is Benjamin’s vision of progress as the angel of history leaving ruins behind as it rushes towards a sightless future. I will use two examples to briefly examine some implications of the arguments I have been presenting, namely, the case of the market in derivatives, and the case of genetically modified foods.

The derivatives market concerns trading on the stock exchange centred on the predicted future values of assets; it is thus a trade in virtual assets, ultimately based on nothing but financial and information technologies that combine probabilistic knowledge and calculations with computer simulations of the future. The derivatives market generates value out of the future as resource. Derivatives have quickly become by far the most important element of finance capitalism. For example, the figures for the past five years indicate that this trade in its various forms has expanded to become the biggest business in the world, exceeding in value annual world GDP. Even in 1997 its combined annual value was \$675 trillion compared with a world GDP of \$147 trillion in 2000 (Arnoldi, 2004). But, like all capitalist ventures, it must calculate and manage risks and intangibles like market moods even as it bets on uncertainty. In particular, it must attempt to minimize risk by making risk itself the object of a system of calculation as well as what provides the ground for the complex practice of gambling that trading on the futures market involves.

My point is not about this virtual world of finance that informational technology has produced (a good account is given in Lee and LiPuma, 2002). It is about the fact that it is time itself which is being traded, and the extent to which the drive to minimize the risks involved means the abolition of the future as emergence and as indeterminate becoming. Basically, with the derivatives market, capital is obliged to organize the present in such as way as to ensure the future conforms to what has already been predicted by the probabilistic calculations. In order to ensure the future happens more or less as anticipated, capital must abolish contingency even as it plays with it, and it must bring everything within the order of the orderable and the calculable – paradoxically using the sophisticated, and potentially disruptive, mathematics of complexity theory, chaos theory, fractals. The future thus becomes an extension of the present, and the present an intensification of the future. Capital controls the present by controlling the future. Extending some ideas from Deleuze and Guattari, one can say that it is time itself which is being colonized. Information and its maximization are crucial here – as were statistics and probability theory (of Quetelet) for the Enlightenment’s ‘social art’ – and so is the predictability of human action. But risk continues to haunt capital in the form of the indeterminate and the event – not only natural disasters, climate change, corporate crashes, but also the fact that the ‘natives’ get restless and think of resistance, and knowledge is always provisional, and newness erupts out of the complexity of world (and from the Thing, which I must leave out). Capital deals with the uncanny spectrality of the event by killing: the future-as-difference, and anything and anyone who introduces uncertainty and resists calculation and informationalization. The temptation of totalitarian thought is precisely to abolish recalcitrant difference; in this way it makes truth and faith coincide. And, importantly, this coincidence of truth and faith is the basis of all fundamentalisms.

The implication for transmodern and transcolonial critique is the extent to which the postcolony and its resources – water, power, labour, forests, minerals, products, etc. – are the assets that function as ‘supplement’ for the virtual assets derivatives trade upon. Without the oil, foods, diamonds, critical materials like coltan, uranium, and so on, the rest of the machinery and imaginary with and on which finance capitalism operates would not work; the ratio of market value to assets would break down (as it did in the case of the dot.com crash). Capital must acquire these material assets and control them, indeed informationalize them, that is, own them as immaterial property. But this immaterial property has the capacity for material actualization: as capital, as corporate and individual wealth. Another implication is that the abolition of the future as difference eliminates the possibility of alternatives. This too is part of a new form of colonization. Indeed, a global map of the location of the kinds of assets I have mentioned, e.g. oil, coltan, uranium, coincides with a map of military and ethnic violence, and a map of postmodern ‘enclosures’ and pauperizations. If we were to define the postcolonial, or rather the transcolonial as a virtual space, that is to say, a space of potentiality and unprecedented becomings, it follows that it must resist the logic at work in these intensifications of inequalities.

My second case, that of GM foods, will reinforce the arguments about ownership and the society of control (Hardt and Negri, 2000). Today anyone, anywhere can grow wheat or corn, raise chicken, and so on, that is to say, survive without having to pay a licence to anyone for the genetic information of the wheat or the corn. Let us call the knowledge that makes this agriculture possible wealth-knowledge, in contrast to property-knowledge, bearing in mind here the important distinction between wealth and property that Arendt underlines. Wealthknowledge, as collective capital, is a form of inheritance, belonging to a collectivity, it is part of the common good, it belongs to the language of heteronomy (Derrida and Stiegler, 2002). What GM foods introduce through new varieties of seeds and, soon to come, biotechnologically modified animals, are new strains and specimens that are supposed to be more resistant to pests and diseases and also have greater yields. But knowledge of new plants and animals as genetic information is owned by the biotech corporations. The GM seed as bar-coded information is the property/knowledge that one must buy and use under licence. The logic of genetic modification in the current global economic system is that knowledge that was once free will in the future be owned by those who already have most of the wealth and economic power. Indeed, the industry is producing varieties with ‘terminator genes’ that make the seeds infertile so that farmers cannot use them. The interesting scenario then is to imagine the situation in which the biotech companies will own most varieties of seeds and breeds of animals, the native varieties will have become contaminated through genetic pollution and eliminated as viable crops and species. Wealth-knowledge will have been converted into propertyknowledge worldwide, privately owned in its immaterial form. Once again, the logic of the informationalization of knowledge in the context of capitalism, institutionalized in Trade-Related-Intellectual-Property-Rights or TRIPs, is to acquire as assets the wealth of the world. As with derivatives, the future is being bar-coded.

Already the experience where GM seeds have been introduced, as in Canada, India, Africa, Brazil, is that farmers must buy new seeds each year and are not allowed to save them from their crops. The history of the Green Revolution points to the real dangers for ‘developing countries. Introduced from the early 1970s, the new varieties of, for example, rice were meant to have greater yield, but needed new pesticides and chemical fertilizers to fulfil their potential, and could not be grown alongside other crops. Only the wealthier farmers could afford them, and poorer ones were made destitute. Interestingly, from 1974–2000 farm gross income grew by 300 percent but net income fell because the suppliers took 100 percent of farmers increased gross returns. For example, the Green Revolution did help India to increase food production, but the poor cannot afford to buy this extra food which is kept in vast silos where it mainly rots away or is eaten by rats. The mechanisms I am describing reproduce and deepen inequalities of wealth and power.

The decisive issue is the implications for subjectivity and for politics of the emergence of the biomediated body, the prosthetic body and its mediatized prosthetic memory, that advances in bio-info technologies promise. From the point of view of the ownership of knowledge-as-information, one wonders who will own one’s genetic information and one’s body. For instance, what will happen when one can no longer rent or pay for the body parts one has ‘acquired’, or the medicines and nutrients that will maintain the biomediated body? And, shall we see in the near future the emergence of human farming, concerned with the production of human babies, kidneys, blood plasma, and so on, sold as commodities? Does the