commodification of knowledge produce the commodification of life and a new biopolitics (of the biomediated and genetically modified body)? And what does all this mean for the role of knowledge in the process of political liberation from exploitation and oppressions?

A few brief points to conclude. Through the examples and the transformations that I have described I have tried to show that the location of knowledge by reference to a project of emancipation such as that of the Enlightenment has become very problematic and is in crisis. The capitalist context is crucial, and so is the legacy and continuities of colonialism in other forms, including the colonization of time – I should note here that I understand colonialism to refer to any system of subjugation and exploitation based on the homogenization and privileging of a centre, an origin, a sovereignty or a world-view, or their permutation. The informationalization of knowledge without an archive and without a critical language and practice undermines any politics that aims to alter the relations of power and privilege. The politics of knowledge within Enlightenment thought, in spite of its ambivalence with regard to Europe’s others and to capitalism, intended to bring about forms of socialities that would be more just. We now have a great deal more knowledge than in the 18th century, yet inequality and poverty and the gap between rich and poor, after a period of improvement, is moving back towards the distribution of opportunities and freedoms as it was at the time of the Enlightenment. Globally, inequalities of wealth, gender, and race are once more being normalized in the form of new servitudes, hastened by kleptocracies. The commodification of knowledge, incited by its mediatization and informationalization, amplifies tendencies inherent from the beginning in the great shifts that announced modernity. An age of fanaticism has appeared, evidenced in market fundamentalism as much as in a variety of religious fundamentalism, preparing the ground for a century of despotism. The question for knowledge now is about the kind of world for which it is being recruited and repositioned, as a postmodern technics or techne, divested of ethical substance. What emerges for the work of reorganizing knowledge which the New Encyclopaedia Project is undertaking is the interconnections between a politics of memory, a politics of information and knowledge, and the link between the encyclopaedia and a new discourse of emancipation, that is, a new, necessarily post-colonizing, thus a transcolonial ‘enlightenment’.

## References

Arnoldi, Jacob (2004) ‘Derivatives: Virtual Values and Real Risks’, Theory, Culture & Society 21(6): 23–42.

Darwin, Charles ([1837–39] 1974) Darwin on Man, Including Darwin’s Early and Unpublished Notebooks, ed. Harry Gruber and Paul Barrett, transcribed P.H. Barrett. London: Wildwood House.

Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari (1988) A Thousand Plateaus, trans. Brian Massumi. London: Continuum.

Derrida, Jacques (1982) Margins of Philosophy, trans. Alan Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Derrida, Jacques (1997) Le droit à la philosophie du point de vue cosmopolitique. Vendôme: Editions UNESCO.

Derrida, Jacques (2002) Acts of Religion, ed. Gil Anidjar. London: Routledge.

Derrida, Jacques and Bernard Stiegler (2002) Echographies of Television, trans. Jennifer Bajorek. Cambridge: Polity.

Foucault, Michel (1984) ‘What is Enlightenment?’, in Paul Rabinow (ed.) The Foucault Reader. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

Gilroy, Paul (1993) The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness. London: Verso.

Grosz, Elizabeth (2004) The Nick of Time: Politics, Evolution, and the Untimely. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Hardt, Michael and Antonio Negri (2000) Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Lee, Benjamin and Edward Li Puma (2002) ‘Cultures of Circulation: The Imagination of Modernity’, Public Culture 14(1): 191–213.

Lyotard, Jean-François (1983) Le différend. Paris: Les Editions de Minuit.

Lyotard, Jean-François (1984) The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Lyotard, Jean-François (1988) Le postmoderne expliqué aux enfants. Paris: Editions Galilée.

Lyotard, Jean-François (1993) Un trait d’union. Sainte-Foy: Le Griffon d’argile. Venn, Couze (1982) ‘Beyond the Science–Ideology Relation’, unpublished PhD thesis, University of Essex.

Venn, Couze (2000) Occidentalism: Modernity and Subjectivity. London: Sage.

Couze Venn is Professor of Cultural Theory at Nottingham Trent University. He is a co-author of Changing the Subject: Psychology, Social Regulation and Subjectivity, and author of Occidentalism: Modernity and Subjectivity and The Postcolonial Challenge: Towards Alternative Futures (Sage, 2005).

# Cosmopolitanism

Pheng Cheah

Abstract In modernity, the concept of cosmopolitanism has changed from an intellectual ethos to a vision of an institutionally embedded global political consciousness. The central problem that troubles cosmopolitanism from its moment of inception in 18thcentury philosophy to the globalized present is whether we live in a world that is interconnected enough to generate institutions that have a global regulatory reach and a global form of solidarity that can influence their functioning. Examination of Kant’s pre-nationalist cosmopolitanism, Marx’s postnationalist cosmopolitanism, and decolonizing socialist nationalism indicates the normative attraction of the nation as a mode of solidarity. Contemporary arguments about new cosmopolitanisms focusing on the rise of transnational networks of global cities, postnational social formations created by migrant and diasporic flows and Habermas’s recent revival of Kant’s project of cosmopolitan democracy have likewise failed to address the persistence of nationalism as a normative force within the field of uneven globalization.

Keywords cosmopolitan democracy, cosmopolitanism, diaspora, global civil society, globalization, Habermas, Kant

he story of the concept of cosmopolitanism in modernity is that of a passage from an intellectual ethos to a vision of a global political consciousness that is generated and sustained by institutional structures. The central problem that troubles the modern concept of cosmopolitanism from its moment of inception in 18th-century European philosophy to the globalized present is whether we live in a world that is interconnected enough to generate, on the one hand, institutions that have a global reach in their regulatory function and, on the other, a global form of political consciousness or solidarity, a feeling that we belong to a world that can take root and be sustained within these institutions and influence their functioning in turn. Any theory of cosmopolitanism must therefore address two related questions, first, an empirical question concerning the cosmopolitan extensiveness of a regulatory power embedded in institutions, and, second, a question about the normativity of these institutions, whether they can be in a relation of mutual feedback with a global political consciousness that voices the universal interests of humanity and tries to maximize human freedom. If both these questions cannot be answered satisfactorily, cosmopolitanism remains an intellectual ethos of a select clerisy, a form of consciousness without a mass base.

## Arbitrary Conceptual Roots: Cosmopolitanism in Modern European Philosophy

D’Alembert’s entry in the Encyclopédie notes that ‘cosmopolitan’ derives from the Greek words for ‘world’ (cosmos) and ‘city’ (polis) and that it refers to ‘un homme qui n’a point de demeure fixe, ou bien un homme qui n’est étranger nulle part [a man without a fixed abode, or better, a man who is nowhere a stranger]’ (Diderot and d’Alembert, 1751–65: 4, 297). The term’s philosophical usage to indicate a ‘citizen of the universe’, however, emphasizes that this intellectual ethos or spirit is not one of rootlessness. Instead, what is imagined is a universal circle of belonging that involves the transcendence of the particularistic and blindly given ties of kinship and country. The cosmopolitan therefore embodies the universality of philosophical reason itself, namely its power of transcending the particular and contingent. Hence, the popular view of cosmopolitanism as an elite form of rootlessness and a state of detachment and nomadic non-belonging is mistaken. The cosmopolitan’s universal circle of belonging embraces the whole of humanity. When cosmopolitanism is criticized for being a form of elitist detachment, the real point of dissatisfaction is that it is merely an intellectual ethos or perspective espoused by a select clerisy because the philosophers of the French Enlightenment could not envision feasible political structures for the regular and widespread institutionalization of mass-based cosmopolitan feeling. The bonds of humanity, whether they are predicated in terms of reason or moral sentiment, may be the strongest possible ties. But for various reasons, not many people are able to feel their pull. Rousseau lamented that in relations between different societies, the Law of Nature, or natural pity, the original root of social virtues such as clemency and humanity, has lost

almost all the force it had in the relations between one man and another, [and] lives on only in the few great Cosmopolitan Souls [grandes âmes cosmopolites] who cross the imaginary boundaries that separate Peoples and, following the example of the sovereign being that created them, embrace the whole of Mankind in their benevolence. (1766: 174)

In many respects, the true inaugurator of modern cosmopolitanism is Immanuel Kant. Kant retained the idea of membership to humanity as a whole by insisting on the importance of ‘knowledge of man as a citizen of the world [des Menschen als Weltbürgers]’ in his writings on pragmatic anthropology and universal history (1968a: 400). However, Kant was primarily concerned with man as a practical being and actor in history, someone who not only knows the world as a spectator of a play but knows his way about the world as a participant (1968a: 400). A world-citizen acts from the pluralistic standpoint of humanity as a collective actor as opposed to that of an egoistic individual (Kant, 1968a: 411). Accordingly, Kant articulated at least four different modalities of cosmopolitanism that would become the main topoi of contemporary discussions of the concept in normative international relations theory (including accounts of global civil society and the international public sphere), liberal political economy and theories of globalization. These different modalities, which are part of a systemic whole, are: (1) a world federation as the legal and political institutional basis for cosmopolitanism as a form of right; (2) the historical basis of cosmopolitanism in world trade; (3) the idea of a global public sphere; and (4) the importance of cosmopolitan culture in instilling a sense of belonging to humanity.

What Kant calls ‘a universal cosmopolitan existence’ is nothing less than the regulative idea of ‘a perfect civil union of mankind’ (1968b: 47). It is a constitutional global federation of all existing states that is

based on cosmopolitan right [Weltbürgerrecht], in so far as individuals and states, coexisting in an external relationship of mutual influences, may be regarded as citizens of a universal state of mankind [allgemeinen Menschenstaats] (ius cosmopoliticum). (Kant, 1968e: 203n)

Although it would not possess the coercive means of enforcement available to a world-state, it would nevertheless be a legitimately institutionalized world community, able to make rightful claims on its constituent states regarding their treatment of individuals and other states.

Individual states would retain their sovereignty, but would be held accountable by a universal citizenry – humanity – with regard to issues such as disarmament and imperialist expansion. Kant’s world federation would therefore fall somewhere between the political community of the state in its lawful relations with other states and a world-state.

Kant regarded state sovereignty as inviolable because the state was formed through an original contract by rational consensual individual wills. He also believed that the state had a fundamental role in the moral-cultural education of its citizens. Hence, his idea of cosmopolitan right remained restricted. The cosmopolitan community is a federation of states and not of world citizens, and the ultimate purpose of ‘a cosmopolitan system of public political security [weltbürgerlichen Zustand der öffentlichen Staatssicherheit]’ is to bring about lasting peace so that states can devote their time and efforts to the cultural education of their citizens and increase their aptitude for morality instead of wasting their resources on expansionist war efforts (Kant, 1968b: 44–7). Consequently, the scope of cosmopolitan right is limited to the provision of hospitality. It is ‘the right of a stranger not to be treated with hostility when he arrives on someone else’s territory’, a mere right of resort and not a right of a guest to expect to be entertained (Kant, 1968e: 213–16). The protection of individual rights that we call ‘human rights’ does not fall under cosmopolitan right but is left to the civil constitution of each state (Kant, 1968e: 204–6). Matters concerning relations between states such as the principle that a state has no right to use its citizens for war against other states are also not governed by cosmopolitan right, but come under the right of peoples (Völkerrecht) (Kant, 1968d: 467–9).

In Kant’s view, world trade provided the historical basis of cosmopolitan unity. As the spirit of commerce spreads throughout the world, states find that it is in their self-interest to enter into a world federation to prevent war and violence because these deplete their financial power (Geldmacht) (1968e: 226). Moreover, the unity brought about by trade and other forms of encounter between countries creates something like a global public sphere that will safeguard cosmopolitan right by protesting any violations of it in the same manner that a critical national public sphere safeguards the rights of citizens vis-à-vis the territorial state:

the peoples of the earth have thus entered in varying degrees into a universal community, and it has developed to the point where a violation of rights in one part of the world is felt everywhere. The idea of a cosmopolitan right is therefore not fantastic or overstrained; it is a necessary complement to the unwritten code of political and international right, transforming it into a public right of humanity [öffentlichen Menschenrechte]. (Kant, 1968e: 216–17)

In addition, forms of culture also instill a deeper subjective sense of cosmopolitan solidarity or the feeling of belonging to humanity by encouraging universal social communication and sympathy. The fine arts and the sciences play a crucial role in developing our humanity (Menschheit) because they involve ‘a universally communicable [allgemein mitteilen] pleasure’ (Kant, 1968c: §83, 321). The humanities (humaniora) cultivate our mental powers by instilling in us

the universal feeling of sympathy, and the ability to engage universally in very intimate communication. When these two qualities are combined, they constitute the sociability [Geselligkeit] that befits humanity and distinguishes it from the limitation of animals. (Kant, 1968c: §60, 300)

It is important to emphasize that although the different modalities of cosmopolitanism exhibit universalistic tendencies, unlike the philosophers of the French Enlightenment, Kant did not conflate the normativity of cosmopolitanism with that of moral reason and universal freedom. True freedom or autonomy could only be found in a kingdom (Reich) of ends, a systematic union of all rational beings through the moral law that each member is to treat himself and all others never merely as means but always at the same time as ends in themselves. Such a community could never be realized in the finite, sensible world because all sensible existence,