confluence of urban development and migrant communities. Street demonstrations by the disenfranchised – poor migrants, shantytown dwellers, refugees – articulate an array of civil, political, and social rights. The streets form an arena for the political mobilization of the poor to claim public resources such as urban housing, water, and electricity as a kind of substantive citizenship (Holston, 1993). There is the perception that citizenship encoded in law is no guarantee of protection for the marginalized. In many cases, market intrusions and displacement have created arenas for the activation of citizenship in demanding state delivery of resources and justice. Democratic values are becoming performed in public spaces to challenge authoritarian rule, corruption, and the lack of access to rights and benefits for excluded populations.

## In Cyber Space

Markets and electronic technology have also opened up other venues of political performance and claims. For a socialist market-economy society like China, the internet is emerging as a space of citizenship formation, but also as a space of government surveillance. Online commentaries, criticisms, and mockery of state policies have flourished in the relatively democratic and elusive cyberspace. A cyberpublic made up of millions of online Chinese uses the internet for accessing foreign news, spreading stories of injustice, and promoting alterative cultural forms. A college student called ‘the Stainless Steel Mouse’ has written articles spoofing the pomposity of the Chinese Communist Party. Other cyber rebels include ‘Reporters without Borders’ who seek to expose hidden abuses of peasants by local authorities and the new rich, protest against injustices and corruption, and demand accountability from the government. In response, state anti-cyber interventions have closed down certain dissident websites, blocked access to some foreign news websites, and tracked down and punished dissidents where possible. But the surveillance of the cyberpublic space is very chancy, and ‘netizens’ has become a term to index this new style of democracy in action.

The cyber space is a new site for mapping out a war of positions, and for playing a catand-mouse game over the freedom of information essential to democratic citizenship. The Chinese nexus between market reforms, web technology, and dissidents has enabled criticisms more focused on the lack of freedom of political expression under authoritarian rule than on attacking neoliberal values. In contrast to the assemblage of factors in Europe that induce ordinary citizens to resist unregulated market forces, in China, the confluence of markets, technology and activism is a space that enables people to perform the kind of democratic citizenship that is denied in society at large.

The cyber space, however, can also be the site for the articulation of overweening ethnic power that exceeds the nation-state. In diaspora, transnational groups such as overseas Chinese or ethnic Indians have increasingly turned to the internet to construct a web-based ‘global citizenship’. One such internet-based group is ‘Global Huaren’ (Global Chinese), which acts as a cyber-watchdog, condemning government actions anywhere in the world that are construed to be against co-ethnics. There are, however, dangers when such ethnic networks seek to leverage their cyberpower vis-à-vis a specific state. The outcome is a kind of borderless citizenship based on claims of global ethnicity that is not answerable to any overarching authority.

## Sheer Survival

Another arena of political mobilization is the space of endangerment and neglect. Here the question is whether political resolutions to the plight of imperiled or abject bodies are framed in terms of the binary opposition between citizenship and statelessness. Giorgio Agamben draws a stark distinction between citizens who enjoy juridical-legal rights and excluded groups who dwell in ‘a zone of indistinction’. Only the erasure of the division between People (political body) and people (excluded bodies), he maintains, can restore humanity to the globally excluded who have been denied citizenship (Agamben 1998: 177, 180). Such views are reflected in claims that the human rights regime is capable of transforming millions of people enduring a bare existence in Africa, Latin America, and Asia into citizens, thus actualizing their humanity. But the rhetoric of ethical globalization operates at too vast a scale to deal with specific milieus of exclusion and endangerment. Furthermore, the focus on citizenship and human rights gives short shrift to other modes of ethical reflection and argumentation. It is by no means clear that the right to survival will everywhere be translated into citizenship or merely legitimized on the grounds of common humanity, or relevance to labor markets. Let me briefly cite three situations of interventions on behalf of the injured or threatened body, and their different resolutions in relation to citizenship.

In recent decades, health-based claims have become an important part of citizenship rights in the West. In the aftermath of the Chernobyl accident in the Ukraine, sufferers claimed biomedical resources and social equity, thus giving rise to a notion of ‘biological citizenship (Petryna, 2002). In France, migrants have recently made health the ground for claiming asylum. Didier Fassin argues that the suffering body of the HIV-infected migrant reverses public perception of his biopolitical otherness rooted in race and alien status. Increasingly, some form of legal recognition is awarded in the name of humanity, i.e. the right to a healthy body, regardless of the citizenship of the patient (Fassin, 2001).

The explosive growth of NGOs is an index of the humanitarian industry that seeks to represent the varied interests of the politically dispossessed. Increasingly, such voluntary groups are shaped by specific interests, affiliations, and ethics, forming themselves into socio-political groups in order to make particular claims on states and corporations. Thus, the language of universal human rights is often superseded by more specific categories finely tuned to the criteria of state or philanthropic organizations. In the non-state administration of excluded humanity, groups and individuals are sorted into various categories, in relation to particular needs, prioritized interests, and potential affiliations with powers-that-be. These are ‘counterpolitics of sheer life’ – a situated form of political mobilization that involves ethical claims to resources articulated in terms of needs as living beings (Collier and Lakoff, 2005: 29).

The politics of sheer life is emerging in Southeast Asia, where a vast female migrant population – working as maids, factory workers, or prostitutes – is regularly exposed to slave-like conditions. Feminist NGOs invoke not the human rights of female migrants but something more minimal and attainable, i.e. biological survival, or ‘biowelfare’. The claims of a healthy and unharmed migrant body are articulated not in terms of a common humanity, but of the dependency of the host society on foreign workers to sustain a high standard of living. NGOs invoke the ethics of reciprocity or at least recognition of economic symbiosis between migrant workers and the affluent employers who feel entitled to their cheap foreign labor. Where citizenship does not provide protection for the migrant worker, the joining of a healthy body and dependency on foreign workers produces a kind of bio-legitimacy that is perhaps a first step toward the recognition of their moral status, but short of human rights.

A simple opposition between territorialized citizenship and deterritorialized human rights is not able to capture the varied assemblages that are the sites of contemporary political claims by a range of residential, expatriate, and migrant actors. The confluence of territorialized and deterritorialized forces forms milieus in which problems of the human are crystallized and problems posed and resolved. Diverse actors invoke not territorialized notions of citizenship, but new claims – postnational, flexible, technological, cyber-based, and biological – as grounds for resources, entitlements, and protection. These various sites and claims attest to the contingent nature of what is at stake in being human today. Such political mobilizations engage but also go beyond human rights in resolution to situated problems of contemporary life. In addition to the nation-state, entities such as corporations and NGOs have become practitioners of humanity, defining and representing varied categories of human beings according to degrees of economic, biopolitical, and moral worthiness. Diverse regimes of living are in play. In short, global assemblages crystallize specific problems and resolutions to questions of contemporary living, thus further disarticulating and deterritorializing aspects of citizenship.

## References

Agamben, G. (1998) Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life, trans. Daniel Heller-Roazen. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Anderson, B. (1991[1983]) Imagined Communities, 2nd edition. London: Verso.

Arendt, H. (1998[1958]) The Human Condition, with an Introduction by Margaret Canovaan, 2nd edition. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Collier, S.J. and A. Lakoff (2005) ‘Regimes of Living’, in A. Ong and S.J. Collier (eds) Global Assemblages: Technology, Politics, and Ethics as Anthropological Problems. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Fassin, D. (2001) ‘The Biopolitics of Otherness’, Anthropology Today 17(1): 3–23.

Habermas, J. (2001) ‘Why Europe Needs a Constitution’, New Left Review 11 (Sept–Oct): 5–26.

Holston, J. (1993) ‘Introduction’, in J. Holston (ed.) Cities and Citizenship. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Ong, A. (1999) Flexible Citizenship: The Cultural Logics of Transnationality. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Ong, A. (2000) ‘Graduated Sovereignty in Southeast Asia’, Theory, Culture & Society 17(4): 55–75.

Ong, A. (2003) Buddha is Hiding: Refugees, Citizenship, the New America. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Ong, A. and S.J. Collier (eds) (2005) Global Assemblages: Technology, Politics, and Ethics as Anthropological Problems. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Petryna, A. (2002) Life Exposed: Biological Citizens after Chernobyl. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Rose, N. (1999) Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Soysal, Y. (1994) The Limits of Citizenship: Migrants and Postnational Membership in Europe. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Aihwa Ong is Professor of Anthropology at the University of California, Berkeley. Recent books include Flexible Citizenship (1999, Duke University Press), Buddha is Hiding (2003, University of California Press), Global Assemblages (2005, Blackwell), and Neoliberalism as Exception (forthcoming, Duke University Press).

## The Political

Jeremy Valentine

Abstract This article looks at the problems of the co-determination of the political within western metaphysics and political reflection, and considers solutions that are figured in terms of failure and incompletion. The focus is on the relation of the political to political modernity, its defenders and attackers, and those who seek to overcome the opposition.

Keywords failure, incompletion, political modernity, post-foundationalism

t is worth remarking that in the English language the notion of the political is an awkward grammatical formulation. The transformation of an adjective into a noun suggests that the notion is detached from its proper enunciation, as if to prompt the question ‘the politi  
cal what?’ in order to complete it. The awkwardness has arisen from the translation of a   
distinction commonly found in Germanic and Romance languages for which precise   
equivalents are not available in English. Thus the distinctions between die Politik and das

Politische in German, between la politique and le politique in French, and between la politica and il politico in Italian are rendered in English as the distinction between politics and the political without any obvious referent for the latter term. The presence of the notion of the political in English can be explained, at least in part, as a consequence of the translation of, for example, Carl Schmitt’s Der Begriff des Politischen (1996[1932]), or of Paul Ricoeur’s ‘Le paradoxe politique’ (1965[1957]). In fact Ernst Vollrath suggests that the word ‘polity’ is the nearest English equivalent of the political insofar as it means the self-understanding of a concrete existing political system and its institutions and practices (Vollrath, 1987: 25). Even in this case problems of translation continue as Vollrath traces the origin of the word to a mistranslation from Latin in Sir John Fortescue’s The Governance of England written in about 1471. These problems of translation are not incidental to the notion of the political and are indicative of a deeper characteristic which can be summarized as follows: the concept of the political is the name of a problem which traces the conceptual and empirical incompletion of politics.

As an object of knowledge the political is determined by two constraints. First, the political has always been thought of and understood as a concept within the Western tradition of metaphysics. Thus, amongst other things, the political emerges from within the distinction between the conceptual and the empirical, which the tradition both establishes and attempts to overcome. We owe to Derrida the insight that Western metaphysics is hampered by the decision to conceptualize concepts in exactly the same way that empirical phenomena are conceptualized as fully present to sensation and consciousness. Consequently concepts will always fall short in two ways: first, with respect to their pure or Ideal existence as concepts, and second with respect to the concept of empirical phenomena as that through which the existence of concepts is established. Importantly this applies even in cases where concepts are supposed to somehow transcend empirical phenomena. In that respect Derrida’s thought is significant because it points in directions away from the paradoxes that are tied up in the failures of the metaphysics of presence, and thus of the constraints through which the political is determined, chief amongst which is the exclusion of failure from the concept of the political. Derrida has attempted to give some sort of positive expression to failure as a necessary and irreducible incompletion, or what he calls ‘to come’ (e.g. 1994).

The effects of such failures are visible within the second constraint which determines the political, namely, the traditions and genres of political reflection in which the political is distinguished from politics in the sense that the former has the status of a ground, foundation or cause of the latter which is at the same time present in it. In short, the specificity of the political as an object is that of something which establishes the space of a relation between politics and that which conditions it.

At a formal and empty level the distinction between politics and the political serves to designate a difference between on the one hand normal, ordinary and routine everyday activities which are occupied by the production and distribution of power, in both senses of ‘power over’ and ‘power to’, and including the contested and disputed nature of these activities, and, on the other, that which is supposed to ground, explain, or distinguish and locate these activities as a specific sphere of thought or action. Because the notion of politics is so descriptive and nominal there is little substantial dispute over its conceptual referents. The same cannot be said, however, with respect to the political as the purpose of the concept is to explain politics by designating that which is political sui generis, and thus distinct from the economic, the social, the psychological, the cultural, etc., and which can be specified essentially, substantively, topographically, temporally, stylistically, etc., in order to provide politics with a relation to a ground or foundation. But at the same time the political also raises the question of its relation to that which it is not, and thus of whether such a relation can be understood politically, as for example in terms of conflict, or as domination or subordination. Hence perhaps at a more fundamental level one would have to begin by posing the question as to why the issue of the political is raised at all. According to Vollrath the specificity of the political can be determined as an answer to the following question: ‘what kind of rationality is adequate to political phenomena and the sphere of the political in general and where does it reside so that it can be grasped from there?’ (1987: 18).

In principle there are many ways in which politics is conceived and thus there are many ways of conceiving the political. For example, politics can be understood as the conflicts which follow from the individual pursuit of rational self-interest within a competitive context of finite resources. In that case the political could be understood as the conditions through which politics is maintained, such as the rules and conventions which ensure order and the manner of their application. In this case the political would be understood as the ground of the polity. What matters is the difference between the political and politics and the attempt to minimize it through demonstrating the coincidence of the two terms in phenomena that can be conceived as equally present to sensation and consciousness, and thus also the deconstruction of that attempt.

In the hypothetical example referred to, deconstruction might fall on the failure to differentiate the application of order from the plurality of interests, and might be evidenced by the failure of increased abstraction from a determinate terrain of empirical politics in order to establish a position from which it can, in principle, be ordered. In general that would be the case in Liberal genres of political reflection where, since Hobbes at least, the creation of agreement between competing interests over the existence of the polity requires that the polity already exists for agreement to take place. Hence the coincidence of the political and politics fails in a circle of pre-suppositions which are never finally present (Ricoeur, 1988).

What follows will begin with a discussion of the failures of some relatively contemporary attempts to establish the difference between the political and politics and its elimination in the coincidence of the two terms. From this, the discussion will proceed to some more recent attempts to turn the problem round by conceptualizing the political as the positive expression of its failure, and which can be categorized as deconstructive or post-foundational politics. Here the notion of the political is located in the difference between politics and a ground.

Finally we will conclude with a discussion of some of the ways that some contemporary empirical phenomena are understood in order to test post-foundational politics.

One approach to the emergence of the question of the political is provided by Heller (1990). On this account the political arises within the emergence of modernity through which the grounds of the polity are brought into question as an effect of the radicalization of thought and politics. Indeed, radicalization and ungrounding are synonymous terms for Heller, encapsulated by the claim that: ‘The modern concept of the political – or, to avoid tautology, the concept of the political as such – is to be derived from the quintessence of the modern political dynamic’ (Heller, 1990: 120). Taking Heller’s problematic we can begin by considering how the failure of the political is a problem interior to modernity, not least with respect to the idea of modernity as a clean break with anything designated as non-modern from within it. That is to say, modernity is that which would be fully present to itself, self-sufficient and thus, in a manner of speaking, self-grounding. Thus what may be most significant about the concept of the political is that a requirement to establish a ground goes against the critical and radical thrust of the thought and politics through which modernity happens. In other words, the political is the attempt to establish a ground where the possibility of doing so has been subverted through ungrounded radicalization, insofar as these two terms can be distinguished.

Hobbes’s notion of a ‘state of nature’, which arguably inaugurates political modernity in its radical conception of the absence of society, is perhaps the most striking metaphor for such a situation, and the solution in the social contract, itself centred on a voluntary transformation of ego-centred rationality, provides the clearest example of the circle of presuppositions mentioned above. For Hobbes, the political is established in a moment of deliberation which eliminates a state of nature and creates civil society, but which is not present in either term. In that respect the Hobbesian sovereign can be understood as the persistence of the question of the political by virtue of the fact that it is supposed to both order and transcend civil society. In which case, and in order to make things simpler, perhaps modernity is best understood as the emergence of the political as a question of a ground, rather than the establishment of one, in Heller’s sense of ‘as such’. Moreover, the question of a ground would be a place-holder for its failure. By the same token, the failure of the question of the ground would be the failure of political modernity.

At this point it is perhaps best to pause and consider the methodological issues raised by an approach that places failure above success. These issues relate to the specificity and modality of posing the political as a question. Here one can consider the phenomenological approach that emphasizes those aspects that stress the historicity or ‘coming-to-presence’ of the political as an event, rather than the attempt to describe some ‘originary’ political experience. For example, Schürmann affirms the autonomy of the political with the proposition that ‘the origin of the political does not lie outside the political, and political action is left without recourse for justification’ (1981: 245). The political is an epochal matter, in both the phenomenological sense of epoché and the historical sense of epoch.

Yet at the same time the specificity of the political is not accessible from within the historical or conceptual formation of the political itself. That is because the self-grounding of the political is understood in the sense of principium (Schürmann, 1981: 246), which refers to the coincidence of the order of authority derived from a prince and the order of intelligibility derived from a principle, both of which are ‘observed without question in a given epoch’ (p. 247). For Schürmann, the political is only accessible as thinking between epochality, the ‘fold’ or crisis which reveals the difference between the political and its coming-to-presence and makes legible the coherence and cohesion through which all are implicated in its dispositions and trajectories. In which case, the specificity of the political is not an epochal matter but is a measure of its internal failure, which in this case would refer to the non-coincidence of principium, or what Schürmann refers to as the ‘obverse’ of the political.

Two sets of examples from the genres of political reflection can serve to illustrate the failure of the ground of political modernity, its ‘obverse’, not least because each is politically opposed to the other. First I examine the attempt to ground the political in a type of deliberation that secures the polity, as in the work of Habermas (e.g. 1995) and Rawls (e.g. 1995). Habermas grounds the political in its legitimacy, which is derived from legal norms established through non-instrumental communication in the public sphere in order to reach rational consensus on the authoritative distribution of resources. For Habermas the life-world is dominated by instrumental reason driven by the practices of market exchange. Somehow the situation can be remedied by the realization of the norms of sincere communication, although, as there is little in the argument by way of an account of how this has been prevented, one would be inclined to retain a degree of scepticism as to their existence. In essence, for Habermas the well-ordered polity is little more than the idea of a harmonious balance between all of its components, each in its proper place and identical with itself.

Similarly, Rawls emphasizes law as the source of justice for the legitimate distribution of resources although his account of public reason is a bit more clunky, entailing that deliberation takes place as if from behind a ‘veil of ignorance’ in order to guarantee impartiality. Rawls has taken a cannier approach to the problem of the historicity of the political as a response to the criticism that his notion of deliberative justice is just an attempt to universalize the particular self-image of modern Western liberal democracies (e.g. Sandel, 1982). For Rawls the criticism is actually flattery as it confirms the practical relevance of the argument. Hence the famous claim that his account of justice is ‘political, not metaphysical’ (Rawls, 1985). That is to say the criticism supposes that his account of justice is actually present as the ground of existence of the modern liberal democratic polity, and Rawls is happy to agree. If modern liberal democracies are merely communities, then so be it.

Both Habermas and Rawls propose a version of Enlightenment without critique. In both cases the political does not take place. In other words, both Habermas and Rawls desire political ends without the use of political means by rendering a series of proposals as descriptions in which the referent, a well-ordered polity, is absent. The Enlightenment value of critique and the politics that goes with it are missing from their account of the political. In this respect Habermas and Rawls re-enact the ‘circularity of the political’ in which what is proposed as an alteration of reality is pre-supposed as already existing, a structural feature of the modern liberal ‘social contract’ account of political legitimacy (Ricouer, 1988). In doing so the historicity of the polity is denied, excluded from reflection.

Yet in both cases the presence of the polity which would function as a ground of politics is undermined as a consequence of something non-political, but which nevertheless registers as a series of political effects. The political is always missing, corrupted, dominated by or subordinate to something else which is non-political but which appears to enjoy political effects in the form of the exercise of power by non-political means, as a kind of dishonesty and subterfuge. Thus from the point of view of rational deliberation the failure of the political is always the fault of something else: the market, the mass media, or whatever. The question of the existence of modern liberal democracy is never posed because it is assumed to be fully present already and simply requires rational agreement that this is the case. In that respect modern liberal democracy fails as a historical and phenomenological epoch.

The second set of examples concerns thinkers who, despite their differences, share what might be called a radical anti-modernism. Each proposes a concept of the political in response to what they take to be the denial of it within modernity. They thus subscribe to the epochality of modernity in order to affirm some authentic ‘originary’ moment of the political against it from a position external to it. In general, that is taken to be pre-modern or classical, although each provides examples from within modernity which are exceptional in that they could be put under these categories.

Thus for Schmitt the political is an exceptional moment of decision which simultaneously institutes both a violent friend–enemy distinction and the authority to decide what that is as the means by which the space of a polity is determined (1996). For Schmitt the political is defined against modern liberalism as the enemy of the political prior to the decision to institute any friend–enemy distinction – in which case Schmitt fails to account for the political within liberalism through the assumption that modernity exists. For Strauss the political is a style of discussion about human action codified as Socratic dialogue and targeted at the confidence of actual political leaders (1971), and which may even have had some posthumous real world success (Curtis, 2004). Here the political is denied through the success of relativism, which Strauss attributes to the influence of Weberian sociology. Again, Weber’s attempt to capture the political dimension of modernity and the institutional response to it is reified as an empirical fact. Lastly, for Arendt the political is the courage to stand and speak honestly in public about matters of collective action exemplified by situations of immediate co-presence represented in Classical literature (1970). Although some exemplary representative moments can be discovered within modernity, mainly those which have occurred in revolutionary situations, on the whole modernity denies the political through the rise of the social and the elevation of questions of life itself. Again, the political dimensions of these phenomena are foreclosed by Arendt’s commitment, shared by the others, to put the political on a ground internal to itself.

Hence within these radical anti-modernist thinkers the notion of the political is intimately bound up with the nostalgic hope for its return in the context of a process of social differentiation which denies it, which begs the question as to whether it has ever been, and which remains on principle blind to the political dimension of that which it opposes. As with Habermas and Rawls the question of the failure of political modernity is never posed. Which is not to say that political modernity and its failure does not take place. As Vollrath points out,

. . . in our time the polis does not exist anymore, and it would have disastrous consequences to put new life into the ancient polis. Under the conditions of modernity it becomes the more necessary to differentiate between ‘the political’ and ‘politics’. (1987: 24)

The political is no longer a matter of the tribe gathering under an old tree to draw lots for combat, sacrifice and the exchange of women. It’s more a matter of the elimination of such scenes and the ways in which that is resisted. Yet if the pre-modern nostalgia option is not satisfactory, is it possible to extract some sense of the political from within modernity itself?

Here we can return to the assumption of epochality and the methodological constraint that an account of political modernity can only be obtained from a relation to its failure. It would be easy to satisfy such a requirement by pointing to something like the decline of modernity as a vantage point from which to do so insofar as it remains within modernity. The straightforward affirmation of postmodern politics would do that.

However a difficulty remains insofar as such an approach preserves the assumption of presence which characterized political modernity within postmodernism. Work that can be characterized as post-foundational attempts to avoid such a possibility (see Marchart, forthcoming). First, working from within the deconstruction of Heidegger’s notion of ‘ontological difference’, Nancy argues that contemporary political thought and practice takes place from within the dereliction and disintegration of the polity on an epochal and global scale which reveals the absence of a substantial ground (Nancy, 1991). That is to say, from within the existence of the ‘obverse’ in Schürmann’s sense. Moreover, any attempt to reconstruct a foundation from a principium is futile. Hence the political becomes a matter of relations organized by the shared commonality of nothing. Although Nancy wishes to wire an ethic of openness and alterity into such relations, as Caygill points out there is no reason to exclude violence from them (Caygill, 1997). One might also point out that perhaps nothing is shared unevenly in that some have more of it than others who want to keep it that way, a situation which is brought into focus by research on ‘risk society’.

Second, from within post-Marxism and its displacement of the necessity of the economic as a ground, Laclau and Mouffe deny the foundational dimension of any polity (1985). The polity is a contingent entity which is established artificially through a hegemonic process and is thus constitutively prone to disruption, although it remains a moot point as to whether this is a consequence of the social antagonisms which hegemony organizes, or of the effects of capitalist dislocation which remain absolutely exterior to the space of the social and thus nonpolitical. Their argument is that the hegemonically structured polity exists insofar as it can represent the particular contingent moment of dislocation as necessary and universal. That this happens is itself a contingent matter, dependent on the invention of a negative other which provides the limits of a hegemonic space.

Third, the radical-democratic approach – here we can return to the trajectory of Wolin’s thought which has recently proposed an ‘episodic’ notion of the political as ‘moments of commonality when, through public deliberations, collective power is used to promote or protect the well-being of the collective’ (Wolin, 1996: 31). These are essentially creative, heterogeneous and transgressive moments, temporary and occasional, which are equated with democracy and revolution; they are contrasted with business-as-usual politics in the polity in which, controversially, Wolin includes postmodern multiculturalism as the institutionalization of homogeneity through the disciplinary affirmation of cultural particularity. Hence the political is equated with unfixity, and the latter is equated with democracy in the sense that the identity of the polity is in question, although Wolin concedes that the relation with democracy is contingent. Despite their differences, Wolin’s approach is also similar to William Connolly’s notion of ‘agonistic pluralism’ in the sense that pluralism is not simply a quantity of stable things which somehow have to manage to ‘get along’, but is a consequence of pluralization as the increased visibility of the contingent nature of everything (Connolly, 1995). As Connolly puts it, ‘nothing is fundamental’.

Here one can call to mind a general abandonment of the principle that a well-ordered polity is predicated on stability and agreement. In other words, incompletion has become a solution, failure has become an assumption. Evidence for this direction can be found, for example, in the turn within political science to notions of ‘governance without government’, which as an empirical development describing horizontal relations has left both democratic participation and philosophical reflection behind (e.g. Roseneau and Czempiel, 1992), although arguably Hardt and Negri (2000) have managed to indicate some of the radical potential of this shift in the idea of the mobility of networks. Similarly one might say that today the political is rescaled, encompassing the vastness of the globe and beyond, and the smallness of things down