theoretical contradiction is however no impediment to its realization: global knowledge is no less contradictory and no less realizable than the soverogue. Not only because of the historical reason that any realization of global knowledge relies upon and is consequent to the quasiordering of globality by American domination, but also because of the theoretical reason that the opposition between the categories of the sovereign and the law-abiding is rendered obsolete by US soveroguery. The USA acts both legally and extra-legally, subject to international conventions and institutions (be they mobilized to ensure that the international order maintains enough authority and stability for the USA to be given the veneer of quasi-democratic sanction and legitimacy) and in flagrant defiance or domination of them. In this duality, which we have called the soveroguery of the USA, in the situation of the historical actuality of the supernational quasi-order called globalization, the opposition between the sovereign and the law-abiding is redundant. As then is the categorial and practical opposition between knowledge and sovereignty, that is, between knowledge and the global. Amongst many other determinations, what can then be realized since the global under the aegis of US soveroguery is: (i) a knowledge that opens a futurity for the moment-ary and moment-ous unworking of the global in its sovereign constitution, as global experience (in more politically recognizable terms, a future that extends beyond the American domination of the global); and (ii) that such a knowledge is an unworking of its future in use, which is to say, not subject to any known future other than that which could be determined through the global. Global knowledge would then be (to adopt a quasi-Derridean formula) an unknown future of knowledge, a future without universality. Somewhat sovereign, global knowledge would be a knowledge and a future that contends with yet contributes to an unknowledge of the global.

## References

Bataille, George (1993) The Accursed Share, Volumes II & III, trans. Robert Hurley. New York: Zone.   
Derrida, Jacques (2005) Rogues: Two Essays on Reason, trans. Pascale-Anne Brault and Michael Nass. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Suhail Malik teaches in the Department of Visual Arts, Goldsmiths College, London, and is currently working on a philosophy of American power.

# Democracy to Come

Irving Goh

Keywords cosmopolitanism, ‘democracy to come’, friendship, hospitality, reject

n his discussion of the cosmopolitical and the debate about the ‘end of history’, Derrida (1997c: 41) points to the ‘to-come’ character   
of democracy as something that is intrinsic to the   
idea of democracy. The implication is that there   
can be no final state of democracy, no end to its   
history since openness to the event and to   
becoming are aspects of the openness to alterity,   
that is, an ethic of hospitality that underlies   
democracy. The history of democracy since Kant   
has become aligned with the history of an occiden-

talist cosmopolitanism. But should this be its final form?

Democracy today wants to give itself to anyone. This is testified to by its cosmopolitan dissemination since the 20th century, and its autodeconstructive history as a multiplicity giving place to fictions of itself, as demonstrated by Jacques Derrida in Rogues: Two Essays on Reason (2005). One might say that democracy’s giving itself to the world at large involves a certain hospitality, for that giving involves inviting and receiving (just about) anyone. Today, democracy’s state of hospitality appears to be reaching perfectibility, as almost all states in the world have taken on a more or less democratic countenance. And yet there can be no doubt that, at the beginning of the 21st century, there is a sense that democracy is in retreat. Instead of plural and heterogeneous democracies, we witness only states deferring to the singular hospitality of American democracy. One even ought not to be ‘out of step’ with the latter, as the rhetoric of contemporary geopolitics goes. In the face of this democracy, Derrida also maintains in Rogues that there is still not yet democracy in the world. For Derrida, it remains for one to reason with, or reject, present democracy. And one ought to remain open to the arrival of that which surprises any present form of thought or act of democracy. That is at least the dual task of Derrida’s ‘democracy to come’, in duel with the cosmopolitan democracy that we experience and have come to know today. Here, I would like to suggest that for ‘democracy to come’ to continue to have a chance now and in the future, there needs also an exposition of a right to reject this cosmopolitan hospitality.

One could perhaps already sense the emergency of such a violent and supplementary force of the right to reject hospitality, notwithstanding the fact that Derrida’s ‘democracy to come’ simultaneously calls for an ‘unconditional hospitality’. For Derrida (2001), the right to hospitality, which is the unconditional duty of welcome to the stranger as well as the (Kantian) conditioned right exercised in any practical hospitality to expel anyone and/or anything that threatens the security or sovereignty of the host, is understandable. But the rejection of hospitality is almost unthinkable. ‘Unconditional hospitality’ speaks of a sense of letting anyone or anything arrive into one’s space or care at any time, and without demand for or expectation of any kind of return. But if a right to reject hospitality were to become categorical today, as a supplement to ‘democracy to come’, it would only be because present ‘American’ cosmopolitan democracy seems to have appropriated for itself a semblance of ‘unconditional hospitality’. Because it works via a ruse of ‘unconditional hospitality’, one ought to be vigilant against that. American democracy has assumed a posture of ‘unconditional hospitality’ because almost every democratic state in the world defers to it, as argued above; and it takes them in. If these states submit themselves to the hospitality of American democracy unconditionally, it is only by the seemingly irresistible reason of the incomparable politicomilitary force of American democracy, as that which alone can secure a cosmopolitan peace and security. American democracy after all has demonstrated its ability to saturate cosmic space with teletechnological imaging machines, seeing the world from above, and keeping watch that nothing deviates from it. With such a cosmo(s)-political technics, justified by the ‘reason’ of cosmopolitan peace and security, almost nothing escapes being under the architecture, otherwise known as the hospitality, of American democracy. This is the terrifying simulacrum of 21st-century cosmo(s)- political democracy. We are not even citizens of this democracy as the ‘invited hostage’, which Derrida talks of in situations of hospitality (‘hostage’ because, as guest, one always assumes certain performatives demanded of the space of hospitality). We have not been ‘invited’. We do not even desire to enter or even approach it. And yet we are already automatic citizens of it.

A democracy that would sidestep this present state and State, then, must reason with, if not contest, 21st-century (American) cosmo(s)- political democracy. And that is why the violent supplement of a right to reject hospitality becomes necessary within the thought of hospitality. I suggested that this supplement potentially also displaces Derrida’s thought of ‘unconditional hospitality’. But let it be said here that the right to reject hospitality is not at all an unthinkable inhospitality. Instead, it is the immanent freedom to choose not to enter into a given relation or hospitality. It is the right to just turn away. The recognition of this right or freedom is, however, somewhat unarticulated in Derrida’s ‘unconditional hospitality’, which remains very much on the side of the potential giver of ‘unconditional hospitality’. But to remain on that side in a thinking of ‘democracy to come’ would risk ‘unconditional hospitality’ becoming an end-game for the other, in which an enclosing hospitality, like that of cosmo(s)-political democracy, is given, such that one cannot find an exit. Again then, for a ‘democracy to come’ that will liberate itself from the totality of cosmo(s)politanism, the supplementary right to reject the perverse hospitality and the given citizenship of the state, and State, of cosmo(s)-political democracy is imperative today.

Finally, this supplementary right to reject (hospitality) here is just about giving it exposition. It does not call for an institutionalization of such a right. Neither does it seek to prescribe a method for enacting it. Like Blanchot’s recognition of the force of ‘refusal’, the force of rejection is to be thought of as something that is within us, something that has always already been our potentiality in the face of an as if reasonable ‘reason’. In the face of the latter, like that of American cosmo(s)politan democracy, for example, there will be some of us who will simply and immediately disagree and just reject it, without noise or without submitting this refusal to the performatives of a constitutional debate within the boundaries of institutions. Among this ‘some’, there is a sharing of a certain friendship, a friendship without relation, or an anonymous friendship among strangers just sharing the silent force of the reject. One may regard this radical friendship as ‘non-canonical’, as Derrida would say. And that would place the right to reject (hospitality) back in the spirit of a ‘democracy to come’. For ‘democracy to come’ is also a question of friendship, according to Derrida, except that the friend there will not be one who is teleologically determined from the naturalized history of friendship. Democracy or ‘democracy to come’ is in search of that ‘non-canonical’ friendship that goes beyond all political, ideological, and ethical affinities. It is in search of that figure who maintains his or her right to reject or abandon whatever conditions or limits. The actualization of that right to reject, without reproach, would be the sovereign decision of a free (powerless) body within a space that promises the multiplicities of freedom that democracy promises. It would be the first step towards a freedom that allows anyone to choose freely, to choose outside the false choice of being with a cosmo(s)-political democracy or against it. For a ‘democracy to come’ tomorrow, one must let arrive this figure who affirms the right to reject (hospitality), this friend who is somewhat a little roguish.

## References

Blanchot, M. (1997) ‘Refusal’, in Friendship, trans. Elizabeth Rottenberg, pp. 111–12. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Derrida, J. (1994) Specters of Marx: The State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning, & the New International, trans. Peggy Kamuf, intro. Bernd Magnus and Stephen Cullenberg. New York and London: Routledge.

# Global Democracy

Heikki Patomäki

Keywords concrete utopia, Kant, linear time, open-ended process, peace, territory, world state

nternational or planetary democracy was first discussed systematically in the 1940s when the United Nations was founded. The ideal of   
sovereign equality of all UN members is most   
clearly embodied in the General Assembly’s one   
country/one vote principle, standing for democ  
racy between states. Originally, the UN was placed   
at the apex of the emerging system of international   
organizations – including the Bretton Woods insti-

Derrida, J. (1997a) ‘Politics and Friendship: A Discussion with Jacques Derrida at the Center for Modern French Thought’, University of Sussex, 1 December. URL: www.hydra.umn.edu/derrida/pol+fr.html

Derrida, J. (1997b) Politics of Friendship, trans. George Collins. London and New York: Verso.

Derrida, J. (1997c) Cosmopolites de tous les pays, encore un effort! Paris: Galilee.

Derrida, J. (2001) On Cosmopolitanism and Forgiveness, trans. Mark Dooley and Michael Hughes. London and New York: Routledge.

Derrida, J. (2003) ‘Autoimmunity: Real and Symbolic Suicides’, in Philosophy in a Time of Terror: Dialogues with Jürgen Habermas and Jacques Derrida, interviewed by G. Borradori, pp. 85–136. Chicago, IL and London: University of Chicago Press.

Derrida, J. (2005) Rogues: Two Essays on Reason trans. Pascale-Anne Brault and Michael Naas. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Derrida, J. and A. Dufourmantelle (2000) Of Hospitality, trans. Rachel Bowlby. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Irving Goh is Research Scholar and President’s Graduate Research Fellow at the National University of Singapore. He is also Visiting Fellow at Harvard University for Spring 2006. He has published on contemporary politics with a continental philosophy emphasis in the journals Cultural Theory and Cultural Politics, and in Jordan Crandall’s Under Fire 2.

tutions (International Monetary Fund, World Bank). The Economic and Social Council, ECOSOC, was designed to be the core of this system of international organizations. According to the UN Charter, decisions of ECOSOC are made by a majority of the members present and voting. Moreover, ECOSOC may make suitable arrangements for consultations with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) concerned with matters within its competence.

In the 1940s, democracy had become a universally accepted principle but there was no agreement as to the meaning of democracy. Thus the Cold War and political cleavages in the world appeared to make any of the more ambitious proposals unrealistic. In his classic book Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace, the first edition of which was published in 1948, Hans Morgenthau argued that a world state is eventually necessary as the only possible secure guarantee of world peace: ‘The experience of two world wars within a quarter of a century and the prospects of a third one to be fought with nuclear weapons have imparted the idea of a world state an unprecedented urgency’ (Morgenthau, 1961[1948]: 501). However, as evidence that there is as yet no world political community that could ground the would-be world state, Morgenthau (1961: 513) argued that a directly elected world parliament is not viable because ‘none of its constituent groups [such as the Americans, the Chinese, the Indians, and the Russians] would willingly submit to the majority vote of a legislative assembly thus constituted.

In the 1970s, sovereign statehood re-emerged as a key resource in the global emancipatory struggles over recognition of agency and autonomy. With the process of decolonization, the conventional UN ideal of international democracy had a revival. The institution of state sovereignty seemed, during and in the immediate aftermath of the process of decolonization, to provide a legitimate platform for fighting the imperial rule and capitalist exploitation that the majority of humanity experienced outside the core regions of the world economy. Hence, in the 1970s, world democratic aspirations were articulated in terms of inter-state relations. When the Third World had assumed a majority in the General Assembly and demanded a New International Economic Order, it was declared that:

all states are judicially equal and, as equal members of the international community, have the right to participate fully and effectively in the international decision-making process in the solution of world economic, financial and monetary problems. (United Nations, 1975: article 10)

The inherent ambiguities notwithstanding, this first global recognition of universal agency and autonomy can be seen as the beginning of world politics proper.

The topic of planetary democracy re-emerged in the 1980s with the rise of the globalization discourse and, a little later, the end of the Cold War. Preceded by Jürgen Habermas’ abstract Kantian speculations about world citizenship and ‘a fictive world society’ as the highest stage of human learning, David Held’s works on critical theory, democracy and state theory in the 1980s, and related early attempts to question the connection between democracy and the state, resulted in the theory of cosmopolitan democracy. This theory was first outlined in Held’s (1991) essay ‘Democracy, the Nation-State and the Global System’ and developed further in the book Democracy and the Global Order (Held, 1995).

The Kantian model of cosmopolitan democracy is based on a selected set of past experiences and reflections on them. Apart from the Kantian-Habermasian critical theory, it stems from the European experiences of overcoming the tragic dilemmas of inter-state relations by means of integration and development of the European Union. Jürgen Habermas’ social and political theory can itself be seen, in part, as a reaction to Nazism and the Second World War. Since the end of the Cold War, Habermas (2001) has devoted his attention increasingly to post-national politics and conditions of cosmopolitan democracy. He has been arguing, also with Jacques Derrida (Habermas and Derrida, 2003), that a more democratic European Union, also as a counter-balance to the one-sided hegemony of the USA, is a step towards world domestic policy and democracy.

The post-structuralist suspicion is that the model of cosmopolitan democracy is just another modern political blueprint. As a straightforwardly universalist scheme, it may also be potentially dangerous. Post-structural political theorists (Connolly, 1991; Walker, 1993: ch. 7) have also criticized the territorial conception of space and linear time implicit in the models of both conventional and cosmopolitan accounts of democracy. A concern is that, as progress is measured in terms of movement towards becoming a full member of the community of cosmopolitan democracy, the ideal of cosmopolitan democracy might give rise to a definition of higher and lower beings – others – located territorially in different parts of the world. This implies moral and political distance from the different others. The others may then be treated as innocents to be converted, as amoralists to be excommunicated or simply as outsiders (the far away anti-democrats) who can impose a threat of violence on us, i.e. the potential enemies. There also arises the perceived need for coercive powers to ‘protect’ the territory of cosmopolitan democracy.

Pragmatist (Cochran, 2002) and critical realist (Patomäki, 2003) approaches to global democracy – understood as an open-ended process – are based on notions such as trans-cultural dialogue, bottomup reforms and concrete utopias. Democracy is best conceived as a process of democratization. There is no model that would exhaust all democratic possibilities; and without any movement towards further democratization, strong tendencies to corruption and accumulation of power can easily take over – within a supposedly stable state of democracy, whatever the context. Moreover, in