they apply to these basic issues that it carries the hopes of the world, especially now that there is only one superpower. But how universal are these principles even today and even in relation to human rights? How effective were the ropes with which the Lilliputians sought to restrain Gulliver?

In the West domestic law is commonly understood to derive its power from its role as the symbol and indeed the major guarantee of fairness, stability and justice – to the degree that societies without law or within which the law plays a relatively small role in social life are generally considered to lack something very important, to be intrinsically unfair, unstable, unjust, and therefore to be inferior. When viewed historically and sociologically, however, domestic western law may be seen to have in fact initially derived its power from its role in ensuring fairness, stability and justice for a very small group of people. These were people who wished to: benefit personally from their possession of land and/or other factors of production; be excused both the payment of feudal tithes and any broader responsibility to their employees than the payment of wages; and appropriate for themselves any surplus produced through their cooperation with others. By the end of the 18th century these privileges had been broadened to include a second order of entitlements that allowed the beneficiaries of the first order to speak up for and organize themselves politically in defense of the same privileges.

The statements in which the courts defined both the first and second-order privileges eventually came to be known as civil and political rights. As the beneficiaries of these privileges prospered, multiplied, amassed fortunes, and gained control of states, their rights came to be seen as both sources and instruments of power. Moreover, these civil rights soon came to be regarded as universal not because everyone actually enjoyed them, but because they were available to all property owners and in time it became possible for anyone to be a property owner. Thus it was not surprising that when the Western European nations began their colonization of the rest of the world they took their law with them, thinking it to be beneficial to both themselves and the benighted peoples of other lands.

The reason why the few rather than the many actually enjoyed their rights was because, at the same time as the arrival of capitalism freed the few from economic subordination, it also deprived the many of economic security and therefore of any realistic possibility of owning their own productive property. In other words, economic freedom came at a price – the right to own property required that the many sacrifice the results of their labour in the interests of the few. In time, of course, the propertyless won the rights to vote and stand for election and succeeded in achieving a certain amelioration of the sacrifices demanded of them. Thus tithes returned in the form of taxes and the State took responsibility for the general welfare by creating certain economic and social rights.

During the course of the Second World War and led by the United States, the Allied Powers achieved a consensus around this individualcentred complex of rights and subsequently succeeded in having it adopted by the newly formed United Nations in 1948 as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. These rights are deeply embedded in the social routines of western societies and are therefore widely respected. Despite or because of the spread of capitalism, these rights are neither so deeply embedded nor so widely respected in the rest of the world. Is this really because the rest of the world is less civilized than the West? Or might this be yet another case of the pre-emption of the possibility of a global consensus by the prior formation of a western one? Is an unalloyed individualism in fact the only basis upon which a discourse of respect for the other may be constructed? Why is it so hard to see that most of the world’s population still depends on the virtuous behaviour of superiors for any protection it enjoys? Why is it that evil can be prohibited but goodness cannot be required? Why not make virtue, duty, or benevolence legally enforceable? Frighteningly, the apparent ridiculousness of these questions may suggest that international law was indeed the world’s last best hope. However, what seems ridiculous to one generation can become the commonsense of later generations, and remarkably quickly – vide neo-liberalism.

## Reference

Cassese, A. (2001) International Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Anthony Woodiwiss is Dean of the School of Social Sciences at City University, London. Amongst his many publications are three in the area of the sociology of human rights: Globalization, Human Rights, and Labour Law in Pacific Asia; Making Human Rights Work Globally; and Human Rights.

# The Globalization of American Law

David A. Westbrook

Keywords American, cultural imperialism, globalization, hegemony, law, modernization, state, United States

‘G<sup>lobal’,</sup> <sup>‘legal’</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>‘American’,</sup> <sup>name</sup>important aspects of much contempor- important aspects of much contemporary life. One way (there are of course others) to organize these vague descriptions is to begin from three commonplace observations. These observations are suggestive (they mean more than they say), problematic (they are not simply true; their contradictions have merit), and somewhat incommensurate (the logical relations among the three are not completely clear). First, globalization is a process in which law plays large roles. The global is self-evidently legal in treaties, international institutions, and more deeply, the vast webs of property, contract, and finance through which global business takes place. More personally, acts on the global stage such as an assertion of a human right, or joining a nongovernmental organization, or using a credit card, all entail a great deal of law, even though such law ordinarily is not at issue, submerged. The second commonplace is that law is increasingly understood to be articulated at various levels of politics, above, below, and including the nation state. While law is not the same everywhere (there are numerous variations among jurisdictions) such differences increasingly exist within the same conceptual frame, a frame with global scope. And a third commonplace is that global culture, and particularly its law, feels somehow ‘American’. ‘American’ includes not only the law as it emerges from the many authorities within the United States, but also indicates a certain cultural stance. Taken together, these three common observations suggest the proposition that law is being used to make a global society that is somehow American.

One of the difficulties in thinking through this proposition is that ‘law’ has no stable referent. Sometimes, law is understood to refer to distinct social phenomena such as treaties, constitutions (often guaranteeing rights), institutions, and the web of legal relations that inform civil life, law visà-vis society. All this is true enough, but law is also ineluctably part of that which it constrains. Law constructs much of the objects within the realms of politics, morality, and so forth. Thus politics, morality and society writ large (indeed global society) are always already legal in character, law within society. In any society, most matters tend to be so well settled as to be hardly discussed. Law, in this sense of the word, tends to be unquestioned, invisible, hegemonic. To ask ‘what is the role of (American) law?’ is, already, to have assumed a duality between law and its society that obscures much of importance.

As a result of the simultaneous opposition and interpenetration between ‘law’ and ‘society’, description of the relationship between law and a particular social phenomenon is difficult. And when the ‘phenomenon’ is that huge set of developments mystically discussed under the rubric of a ‘great transformation’, then the problem of delineating relationships between law and the phenomenon becomes difficult indeed. Consequently, thinking about law and globalization cannot aspire to more than understanding (sophistication). Demonstrable truth (certainty) is out of reach. In response to this situation, social critics may be expected to soften their approaches somewhat, to turn from ‘theory’ modeled on science to something akin to aesthetic appreciation, and an effort to think through the sources and implications of felt experience – the question requires not only rigor but critique, not only demonstration but sensibility.

Globalization could be understood from the end of the Second World War, when a number of treaties were signed that established a framework for the integration of non-communist states in Western Europe and elsewhere. The International Monetary Fund (IMF), the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank), and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT, which has been incorporated into the World Trade Organization, WTO) established an international, now global, trade and financial order designed to avoid the rivalries that led to both World Wars. Similarly, a series of treaties has created a Europe of interpenetrating politics, laws, economies, militaries, personal ties, and cultural identities – a project that was intended to make war among European states infeasible. In this story, law is a primary mechanism through which the great transformation was begun. And as the strongest power at the end of the Second World War, the United States played a major role in the construction of the new regime.

Such an instrumental view of law, however, is only half the story. While treaties provide a legal context for economic integration and so cultural transformation, global society is woven from countless interchanges among actors in civil society. Such transactions require agreement on fundamental social conventions, most obviously property, contract, and currency, but also less obviously economic matters. As the planet’s dominant national economy, the United States has been unsurprisingly influential in the creation of global standards, influence neatly symbolized by items like the US country dialing code (1), the language of air traffic control (American English), and the lack of a country identifier for US internet domains. But such systems, and by extension, the global, are not American property, and in many ways operate against American interests.

As mention of technology suggests, the Americanization of law also proceeds through efforts to modernize. Modernization is usually a spatial as well as a temporal concept. Especially from a country admitted to be ‘developing’, modernization is understood as the adoption of modalities found in a developed country. This is often presented in triumphal terms, as if no other modernity were imaginable. But more subtly, the experience and hence the practical authority of those who represent the modernity in place tend to be limited to their own history. The developed country has by definition been successful in becoming modern; the modern is understood in terms of what the developed country has become. Thus advice is given in terms that already presume and so promote the culture of the center. Asked about the establishment of core institutions of modernity, notably after the collapse of communism in the Soviet block, American lawyers and other experts have had great difficulty in doing anything other than recounting what they really know, the US situation. With regard to other possible modernities, such experts have no experience and hence little business giving advice.

In light of the vast power of the US government, the ubiquity and wealth of US civil institutions, especially corporations, and the sheer difficulty of thought, observed Americanization is often understood instrumentally, as the success of a policy. And oftentimes it is; Americanization is often intentional. Hence the globalization of American law may be thought to reflect nothing more than US interests and the power to realize such interests, a species of ‘cultural imperialism’. Social thought should guard, however, against letting Realpolitik slide into reductionism. Deciding whether a particular instance of law or globalization on an American model should be understood instrumentally, as an expression of US power, or as socially constituted and perhaps constrained by the process of globalization itself (or both, but in what proportion?) would require a situated analysis considerably beyond the scope of this supplement.

On a theoretical level, however, ‘cultural imperialism’, as a fancy word for the power of the United States, tends to negate the most fundamental premise of globalization, that politics is no longer understood through the conceptual apparatus of the nation state. Without denying either the power of the US government or the frisson of using imperial imagery as a provocation, ‘cultural imperialism’ does not help much in understanding what is new. (Power politics is important, endlessly fascinating, but not new.) More specifically, although the globalization of American law has its undeniably pedantic (or imperial or evangelical) aspects, such characterizations of the operations of law in global society are rather too simple. The charge of ‘cultural imperialism’ presumes that the basic unit of actual politics is a nation, the United States. If that is so, then presumably law too is intrinsically national. From this perspective, the globalization of American law is merely a euphemism for US hegemony, and globalization is an unnecessary analytic concept. Thus, to the conceptual difficulty of sorting out ‘the legal’ from ‘global society’, we must add another difficulty, that of determining whether contemporary phenomena are to be understood nationally (as an expression of American interests), or as a transformation of, inter alia, the meaning of ‘the national’, and thereby, the meaning of ‘American’.

A related problem with the idea of understanding the Americanization of global law as a form of cultural imperialism is the tacit assumption of a nationalist definition of law. The idea that it is evil presumption for one nation (perhaps the United States) to influence the law of another nation reflects a deeply positivist understanding of what law is, namely, the formal commitments of a given polity, articulations of the will of a given people. This is hardly the only way to understand law. Law has generally been understood as a constraint on contemporary politics, not merely as a concrete and formal expression of political will. The commandments of God; the law of our fathers; the law of nature or of justice; the law of all nations – such law is understood to exist above national politics, and may be used to judge, even constrain, national politics. The most explicit expression of this impulse in the new global society is human rights law. Human rights are defined in terms of universal human entitlements, rather than local political circumstances. Thus, from the ideological perspective of the nascent global society, law cannot be defined simply as the formal expression of the will of any state, even a state as powerful as the United States (witness the international outrage over torture conducted by US forces).

Indeed, at least in extreme circumstances such as genocide, national sovereignty is understood to be subordinate to global law, and hence armed interventions are justified. Consider, in this regard, the French use of force in Cote d’Ivoire, or the Australians in East Timor, and perhaps most importantly, the NATO intervention on behalf of Kosovo, which proceeded without Security Council authorization. Thus, although the state remains practically indispensable and undeniably present, if globalization is taken seriously, the state can no longer claim to be the foundational unit of international law and relations, as it has been throughout the modern period (for these purposes, usually dated from the Peace of Westphalia in 1648). And, as a corollary, if law is understood as the largely unarticulated yet foundational commitments of a global society that cannot be reduced to states, then law, too, cannot be defined as the formal expressions of states. Instead, law suffuses states. Therefore, the idea that states are sovereign, in any exclusive sense, over their laws, is no longer tenable.

We are thus left asking if anything, other than the influence of old-fashioned national politics (which remains important), explains the American ‘feel’ of global society? To close with a suggestion: global law is familiar in an American sort of way in part because many of the questions confronting global society have long been asked in the United States. Like global society, the United States was established as a polity that partially fused different cultures, while allowing for a fair degree of personal and communal difference. The visible institutions of law are especially important to such societies. Law resolves disputes among people who share little else and for whom community is difficult. More subtly, law enables also culture and commerce, the weaving of a thin but durable social fabric among people strange to one another. Law even structures the ways in which society, ‘the public’, is conceived, notably through the assertion of rights.

But people who assert rights against one another may not share enough; the law is a rather thin basis for culture. As a huge and young nation, the United States has since its founding struggled, sometimes very violently, to forge a culture among peoples who share little. Unity (or even community or solidarity) is perpetually a problem for the United States. The lack of fellow-feeling is increasingly recognized as a problem for the European project, and is an even larger problem for global society. The problem is that very large modern societies are, by definition, formal and legal. In such societies, individuals are defined in legal terms rather than by place, tradition, community, status, and so forth. Nowhere has this been more true, or true for longer, than in the United States, founded by immigrants who did not know one another, shared little, and then moved about the country, first westward, and now within a huge internal labor market. But wherever the citizen moves within the United States, she carries with her a set of legal understandings, rights, that protect her, and that facilitate certain kinds of expression, foster personality in certain ways. On the global stage, and somewhat independently of her actual citizenship, our exemplar may claim human rights. But her rights, as either a citizen of the world, or of the United States, will not provide our exemplar the sorts of communal understandings – the sense of place, home – commonly found in more stable societies. Hence the American ‘feel’ of global law and society (one of the commonplaces with which we began) is not merely due to American origins or influence, but to a similarity in the situation of the individual vis-à-vis those overwhelmingly large, modern, and therefore deeply legal social matrices that are vaguely but inescapably denominated ‘global’ and ‘American’, where law on good days provides order, but little solace for alienation.

David A. Westbrook is Professor of Law, University at Buffalo, State University of New York. He is the author of City of Gold: An Apology for Global Capitalism in a Time of Discontent (Routledge, 2003).