# Cyberlaw Itsuko Yamaguchi (Translated by David C. Buist)

Keywords cyberspace, information, Internet, Japan, ubiquitous network

## Cyberlaw and the Japanese Concept of ‘Information Law’

The terms ‘cyberlaw’, ‘cyberspace law’, ‘Internet law’ or ‘information technology (IT) law’ have gained considerable currency in recent years. To what extent do any of these terms denote a distinctive and consistent field of legal investigation? The concept of ‘information law’ has existed in Japan since the 1960s, but its definition depends greatly on the varied interpretations of the key concept of ‘information’. Given the inevitable overlap between the concept of ‘cyberlaw’ and the existing category of ‘information law’, it would seem instructive to begin by considering how they might relate to each other. One characteristic of ‘information law’ is that it has been formed as a category largely according to practical criteria rather than having any clear foundation in legal theory. It came about in response to pressing social concerns about the legal implications of information technology. The development and adoption of new information technologies raised legal issues that crosscut the existing compartmentalization of legal theory. These issues fall outside the scope of the typical problems envisaged by existing legal institutions. Attempts to formally define ‘information law’ are thus inevitably broad and flexible in interpretation, as is illustrated by the following influential definition: ‘law pertaining to the production, distribution and consumption of information’ (Hamada, 2002: 473).

‘Cyberlaw’ inherits from ‘information law’ the characteristic of being practically oriented rather than being defined in terms of legal theory. The Internet and virtual sphere of ‘cyberspace’ does provide some basis for its overall conceptualization. Nevertheless, the legal problems raised by cyberspace still transect the traditional divisions drawn between different fields of law, such as libel law, obscenity regulations, privacy and personal data protection law, copyright law, and the laws governing electronic commercial transactions. All these areas are simultaneously brought into play when we consider the issues frequently raised by cyberspace communications, such as the inherent tendency to cross international borders, the high degree of anonymity, and the uncertain liabilities of Internet Service Providers (ISPs). An additional complication is that the Internet is itself inherently changeable in character. The basic structure or ‘architecture’ of the Internet is subject to change through the way in which the technological ‘means’ of software and hardware are arranged in order to bring about the realization of specific desired ‘ends’ – whether these be values, ideals or functions. Broadcast media in the past had severe inherent technological and physical limitations arising from the finitude and scarcity of useable electro-magnetic frequencies. The existing legal and regulatory system of broadcast licensing and content regulation grew up in accordance with those conditions. However, the Internet is entirely different in this respect. It has no fixed, unchangeable or easily defined character. Cyberlaw will therefore be highly susceptible to periodic changes in technology, social norms, social consciousness, and socioeconomic conditions.

## The Digital Impact on Free Speech Theory in Japan

In order to give a more concrete picture of the social changes brought about by cyberspace, I will now focus on the issue of freedom of speech and expression in Japan. During the early stages of rapidly expanding Internet usage in the mid-1990s, the Japanese government took a very cautious approach toward the enactment of legal measures to counteract emerging problems such as defamation on the Internet and cyberporn. This caution was particularly marked when issues of free speech and privacy were concerned. This is in contrast to the United States, which was among the first to adopt legislative measures with the Communications Decency Act of 1996. However, towards the end of the decade, Japan began to be more proactive on the legal front, even when this impinged upon rights of free expression and data privacy. This is seen, for example, in the ‘Law for the Partial Amendment of the Law Relating to the Regulation of Amusement Businesses and the Improvement of Services’ (Law No. 55 of 1998), which extended conventional administrative control over sex-related amusement businesses to cyberporn. In 2001, a further law was enacted as the ‘Law on the Limitation of Specified

Telecommunications Service Provider’s Liability for Damages and the Disclosure of Information about the Senders of Electronic Communications (Law No. 137 of 2001). This law sets specific conditions for the indemnity of Internet Service Providers, and also provides for a legal right to demand and receive the disclosure of information on the senders of communications.

These recent changes in the institutional conditions relating to freedom of speech and expression are likely to have a major impact on how we study or ‘theorize’ this freedom (Yamaguchi, 2002). In postwar Japanese constitutional theory, the importance of free speech was so taken for granted that there seemed to be no need for any direct discussion about its intrinsic worth. The demand for tougher constitutional guarantees for the freedom of expression has always been backed up by an intense distrust of government power on issues relating to public expression, and any movement toward regulation in this area has been met by a profound mood of ‘scepticism’ and loud protests. There has also been lively proceduralist discussion over the finer points of legal interpretation and judicial criteria with the aim of counteracting any movement by courts to stretch the interpretation of existing laws or the constitution in such a way as to limit people’s rights to free expression. However, attitudes have since begun to shift somewhat with public recognition of the inevitability of stringent regulatory measures to curb the harm that can arise from free expression in the new environment of almost instantaneous worldwide communications. Furthermore, in the context of present government policy to promote the further development and use of information technology, the need for regulation against illegal contents is also being argued from an economic point of view. With the move towards greater legislative interventionism in this field, the current prevailing view is that the existing laissez-faire policy with respect to public expression based on the mistrust of government control cannot function so well in the new technological and social environment. The challenge is now to find ways of balancing the competing interests of free expression on the Internet and people’s rights to public honour and privacy, as well as providing for the wholesome rearing of children and youth, and fulfilling people’s expectations that the Internet will be a secure and trustworthy medium for commerce. To this end, it is necessary to think more deeply about the ‘theory’, ‘philosophy’, ‘rationale’ or ‘why-questions’ of free speech. These are matters to which Japanese constitutional theory has given relatively scant attention in the past. The prin ciple task now confronting us is to seek philo sophical justifications for the constitutional protection of free expression and explain its underlying virtues.

## Cyberlaw in the ‘Ubiquitous Network Society’: What Lessons Might American Cyberlaw Have for Japan?

The most recent trends seem to indicate a gradual loss of the distinctive mood and spirit that surrounded cyber-‘space’ in the early days of Internet growth. The latest technological developments – such as the widening use of broadband and wireless Internet connections, the miniaturization of communications terminals, and ubiquitous computing – suggest a fundamental change in the way people relate to the Internet. Instead of people using computers to enter into cyberspace, it is now more the case that computers enter invisibly into people’s lives. Computers are becoming a ubiquitous part of daily life. Therefore, the very concept of cyber-‘space’ on which existing cyberlaw is premised is itself changing.

Nevertheless, the cautious approach adopted in existing law toward the regulation of cyberspace, as exhibited especially in American cyberlaw since the 1990s (Lessig, 1995, 1999), remains of fundamental importance in Japan, even more so now as we seek to clarify the legal challenges facing us in the rapidly changing technological environment of the present day. In particular, we need to take a serious look at alternative types of regulatory measure, rather than relying solely, or even at all, on traditional legal instruments based on the ‘command-and-control’ model. This is necessary in consideration of the distinctively complex and changeable ‘architecture’ of digital networks. Such alternative means of regulation might include, for example, self-regulatory systems among private corporations, encrypting and identification technologies, control systems employing rating and filtering techniques, and educational measures aimed at promoting information literacy and awareness of information ethics. Furthermore, in view of the fact that controversies relating to the Internet cross-cut multiple fields of law, there is a necessity for widespread and constant monitoring to see whether the numerous measures in place are interacting in such a way as to maintain a proper balance between freedom and regulation.

These are certainly no easy tasks, which is precisely why we must first give some thought to the matter I raised at the beginning – how to theorize the concept of ‘cyberlaw’. In light of our existing experience of trying to theorize the concept of ‘information law’ in Japan, there are two points that particularly need attention here. First, cyberlaw provides the occasion for reflection on fundamental questions, such as which basic evaluative norms need to be observed when dealing with specific individual case issues, and why such principles have come to be enshrined in law in the first place. Making explicit the normative values and principles that law seeks to actualize is absolutely essential if we are not to be overtaken by the factual changes which are constantly occurring as a result of the intrinsically changeable nature of digital networks. In other words, attempting a theoretical analysis from the perspective of cyberlaw means returning to the fundamental values and norms underlying the various areas of law that pertain to digital communications. It means investigating at a more basic level what values free expression and the flow of information on the Internet fulfil for individuals and society. It also involves consideration of how the harmful effects of these activities can be controlled. The second point is closely related to the first. That is to say that cyberlaw can throw new light on the problems inherent in existing laws by providing us an opportunity to reexamine them in relation to contemporary issues. It allows us to think again about whether the present legal framework is ‘optimal’ from the point of view of realizing the basic principles that are supposed to be its underlying goal. In other words, the new perspective provided by cyberlaw not only illuminates fundamental principles, but also reveals the deficiencies of existing law.

## References

Hamada, J. (2002) ‘Jo¯ho¯ Ho¯’ [Information Law], in Takashi Kitagawa et al. (eds) Jo¯ho¯gaku Jiten [Encyclopedia of Media and Information Studies]. Tokyo: Koubundou.

Lessig, L. (1995) ‘The Path of Cyberlaw’, Yale Law Journal 104: 1743.

Lessig, L. (1999) ‘The Law of the Horse: What Cyberlaw Might Teach’, Harvard Law Review 113: 501.

Yamaguchi, I. (2002) ‘Beyond de facto Freedom: Digital Transformation of Free Speech Theory in Japan’, Stanford Journal of International Law 38: 109.

Itsuko Yamaguchi has been Associate Professor of Information Law and Policy, Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies at the Graduate School of Interdisciplinary Information Studies, University of Tokyo, since 2000, and was Visiting Researcher at Harvard Law School in 1999–2000.