university’ is the site of intersecting alienations, and is alienated as a whole from the organization which bears that name. The detachment of the universitas from the university (as studium generale) has a positive effect in that the former is constituting itself across universities and countries, in the form of networks, journals, conferences and so on. This interactivity – still housed by universities, but implicated in career structures, inter-institutional competition, accountability mechanisms – sustains the universitas, and allows Readings (1996), for example, to speak in non-lamenting tones about the possibilities of maintaining academic life in some ‘real’ sense amidst ‘the ruins’. There are also possibilities of the universitas (re-)occupying parts of the university, through new or existing teaching programmes, research centres and colleges. Governance structures may provide a residual basis for re-autonomizing and revitalizing corporatized institutions. Some of these conflicts can flow into union/management conflict. In any case, the growing non-coincidence of the universitas with the ‘university’, and of both with what such terms might authentically connote, is fundamental to understanding the condition and dynamic of the contemporary university, and can be expected to remain so.

In that combination of globalization and cybernation that is setting the parameters for the next round of the university’s hypermodern development, a prominent trend will be the growth of global universities – both virtual and land-based – competing around the world. At the same time, the growth of professional life outside of and between institutions has lessened dependency on them, and the academic intelligentsia has become interconnected as never before. It remains to be seen whether and in what way a ‘community of scholars’ can reconstitute itself in this new configuration.

## References

Kerr, C. (1964) The Uses of the University. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Malinowski, B. (1954) Magic, Science and Religion. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.

Marrou, H.I. (1964) A History of Education in Antiquity, trans. George Lamb. New York: Mentor.

Marx, K. and F. Engels (1976) The German Ideology. Moscow: Progress Publishers.

Newman, J. (1996) The Idea of a University. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Rashdall, H. (1895) The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Readings, B. (1996) The University in Ruins. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Snow, C.P. (1998[1959]) The Two Cultures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Andrew Wernick is a sociologist and historian of ideas working in the Cultural Studies Programme at Trent University. His books include Auguste Comte and the Religion of Humanity (Cambridge University Press, 2001) and Promotional Culture (Sage, 1991).

## The Global University Ryan Bishop

Keywords global, knowledge, military, nationstate, research, university

In an influential series of essays entitled The Idea of a University, John Henry Cardinal Newman wrote that universities are ‘a place of teaching universal knowledge’ (1996: 3). Although

the title of Cardinal Newman’s lectures uses the indefinite article ‘a’, many people cite it with the definite article ‘the’. This mistake in article usage reveals the existence of a generalized concept that coheres around the very universality of the university as invoked by Cardinal Newman. Producing and conveying universal knowledge constitutes the claim from which the institution has derived its authority and legitimacy. But, as many scholars have pointed out, universities around the globe in the late 20th and early 21st centuries display a complex heterogeneity largely at odds with claims to the generation and teaching of universal knowledge. Therefore, can one speak of the university as a universal concept? If so, does it actually reflect the production and transmission of universal knowledge, or might it depend on other shared qualities? And if not, then what are some of the specific cultural–historical forces that cause them to be so widely divergent phenomena while still making claims in the name of universal knowledge?

Because of their current import in the shaping of global institutions in the post-Second World War era, North American universities might point toward some answers to these questions. Large, research-oriented universities in the USA exemplify a specific set of assumptions related to ‘the university’ as a concept and provide the model for the emergent global university in the post-Cold War era. Central to this concept is ‘research and development’ (R and D) as that which attaches the university to the nation-state and its goals, as well as to the (trans)national economy. The shift to R and D of a specific nature (one often at odds with ‘pure research’) indicates institutional variations from the University of Berlin model central to the large scale US expansion of public, tertiary education. The University of Berlin model explicitly grounded the university’s project in that of the nation-state. The university was charged with producing a well-rounded elite group of future leaders versed in the history of ideas and specific national culture. In the USA, this foundational purpose has been of import, but US institutions have taken, almost from the outset, a more instrumental approach: that is, although the university is meant to instill such knowledge, it should, at the same time, work for the economic benefit of the nation-state. The use-function of a university in the USA, therefore, has had both immaterial and material dimensions.

With the advent of the Second World War, the instrumental aspects of university-based R and D, especially in the sciences and social sciences, were mobilized in the ‘total war’ effort through the establishment of federally-supported research laboratories. These laboratories became precursors of massive research projects carried out after the end of the war, and led to a vastly different institutional makeup and project. Recent commentators, such as Bill Readings (1996), argue that the university now no longer serves primarily in the role as inculcator of national culture for the nationstate. In this manner, parts of the university act as repositories of knowledge ‘once-valued’ in an abstract sense but no longer valued in an economic, applied one. The university, through libraries and various disciplines, has long had this kind of archival function but, in the second half of the 20th century, the US-global model contained clear demarcation within the institution: that portion which archives and that which produces, especially R and D that can be converted into patents and revenue for the university, for private companies, for hybrid academic-commercial entrepreneurial enterprises, and for the economy at large. The result is the ‘common-sense’ division within the global R and D university partially anticipated in the latter part of the 19th century and early part of the 20th century as the USA imported various aspects of German and French universities. Once in the USA, however, the models metamorphosed, largely driven by an ethos of pragmatism.

Although involved in university operations much earlier, the federal government’s role increased substantially in 1862 with the passage of the Morrill Land Grant Act, which provided not only land and funds but also dictated the teaching of specific subjects (including those related to agriculture and technology). At the inaugural address on the founding of the University of California in 1872, Daniel C. Gilman asserted he had no need ‘to make a plea for the study of modern sciences’ in the newly established state institution, for ‘Science . . . was the mother of California’ (Gilman, 1872). Gilman’s paralipsis indicates the newness of, and controversy surrounding, the inclusion of the modern sciences as part of the general university curriculum. Gilman became president of Johns Hopkins University just three years later, and, at its founding, he explicitly argued the case there. Johns Hopkins University became the model of the research-oriented university within the USA, emphasizing professional schools, graduate programs and research. (Gilman’s argument for including the newer sciences countered those put forward earlier in the century by Hegel and Schleiermacher that sought to relegate the sciences to institutional formations different from the university.) Gilman’s reputation for incorporating the sciences and technology into the body of the university partially explained his presence at Johns Hopkins.

At the turn of the 21st century, the opposite relationship exists for the global R and D institution, with the humanities, arts and qualitative social sciences being the areas requiring arguments claiming legitimate inclusion. The increased role of R and D as a revenue generator, at the level of government grants or intellectual property patents, begins to form fully during the Second World War, though the trajectory actually began much earlier. The global R and D university, for which the US institutions serve as a global paradigm, results from a deep enmeshing of academic research of a staggering variety in the military-industrial-entertainment-academic complex. ‘The conversion of military research into university science’, Donald Kennedy, former President of Stanford University noted, ‘added tremendous impetus to the domination of the research university by research’ (Kennedy, 1995: 10). The military, as well as a related military logic and ethos related to technological research in relation to the uses of the university, have come to dominate the shape and nature of the global R and D university. That transnational corporations share this logic and ethos in relation to the university furthers their sway in the formation of the concept of the global R and D university.

There are many reasons for this increasingly intensified relationship between apparently disparate aspects of a nation-state: military, economy, university and technology. But the import of a standing army to the phenomenal growth of military technology over the last few centuries cannot be over-estimated. The larger, steadier concentration of military establishments allowed for military technology to flourish. With the Industrial Revolution, change in military technology became increasingly rapid, and the first arms race got under way. Armies and their weaponry, as a result, became outdated in a matter of decades. (Needless to say, this pace of change and window of technological advantage is measured now in a few years if not months.) By the late 19th century, as the demand for weaponry continued unabated, the complexity of weapons and weapons systems necessitated huge financial and engineering resources, often outside the sole control of individuals or the state, as well as a willingness to conduct long-term research that might never deliver profitable or deployable results. Thus corporations, with tangential university co-operation, became the major players in arms development and production. Some corporations even established colleges that would work with industry to address problems of industrial technology and mobilization, as Johns Hopkins University (1875) and the University of Chicago (1892) exemplify.

The firm belief that military victory directly correlated with military technology was long in coming, but the First World War finally secured it. Once it did so, the nation-state in the USA pursued military technological superiority intensely, and during the period between World Wars corporate and state coalitions increasingly began enlisting the aid of universities in the pursuit of grant sourcing and product generation related to military technology, a process accelerated by the Depression. For the most part, prior to the Second World War, universities played a rather minimal role in the nation’s political economy, though they did so more directly at the individual state level. Afterward, they would become indispensable to it.

Universities that had feared the intervention of federal patronage in the 1930s came to see it as a necessity a mere three decades later. But the annual largesse of US\$1 billion for R and D specified for academic institutions was not evenly doled out, and great chasms of funding yawned between departments – between the heavily moneyed sciences and the anemically strapped humanities, between those fields deemed as being of ‘national import’ and those whose practicality was questioned and questionable. Or, as Clark Kerr, chancellor of the University of California at Berkeley in the 1950s and 60s, described the situation at that time, ‘scientists affluent, humanists militant’ (1963: 60). This ‘common-sense’ division between and within academic institutions, which still holds in the early part of the 21st century and which defines the global R and D university as such, emerged from a decades-long set of specific cultural/historical events and pressures.

The shift from undergraduate instruction to an emphasis on research and publication is another hallmark of the global R and D university. As the title of Clark Kerr’s book The Uses of the University (1963) suggests, the triumph of instrumental reason had resulted in ‘use value’ supplanting ‘knowledge for knowledge’s sake’. To put it another way, Cardinal Newman’s universal knowledge gave way to bottom-line accounting and accountability. The shift toward the dominance of research in the research university highlighted the ascendancy of external patronage, from either corporate or governmental sources. The university, starting in the early days of the Cold War, began to resemble the transnational corporations it aided with the substantial support of state and federal funds. The tension in this alliance, of course, rests in the paradox of liberal democratic, late capitalist states.

To return to the questions raised at the outset of this supplement, we can say that the global R and D universities, modeled on those in the USA, share a set of agendas similar enough that it might be accurately labeled a ‘universal’ endeavor (though ‘global’ is probably more accurate). But this agenda is not the one that is often commonly assumed, namely a teleology toward truth and knowledge aided and abetted by a powerful, centralized state. Rather it is a complex set of agendas predicated on R and D strategies set by a host of economic, technological, geopolitical, and military concerns, which at times might be central to state policy and other times antithetical to it. The global R and D university serves the militaryindustrial-entertainment complex and now adds itself as the integral fourth portion of the assemblage while simultaneously operating as an archive of ‘knowledge-past’ and cultural heritage, producer of corporate workers/citizens/consumers, and essential node in national/global economic networks.

## References

Gilman, Daniel C. (1872) The Building of the University, an Inaugural Address. Delivered at Oakland, CA, 7 November, URL (consulted 30 November 2005): http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/ calhistory/inaugural.gilman.html

Kennedy, Donald (1995) ‘Another Century’s End, Another Revolution for Higher Education’, Change May/June: 8–15.

Kerr, Clark (1963) The Uses of the University. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Newman, John Henry (1996) The Idea of a University. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Readings, Bill (1996) The University in Ruins. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Ryan Bishop teaches at the National University of Singapore in the Department of English and has published on urbanism, military technology, critical theory, avant-garde aesthetics and international sex tourism.

# Rebranding Harvard

Andrew Wernick

Keywords advertising, brand, corporatism, institution, marketing, privatization

A <sup>distinguishing</sup> <sup>feature</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>contemporary</sup>universities is the extent of the (self-) marketing practices in which they have come to be immersed. Universities, like other public institutions in the age of privatization, quasi-markets and private–public partnerships, have become increasingly promotionalized.

This appears not only in the opening up of the university to outside advertising through sponsorships, display adverts and the naming of buildings, and in all the impression management associated with student and professorial careers. It also appears in the competition of universities with each other. From websites to architecture, from fundraising to student recruitment, from mission statements to touted areas of excellence, from orientation week to convocation, from profiling star faculty to choosing a president/vice-chancellor, every dimension of the institution has come to be pressed into the service of cultivating a public image in line with its management’s chosen competitive strategy. As in the corporate world, with its concern for niches and market share, this image cannot be left to chance. Competition for students, capital funds, research income and so on dictates ongoing attunement to changing markets and conditions. Maintaining the value of a university’s brand, then – not just as a university but as this one – entails a whole labour of reproducing it, modifying it, and sometimes, as in operations of ‘rebranding’ and ‘repositioning’, giving it a complete overhaul.

What is new in this respect is neither the mere fact of rivalry and competition, nor the importance of reputation. These were part and parcel of the university from its classical and medieval origins. It is, rather, the self-consciousness with which a university’s corporate image has come to be managed, the administrative prominence this task assumes, and the objectification, and indeed monetization, of academic reputation itself as brand.

In general, brand-consciousness heteronomizes. The choice of market strategy embodied in a projected brand-image feeds back into both product and its style of presentation. In universities this includes programme mix and research emphasis. Which is not to say that the convergence between academic and more direct commercial branding practices is complete. What sets university branding apart is that academia (like churches) has its own criteria in terms of which to evaluate worth – criteria that are themselves anchored in something presenting itself ultimately as universal. Through degrees and appointments, conversely, academic institutions are guarantors of the intellectual and professional culture that ensures maintenance of these standards as a cultural value. It is in that spirit that Harvard, for example, has veritas (truth) inscribed on its logo-ized coat of arms.

However, from the point of view of consumer or sponsor information, as well as from that of the meritocracy that democratized universities have come to approximate, objective comparisons cannot be made on so nebulous a basis. The master value that has come to assert itself in practice, therefore, is performative excellence, wherein the same logic applying to inter-individual evaluation has come to apply to value comparisons between whole universities. Indicators like those related to teaching, research and student service are not a pure construct. They involve, nevertheless, some of the same circularity as results from promotionalization on other levels. Tests, including self-tests, measure the ability and willingness to do them. Their reportage involves self-presentation. Overall, competition for brand value reinforces trends towards the conversion of universities into machines for the production of high scores in performance indicators and whatever else is needed to bolster the perceived differential value of what they have to offer. In addition, even in ‘objective’ data about teaching and research productivity there is an irreducible element of qualitative assessment by those qualified. But those qualified are drawn from a credentialized peer group that, through the self-reproduction of academia, has in a sense qualified itself.

What prevents performative excellence from succeeding truth, wisdom and so on to become itself a weightless currency is the acknowledged hierarchy not just within but between institutions. At the top are a handful of world-class universities whose credentials serve as a kind of guarantor and gold-standard for the whole currency of excellence. The imagistic and the value side of branding work differently, therefore, at different levels of the academic system. Regional and feeder universities, less able to draw on their own mythos, compete primarily through performance and specialization. They are liable to be rebranded to differentiate them within a state or sub-state system. As we ascend the scale, however, branding is a different proposition, both because it can draw on a reputation that gives added value to degrees beyond any measurable excellence, and because of an institution’s credentializing weight within the wider system of evaluation. At the apex, the most prestigious and well-recognized universities have been able to convert a long-entrenched academic reputation into a fully capitalizable brand. This has enabled them, on the one hand, to generate income from the associative value of the (copyrighted) school name as a rentable property; and on the other, to use their accumulated brand-value to position themselves strongly for the coming bigleague competition in the global academic market.

The case of Harvard’s coming to brandconsciousness in the early years of the new century is paradigmatic. The change was signaled by three things. First was the appointment of a new president, a noted economist well known as an enthusiast for globalization and keen to reposition Harvard in light of the globalized academic market. The second change was a set of moves to coordinate and intensify what had already become a plethora of initiatives to capitalize on the Harvard name, including private sector spin-offs to exploit patents and other forms of intellectual property. The third was an effort to globalize Harvard’s reach technologically, by loosening undergraduate residency requirements, making course materials comprehensively available online, and launching a large-scale distance education programme. Not surprisingly, the debate at Harvard – over and above controversies such as those surrounding affirmative action (a conflict one might say between brand-value and brandimage, given Harvard’s liberal and noblesse oblige character) – has concerned the extent to which a focus on exploiting the Harvard brand has combined with a dilution of the actual student experience, and of Harvard as an elite bastion of intellectual culture, to undermine the brand’s differential value.

The gamble of the new Harvard is that it might be possible to capitalize on the old form of ethosand-nostalgia-driven reputation to acquire the excellence (e.g. via admission and SAT scores) needed not only to sustain the brand’s value but also to replace the former with the latter as the basis of Harvard’s claim to gold-standard status. The critics could well be right that this will also dissolve whatever was real in the elite and ivy-covered intellectual culture underlying Harvard’s image, rendering that image hollow. The import, though, is unclear. For it will have capped a larger change in which, not only for Harvard but also for academia more generally, the intellectual and institutional traditions from which post-industrial universities have ceased to draw values even as an alibi are formally replaced with the coin of another currency.

Andrew Wernick is a sociologist and historian of ideas working in the Cultural Studies Programme at Trent University. His books include Auguste Comte and the Religion of Humanity (Cambridge University Press, 2001) and Promotional Culture (Sage, 1991).