# Transparency and Teaching

Graham Allen

Keywords administration, freedom, information, quality, teaching, transparency, university

ne of the ironies of globalization is that it takes different forms in different parts of the world. However, for people working in institutions such as universities (institutions that, in their very name, place a priority on globalizing notions), globalization is perhaps most regularly registered in terms of a set of concepts with an ethical and practical performative power: quality, excellence, freedom of information and, I would suggest, transparency. An example of the last comes in the European experience of globalization – a strange experience of a demand to be rigorously national, rigorously European and rigorously global, or at least open to the world, all at the same time. To be an academic in a European university is to feel increasingly interpolated by the performative force of transparency, a force (an imperative, a demand) that requires everything that we do as academics to be comparable, measurable and calculable by others and, in particular, our European friends and neighbours. The Bologna Process is a good example of this globalizing force and trend. For academic readers not previously aware of the Bologna Process it might come as a surprise that this crucial European initiative has passed through many stages, including the Sorbonne Declaration (25 May 1998), the Bologna Declaration (19 June 1999), the European Commission’s TUNING agreement (2000) and the Prague and Berlin Communiqués (May 2001, September 2003).

The process<sup>1</sup> involves a set of 10 action lines:

1. adoption of a system of easily readable and comparable degrees;

2. adoption of a system of essentially two cycles (either three years BA plus two MA or four years BA plus one MA);

3. establishment of a system of credits (such as ECTS [European Credit Transfer System]);

4. promotion of mobility;

5. promotion of European co-operation in quality assurance;

6. promotion of the European dimension in higher education;

7. lifelong learning;

8. higher education institutions and students (that is, participation of staff and students in the creation of the EHEA (European Higher Education Area), the social dimension of the Bologna Process and quality within their own institutions);

9. promoting the attractiveness of the EHEA and the ERA (European Research Area); and

10. doctoral studies and synergy between the EHEA and the ERA.

Most academics will become aware of the Bologna Process when it begins to impact practically on their institution’s decision making and especially their established degree structures. The first physical space in which an academic will confront Bologna, therefore, will probably be either in the department or faculty meeting or, perhaps, in a meeting of some committee responsible for academic and structural development. By the time academics meet Bologna in such spaces, however, it will be too late to enter into any dialogue with the process. The Bologna Process is a fact, a legal treaty, entered into by 29 European Ministers of State for Education when they signed The Bologna Declaration of 19 June 1999.

Bologna demonstrates a political reality, which we can use as an example of globalization: it is a treaty and a process that is and promises to make radical changes in the manner in which education is delivered, designed and thought about in the countries which make up the European Union. In this sense it is a sign of the transnational or globalized university, a university which is now shaped by forces and trends outside of and beyond those traditionally assigned as legitimate parties responsible for a university’s direction, its educational and intellectual mission – the university faculties and the state. The Bologna Process can be used to authenticate claims that the modern idea of the university, exemplified for instance in Kant’s The Conflict of the Faculties (1996), has been superseded by a university which, as Bill Readings argued in his The University in Ruins (1996), no longer directly serves and benefits the nationstate. Gregg Lambert, in his Report to the Academy: (Re: The New Conflict of the Faculties) (2001), attempts to update Lyotard’s seminal report on the university (Lyotard, 1984), along with other works such as Readings’ much-read book on the idea of the university. Lambert, among other things, argues that the modern,

Kantian model of the faculties has been superseded by the emergence of what we might call a fifth faculty, which is higher in its powers than Kant’s ‘higher’ faculties. This new, administrative faculty speaks of and to the university, it treats the traditional faculties and disciplines within the university as so many troublingly diverse and ‘resistant’ cultures to be colonially ruled (silenced, brought into line) and it treats the outside world either as a further layer of the administrative arm of the nation and increasingly transnational structures or it treats it as a client requiring a transparent and quality product. Many will, no doubt, feel the strength of such a description of the new administrative or fifth faculty that today rules the university in the name not of reason but of market demand and market competitiveness: ethical, procedural, serviceable transparency being an indispensable part of a university’s market viability. However, Bologna is not the invention of any university’s administrative faculty. It is a process discussed and then ratified by ministers of state for education. The university’s design and direction is, today, increasingly being shaped, at least in Europe, by governmental agents not directly attached to the university’s insides, its conflicts, save for their ministerial prerogative. The situation is global at the same time as it is distinctly European. Phenomena such as Bologna do not come down, in a top-heavy manner, within the university’s mutating internal structures, they arrive as a kind of climate change for all those working within such institutions, whether they be members of human resources departments, governing body or members of departments of dairy science, human geography or literary studies. Trying to come to an understanding of a process such as Bologna requires that one by-pass staff members of the university itself and move directly on to the internet, where the various stages of the process can all be read. This situation is not insignificant: European universities are now quite literally transparent, their raison d’être, their mission statements and the core values by which they operate, are now readable in a cyberspace sweeping through them in a digital form, which encounters no resistance save for the often antiquated machines upon which many staff and students still depend. The postmodern university’s inside, the centre of its thinking, its ‘principle of reason’, lies in a place which is literally (physically) neither inside nor outside. The post-modern university’s inside, its ground, is transparent (see Derrida, 1983).

Many of the ideals of Bologna are, of course, noble and just. It would be irresponsible to treat the whole process as if it were just another example of perniciously spreading economic and cultural (colonial) globalization. The phenomenon of Europe is, it hardly requires me to say, extraordinarily complex. However, it is the responsibility of all those involved in higher education to submit the terms, the objectives and the language of the numerous Bologna declarations, communiqués and policy documents to rational scrutiny, and to vigorously resist the danger of the universities across Europe collapsing into an integrated, uncanny hall of mirrors capable of reproducing the same student, the same degree, and the same knowledge at previously unimaginable speeds. Transparency is a force against conflict: the question remains, however, whether conflict is as pernicious in intellectual spheres as it is in the sphere of international relations.

One of the points of most resistance as far as the Bologna Process is concerned, and one of the things which threatens to complicate the model of a unified, flexible (mobile), calculable, nonconflictual and transferable European Higher Education Area, comes in the form of teaching itself. What is teaching? Has it to do with knowledge or information, technical skills, vocational training or critical thinking? Is it calculable? Are its results guaranteeable or even visible? Is it teacher led or student led? Can it remain free of institutional, governmental and market pressures in an environment of transferability, calculability, mobility, consensus and transparency? Is the increasing demand to audit its representations, in the name of quality control, likely to transform (inform) its character and its reasons? Can teaching, that thing that, since philosophy began in the West, seems to have had to do with irony and subterfuge, doubles and deceit, power and betrayal, ever survive in a culture of consensus, perpetual peace and transparency? We will no doubt come to see the answers to at least some of these questions. But those of us who call ourselves teachers should not be silent in the interim.

## Note

1. Information on the Bologna Process Berlin 2003, ‘Realising the European Higher Education Area’, can be found on the following websites: http://www.bologna-bergen2005.no/ and http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/ Treaties/

## References

Allen, G. (2005) ‘On Information and the Chance of Teaching’, pp. 27–37 in P. Crowley and P. Hegarty (eds) Formless: Ways in and out of Form. Oxford: Peter Lang.

Derrida, J. (1983) ‘The Principle of Reason: The University in the Eyes of its Pupils’, Diacritics 13(3): 3–20.

Kant, I. (1996) ‘The Conflict of the Faculties’, pp. 235–327 in A.W. Wood and G. Di Giovanni (trans. and eds) The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant, Religion and Rational Theology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kilroy, P., R. Bailey and N. Chare (eds) (2004) Parallax, Auditing Culture 31(2). London: Taylor & Francis.

Lambert, G. (2001) A Report to the Academy: (Re: The New Conflict of the Faculties). Aurora, CO: The Davies Group.

Lyotard, J.-F. (1984) The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi (trans.). Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Readings, B. (1996) The University in Ruins. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Graham Allen teaches literature and literary theory at University College Cork. His main areas of current research interest are literary theory, romantic studies and the university. He is the author of Harold Bloom: A Poetics of Conflict (Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1994); Intertextuality: The New Critical Idiom (Routledge, 2000); and Roland Barthes (Routledge, 2003).

# Research

Ryan Bishop

Keywords accountability, global education, knowledge, research, university

ristotle writes in The Metaphysics that ‘all men, by nature, have the desire to know’. Although a certain self-evident, common sense meaning adheres to this statement, a range of critical questions needs asking: is this true of all humanity? How do we ascertain the nature or essence of humanity? What is the relationship between desire and knowing? And, to cut the list, what does it mean to know? How do we know what we know and that we do indeed know something? To ask these questions is to venture into ontology, epistemology, metaphysics and a whole host of systematic inquiries into the nature of knowledge beyond the topic at hand. Needless to say, these questions remain in play, and from the advent of the Renaissance in the West to the present, an increasingly important strategy/activity for accessing answers to these questions can be said to reside in the notion of ‘research’, an idea central to the functioning of the modern and contemporary university.

The term ‘research’ in English in the 16th century involved the act of searching for or after a specific person or thing. In this sense, the object of inquiry was constituted ahead of time, leaving little desired room for accidental or unintentional discovery, and targeting a specific outcome. Later, as research began to be used for a range of investigations, the goal of inquiry grew increasingly nebulous, manifesting a value in the process itself: the general questioning of nature and the world to understand it in terms not necessarily bestowed from the authority of the dogma as meted out by the church or head of state. Increasingly, research was undertaken by individuals, both ‘specialists and amateurs, in pursuit of the enlargement of knowledge outside institutional sites, leading to an astonishing number of discoveries and inventions, for instance about the nature of light or the study of plants or in the development of mathematics. In the 18th and 19th centuries, many new associations and learned societies, like the Lunar Society, were established to discuss and diffuse such knowledges. Clearly this Enlightenment ground meant that guiding principles needed to be established for research if it was to produce the knowledge that all humanity desired. The guiding principles became reason, objectivity, truth and empiricism, to name a few, and universities, as we know them today, proclaimed these as the core justification of their existence. These principles, by implication, stood in opposition to irrationalism, subjectivity, ignorance and faith in traditional dogma. This situation marked a shift within the institution of the university itself as it also had been a site for the distribution of the very sort of received knowledge (dogma) that research intended to question. Thus a tension between parts of the university, not necessarily confined to departments or fields of inquiry, arose between those whose purpose was to archive and store texts, documents, data and knowledge past that would become the source of research and those who undertook research to test knowledge and challenge ideas. The university shifted from merely being a repository of knowledge used for the training of students to an institution that also produced new knowledge.

Along with research came a number of sites and apparatuses associated with it: the laboratory, technical equipment, methods of verification, the import of repeatability, external confirmation, private and government sponsorship among these. These processes, sites and modes of inquiry also allowed the university to establish firmer connections with the business world and the government, seeing research as a means to help the economy and governance. Research became implicated, therefore, in the very ways of thinking and material conditions that made it possible to exist. That is, questions emerged about the purpose of research. Was it merely for the pursuit of knowledge and truth in the abstract? Might it have applications? If so, how can it be applied? To what ends? And can we determine what those ends might be prior to the conduct of the research? Can research have targets, goals, and outcomes that can be presented to potential sponsors? When funding bodies, such as private corporations and government institutions, enter the picture, choices must be made about what sort of research receives sponsorship and what kind does not. In this manner, especially in the 20th century as the university was increasingly incorporated into the geopolitical demands of the First World War, the Second World War, and the Cold War, end-oriented research, or research that is programmed to have a specific set of outcomes that have instrumental value for the sponsor, began to outpace research for the sake of intellectual curiosity and the once noble, perhaps never actual, pursuit of truth for its own sake. The situation generated its momentum. As departments and institutions generated revenue from specific types of research, which, in the 20th century, often meant but was by no means limited to military application, increased demands to bring in research funds shaped research agendas, disciplinary focus and professional markers. A type of ‘audit culture’ thus began to be combined with the endeavor of research. With the institution of promotion and tenure within North American universities, for example, as well as the United Kingdom’s Research Assessment Exercise (RAE), decisions regarding who received these institutional rewards often rested on the generation of grants, revenue and research outcomes. The bureaucratic and institutional apparatus of research had moved it much closer to its earlier usage, with little value being placed on the endeavor itself and great value ascribed to a set of predetermined goals and agendas both within the university and outside of it.

In the current moment, the global standard of the university is determined by these various benchmarking exercises that center on research and its outcomes. The success of an institution largely rests on what is called its research and development (R and D). The outcomes are quantified in terms of number, impact and, increasingly, revenue generated by research (through patents and products, as well as entrepreneurial endeavors teaming a part of the university with a corporate research team). This is how the ‘excellence’ of a university is currently gauged within the marketplace of global education, and students choose to enroll at a given institution based on its status, largely determined by research. Research now serves multiple related, but some times selfcontradictory, purposes within the institution that most relies on it. Research is method and measure, purpose and goal, consumer and producer (of funds). This has been the development of research, thus far. It remains to be seen if the development of ‘development’ in R and D can maintain some aspect of thinking that is relatively free from programmed, directed research that has become the logic of the university.

Ryan Bishop teaches at the National University of Singapore in the Department of English and has published on urbanism, military technology, critical theory, avant-garde aesthetics and international sex tourism.