# Research – China

Li Shiqiao

Keywords China, evidential research, useful knowledge

he contemporary Chinese terms for research are yanjiu ( research in the general sense) and keyan ( research in areas of science and engineering); the formation of these terms, however, was relatively recent and owed a great deal to the influence of the notions of research in the Western tradition. Perhaps the traditional Chinese terms that most closely resemble the English word research are kaoju ( ) or kaozheng ( ) (evidential research), which refer to the tradition of philological scholarship that reached its height in the 18th century (Qing dynasty). It took the form of scrupulous textual analysis on a range of classics – the originals of which were lost over time – in terms of their internal inconsistencies and factual errors attributable to scribes and printers, and its credibility rested on the mastery of a vast amount of information; its purpose was to restore the classics to their ‘original’ and ‘authoritative forms in which they were to be understood and respected. In paying homage to classics as the substance of a tradition, this scholarship reaffirmed the classics with a profound respect for ‘timeless truthfulness coupled with a deep sense of filial piety. In this form, kaoju was central to Chinese scholarly tradition for many centuries. In the late 19th century, the philological rigor inherent in this tradition was allied with reform; through kaoju, Kang Youwei, founder of the so-called New Text School, pronounced Confucius a ‘reformer’, and Liang Qichao, in his ‘Outline of Qing Scholarship’, saw in this tradition a development comparable to that of philology and textual criticism centered on the Greek and Roman antiquity in Renaissance Europe.

The practice of kaoju emerged with very different intellectual assumptions from those found in the ontological inquiries of Plato and Aristotle. Instead of truth, form and idea, the primary goal in kaoju research was the establishment of authenticity, which served crucial functions in sustaining institutional, moral and aesthetic forms. Two types of theoretical formulations occupied the grounds of Platonic or Aristotelian metaphysical discourse: analogical abstractions that are capable of mapping the natural world with a certain degree of sophistication (such as Book of Changes), and ethical codes of conduct founded on the principles of ‘hierarchy’ and ‘moderation’ as paths to familial and social harmony (such as Confucian classics).

Quite separate from metaphysical inquiries, ‘useful knowledge’ in the Chinese context would also constitute what we mean today by ‘research’; in this regard, there was an astonishing range of discoveries, inventions and theoretical formulations in mathematics, medicine, ship-building, navigation, agriculture, art, techniques of construction and so on. During the European Renaissance, Chinese technologies, such as printing, navigation and gun-powder, played unacknowledged but critical roles in the formation of notions of modernity. One of the most notable recent publicizers of these achievements is Joseph Needham, whose monumental Science and Civilization in China contributed a great deal to the understanding and dissemination of traditional Chinese research in the English language. Despite these achievements, the divide between the discourse of metaphysics and that of useful knowledge – the union of which European empiricism has always insisted – cultivated distinct forms of research results in China. The divide between metaphysics and use was marked in the traditional Chinese culture by universal binary constructs based on the idea of ‘essence’ and ‘use’, such as dao/qi ( ), ben/mo ( ) and ti/yong ( ). The fundamental importance of essence (dao, ben, ti) was often cited at crucial moments when useful knowledge (and outside influences) threatened to distablize established institutional and moral foundations. These notions of research, like many other aspects of the Chinese culture, have undergone tremendous changes since the late 19th century, but they continue to exert an important force in the Chinese reformulation of research under the new global influences.

## Reference

Needham, Joseph (1954–2004) Science and Civilization in China, 6 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Li Shiqiao is Associate Professor in the Department of Architecture, Chinese University of Hong Kong. He has published on architecture and modernity in China and England, and has won architectural design awards.

# Hospital

Bryan S. Turner

Abstract Hospitals are traditional sites, not only of care, but of knowledge production. The word ‘hospital’ is derived from ‘hospitality’, and is also associated with ‘spital’, ‘hotel’ and ‘hospice’. In medieval society, the hospice was a place of rest, security and entertainment. The Knights Hospitallers were an order of military monks that took its historical origin from a hospital founded in Jerusalem in 1048. Before the rise of the modern research hospital, these spitals had a more general function as charitable institutions for the care and maintenance of the aged, infirm and impoverished. Hospitals were important in the historical emergence of the university, but with the dominance of bio-medical sciences medical faculties have become increasingly separated geographically and administratively from other faculties. Medical research is dominated by private corporations and increasingly medical knowledge exists outside the conventional procedures and norms of scientific research.

Keywords Foucault, laboratory, medical faculty, medical knowledge, professions

## Religious Institutions of Hospitality

Hospitals as religious foundations were closely associated with pilgrimages, and provided care and support for those who fell infirm while undertaking such religious activities. Most monasteries came to develop a hospitium at the abbey gate for travellers. In Britain between 1066 and 1550, approximately 700 of these institutions were established. More specialized services were developed by lazar houses for the care of leprosy. In the 11th century, two spitals for the care of lepers were created at Rochester and Canterbury, but in the next two centuries leprosy spread rapidly and many almshouses were transformed into lazar houses. It is sometimes argued that the Black Death (1346–1350) killed off leprosy, since lepers were already vulnerable. The plague was also responsible for a rapid decline in hospital foundations, because the rapid decline of the population meant that there was little demand for their services. These two conditions – leprosy and plague – provided the historical setting for Michel Foucault’s Madness and Civilization (1971) in which he examined the development of medical organizations as institutions of social surveillance, often based on principles of panoptic governance. Foucault noted that hospitals for the insane were aspects of the transformation of governmentality as a system of micro-regulation and normalization. However, the medieval hospital was primarily an ecclesiastical institution whose functions were liturgical rather than therapeutic. The prayers of the hospital inmates were to aid the spiritual progress of their benefactors through purgatory. Hospitals offered care for these inmates rather than their cure. Nevertheless, these religious foundations provided important welfare services in their local community. The Reformation and the dissolution of religious foundations for the sick and infirm closed every medieval hospital in England, and by 1600 London, with a population of 200,000, had only three small hospitals.

There were important changes in the funding and functioning of hospitals in the 18th century, when hospitals were constructed as charities, thanks to middle-class philanthropy. In 1719 Westminster Hospital was founded by a group of London merchants, and was quickly followed by Guy’s (1725), the London Infirmary (1734), the Middlesex Hospital (1746) and Bath Hospital (1742). These charity institutions provided shelter for the poor, elderly and infirm. These institutions reinforced deference and respect rather than providing medical services. There were similar developments in North America where the Philadelphia General Hospital was founded in 1751 with support from Benjamin Franklin. These hospitals can be seen as physical manifestations of an urban culture of philanthropy and voluntarism in which care of the deserving poor was an expression of civic pride.

The French Revolution had significant consequences for the development of secular and scientific medicine in which the state and physicians were united behind nationalist objectives. French doctors abandoned traditional text-based principles of learning, and opened up cadavers to see pathologies in their specific settings. Enlightened empiricism was carried forward by figures such as Pierre Cabanis (1757–1808). The new empiricist trend of anatomicopathology sought the lesions – tumours, inflammation, and gangrene – that were the real source of morbidity and mortality. The challenge of Marie-François Xavier’s treatise on membranes of 1799 was to abandon bedside note taking in favour of cutting open bodies to see and feel the reality of pathological conditions. Looking at and listening to the body replaced the recording of symptoms through clinical consultation. The transformation of French medicine in response to the Revolution is the historical context of Foucault’s The Birth of the Clinic (1973). The Revolution’s Committee of Medicine paved the way for the new empiricism in medical training. With the arrival of these new medical ideas, a theory of the classification of diseases in terms of space and the medical gaze became crucial.

There are three levels of this ‘spatialization’ of disease. There is the flat, one-dimensional space of the disease in which disease ontologies are differentiated by resemblance and analogy. Second, the disease is mapped onto the human body, where it can move from organ to organ, but also undergo metamorphosis. Within this corporeal space, diseases undergo a localization. The tertiary specialization involves ‘all the gestures by which, in a given society, a disease is circumscribed, medically invested, isolated, divided up into closed, privileged regions, or distributed throughout cure centres, arranged in the most favourable way’ (Foucault, 1973: 16). The new empiricism required a classification of disease that transformed the ways in which people thought about the relationships between the state and society. Because the French Revolution regarded the traditional hospital as a representation of the corruption of the ancien régime, the family was regarded as the natural place for the cure of the sick. The family offered a ‘moral regime’ that would complement the ‘medical regime’ (Donzelot, 1979). Although many of the ambitions of the Revolution for medical reform were not successful, Paris became the great centre of medical education, and it was in response to this French influence that London University and its teaching hospital were founded. As in Paris, anatomy dominated the new curriculum. The demand for bodies prompted ‘resurrectionists’ to steal bodies from new graves, and resulted in criminals such as the infamous Burke and Hare who murdered 16 people before they were apprehended (Porter, 1997).

Another important scientific development was the creation of the laboratory as an institution for training doctors through experimental science. In Germany, the microscope ushered in a new era of histology as the bridge between anatomy and physiology. Improvements in lenses and other instruments assisted the study of cell biology and pathology, and the microscope became a basic tool of medical education. In association with the Humboldt reform of higher education, medical research institutions began to flourish in German universities with state support. Britain lagged behind both France and Germany for a variety of reasons: Queen Victoria’s support of anti-vivisectionism, the failure of Oxford and Cambridge universities to modernize, and the dominance of laissez-faire economics.

In North America, the age of scientific medicine was launched by Abraham Flexner in his 1910 report on Medical Education in the United States and Canada (Rothstein, 1987). He argued that medical education had to be based on experimental science and insisted that medical schools should be part of a university. He also made recommendations about entry requirements and the length of student education. The majority of existing medical schools failed to match his criteria and 46 colleges were closed, including those colleges that provided education for women and blacks. His scientific assumptions also resulted in the decline of homeopathy, and, partly through the decline in the supply of doctors, increased the status and pay of those doctors who were accredited under the Flexner criteria. With Rockefeller funding, Johns Hopkins University was able to establish full-time chairs in specialist areas of medicine.

## The Golden Age of Doctoring

From 1910 to 1973 scientific medicine enjoyed a golden age of increasing influence, status and wealth. The research hospitals were models of scientific application, acute diseases that had ravaged western societies were being eliminated, and the medical profession enjoyed the trust and respect of society. These conditions have changed for a variety of reasons. Chronic illness, which is related to life style and an ageing population, cannot easily be cured or effectively treated. The medical profession has changed under the impact of technical advances in medicine and economic transformations of medical practice. The growth of genetics research has also ushered in new approaches and opportunities that may further transform the practice of medicine. But there are also important contradictions in medical sciences that will have important consequences for medical education and medical settings. The pharmaceutical companies are withdrawing research investment in antibiotics because they are not profitable. Antibiotics are economically the worst pharmaceutical product because they actually cure the patient. The most profitable areas are drugs for chronic disease – diabetes and hyper-tension – because the patient will need the drug for life. There are major contradictions between the medical ethic of curing the patient and the medical economy, which derives profit from the life-long maintenance of illness.

The success of the medical profession rests not only on its political power, but also on the trust of the public. These two dimensions of professionalism are medical dominance and the consulting ethic; the former requires the support of the state, and the latter depends on public confidence and trust. These two dimensions have been transformed by the growth of corporate and global medical systems. This global corporate development of the commercial potential of health and illness constitutes the veritable emergence of a medical economy. These global changes are transforming the traditional doctor–patient relationship, but they are also opening up new possibilities, the future directions of which are unclear. Although the quality of general practice still depends in large measure on interpersonal skills that can only be fully acquired through experience rather than training, the status of medical institutions in society depends significantly on ‘hard’ science and technology. Medical technology presents simultaneously the promise of significant therapeutic improvements in the management of health and illness, and significant risks to human well-being and social stability.

To secure the full benefits of medical innovation, there must be some regulation of the risks associated with contemporary medical sciences (in relation to cloning, new reproductive technologies, organ transplants, and so forth). Who should exercise these regulatory constraints or governance? The professions and governments are no longer able to deliver effective oversight, because the globalization of markets makes legislative and political regulation problematic. The result is an endless cycle of risk, audit, regulation and deregulation. The cycle further inflames lay suspicion of expert opinion and erodes the relation of trust between patients and doctors. The British Medical Association has been criticized for its failure to effectively monitor doctors who have been charged with criminal offences or malpractice. A shortage of doctors and nurses in the National Health Service has reinforced the general sense of crisis and poor management. In addition, the apparent instability in the expert advice surrounding the foot and mouth epidemic of 2001 in Britain further illustrated the problem of the authority of scientific or expert opinion. The ambiguities and tensions between lay trust and distrust in expert systems have become a major issue of modern society.

Any sociological understanding of medicine will have to examine the economics of the corporate structure of medical practice and have to locate that corporate structure within a framework of global processes. The spread of the ‘old’ infectious diseases (TB, malaria, typhoid and cholera) will have significant negative consequences for the economies of the developing world, but they will also re-appear in the affluent West as a consequence of the globalization of transport, tourism and labour markets. The deregulation of global markets as a consequence of the neo-liberal policies of Reagan and Thatcher will have the unintended consequence of bringing about the globalization of disease. It is unlikely that corporations will adopt policies of corporate citizenship sufficiently quickly for corporations to exercise constraint and to institutionalize environmental audits to regulate their impact on local communities. These global developments have created new opportunities for the exercise of consumer power as a mechanism whereby the negative impact of corporate enterprise on fragile communities and environments can be challenged. Future developments of health care need to be linked to existing debates about civil society and citizenship. We need to realize that health, more than employment, education and welfare, is the fundamental entitlement of citizenship. This health entitlement is often difficult to implement within a world economy where risks are global. The question of health as entitlement raises difficult political and policy questions, because there is an inevitable tension between citizenship as a bundle of national rights and obligations, and human rights as a system of entitlement that does not rest directly on the sovereignty of particular nation-states.

Globalization, the commercialization of medical care and the creation of free markets in body parts have also had an important set of consequences for the professional model of health care. The model of the independent professional doctor is now obsolete with the passing of the ‘golden age of doctoring’. Between 1875 and 1920 the status of the general practitioner in the USA was transformed by a number of social developments. The expansion in the market for medical services was a consequence of economic growth, urbanization and the development of urban transport systems. The sovereignty and autonomy of the medical profession were reinforced by the development of licensing laws with the legal backing of the state. With the professional development of medicine, physicians opposed alternative forms of medical practice that departed from the fee-for-service model. Alternative medicines went into decline, or at least into retreat. The professional associations of medicine were generally critical of state control of health, which was seen to be a threat to professional autonomy. The professions claimed that collectivist innovations in the delivery of health care would undermine the principles of individualism, self-help and self-reliance, upon which Western medicine had been built.

The rise of corporate control over medical care has contributed to the decline of professional autonomy, initiative and social status. The neo-liberal emphasis on the free market and aggressive entrepreneurship has brought about a decline in the social status of the general practitioner by converting them into the hired employees of profit-making, private-sector health systems. The professional physician who is hired by a commercial enterprise has to make a profit in addition to providing an adequate system of health care. Furthermore, the contemporary development of health care in the USA has brought about a new emphasis on medical specialization that has undermined, or at least threatened, the occupational coherence and solidarity of medicine as a professional group. In addition to this internal division, with the growth of consumer groups, malpractice legislation and public alarm over technological medicine, there is renewed interest in more holistic forms of medical service through alternative and complementary systems. The commercialization of medicine and the dominance of free-market policies have had the paradoxical consequence of eroding the foundations of the traditional autonomous professional physician as an individual provider of care in a direct relationship to the client.

While neo-liberal policies may have changed the conditions under which the traditional autonomy of the medical profession was sustained, these policies have also had serious consequences for users and consumers. The consequences of these policies have become apparent in a variety of areas of welfare. For example, in the USA poverty has increased by 30 per cent among children since 1979. Between 1981 and 1982, 11 states in the USA showed increases in the infant mortality rate and also showed considerable differences between black and white mortality rates. In Michigan, for example, infant mortality rates rose for the first time in over 30 years to over 13 per 1000 live births. These increases in the infantile mortality rate are associated with the increase in poverty, unemployment, decline in nutrition and the loss of