health insurance coverage through the new limitations on Medicaid. The health-care crisis was manifest in the rising numbers of uninsured Americans, the increasing use of alternative medicine, the inability of the ‘germ theory’ to contribute to the treatment of chronic illness, and the growth of self-help movements. While there are significant indicators of increasing poverty, the private health sector has enjoyed buoyant profitability and expansion. The economic and political importance of the tax cuts under the Reagan administration was such that, by reducing revenue to the state, they curtailed the ability of future governments to introduce new social welfare programmes to remove hardship, stimulate employment schemes and restore welfare measures. As medicine has become increasingly specialized, the general practitioner has become the conduit into medical care through whom the patient is referred to specialists further down the chain of delivery. The traditional relations of trust that characterized medical practice have been eroded by the commercialization of services and the increasing anonymity of medical practitioners in relation to patients.

## Globalization, Technology and Medical Science

Public concern about the pace of technology and its unintended pernicious consequences has been a feature of public inquiry into medicine for a considerable time. In the post-war period, doctors, especially in research hospitals, were criticized as ‘priests of the machine’, and within the doctor–patient relationship, it was feared that medical technology would create ‘physiciancentred medicine’ rather than ‘patient-centred medicine’. Scientific anxieties about ‘medical harm’ and adverse drug reactions began to appear in the medical literature in the 1950s and 1960s. With the expansion of legal rights of patients, trust between patients and their doctors has been tested by the emergence of a culture of litigation. Litigation against medical malpractice has become an important part of modern legal practice and lack of confidence in medical practice has become a contentious arena of public life. There has been an erosion of public confidence in the medical profession and institutions. At the same time, the technical and technological problems of medicine have become global, and the risks of medical failure or mismanagement have massive legal and economic consequences for the health-care system.

New reproductive technologies, genetic engineering and the enhancement of human traits are components of a ‘second medical revolution’ that combines micro-biology and informational knowledge systems. This revolution presents a major challenge to traditional institutions and religious cosmologies, but it may also pose a threat to the processes of political governance. The modern notion of the risk society provokes questions about the unintended consequences of medical change, whether the technological imperative can be regulated, and the relationships between pure research, commercialization and academic autonomy. For example, pharmaceutical companies have turned to contract research organizations (CROs) rather than universities and hospitals to undertake basic research on drugs. These CROs are economically cheaper, but they are also less independent than academic institutions. In the USA, around 60 per cent of industry-based pharmaceutical grants went to CROs rather than to universities. The scientific community has argued that such research is not systematically published and it is unlikely to be critical of the pharmaceutical products. In short, such ‘private’ forms of research are not compatible with the public norms of publication, debate and criticism that are assumed to be essential to scientific objectivity. Because the pharmaceutical industry is currently dominated by a limited number of corporations – ICI, Ciba and Hoechst – there are serious problems with respect to the regulation of the industry and the freedom of market relations.

Global economic changes have significant consequences for medical institutions and professions, especially from global competitive insurance and funding arrangements. To take one obvious illustration, the ownership and current development of the pharmaceutical industry are global. We are also on the verge of health-care systems that will depend on global electronic communications. One remarkable example is ‘telesurgery’ that involves the use of robot-assisted distance surgery. Such operations have to overcome a variety of problems including long-distance transmission delays. Contemporary telesurgery was pioneered by the US military in order to provide expert medical services in the battlefield, but it could also make a valuable contribution to assist workers in developing societies and provide important training services for young surgeons. The first operation that overcame the problems of transmission was undertaken by a French team in New York involving a gall bladder removal of a woman in Strasbourg on 7 September 2001. Surgical movements on a robotic console in New York appeared within 155 milli-seconds on a computer screen in Strasbourg. The commercial use of such instrumentation is significant, because patients would in principle be able to buy the best surgery from anywhere in the world. It was alleged that the cost of the Strasbourg operation was \$1 million. Surgery has always evolved through its association with the military. The development of surgery has been driven historically by military conflict and the need to treat traumatic injuries sustained in combat. Telesurgery will make it possible to provide rapid surgical support in future global military campaigns.

Health-care systems have often been slow to adopt innovations in information technology, because the hardware and software are not sufficiently advanced to make a useful or specific contribution to health care. It is assumed that in the future patients and doctors will use broadband technologies that will begin to deliver health-care packages to homes and hospitals. The growth of ‘e-health’ will create virtual hospitals, transform health education and deliver health services to elderly or disabled patients who have limited mobility. It is assumed that e-health could also improve health delivery to remote rural communities. The technology and delivery systems for such innovations will necessarily be global, and will be organized and owned by global health corporations.

A great deal of social criticism of globalization and the rise of e-health has been with regard to these developments as further evidence of the commodification of medicine, but there are alternative arguments that indicate a growth in consumer autonomy, increased involvement of consumer or patient groups in decision-making and an erosion of medical dominance in favour of ‘bottom-up’ participation. Alongside the global dominance of large pharmaceutical companies, there is greater interest in and use of alternative medical systems and practices from homeopathy to aromatherapy. For a variety of specific conditions and diseases there has been increased use by patients of consumer websites for care, support and information. To some extent, the model of the consumer/patient lobby group has been provided by the HIV/AIDS epidemic where activists have successfully challenged medical control and shaped the nature of AIDS research and research funding. AIDS websites have played an important part in organizing such movements. A variety of social movements have exploited the opportunities provided by electronic network communication: human rights, women’s movement, environmentalism, labour, peace and religious movements. The employment of electronic networks by lay health groups is increasingly significant. As life expectancy rates for AIDS sufferers have increased to 30 years of age, public health-care systems have had to rely increasingly on home help and lay care givers. There is now a range of CF websites that provide health information such as the use of intravenous injections for home care. The result is to side-line professional medical control and to transform the nature of medical authority. With the increase in chronic illness as a result of HIV/AIDS, ageing and changes in lifestyle, the management of care may pass more and more into lay hands with the support of e-health systems. Obviously this is a mixed blessing as more care is devolved to female heads of households, but it also does represent an increase in lay power. It also recognizes that corporate e-health will take a predatory interest in ‘indigenous pharmacy’, will seek to commercialize alternative health care and to monopolize medical knowledge and research. There is an endlessly circular struggle between centralized and localized e-health, a struggle that exactly complements the processes of glocalization.

## Conclusion: Medical Sites

Hospitals became dominant sites of research and teaching as medical technology and medical sciences expanded in the post-war period. Medical faculty budgets came to dominate university funding, and medical faculties, because they enjoyed prestige and public support, were able to dominate the curriculum of the university. Public concern, for example, about cancer meant that research in medicine could command very large budgets, both from government and the pharmaceutical industries. The medical faculty typically remained geographically separate from the university (because they were often housed inside hospitals), but they were also separate in terms of status and prestige.

Although this privileged status remains in place, there are important political, social and medical changes that are beginning to transform medical sites of research and practice. There has been an important shift in power between doctors and patients that has been brought about by successful consumer lobby groups (especially in the United States), and the growth of medical malpractice litigation has also transformed the traditional doctor–patient relationship. Perhaps the most interesting development, however, is the use of electronic information by patients to form patient groups that operate partly without reference to hospitals or consultants. The growth of e-health implies: (1) hospital services could be devolved and localized, and hence there may be less need for medical centralization of services in large hospitals; (2) patient groups could take responsibility for self-medication and self-care; and (3) the training of doctors could be achieved through e-education. The use of new media can transform the traditional doctor–patient relationship and open up a new medical conversation, thereby recasting medical knowledge.

## References

Donzelot, J. (1979) The Policing of Families. New York: Pantheon.

Foucault, M. (1971) Madness and Civilization. London: Tavistock.

Foucault, M. (1973) The Birth of the Clinic. London: Tavistock.

Porter, R. (1997) The Greatest Benefit to Mankind: A Medical History of Humanity from Antiquity to the Present. London: HarperCollins.

Rothstein, W.G. (1987) American Medical Schools and the Practice of Medicine: A History. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bryan S. Turner is Professor of Sociology in the Asia Research Institute at the National University of Singapore, and the author of The New Medical Sociology (W.W. Norton, 2004).