# Library

Sean Cubitt

Abstract The modern library derives from a vision of public service developed in the 19th century. At various times in the past a commercial service, an educational resource, a religious domain and a political institution, the library today exists in various forms, including all these but in addition the professional libraries held by law firms and scientific or technological associations, multimedia lending libraries and certain areas of the world-wide web.

Keywords index, institution, key word, library, media, public, world-wide web

## Concept

The modern library derives from a vision of public service developed in the 19th century. At various times in the past a commercial service, an educational resource, a religious domain and a political institution, the library today exists in various forms, including all these but in addition the professional libraries held by law firms and scientific or technological associations, multimedia lending libraries and certain areas of the world-wide web.

The library is a place where records are accessed. As a concept, the library is distinguished from the archive (q.v.) by its role in making its contents accessible. The archivist’s task is to preserve, and the techniques most frequently developed by archivists derive from scientific and technological research into preserving time-sensitive materials and information. The librarian’s task is to make available, and the techniques most frequently developed concern modes of searching collections to identify materials. While libraries have a preservation function, they are distinguished by their key function of indexing. The library is a machine for retrieving information. A good index is like a father. It constructs routes of access, it guides towards the results you didn’t even know you were seeking. A good catalogue extends the value of a book outward to the community of books. The classed catalogue (which allows access by author, title and subject matter) orders holdings in a way that encourages browsing, the serendipitous discovery of related materials. The concept of searching by keyword has added both new precision and new possibilities for linking otherwise dispersed areas of library holdings.

The library can be understood as the unit of media. A book is incomplete because it presupposes the existence of a dictionary, and because it references other books by quotation, footnotes, indices and generic codes. These linkages are made concrete in libraries, where all books are anchored into networks of subject, author, publisher and date among other categories. In national libraries, the integrated catalogue includes the holdings of buildings dispersed throughout the territory, linked to continent-spanning inter-library institutions which can be conceived of as having ambitions to include all public holdings in print and, increasingly, multimedia and electronic forms. No single library can hope for universality, but the integration of networks across national and even public–private boundaries (for example the private libraries housed in universities and museums) provides for universality. In this sense there is now only one library. However, restricted access subscription databases pitch commercial property against universal public access. This forms the dialectic of the library in the 21st century.

## History

Ancient, Mediaeval and Baroque Libraries

The Babylonian and Chaldean libraries from which the Hammurabic Code and Epic of Gilgamesh were retrieved coincide with the beginnings of recorded history. The ancient libraries of Ur were repositories, clearly ordered for sacred and legal purposes. The Egyptian dynasties amassed records as a religious function, and stored them in temples. The Greeks of the classical period collected and shared books: Aristotle’s library of manuscripts was a keenly contested legacy after his death. But library history can conveniently begin with the great library of Alexandria (El-Abbadi, 1990), founded in all probability by Ptolemy I, no later than 295 BC. Alexandria was home to both the library and the Mouseion, a house of learning. This relation between writing and talking remains a vital element in library culture throughout its history, another feature distinguishing the library from the archive, linking libraries at least with civil society if not necessarily in all cases with the public sphere.

Hellenistic Alexandria had ambitions to universality, housing at the minimum a half million texts, many of them containing more than one work, from as far afield as Asoka’s India. This generous embrace of learning regardless of origin was to permit the dispersal of Greek knowledge among the Arabs during the great biblioclasms of the Christian emperors, indicating a founding principle of librarianship: pluralism.

During the ensuing centuries, libraries continued to serve religious and dynastic purposes, and were to that extent collections rather than libraries. Few libraries were available to scholars before the emergence of the universities, first in North Africa, later in Europe. Modelled on the monastic chained libraries, shelving doubled as reading desks, from which books could not be removed. Library history reflects the diminishing rarity and cost of books, allowing them first to be read away from their storage areas, and later to be borrowed. With the rise of the mediaeval manuscript ‘factories’ (scriptoria) and later of the printing press, books became far cheaper and far more replicable, promoting a less archivist and collector-oriented culture.

It is during the baroque period that such lending and sharing begin to be established in library architecture. On the one hand, Michelangelo’s design for the Biblioteca Laurenziana indicates an ascent from the physical towards a spiritual realm of learning; on the other the Escorial and Boulé’s unrealized designs for the Bibliothèque du Roi suggest that open shelves promote a community of readers. In 1627 Cardinal Mazarin’s librarian, Gabriel Naudé, proposed that ‘a Library arranged for the use of the public must be universal’ (Chartier, 1994: 64), with the caveat that this could never mean infinite (the paradox posed in Borges’ fable of ‘The Library of Babel’). Naudé’s universality would be represented by only the most important books read, as Altick (1957: 41) makes clear, by the most important people.

A national library, it has been widely held since the 19th century, should hold all of the nation’s literature, and a selection of works from overseas. In the most cases, copyright law demands the deposit of a copy of every publication in a copyright library. This function relates closely to the print capitalism which, Benedict Anderson (1983) argues, is an essential characteristic of nation-building in the modern and especially the postcolonial world, an argument extended in detail by Rama (1996) and Viswanathan (1991). At the same time, local libraries in the English-speaking world were exhorted, from the early 19th century, to be particularly devoted to collecting local literature, antiquities and natural history, suggesting that as the library service grew, the national library was increasingly seen as an aggregate of collections across many buildings. This is clear, for example, in the British system, in which newspapers, sound recordings, film and television, scientific reference works and other specialist holdings are kept by separate institutions. The growth of inter-library loans on a national scale, of integrated catalogues including the holdings of multiple libraries, and ultimately the Library of Congress MARC (MAchine Readable Cataloguing) scheme, indicate that there are more than simply economies and efficiencies of scale and specialism, but that there are in addition conceptualizations of the global library services as forming a single agglomerate.

Such integration has also impacted on library design. Already by the 19th century the sheer numbers of books being published demanded handling systems which had not previously existed. One impact was on the design of the larger library buildings, where receiving and cataloguing had of necessity to be separated from searching and advice to users, and both from areas set aside for study. In particular, the sheer numbers required a limitation on the open stack system, in which readers might browse along shelves at liberty. In the Bibliothèque Nationale of Ste Geneviève in Paris, the book stacks were for the first time removed from the reading area, a model repeated in university libraries and more recent national libraries like the José Martí in Habana. This reintroduces a professionalized mode of retrieval, and demands of the users high degrees of skill in using catalogues. It also puts the browser at the mercy of the catalogue, and therefore guides searches according to the principles on which it has been designed and maintained.

At the same time, however, the invention first of ftp (file transfer protocol), and from 1993 the popularization of hypertext transfer protocol (http) and the world-wide web opened up new ways of sharing information. Such sites as Project Gutenberg and the many Marxist and anarchist collections which began as volunteer projects typing out-of-copyright texts into web format, have grown to massive libraries in subsequent years. Google’s 2004 commercialization of this type of project is if anything a diminution of what is available elsewhere online. The explosion of print media has been duplicated by the explosion of online media, now measurable in terabytes per annum. At the same time, leading archivists of film and television estimate that approximately 9 billion hours of moving image media are being produced annually across the world. The scale of publication now outstrips the ability of even whole communities of librarians to view everything. National libraries threaten to limit their cataloguing and storage of new printed publications other than those published in their own country. National archives have long since resigned themselves to sampling the huge volume of media in their respective fields. World-wide web search engines are self-cataloguing but not self-archiving: the efforts of archive-org to record the early state of the web demonstrates the scale of the issue. Insofar as the full extent of the archive is no longer humanly perceivable, the task of archiving has been delegated to machines, as have the tasks of sampling rates and catalogue design.

Lessig’s (1999) disturbing maxim, ‘Code is law’, applies to such library-related issues as copy-protection, user-tracing and the sampling of datastreams. Attempts by national governments and corporations to restrict media flows are undertaken at the level of mechanical performativity. The meta-catalogue of the world-wide web has come closer to universality than any previous library, but at the cost of the principle of legislative autonomy. At the same time, large areas of the world-wide web, the so-called ‘deep web’, restrict access to subscribers, a trend especially noticeable in electronic journal subscription and in professional publishing, for example legal texts and pharmacopias.

## Lending and Storing

Early debates on the merits of public libraries focused on the dangers of a literate and wellread population becoming like the French artisans who led the revolution in Paris in 1789 or the large number of print workers who signed the manifesto of the First International. But the demands of an increasingly bureaucratized society and an increasingly manufacturing-based industry required at the least a modicum of instruction, and at least some avenues of selfimprovement, according to the influential political platform of Samuel Smiles, to avoid those social bottlenecks that would bring about revolution by neglect and repression. The early ideology of the pubic library was then one of instruction or, as Michel de Certeau (1984: 166) has it, of informing, that is of inculcating the values expressed in Enlightenment circles through the encouragement of reading. However, as de Certeau goes on to observe, informing also has the sense of making something more fit to itself: the opposite effect, in which readings become materials for a populist view of the world. The commercial imperative resulted in the rise of the popular press and of mass-circulation books (themselves often presented as ‘libraries’). It also provided libraries with another rationale for their claim to public subsidy: that they offered an entertaining alternative to drinking. The entertainment value of libraries, decried throughout their existence, may be seen as integral to their subsidiary role as shelter for the homeless and unemployed, and as one way they could guarantee readership among the working class. The balance of instruction and entertainment continues to make the multimedia library, actual or virtual, a constantly changing institution.

Among changes affecting library holdings and policies have been the shifting fortunes of vernacular literature. The rise of the popular novel could be countenanced as long as it was a genteel pastime. When it began to evolve into the gothic romance and the penny dreadful, libraries were blamed for its deleterious effects, especially on youth. The popular press was already regarded as politically suspect: it only became morally dangerous with the rise of the racing press, when libraries were characterized as betting shops. Surviving records indicate a gendered space: far more women than men removed books on loan from library premises in the second half of the 19th century (Altick, 1957). On the other hand, though Melville Dewey’s pioneering school of librarianship at Columbia (Dewey, 1876) was closed down for being equally pioneering in training women librarians, librarianship has been a strongly feminized profession since the later 19th century on both sides of the Atlantic.

Early subscription libraries relied on effective common ownership of the books, the subscription going towards the purchase of new stocks. Previous foundations, such as the gifts of libraries to communities and schools in the 15th century, had not in general permitted borrowing. The commercial lending library was to have a long life, Jesse Boots’ library, for example, functioned successfully into the 1950s in Britain. The free public library with universal access grew out of a bewildering range of social trends, political attitudes and philanthropic gestures, to become a central plank of modern democracy. With roots in the granting of access to manuscripts in ancient times, the library is more than a repository. It is instead a gift a society makes to itself, a recognition of the commonality of the knowledge stored in libraries.

## Theoretical Logic

## Indices and Catalogues

Umberto Eco (1999: 226) distinguishes between the dictionary, a rational structure of definitions operating as a closed system and organized in a hierarchy of classifications; and the encyclopaedia, which opens out onto knowledge about things derived from outside the system, and includes cross-referencing to other related fields of knowledge and received opinion. Not necessarily rational, the encyclopaedia is the project of a community.

Library classification has attempted both models. The Dewey decimal system, foundation of the majority of modern catalogue classifications, uses a hierarchical structure, so that, to use one of Eco’s examples, dolphins will appear as a subcategory of mammals. Others, like Ranganathan’s Colon classification, permit the dolphin to be retrieved from a search for fish. James Thompson argues that a library’s holdings must not only be ordered, but that ‘Practical convenience should dictate how subjects are to be grouped in a library’ (1977: 224). These practical considerations are subject to historical change, far more so than the absolute categories of Linnaean or grammarian taxonomies. Despite some serendipitous scattering, classification systems are restricted in their ability to provide the rich interweave of crossreferencing because a book has to be located in a single physical space on the shelves. Keyword searching has thus become a rewarding substitute for the old open-shelf system of browsing. The logic of the library since the explosion of printing has been relentlessly spatializing. A search by accession or purchase date is unlikely to provide information that even professional users would find useful. Chronology and other temporal modes of organization are stored usually only to distinguish books of the same title or editions of the same book, that is, as adjuncts to the fundamentally spatial logic of the catalogue, itself a function of the necessity to make the books available, for which they must first be locatable.

In this the library catalogue follows the logic of filing and cartography, the other two great taxonomic achievements of the Baroque. Lying between the two, the library catalogue is at once a filing cabinet and a map (even though for years its typical form was the ledger: file cards only came into use in the late 19th century). Where some mosque libraries still catalogue in order of acquisition, on the principle that the more removed from the time of the