Prophet, the less valuable the text, the flattening out of historical depth in western libraries removes knowledge from time, save only in disciplines where the most recent text is always deemed the most relevant (for example, in the physical sciences).

## Information Retrieval and Semantic Searching

Mechanical information retrieval systems developed during the 1970s and 1980s tended to be expert systems, replicating the professional taxonomies and hierarchies of specific professional domains like medical diagnostics and engineering. The applicability of such systems to public access was and remains limited. Many early adopters have had to replace their first systems with new ones capable of the multiple dimensions of searching which a non-professional is likely to employ. The use of authorship as the basis for ordering collections derives from the common encyclopaedia where the author’s name precedes the work, as is the case with Shakespeare, as well as from the development of copyright law. In certain media, however, the author is relatively insignificant for a researcher. Slide librarians face an especially difficult task in the categorization of photographs. When a typical user wants an image of Hitler or the Rio Grande, the authorship of the image is unlikely to feature strongly. Computers are notoriously reluctant to learn visual lexicons, but users will in many instances have a particular image in mind (Hitler on a podium, seen from the side, giving the salute to the Nuremberg rally in daylight). There are few guidelines as to whether such an image should be stored under political history, biography or architecture. Similar problems may be encountered in art history collections: searching for a still life with lobster is notably difficult in libraries organized by artist. What Ranganathan calls the ‘aspects’ of the work become crucial when dealing with humans’ visual memories rather than with hierarchical trees defining the semantic content of a work. If it is the case that the library catalogue is encyclopaedic, in the sense that it is not rational but is communal, the unit of organization is not the brain but the community of users, and its extent defined not by taxonomic categories but by common sense about the physical world. Library science here runs counter to cognitive science.

## Substantive

## Professional Libraries

The exception to the definition of libraries of universal ambition in terms of holdings and access is the professional library. Such libraries may be held by membership organizations (the Royal Society, for example). But the libraries which are of most concern for social theory are those belonging to commercial enterprises. A law firm of any scale will always have its own library. These libraries are a precious resource for the firm and will have their access severely restricted. In areas such as case law the holdings must be constantly updated, and in fields like tax law, archive holdings are swiftly redundant for professional purposes. These libraries are such only in name, because rather than developing their holdings over time, they replace archive holdings with newer documents. Many firms today subscribe to digital libraries for this reason. Not only is the mass of law increasing beyond the capacity of expensive downtown real estate, but the pace of change is such that digital storage and online updating is the only realistic solution to the problems of bulk and ephemerality. The subscription model, however, is in itself restrictive, and denies the principle of access. Such specialist professional libraries diminish the public stock of knowledge to the extent that their professionalization as well as their commercialization remove them from the encyclopaedic domain and restore them firmly to taxonomic hierarchy. Pharmacopias provide another example of a knowledge base whose architecture has been reorganized to accommodate rapid growth and change, for commercial gain and in order to retain the privilege of the professional. These developments move in the opposite direction to the public library. Contrast here the evidence of Antonio Panizzi’s evidence to the Select Committee on the British Museum in 1836:

I want a poor student to have the same means of indulging his learned curiosity, of following his rational pursuits, of consulting the same authorities, of fathoming the most intricate inquiry as the richest man in the kingdom, as far as books go, and I contend that the Government is bound to give him the most liberal and unlimited assistance in this respect. (cited in Thompson, 1977: 73)

Panizzi, usually regarded as the founder of the British Library, here gives the heart of patrician England a lesson in communicative rationality that removes the concept of the public sphere from the lost past and the de facto class-system of the coffee house and the salon, and delivers it to the hands of Chartists and working people at the public expense.

Many university libraries operate as if on the basis of a professional library. Where access is restricted to members of the university, and where access to materials (such as online journals) is restricted by password, the principle of open access is likewise denied or circumscribed. Where this is the case, the links between texts and talk are also likely to be broken in the interests of commercial confidentiality or professional ethics. To the extent that the open access library is dedicated to the community of readers and thus to the increase of communication, while the professional library restricts privileged access to its members, even though the former replicates professional holdings, it does so subject to delays and occasionally limitations on access which defer and restrict public communication.

## Slide, Moving Image, Sound and Multimedia Libraries

Owing to the unstable nature of the media on which they are recorded, early film and perhaps even more so early videotape have become the preserve of archivists. Nitrate film is dangerously volatile as well as liable to radical degradation over time: transferring to celluloid is expensive, dangerous and slow. Magnetic media, tape and disc, lose their magnetism, and the plastics on which the iron oxides are bound lose their flexibility and integrity over a period of only a few years. Optical media (laserdisc, CD, DVD) are also prey to degradation over time. The sheer volume of production is now so great that no archive can store more than a fraction of annual output, and providing up-to-date catalogues, let alone viewer access, is prohibitively expensive. Yet audiovisual media provide not only access to popular tastes and pleasures of the past, but technical detail, and in many instances creative work of the highest value. Audio and slide archives share the same problems. One response is to manage the storage and retrieval of documents in digital form. Two drawbacks to this are the difficulties and costs of handling older, and to that extent more vulnerable materials, in order to digitize them, and the instability and rapid turnover of digital formats. Despite their ostensibly dematerializing effect, digital media are if anything more dependent on their material substrate than the original formats.

## Digital and Virtual Libraries

Not only do storage media (floppy discs, laser discs, CD-ROM, DVD-ROM . . .) constantly change, but older technologies are themselves by now archivable, and the problem of retransferring from one storage system to another adds new dimensions to the Library of Babel scenario that archivists and librarians fear. Annual production of print, film, optical and magnetic content has been estimated at 1.5 billion gigabytes of storage (Lyman et al., 2000). The problem now becomes one not so much of access as of evaluation. Such evaluation has always been a necessary part of the archiving problem (Groys, 2003). But the principle of universality has not applied the same evaluative judgements to libraries. Nonetheless, users must have some sense of their whereabouts in the collection, either via a cataloguing system, or by a simple generic labelling of collections distinguishing Children’s Books from Romance or Reference. Digital libraries have no walls, labels or rooms, and such sorting as is available is undertaken by ‘portals’, variously authoritative gateways run by physical libraries and other public service entities or commercial ventures, including some of the most lucrative and most frequently visited sites on the web. Among the latter, and especially among search engines like Yahoo, ranking in searches can be assured by payment to the operator.

Derived from document management, storage, retrieval and sharing systems developed at the Centre Européen de Recherche Nucléaire, the world-wide web as initially envisaged by Tim Berners-Lee (Berners-Lee with Fischetti, 1999) and his collaborators (Gillies and Cailliau,

2000) was to be an open library accessible on any computer with an Internet connection, but it was also to be an open forum for writing and rewriting documents. The latter function was lost early on, in the early 21st century, due to the commercialization of the web; the former function has begun to wane due to the effort to make the web conform to the televisual model of delivering audiences to advertisers adopted by, among others, the corporate interests who control browser and browser plug-in design, to such an extent that more radical voices are contending that the age of the web browser is already over.

This proposal implies limitations to free, open and universal access to the web. Panizzi’s commitment to the free inquiry of any user is belied by the storm of automated preference setting and guided browsing that results from cookie technology. The digital library, unlike the digital archive, does not suffer from a politics of exclusion but from the proliferating technologies devoted to shaping – and to that extent restricting – free enquiry, turning it instead towards commercial services. To the extent that the library is dedicated to research and selfimprovement, it is an instrument of individual and social change. To the extent that it is driven by the confirmation and feeding of a presumed profile, the world-wide web as mass medium is dedicated to stasis.

A further challenge posed to the ideal of the library by digitization arises from the problem of copyright, and from the increasing importance of intellectual property rights in the economy of the early 21st century. The deep web of subscription access is blocked from most search engines, and is restricted to users whose institutions pay often extremely high rates for the right to access electronic journals and other resources. At time of writing, many electronic publishers sell subscriptions not by individual title but in blocks, reminiscent of the practice of Hollywood studios’ ‘block booking’ made illegal by the Paramount Decrees of the late 1940s and early 1950s. Major publishers sell subscriptions to lists of titles, all of which must be purchased in order to access the specific titles that an institution requires. As the scholarly and economic value of journals, for example, increases, and as the sheer scale of journal publishing advances, the restriction of access to such valuable resources suggests that, far from increasing the democracy of access, web technology has been employed instead to reconfirm the powers of ownership in intellectual property and to expand its economic significance.

Finally, the digital library has another unusual characteristic: it is its own index, but it is also automatically creating records of the patterns of use to which it is put. In this sense, the digital library is unable to refrain from automatic increase. To some extent, as an advertising and marketing medium, the web is less concerned with its content than it is with the activities of its users – in this again it is similar to television. The amassing of information about users is the purpose of web culture for many of its participants. This function of the library has been promoted to the head of the hierarchy, not in order to provide service, but in order to extract wealth, once again by restricting, blocking and rendering subject to exchange the communicational community that powers the library as concept.

## Private Libraries

According to John Hale (1993: 397), private studies equipped with shelves and books began to be a feature of merchants’ houses in Italy in the mid-15th century; Leland mentions with delight discovering such a private library in a castle belonging to the Earl of Northumberland in the mid-1530s. Ginzburg (1980) counts 11 books in the possession of the Italian miller Mennochio when he was arrested for heresy in 1584, mostly loaned but some purchased. Over these approximately 150 years, the possession and private study of books had passed from the aristocracy to the artisan, and from the South to the North of Europe. Mennochio’s borrowed books indicate a network of readers, opening their private libraries to friends and acquaintances with a shared passion for reading, a theme celebrated by Charles Lamb (1935) in the 1820s, in an essay on Coleridge’s habit not only of borrowing but heavily annotating borrowed titles.

In one of the warmest accounts of the personal library, Benjamin (1969) writes of the collector’s association of memories with the copies of books in his possession, such that every book, in addition to its contents and aesthetic appeal, is a repository of a personal narrative. The delights of scholarly retreat from the troubles of the world and immersion in one’s library are shared in literary works from China, India, Islam and the West, and become significant to feminist thought in Virginia Woolfe’s A Room of One’s Own. A mode of memorializing one’s own life, the personal library may also have the function of a toolbox for practising writers who, from Anatole France to Umberto Eco, occasionally offer anecdotes defending the eccentricity of the practice. The writer’s library shares with the public library the task of producing new writing on the basis of previous publications. Its relationship with the emergence of a Habermasian public sphere in the 18th century rests on both the lending and borrowing of books between peers and the readiness to enter into conversation on the subject of books that characterizes the emergence of a critical social dialogue.

A tension must be observed between the private and public in the case of libraries and library study. In Dürer’s St Jerome the scholar-saint is a hermit, but nonetheless surrounded by books. Holbein’s portrait of Erasmus on the other hand depicts a scholar in the heart of the struggle for the future of Christendom, but again surrounded by the trappings of private study. This tension, perhaps intrinsic in literacy as such, is enacted specifically in the movement between reading and writing, including the art of translation. The scholar not only acquires but transmits meanings, in this sense reducing the accumulation of knowledge in a personal library to the necessarily smaller number of texts that a single author can produce, while at the same time turning private study to public service.

## Ethics

With the exception of Lamb’s encomium to Coleridge’s annotations, library ethics rest on the premise that a shared book should be treated with respect. Annotations and underlinings are frowned upon; defacing and damaging despised; and stealing has the particular obloquy attached to an act which is not merely a crime against property but a sin against common ownership. In the legitimate second-hand trade, ex-library books are deemed all but worthless. Though there is an illegal trade in stolen library books, the books purchased by libraries are not bought with the intention of reselling. Thus use-value to the community is in inverse relation to exchange value. Interruptions to the quiet of a library, while less despised, are likewise treated as anti-social (though libraries have responded by setting aside specific areas for quiet study). The sociality of the library and of quiet study, the sharing of the resource as a common good, and readiness to enter into conversation on the basis of the book one has open or is carrying are indications of the orientation of libraries towards residual utopian community inherited from aspirations for universal literacy in early modernity. The transition to electronic access protects materials from damage, but tends towards intensified individuation in reading.

## Extended Use of the Term ‘Library’

Such major taxonomic endeavours as the Human Genome Project refer to their outputs as libraries. The analogy is partially with the use of the term in software design to denote collections of subroutines required to add functionality to a basic program. But the analogy is also partly with the public library, and the inference that the knowledge so gathered can be accessed by anyone with the requisite literacy. A true analogy would require not only a library of the genome, but of all known digressions from the model template, that is a library with as many entries as there are human beings. It would also require access not dependent on commercial transactions. Neither analogy holds good.

The knowledge bases of indigenous peoples are likewise frequently compared to libraries. Here the analogy is more closely with the property of storing ancestral wisdom in retrievable form. The analogy dissolves on the matter of library ethics: it may not be possible for outsiders to access items from an indigenous ‘library’ without damaging them. Where such knowledge is sacred or restricted to initiates, the principle of universality is also breached.

Publishers began to use the term ‘library’ to describe lists of books in the 19th century;