access and feedback replaces the former data separation (the file in the box on the shelf) which created the differences out of which an archive order was constructed and reconstructed. The digital archive then should not be seen as just a part of the contemporary ‘record and storage mania’ facilitated by digital technologies, but as providing a fluid, processual, dynamic archive, in which the topology of documents can be reconfigured again and again. The digital archive then presents new conceptual problems about the identity, distinctiveness and boundaries of the datum and the document. Like the earlier shifts in the balance between life and form, the shifts in the digital archive between flows and classification take us to the heart of the questions about the constitution, formation and storage of knowledge in the current age.

The decentred digital archive parallels the development of theoretical writings on the archive by Foucault and Derrida. Here the emphasis is upon the radical instability and contingency of the archive, the archive as a decentred structure, which generates signification. Foucault (1972) reformulates the archive as archaeology and shifts the meaning of the archive away from the unifying structure we find in traditional humanist accounts to a system in which a multiplicity of discourses are created from a given set of data. The emphasis moves to fluid and complex archival traces, in which the archive cannot provide a direct access to the past, but only a textual refiguring of it. The archive fever is the attempt to return to the lived origin, to the everyday experience which are the sources of our distorted and refracted memories whose transience and forgetting makes us uneasy (Derrida, 1996). The notion of the archive is endorsed by theories of the centrality and knowability of the subject: here archives can be seen as ‘encyclopaedic image repositories’ (Kemp, 1998: 37). The archive can be regarded as a paradigmatic entity as well as a concrete institution.

## References

Appadurai, A. (2003) ‘Archive and Aspiration’, in J. Brouwer (ed.) Information is Alive. Rotterdam: V2.

Benjamin, W. (2000) The Arcades Project. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Borges, J.L. (1999a) ‘The Library of Babel’, in Collected Fiction. London: Allen Lane/Penguin Press.

Borges, J.L. (1999b) ‘Funes, his Memory’, in Collected Fiction. London: Allen Lane/Penguin Press.

Bradley, H. (1999) ‘The Seduction of the Archive’, History of the Human Sciences 12(2): 107–22.

Cubitt, S. (1998) Digital Aesthetics. London: Sage.

DeLanda, M. (2003) ‘The Archive’, in J. Brouwer (ed.) Information is Alive. Rotterdam: V2.

Derrida, J. (1996) Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.

Ernst, W. (1999) ‘Archival Action: The Archive as ROM and its Political Instrumentalization under National Socialism’, History of the Human Sciences 12(2): 13–34.

Featherstone, M. (1998) ‘The Flâneur, the City and Virtual Public Life’, Urban Studies 35(5–6): 909–25.

Featherstone, M. (2000) ‘Archiving Cultures’, special issue on Sociology Facing the Next Millennium, British Journal of Sociology 51(1).

Foucault, M. (1972) The Archaeology of Knowledge. London: Tavistock.

Foucault, M. (1978) I, Pierre Rivière. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

Hevia, J.M. (1998) ‘The Archive State and the Fear of Pollution: From the Opium Wars to Fu-Manchu’, Cultural Studies 12(2): 234–64.

Hobbs, R. (1998) ‘Boltanski’s Visual Archives’, History of the Human Sciences 11(4): 121–40.

Kemp, S. (1998) ‘The Archive on which the Sun Never Set: Rudyard Kipling’, History of the Human Sciences 11(4): 33–48.

Lynch, M. (1999) ‘Archives in Formation’, History of the Human Sciences 12(2): 65–87.

Osborne, T. (1999) ‘The Ordinariness of the Archive’, History of the Human Sciences 12(2): 51–64.

Simmel, G. (1997) ‘The Concept and Tragedy of Culture’, in D. Frisby and M. Featherstone (eds) Simmel on Culture. London: Sage.

Steedman, C. (1998) ‘The Space of Memory: In an Archive’, History of the Human Sciences 11(4): 65–83.

Mike Featherstone is Editor of Theory, Culture & Society. His recent publications include Automobilities (edited with N. Thrift and J. Urry, Sage, 2005) and Consumer Culture and Postmodernism (second edition forthcoming from Sage, 2006).

# Museum

Kevin Hetherington

Abstract Through analysis of a critical engagement between Blanchot and Malraux on the museé imaginaire, it becomes apparent that both were seeking to understand the relationship between the museum and experience within modernity. This short article seeks to develop these ideas and to understand the museum as a key institutional space of modernity implicated in addressing the changing character of experience in the present. Following Benjamin’s distinction between experience as Erfahrung and Erlebnis, the essay argues that the museum has always sought to offer a fabricated sense of Erfahrung through its narrative and display techniques and that this facilitates a distracted mode of reception that is now prominent within contemporary cultural life. Through this we can see that the idea of the museé imaginaire is still a prescient one, but it has moved from the virtual space of the photographic art book to the simulated culture of the museumified city in general.

Keywords experience, modernity, museum

W <sup>hen</sup> <sup>Andre</sup> <sup>Malraux</sup> <sup>(1978)</sup> <sup>first</sup> <sup>published</sup> <sup>his</sup> <sup>famous</sup> <sup>essay</sup> <sup>on</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>museé</sup> <sup>imaginaire</sup>(translated as museum without walls) in 1947 he was writing against a long tradition (translated as museum without walls) in 1947 he was writing against a long tradition of criticism, notably developed in France but to spread elsewhere, opposed to the museum as an alienated, alienating and inauthentic institution that had come into being in Europe in the latter years of the 18th century. As early as 1815, Quatremere de Quincy, a leading cultural critic of his day, his sights largely set on the Louvre during the Napoleonic era, had attacked the relatively new idea of the museum for its re-appropriation of history for political ends, its removal of artefacts from a supposedly living, authentic cultural context and placement of them in an inauthentic and fabricated social space and its reduction of art works to things in need of preservation rather than the manifestation of ongoing, living, creative processes of creation (for an overview see Maleuvre, 1999: 13ff.). Yet Malraux, later to become Minister of Culture in France during the 1960s, was not simply defending the old idea of the national museum as a universal survey of civilization, he had set his sights much higher than that. The context might have been France but the issues were those more broadly of modernity, a concept developed in no small part among the Parisian artistic and intellectual elite in the period from the 1850s to the Second World War (Berman, 1982; Clark, 1984). Through Baudelaire to later impressionists, surrealists, vitalists and existentialists, a search had been undertaken to understand, through a reception of life on the streets of Paris, the development of a new mode of experience that had come to characterise modern life: modernité in French, Erlebnis in German (Benjamin, 1973c, 1999; Berman, 1982; Clark, 1984; Frisby, 1985), terms that captured something of the novelty of modern conditions: those uncertain, fragmented, disconnected and now-experienced moments that make up our existence in the urban and industrialized world. Instead of seeing the museum as a stuffy denial of the vitality of the street, the museum for Malraux was a space in which such challenging experiences could be addressed through an understanding of modern experience’s modernist cultural expression in the present by placing it in the context of the artistic styles of the past. The key to this was photography.

For Malraux, the great works of civilizations across the world that the museum had served well in its limited, location-tied way for a century and a half could now be liberated from the space of the universally concerned yet location tied museum and be made accessible to all in virtual form. Technological changes, notably photography, had made this possible. The ideal form of the museé imaginaire, an appropriate cultural response for museum to a modernist culture, Malraux believed, would be the photographic book. He could not have imagined the Internet and our culture of simulation and virtuality at that time but, no doubt, would have approved greatly. What Malraux defended in the idea of the museum in general and in the museé imaginaire in particular, contrary to the tradition of writers like Quatremere de Quincy, was the belief that bringing artefacts together in one space provided them with a single rather than dispersed context for interpretation that allowed for new insights about technique and style to emerge through comparison with works from other times and places (Crimp, 1997: 54ff.). Through an appreciation of art in such a context, new styles, new ways of seeing and also a new experience of the ideals and values of civilizations as a whole that were expressed in art could be revealed, deepening and enriching our cultural experiences in a modern society.

Malraux’s humanist index provided him with the rationale for this argument. Museums, he believed, revealed truths about the human condition in general that leaving art in its original, specific and often sacred contexts, could not. Artists and art audiences alike could learn from the bringing together of artworks in the museum. They could see art in new ways and new developments could follow. Picasso’s appreciation and use of stylistic references from the African art that he encountered in a museum in Paris and its importance to his development of the style of cubism was a case in point. If the museum with walls, like the Louvre, Metropolitan or British Museum, could do this for the receptive viewer, then the advent of photographic reproduction, initially black and white (useful for reproducing images of artworks in the plastic arts) and now colour (important for reproduction of painting), simply extended this effect of the museum to a broader set of artworks and a wider audience, providing access and availability in a democratic fashion to the interested public that could only be offered in more limited form by the museum contained within a building. Perhaps drawing on Benjamin’s (1973a) recently translated essay on the work or art in the age of mechanical reproduction, Malraux not only challenged the idea of the aura of the original by the copy and the possibilities of skilled reception brought about by mechanical reproduction but also suggested that new technologies and new forms of virtual and visual would facilitate new ways of seeing. For Malraux, the museum was above all a bulwark against the disorientating modernité of contemporary life; it provided a form of contact with a richer, more temporally situated form of experience through the reception of art that it afforded.

Malraux was not without his critics. While some simply defended, in a rather conservative manner, the traditional museum against this nascent virtual museum, others were more reflective in their criticisms. One of the most notable was Maurice Blanchot, who, in a long review essay of Malraux’s essay first published in 1950 (1997a), and in a subsequent critique of the idea of the museum in general (1997b), sought to challenge some of Malraux’s major claims for the museum idea and its significance in modernity.

Blanchot did not share the same faith in humanism as Malraux. Certainly he acknowledged that the space of the museum changed both the context of art and also its possible meanings. He also accepted that the museé imaginaire extended this practice to modern art in ways more fitting to its stylistic inventiveness and relationship to the modern than the traditional museum form. Yet, contrary to Malraux, he believed this had as many limitations to it as possibilities. What was at stake, for Blanchot, was how the museum in any form dealt with issues of time, space and the experience of art. Through Blanchot’s treatment of Malraux’s argument we begin to see a concern over the important and changing relationship between modern experience and the museum more clearly. Though they both expressed this concern through a discussion of fine art, a wider concern with the issue of modern experience in general becomes apparent.

For Blanchot, art was not a triumphant expression of a universal human nature and human creative powers as it was for Malraux but, above all, an engagement with the absent and the inexpressible that the artist had sought to capture and experience and thereby reveal to others. Yet in such a view, making things available does not make them accessible. The museum as the space in which this art is now found is a closed and self-referential space rather than an open space in this regard. Blanchot believed the museum should be seen not as a space of access – where the art that is at our disposal (a trope he uses often) is nothing but a pretence of availability – but rather as a space of translation in which something of the art in question to be found there is irretrievably lost in its articulation with the space that surrounds it (on translation see Blanchot, 1997c; also Benjamin, 1973b). The museum creates a world unto itself, a self-reflective and contemplative space for art; not a museum without walls but rather a ‘monad without windows’ (Blanchot, 1997a: 22) in which the end of time and the possible ruin of art through decay and an aporial and challenging encounter with the absent and inexpressible are put in suspension by its demands to make all things available to experience. The other side of (artistic) experience, that which is inchoate and inexpressible, is lost to the museum for Blanchot.

Such an institution was, for Blanchot, founded on a betrayal of the true experience of art. It promises to make art something that is at our disposal yet in practices disposes with the possibility of our connecting with it in a meaningful way because of the artificial character and simplistic narrative conventions of the space in which such an experience is found. At its worst the museum creates not an encounter with art but a mere spectacle of its experience. For Blanchot, the imaginary museum simply extends this principle further beyond the confines of a specific space to the broader world of modern culture. The museum is, in this argument, a space of lack, a space where the negative in art is turned into a positive and its challenging effects devalued:

If, through an image, one were to make perceptible to oneself the dimension that the work acquires in its relation to absence, one can consider the Museum to be, in its imaginary totality, this absence realized, a realization that supposes a certain completion, that completion precisely which modern art would give it. At the heart of this absence, works of art are in perpetual dissolution and in perpetual motion, each one being but a marker of time, a moment of the whole, a moment that would like desperately to be this whole, in which absence alone rests without rest. (1997a: 38)

For Blanchot, the museum affirms our lack of experience of art in the true sense while pretending to do otherwise and the imaginary museum simply makes this lack of experience available to all.

At the heart of both Malraux’s and Blanchot’s very different interpretations of the modern institution of the museum that came into being in Europe in the latter part of the 18th century is a concern with the question of experience. From such reflections we can see that it is with the nature of experience (Erfahrung) in modernity that museums are principally engaged. While the many histories of the museum, whether Whiggish, Marxist or Foucauldian, often make reference to antecedents in classical times in the institutions of the Roman baths, the medieval reliquary and the cabinet of curiosities of the Baroque era (for various overviews on museum history see Hooper-Greenhill, 1992; Bann, 1995; Bennett, 1995; Crimp, 1997; Hetherington, 1999, Maleuvre, 1999; Fyfe, 2000), it is the modernity of the museum and its direct engagement with issues of experience (whether that be the experience of art, history, civilizations, ethnographic encounter or locality expressed in material cultural form) that marks it out as something new. It might be described as an important surface of emergence (Foucault, 1974) in which the modern discourse of ‘the problem of experience’ is enunciated through the narrative orderings of material culture, most notably through discourses of civilization, progress, evolution and place. To understand the museum as an emergent modern creation and to address the differing responses it elicits we need to consider this issue of experience as an epistemological basis for understanding the museum as an idea rather than simply trace out lineages or ruptures with earlier institutionalized forms of collecting, displaying and interpreting artefacts of varying kinds.

Modernity alters the character of experience fundamentally. As Benjamin (1973c, 1973d, 1999) observes, we see with its de-traditionalizing forces a breakdown of experience as a totality (Erfahrung) grounded in the past of memory, custom and epic narrative and the emergence of a more fractured and fragmentary set of experiences of the now as a series of events the lived character of which resists understanding and easy communication (Erlebnis). With this shift in the character of experience such things as custom and tradition are overturned, and a well documented shock of the new prevails in all areas of social life (Berman, 1982). The well worn sociological observations of a shift from Gemeinschaft to Gesellschaft (Tonnies), mechanical to organic solidarity (Durkheim), value rationality to instrumental rationality (Weber), Erfahrung to Erlebnis (Benjamin), mark out, in their different ways, the same issue of the effects of the modernizing, disembedding and de-traditionalizing forces of industrial capitalism on established patterns of social life. What alters fundamentally in such a shift brought about by the forces of modernization is the experience of time and space, and the museum is in large part a response to that.

Koselleck (2004) sums this up succinctly in his analysis of the emergence of the narrative of historical time, something that museums have played an important role in establishing, as a major element to the modern outlook. A pre-modern experience (Erfahrung) was characterized by the sense of a shared topos in which a community existed as a knowable whole to its members. Experiences in the present were felt to be the same as those in the past: changeless, iterable and reproducible in character. People dwelt in this shared topos in a time that was perceived to be continuous and natural and were able to experience the present as a present. There was no sense of emergence, trajectory or novelty in such experience. There was no worldly outside (2004: 9ff), any sense of an end only coming with the belief in God’s intervention at the end of the world. With modernity comes disruption of the social relations that underpin such a form of experience and its cultural expression and with that the temporalization of history or the shift from natural to historical time as a response as cultural understanding seeks to reorientate itself to radically changed circumstances. Out of this emerge ideas of futurity and of progress and ideas about the past, notably the ordering of history into a knowable series of stages or periods, most famously in Hegel’s Philosophy of History, and alongside that the idea of modernity itself. Such a discourse, Koselleck (2004: 22) argues, ‘abbreviates the space of experience’ in a world now perceived to be ever-accelerating and ungraspable as a knowable totality:

This self-accelerating temporality robs the present of the possibility of being experienced as the present and escapes into a future within which the current unapprehendable present has to be captured by historical philosophy. (2004: 22)

The disorientation character of the advent of modernity described in such terms has been much explored by social scientists in recent years (Berman, 1982; Clark, 1984; Frisby, 1985). With it comes an experience that is principally felt as lack, something captured in the powerful tropes of alienation, loss of community, inauthenticity, fragmentation and so on that have developed largely through the idioms of Romanticism over the past two centuries. The centrality of the museum as an institution that seeks to articulate a response to this changing character of experience has been little commented upon (though see Huyssen, 1995, 2003) but it is crucial to the development of the museum in modernity. The museum is one of the key modern institutions in which this sense of experience as lack and disconnection from a natural topos is addressed; it might even be described as its foundation stone.

The museum seeks to provide modern society with a fabricated Erfahrung. It seeks through its display regimes, their narratives and ordering logics to provide people with a sense that they are living in a world where our uncertain and complex set of experiences make sense. It seeks to place us in an historical topos that appears natural. Of course, museums are not all the same. They range from the universal survey museums such as the Louvre, Metropolitan and British Museum that were the main concern of writers such as Malraux and Blanchot (Duncan and Wallach, 1980) through to art collections, specialist collections, collections associated with particular places, crafts, technologies or design fields and so on. But it is the question of the character of experience and the attempt to place it in a singular narrative space that informs their collecting and displaying epistemologies nonetheless. In the varied fields of art, of historical narrative, in the placing of civilizations in context with one another, in addressing a sense of belonging to a shared space of locality or community through the display of artefacts, museums seek to articulate narratives of experience and identity and to make sense of the relationship between time and space in a modern world where they are thrown continually into doubt.

The varied responses to them reflect the responses to the question of modern experience. Conservative critics and defenders of leaving artefacts in their sacred pre-modern contexts like Quatremere de Quincy confused the conditions of the museum for those of modernity in general. They did not recognize the profound social changes they were living through for what they were but nonetheless astutely saw them reflected in museum displays of their time, only to then blame those institutions themselves for robbing people of a true experience. But their critiques remained at the level of the museum as if it had created the conditions that it simply reflected and sought to make sense of. For defenders and champions of the museum such as Malraux, a humanist belief in the universality of experience reflected in art was taken to be resistant to the modernizing erasure of experience in the here and now. What Malraux perhaps failed to recognize, but what is at the heart of Blanchot’s criticisms of him, is that such a faith is itself a product of the museum and its fabrication of a narrative of experience (Erfahrung). Humanism, civilization and progress are just some of the more prominent forms that that narrative can take. In this sense the museum does indeed create little more than a fetishized spectacle of experience that Malraux treats as real.

And what of Blanchot’s response? It retains a whiff of Quatremere de Quincy’s disdain no doubt but does open up the whole question of experience nonetheless. Its conclusions are stark and bleak. We live in the world of Erlebnis that only art can comprehend. Yet art only comprehends in the negative through an encounter with lack, with absence, disaster and the inexpressible. For Blanchot, the museum is premised on making such things invisible by fabricating experience as a total, shared and comprehensible thing. Yet he offers us no answers as to how things might be otherwise.

Perhaps the person who does and who offers us a more nuanced critique of the museum is Walter Benjamin whose work influenced both Malraux and Blanchot. It is in his complex, subtle, even if sometimes confused analysis of modern culture under the sign of the commodity fetish that he explores the question of experience and suggestively points to the museum as one amongst a number of modern spaces in which to analyse it. For Benjamin (1999: 403), museums are ‘dreamhouses of the collective’, bourgeois interiors on the grand scale where the middle classes seek to escape from the uncertain capitalist world that they have so benefited from; they are fetish spaces that offer a phantasmagoria of experience (Erfahrung) in a world where it has been undermined. The museum, like the arcade, is a deeply ambiguous space of modernity for Benjamin. Yet people do not respond to such conditions in a wholly mechanistic and unreflective manner. Both Malraux and Blanchot in their different takes on the museum tend to assume of the audience an absorbed mode of reception – one that has positive effects (Malraux) or negative ones (Blanchot) on cultural understanding. Yet what Benjamin (1973d) recognizes is that the character of reception associated with modern experience is neither an engaged nor distracted form of absorbed reception but rather a somewhat disinterested and distracted one befitting the fragmented character of modern experience. This distracted mode of reception is as open to reflection and the shock of recognition of something that is fabricated as much as it is to a fetishized condition of false consciousness (Benjamin, 1973a). Museums may create a spectacle of experience that is false and imaginary but they produce the effects that can unsettle and challenge these effects just as much as critique from outside can. For example, as the times change museums often do not, or they change at a slower pace. This can unsettle their own narratives from within and thereby their own conditions of possibility. As their once optimistic narratives of progress and civilization come to be read as narratives of Empire and racism, we see the outmoded speak in unanticipated ways. For Benjamin the situation that ‘dreamhouses’, such as the museum or arcade, create is a both/and situation of positive and negative effects rather than one of either/or. It is, for Benjamin, this distracted