as ‘I want to be myself ’). This is why the translator cannot be designated straightforwardly either as I or you: they disrupt the attempt to appropriate the relation of the addresser and addressee as a personal relation between the first person and the second person. The translator cannot be the first or second person, or even the third ‘person’ undisruptively. Ineluctably, translation introduces an instability into the putatively personal relations among the agents of speech, writing, listening and reading. The translator is internally split and multiple, devoid of a stable position. At best, they are subject in transit.

In the first place, this is because the translator cannot be an ‘individual’ in the sense of individuum, the undividable unit. In the second, it is because the translator is a singularity that marks an elusive point of discontinuity in the social, even though translation is the practice of creating continuity from discontinuity. Translation is a poietic social practice that institutes a relation at the site of incommensurability. This is why the discontinuity inherent in translation would be completely repressed if we were to determine translation as the communication of information; the ambiguity inherent in the translator’s positionality would have to be entirely overlooked as long as translation is grasped as the transfer of information.

In the case of translation, however, an ambiguity in the translator’s positionality marks the instability of the we as subject rather than the I, since the translator cannot be a unified and coherent personality in translation. This suggests a different attitude of address, namely, ‘heterolingual address’ (Sakai, 1997: i–xii), which is, a situation in which one addresses oneself as a foreigner to another foreigner. Held captive in the regime of translation, however, the translator is supposed to assume the role of the transcendent arbitrator, not only between the addresser and the addressee but also between their linguistic communities. As monolingual address, translation, as a process of creating continuity in discontinuity (Tanabe, 1963), is often replaced by the representation of translation in which translation is schematized according to the co-figurative communication model.

## Modernity and the Schema of Co-figuration: A Genealogy of the Modern

Let us consider how translation is displaced by its representation and how collective subjectivity, such as national and ethnic subjectivity, is constituted in the representation of translation. Through the translator’s labor, the incommensurable differences that call for the translator’s service in the first place are negotiated. In other words, the work of translation is a practice by which the initial discontinuity between the addresser and the addressee is made continuous. In this respect translation is like other social practices; translation makes something representable out of an unrepresentable difference. Only retrospectively, therefore, can we recognize the initial incommensurability as a gap, crevice or border between fully constituted entities, spheres or domains. Cultural difference which prompts translation is unrepresentable in this sense and can by no means be reduced to either specific difference or spatial distance. But when represented as a conceptual difference or gap, it is no longer an incommensurability. It is mapped onto a striated space, which may be segmented by national borders and other markers of collective (national, ethnic, racial or ‘cultural’) identification.

Incommensurable difference is more like a feeling (Deleuze, 1994) prior to the explanation of how incommensurability has occurred, and cannot be represented as a specific difference (in schemas of genera and species, for example) between two terms or entities. What makes it possible to represent the initial difference as an already determined one between one language unity and another is the work of translation itself. Hence the untranslatable, or what appears to escape translation, cannot exist prior to the enunciation of translation. It is translation that gives birth to the untranslatable. The untranslatable is as much a testimony to the sociality of the translator, whose elusive positionality reveals the presence of an aggregate community of foreigners between the addresser and the addressee, as the translatable itself. We fail to communicate because we are in common with one another. Community does not mean we share common ground. On the contrary, we are in community precisely because we are exposed to a forum where our differences and failure in communication can be manifest. Nevertheless, the translator’s essential sociality with respect to the untranslatable is disregarded in monolingual address, and with the repression of this insight, monolingual address equates translation with the representation of translation.

The particular representation of translation as communication between two particular languages is no doubt a historical construct. Given the politico-social significance of translation, it is no accident that, historically, the regime of translation became widely accepted in many regions of the world, after the feudal order and its passive vassal subject gave way to the disciplinary order of the active citizen subject in the modern nation-state, to an order consisting of disciplinary regimes which Michel Foucault describes brilliantly. The regime of translation serves to reify national sovereignty. As Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri (2000: 95) have argued, it makes ‘the relation of sovereignty into a thing (often by naturalizing it) and thus weeds out every residue of social antagonism. The nation is a kind of ideological shortcut that attempts to free the concepts of sovereignty and modernity from the antagonism and crisis that define them’.

Following the Kantian schematism (Kant, 1956), the poietic technology endowed in the regime of translation which renders it representable may be called ‘the schema of cofiguration’. Since the practice of translation remains radically heterogeneous to the representation of translation, translation cannot always be represented as a communication between two clearly delineated ethno-linguistic unities. Rather, it was this particular representation of translation that gave rise to the possibility of figuring out the unity of ethnic or national language together with another language unity. Thanks to this co-figurative schematism, there emerges an ethno-linguistic unity as if it were a sensuous and unified thing hidden and dormant behind the surface of random sensuous variety. In other words, the schema of co-figuration is a technology by means of which an ethno-linguistic community is rendered representable, thereby constituting itself as a substratum upon which national sovereignty can be built. ‘People’ is thus nothing but an idealization of this substratum.

This self-constitution of the nation does not proceed unitarily, but on the contrary, its figure constitutes itself only by making visible the figure of an other with which it engages in a relationship of translation. Precisely because the two nations are represented as equivalent and alike, however, it is possible to determine them as conceptually different, and their difference is construed as a specific difference (daiphora) between separate identities. Nevertheless, cultural difference, which calls for the work of a translator, is not a conceptual difference but an incommensurability.

Once translation is determined as the relationship of the two terms as equivalent and alike, it gives rise to the possibility of extracting an infinite number of distinctions between the two. Just as in the co-figuration of ‘the West and the Rest’ by which the West represents itself, constituting itself by positing everything else as ‘the Rest’, conceptual difference allows one term to be evaluated as superior to the other. This co-figurative comparison allows for typical binary oppositions – such as the presence of scientific rationality versus its absence, the futureoriented spirit of progress versus the tradition-bound sense of social obligation, the internalization of religious faith and its accompanying secularism versus the inseparableness of the private and the public – to characterize the West and the Rest.

The ‘modern’ is marked by the introduction of the schema of co-figuration, without which it is difficult to imagine a nation or ethnicity as a homogeneous sphere. As Antoine Berman taught us about the intellectual history of translation and Romanticism in Germany, the economy of the foreign, that is, how the foreign must be allocated in the production of the domestic language, has played a decisive role in the poietic – and poetic – identification of national language (Berman, 1992). Most conspicuously in 18th-century movements such as Romanticism in western Europe and Kokugaku (National Studies) in Japan, intellectual and literary maneuvers to invent, mythically and poetically, a national language were closely associated with a spiritual construction of a new identity which later naturalized national sovereignty. This substratum for the legitimation of national and popular sovereignty was put forward as a ‘natural’ language specific to the ‘people’, supposedly spoken by them in their everyday lives. Literary historians generally call this historical development ‘the emergence of the vernacular’. With the irruption of the sphere of nearness – extensive obsessions with things of everydayness and experiential immediacy – in which the ordinary and the colloquial were celebrated (Sakai, 1992), the status of ‘universal’ languages such as Latin, literary Chinese and Sanskrit was drastically and decisively altered. In their place, languages emerged whose markers were ethnic and national – English, German, Japanese, Spanish and so forth – and the ancient canons were translated into these languages. For this reason, Martin Luther’s German translation of the Bible and Motoori’s Japanese phonetic translation of the Kojiki (records of ancient matters) can be said to mark crucial steps in modernity.

## Modernity and the West

In talking about ‘modern’ as it is apprehended in many parts of the world today, first it is historically necessary to anchor it in the original uses of this notion in the history of Western Europe. This is neither because the most authentic forms of modernity can be found in Western Europe, nor because modernity emanated from the center somewhat associated with Western Europe to the periphery of the Rest. Rather this is because the notion of ‘modern’ has been accepted and used primarily as a translation from its European originals for more than a century in many places, including those outside the geographic terrain of Europe and North America. One can talk about ‘modern’ as if there were a globally common apprehension of it precisely because, all over the world, people assume it is impossible to apprehend it without referring it back to its European equivalents, from which their local translations are believed to have derived. In the globally-accepted conception of modernity the schema of cofiguration between the West and the Rest is already at work powerfully.

Despite linguistic and social diversities among the different sites of the world, therefore, the notion of ‘modern’ is supposedly retraceable to the singular history of Western Europe, thanks to the Eurocentric structure incorporated in the very notion itself. In this respect, the schema of co-figuration is the form which is most appropriate to the representation of the Eurocentric world, and it is also a form in which the legacy of European colonialisms is preserved. As far as the local terms used for modernity are concerned, however, the situation was drastically different in ‘pre-modern’ times preceding the translation of ‘modern’ into local equivalents.

The introduction of ‘modern’ qualitatively changed the manner in which people customarily organized their historical experience. With the arrival of ‘modern’, people in many places in the world began to map geopolitical directives, centered on colonial powers in Western Europe, onto their pasts and futures, and to order their destinies and desires in terms of cartographic relativity. ‘Modern’ now implied much more than a chronological closeness to the present moment in which periods are classified. Consequently they sought coherence in the transition from the experience of their past to the anxiety or hope for their future by projecting a trajectory from a locus outside the modern onto a locus within. The progression of time from the past to the future was thus associated with a movement, on the cartographically imagined surface of the globe, from a geographic location outside the ‘modern’ civilization to another within it. The dynamic ecstatic or ex-static process from the past to the future was deprived of its temporality, and represented spatially as a vector from a geopolitical location in the periphery to another in the center. Thereby the temporal movement could be appropriated by the schema of co-figuration, and consequently the two pairing figures of the West and the Rest were imagined as if each were somewhat homogeneous within, despite the fact that neither the West nor the Rest could be an entity or a unity of language anyway. As a matter of fact, this explains how the mythic construct called the West was constituted, and why the West had been perceived as structurally indissociable from the modern until recently.

Accordingly it is important to differentiate two dimensions in which the schema of cofiguration operates. In the case of the West and the Rest binary, it is always the one-and-many opposition, and the West remains the point of reference in all comparisons, whereas the Rest is variable. Therefore, the West is often imagined to be an ever growing originality such as the continuing tradition of Christianity, the foundational structure of medieval legal and theocratic order, and the archaic seed of reason embedded in Greek geometry, while the Rest is simply an accidental assemblage of diverse life forms and does not constitute a single substance. This means that the centrality of the West consists in the polarity of the distribution of ethnic, civilizational and racial comparisons.

Conversely, in the case of the co-figurative identification of the ethno-linguistic unity, it is the postulate of specific difference between two languages in translation. To the extent that the ethno-linguistic unity could be thought of without reference to the polarity in the distribution of comparisons, the international world does not and should not have a dominant center and this idealized international world consisting of equal national sovereignties is expressed in the design of the United Nations.

But, of course, these two dimensions in the operation of the schema of co-figuration are intimately related to one another, and their correlation is one of the fundamental features of the modern international world.

Historically, how we represent translation does not only prescribe how we collectively imagine national communities and ethnic identities but also how we relate individually to national sovereignty. It is also complicit with the discourse of the West and the Rest through which the colonial power relationship is continually fantasized and reproduced.

## References

Austin, J.L. (1967) How to Do Things with Words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Benjamin, Walter (2000) ‘The Task of the Translator’, trans. Harry Zohn, pp. 15–24 in Lawrence Venuti (ed.) The Translation Studies Reader. London: Routledge.

Benveniste, Émile (1971) Problems in General Linguistics. Trans. Mary Elizabeth Meck. Coral Gables, FL: University of Miami Press.

Berman, Antoine (1992) The Experience of the Foreign: Culture and Translation in Romantic Germany. Trans S. Heyvaert. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

Chang, Briankle (1996) Deconstructing Communication. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Deleuze, Gilles (1994) Difference and Repetition. Trans. Paul Patton. New York: Columbia University Press.

Derrida, Jacques (1987) The Post Card. Trans. Alan Bass. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Foucault, Michel (1979) Discipline and Punish. Trans. Alan Sheridan. New York: Vintage Books.

Hardt, Michael and Antonio Negri (2000) Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Jakobson, Roman (1971) ‘On Linguistic Aspects of Translation’, pp. 260–66 in Roman Jakobson (ed.) Selected Writings, Vol. 2. The Hague: Mouton.

Kant, Immanuel (1956) ‘Kritik der reine Vernunft, Von dem Schmetismus der reinen Verstandesbegriffe’, in Der transzendentalen Doktrin der Urteilskraft. Hamburg: Felix Meiner.

Lacan, Jacques (1977) Écrits. Trans. Alan Sheridan. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

Motoori Norinaga (1997) The Kojiki-den. Book 1. Trans. Ann Wehmeyer. Ithaca, NY: East Asia Program, Cornell University.

Nancy, Jean-Luc (1991) The Inoperative Community. Trans Peter Connor, Lisa Garbus, Michael Holland and Simona Sawhney. Minneapolis, MN and Oxford: University of Minnesota Press.

Sakai, Naoki (1992) Voices of the Past: The Status of Language in Eighteenth-century Japanese Discourse. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Sakai, Naoki (1997) Translation and Subjectivity: On ‘Japan’ and Cultural Nationalism. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Tanabe, Hajime (1963) ‘Shakai sonzai no ronri or The logic of social beings’, in Tanabe Hajime Zenshû, Vol. 6. Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo.

Venuti, Lawrence (1995) The Translator’s Invisibility: A History of Translation. London: Routledge.

Naoki Sakai is Professor of Comparative Literature and Asian Studies at Cornell University. Publications include Translation and Subjectivity. He is the founding senior editor of TRACES, a multi-lingual series of cultural theory and translation.