# The Possibility of Translation

Saranindranath Tagore

Keywords Benjamin, Frege, Kant, Lyotard, Tagore, translation

## I

I wish to retrieve the sense of Kant’s (1997) use of the notion of possibility in order to construct in form a Kantian argument in the service of responding to the question of how translation is possible. Kant’s transcendental program can be seen as a vast philosophical gesture of securing the foundations of three terrains of knowledge: mathematics, natural science and metaphysics. Kant’s brilliant strategy, as is well known, resting on the logic of transcendental arguments, enfolded these disciplines within a phenomenology of respect, and paying heed to Hume’s critique, attempted to secure a clearing in which to ground the theoretical triad. The three issues in turn were economized in the single general question of how synthetic a priori propositions are possible. Kant’s sense of possibility tuned to a program of transcendental justification did not assume skepticism at the outset; he worked backwards in order to articulate the kind of philosophical space necessary to justify the system of knowledge, in the face of the skeptical attack. It is this sense of possibility that I invoke in my remarks.

I ask a question textured by the Kantian nuance: how is translation possible? Accordingly, I will take up two tasks. First, I will retrieve two positions (one modern and one postmodern) that attack the ontology of translation. Second, following a Kantian strategy, beginning from a phenomenology of respect, I will articulate the conditions that would justify the respect, which will also act as interventions in modern and postmodern discourses.

The skeptical attack on the possibility of translation may be formulated in this way: the implications of modernity and postmodernity limn a deep skepticism toward the possibility of translation. Let me take up the two positions in turn. For the sake of convenience, I consider Lyotard and Rorty, the latter though not a member of the postmodern collective nonetheless has Lyotardian sympathies. Lyotard attacks the commensurating drive of enlightenment (modern) narratives on the grounds that universalizing discourses silence phrases that cannot be uttered in the vocabulary of the metalanguage. This Lyotardian (1988) position can be extracted from his seemingly descriptive report in The Postmodern Condition (1984) and also from the more normatively driven analysis of the differend. The eliding of metalanguage has resonance for the problem of translation when it is seen in tandem with postcolonial discussion of translational violence. As Spivak (2000: 399–400) has pointed out, metalinguistic transfer creates a leveling process where ‘the literature by a woman in Palestine begins to resemble, in the level of its prose, something by a man in Taiwan’. Returning to the postmodernism of Lyotard, the privileging of the fragment with its Kuhnian resonance, though laudable in its implied critique of translational hegemony, unfortunately and perhaps ironically assumes a skeptical posture toward the possibility of translation. The Rortian (1989) position concerning translation, bearing resemblance to Lyotard’s unhappiness with metaconstructs, is implied in his discussion of comparative philosophy. For Rorty, the act of comparing philosophical traditions across cultures privileges a conceptual framework and attempts to interpret philosophical traditions from the privileged perspective. Such a move, for Rorty, would violate the intrinsic shape of philosophical alterity. If acts of comparison are parasitic on acts of translation – in this case primarily philosophical frameworks and nominally language – one can see that for Rorty, like Lyotard, translation can overcome its own problem only through the gestures of violence, thus violating its task.

Postmodernity emerges as a witnessing and a critiquing moment in the movement of modernity. It wishes to salvage the plural from what it takes to be the reductive posture of modernity. The critique of modernity implies the powerful point that the reductive drive for commensuration cannot found the ontology of translation. Thus emerges the disturbing conclusion that neither the narrative of commensuration nor the distillation of fragments can provide the awning under which the truth of translation can rest. In other words, the modern and the postmodern conditions provide precisely the skepticism that can motivate a transcendental argument on behalf of the possibility of translation.

## II

Rabindranath Tagore’s novel Noukadubi was translated into English by J.G. Drummond and was published as The Wreck by Macmillan in 1921. A year earlier Tagore wrote a letter to Drummond where he made the following observation:

I do not believe in a literal translation, especially when the languages of the original and that of the translation are essentially different. The words of the one language may have their synonyms in the other carrying the same meanings, but their associations are in most cases different. And the suggestions and flavour contained in these associations are more important in literature than mere meanings.

I offer two other inscriptions that articulate the difference between two levels of translatability. First, Walter Benjamin (1968: 78):

Fidelity in the translation of individual words can almost never fully reproduce the meaning they have in the original. For sense in its poetic significance is limited to meaning, but derives from the connotations conveyed by the word chosen to express it.

Second, Frege (1980: 61):

We can . . . recognize three levels of difference between words, expressions, or whole sentences. The differences may concern at most ideas, or the sense but not the reference, or finally, the reference as well. With respect to the first level, it is to be noted that, on account, of the uncertain connection of ideas with words, a difference may hold for one person, which another does not find. The difference between a translation and the original text should properly not overstep the first level. To the possible differences here belong also the colouring and shading which poetic eloquence seeks to give to the sense. Such colouring and shading are not objective, and must be evoked by each hearer and reader according to the hints of the poet or the speaker.

I consider one example to substantiate the dual layer of translatability being evoked by Tagore, Benjamin and Frege. Tagore writes these lines: ‘setha¯ singhada¯re ba¯je din-abasa¯ner raginı¯/ja¯r murchona¯i mesha¯ e janmer ja¯ kichu sundar.’ Paraphrasing the idea, we can offer the following literal approximation: in the spiraling notes of the raga of day-end is mixed everything that is beautiful of this birth. The conception of a raga is culturally bound just as the meaning of, say, contrapuntal development can resonate only in the context of European art music. Given the chrono-sensitive nature of ragas, for the initiated the name of the oft-performed Marwa immediately arises when thinking of music for the moments when the day is coming to an end. A whole universe of associations, musical and extra-musical, is contained in that name: Marwa.

The phrase ‘din-abasa¯ner raginı¯’ rubs against the limits of translatability. Translational symmetry cannot be obtained at the surface level precisely because such symmetry cannot be found at the level of Tagore’s ‘associations’, Benjamin’s ‘connotations and Frege’s ‘colourings and shadings’, or what can be called the cultural depths of language. Postmodern approaches to the question of translation valorize this limit, whereas modernity we can recognize, thanks to postmodern interventions, effaces the limit. The effacement of the limit, through the mediation of a metalanguage, in postcolonial terms, is constitutive of translational violence.

## III

How, then, is translation possible?

Cultural meaning that at least some of the time is culturally bound constitutes the deeper layer of the translational doublet. The sense of Marwa is a localized meaning in that it resists universalization through an act of translation. From a Lyotardian– Rortian perspective, the intensity of the local is such that any act of translation would cause violence to the word, the sentence, the text. In Spivak’s reckoning, as noted earlier, the uncritical universalization through the hegemonic deployment of a metalanguage implicit in many acts of translation, especially from postcolonial languages to metropolitan languages, produces a leveling effect. The postcolonial corrective to what I am dubbing the Lyotardian view concerning the impossibility of translation calls for (at least in Spivak) an intimate access to the cultural codes embedded in the original text. Thus we may add the postcolonial posture to the earlier voices calling for a double-decked ontology of the text. Why access culture if the surface is sufficient? Translation of textual surfaces through the sieve of a legitimating metalanguage (or narrative) leads precisely to the symptom of constituting false identities across textual regions.

The possibility of translation hinges on the condition that translation of culture is causally anterior to translation of language. Just as linguistic translation ranges over words, cultural translation summons translational objects where ‘object’ stands in for any variable that gathers its meaning from its embedded cultural use in the deeper sense of a Heideggerian zuhanden. Heidegger (1971) perceived with great force that an ontology founded on phenomenological description cannot see objects merely as things but must call into presence the expanding circle of cultural and existential significance. Thus the peasant shoes painted by Van Gogh emerge as existential intensities and not merely as material things (vorhanden). Cultural translation is effected when these intensities develop in zones of cultural alterities. Returning to the earlier musical example, the translatability of Marwa hinges upon the cultivation of its existential intensity in the cultural base of the target language. The limits of translation cannot be obliterated but surely can be pushed backwards in the cross-cultural fertilization of translational objects.

Foucault once characterized modernity in terms of an attitude, a mode of a cultural self-representation originating in the enlightenment; similarly, Lyotard’s postmodern incredulity can only be deciphered as an attitude defining a culture’s self-representation (Rabinow, 1984). The normative and strategic directions of both these cultural attitudes make translation impossible. The possibility of translation receives care within a cultural attitude that resists alterity from being reified in a final closure. Such an attitude constructs a mode of cultural being that continuously seeks to narrow the gap between the two layers of the translational doublet. It must be noted that the seeking of unity in translational terms does not amount to the making of hybrid forms (fusion music is an example) but wants to preserve difference and as difference disturb the reified identities of modernity. However, again in translational terms, disturbance through the welcoming of difference, unlike postmodern rupture, in making for the possibility of translation serves the cause of unity without using the services of a metalinguistic hegemon. The gap between language and culture can perhaps never be closed in the folds of a utopia making translation completely transparent. The translational attitude, perched between the modern and the postmodern, can, nonetheless, answer the Kantian question, as my account has sketched, of how translation is possible. Kant’s respect for the epistemic triad and his transcendental justification of that respect concern the edifice of theoretical reason. The critique of translation, considering its limit and scope, implicates the normative reaches of culture. Thus, understandably, the translational attitude forms the rudiments of a critique of culture and addresses what I (2002) have elsewhere called an ethics of translation. Indeed, the translational attitude can de developed as an ethical trope of globalization, but that is the matter for another moment of reflection.

## References

Benjamin, W. (1968) Illuminations. Ed. Hannah Arendt. New York: Schocken.

Dutta, K. and A. Robinson (eds) (1997) Selected Letters of Rabindranath Tagore. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Frege, G. (1980) ‘Sense and Meaning’, in Peter Geach and Max Black (eds) Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield.

Heidegger, M. (1971) ‘The Origin of the Work of Art’, pp. 33–4 in Poetry, Language, Thought. Trans. and intro. Albert Hofsradter. New York: Harper & Row.

Kant, I. (1997) Prolegomena To Any Future Metaphysics. Ed. Gary Hatfield. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lyotard, J.-F. (1984) The Postmodern Condition.Trans. Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Lyotard, J.-F. (1988) The Differend. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Rabinow, P. (ed.) (1984) Foucault Reader. New York: Pantheon.

Rorty, R. (1989) ‘Review of Gerarld J. Larson and Eliot Deutsch, Interpreting Across Boundaries: New Essays in Comparative Philosophy’, Philosophy East and West 39: 332–7.

Spivak, G. (2000) ‘The Politics of Translation’, pp. 399–400 in L. Venturi (ed.) The Translation Studies Reader. London and New York: Routledge.

Tagore, R. (1921) The Wreck. Trans. J.G. Drummond.: New York: Macmillan.

Tagore, S. (2002) ‘Multiculturalism and the Ethics of Translation’, pp. 289–302 in Rukmini Bhaya Nair (ed.) Translation, Text and Theory: The Paradigm of India. New Delhi: Sage.

Saranindranath Tagore is Associate Professor in the Philosophy Department, National University of Singapore. His current research interests are broadly focused on 20th-century trends in European and Indian thought. Apart from publishing academic papers in journals and anthologies, he is also a literary translator having published with co-translator Professor Wendy Barker Rabindranath Tagore: Final Poems (George Braziller, 2001).

# Translation: Politics and Ethics

Couze Venn

Keywords colonization, heterogeneity, indebtedness, monolingualism, untranslatability

homogenizing ambition of Anglo-American as universal language and because of the systematic attempt by neoliberal discourse to colonize every socio-economic, administrative and cultural practice through the re-transcription of these practices into the idiom of neoliberalism. This translation-as-colonization opens them to a restructuring – or ‘modernization’ and ‘liberalization’ in the rhetoric of neoliberal governance – dictated by a corporate, market logic. The effect is the institution of a monolingualism that abolishes the possibility of alternative worlds for it abolishes the distinctions and differences that mark these practices with regard to the values they inscribe and the alternative socialities they enact. A wider questioning about translation emerges here, in addition to the problems associated with translation-ascreolization across cultures occasioned by migration and diasporic displacements. It relates to the language and the discursive spaces in which can be articulated a challenge to such imperial moves.

It was in 1979 at a conference in Montreal, this place that repeats itself as French-but-not-quite, that Derrida developed a number of points about translation that have come to occupy a central place in the debates about signifying practice. Quebec was a fitting location for this questioning, since it has been for a considerable time the site of cultures in translation – French, British, Inuit, American – multiply inscribed in colonialism, and thus marked by the weight of history and the disjunct spatiotemporalities that attach to language when questions of identity, authority, authenticity and the proper surface in relation to power differentials. The already well recognized problems that attach to translation, particularly the necessity to translate if one is to speak to the other at all, thus the question of address, set against the fact of incipient untranslatability, and issues concerning (counter)appropriation, loss, survival and heterogeneity, acquire a sharpness when located in the context of unequal authority to speak and to name. Colonial subjugation relies on the violence of interdicts and the sovereignty of the law of the mightier to impose its language;

but the imposition of a common tongue which subjugation decrees is undermined by the fundamental inadequacy or inappropriateness of any register to fully render the phenomenal and experiential world; something of the world remains untranslatable and unpresentable, harbouring alterity and testifying to what exceeds representation.

This is admirably expressed in Friel’s (1981) Translations dealing with the British effort to replace Gaelic place names in Ireland in the 19th century with the approximations required by the standardized English of colonial administration, an exercise of dispossession that deprives the people not only of a cultural space and its language but of the commonality of a shared memory inscribed and encrypted, that is, inscrypted, in the language. As with other instances of linguistic dispossession in the period of occidental imperialism, the Gaelic proper names, it transpires, are laden with their own narratives of place and deeds, ‘mythologies of fantasy and hope and self-deception – a syntax opulent with tomorrows . . . [a] response to mud cabins and a diet of potatoes . . . to . . . inevitabilities’ (1981: 42). For the English, in the figure of the cartographer Lancey, it was a matter of remaking the land as colonial territory, for the Irish it was a question of surviving colonial re-territorialization and of finding a new idiom in which to preserve the ‘images of the past embodied in language’ (1981: 66). In the play, the failure by the colonial agents to properly translate any of the Gaelic names arises from an underlying disrespect for or ignorance of the scene in which proper names erupt as trace. It is also of course a matter about the addressee in translation, and thus about the recognition of the other in language: to whom is the message directed? What does one want the addressee to hear? How does one make visible or audible what is invisible or inaudible in the original? Whose language claims the right to name? These different stakes in translation oblige one to recognize the effects of power, more so today when ‘certain people must yield to the homohegemony of dominant languages. They must learn the language of the masters, of capital and machines; they must lose their idiom in order to survive or live better’ (Derrida, 1996: 30). In the example I have signalled, the differend separating the two sides exemplarily demonstrates the danger when translation takes place across power differentials, for the effort to translate proper names ‘inscribes the scene of translation within a scene of inheritance and a space which is precisely that of the genealogy of proper names, of the family, the law, indebtedness’ (Derrida, 1988: 104).

My intervention aims to tease out a number of issues starting with this question of the proper name. The definition that Derrida gives in a parenthesis in Freud’s Legacy will indicate the approach I will pursue; he says ‘any signified whose signifier cannot vary or be translated into another signifier without a loss of signification induces a proper name effect’ (Derrida, 1987: 312). Yet the proper name – Auschwitz, Rwanda, Biko – demands both that it be translated, that is, it demands recognition and a response, and yet that it remains untranslatable, that is, that its singularity as event or as the who be respected. The proper name conceals the trace of the untranslatable even as it calls out for a translation that allows it to become visible and thus acknowledged. Indebtedness requires this visibility of the trace. For instance Auschwitz, while it resonates with Hiroshima at the metaphorical level, cannot substitute for it: both proper names demand that their particularity be respected, precisely because the point of view of indebtedness and responsibility underline the particularity of the event even as it judges it according to universal ethical rules. The requirement of both translatability and untranslatability that the proper name makes highlights the dilemma at the heart of translation; this is complicated by the fact that every proper name is multiply inscribed in a variety of narratives and a spatiality that circumscribe its meaning. For example, for cultural theory and philosophy, Auschwitz has become spliced into discourses about modernity and the postmodern so that, as signifier, it now occupies a place determined by the mass of connotations that have accumulated in its wake. In the thought of Lyotard, it stands for the catastrophic sign of the failure of the Enlightenment’s ethical project, and it announces the birth of the postmodern (although the latter is itself modernity’s child), while for the Jews it signals the Shoah and the threshold of a different destiny still being played out. Translation thus requires a hermeneutics, of the unsaid as much as of the already-said, informed by a genealogy of the concept.

The dilemma brings to light also the undecidable character in translation, for every translation sets out with the ideal of perfect translatability, thus with the assumption of a universal language into which every particularity can be transposed. Yet it flounders because the difference between the particular and the universal repeats the differences between cultures, traditions, biographies, dialects, registers and codes that resist transposition from one language or register to another, from one culture or tradition to another. It is well to bear in mind too that the seeming purity of national languages itself conceals the polyglot, heterogeneous and diasporic character of all languages. Equally, national languages, in their emergence alongside the birth of the nation-state, attempt to erase or marginalize differences that arise from class, gender, ethnic, and regional conflicts and inequalities. Translation disturbs, or ought to disturb, the underlying reality that these differences signal, for they occupy the place of the unconscious of every language.

To the multiplicity of languages and registers one must add the fact that in any case the signified exceeds the signifier, since every encoding loses something of the referent even as it adds a whole culture to the signified. For instance, when it is a matter of expressing the experiential, one needs to recognize that a fundamental dimension of identity like the sense of place and belonging involves an intricate mix of sounds, smells, landscapes, social space and feelings that defies adequate expression in any one register, including the linguistic form. It is worth pointing out in this respect the relative neglect of the sonic/acoustic, touch, and other sensory registers that graphocentrism has induced when it comes to the problematic of the adequate expression of one’s experience of being-in-the-world, with implications for the kinds of signifying practices that would communicate that experience. The predominance of teletechnologies today presents its own problems. Cross-cultural translation comes up against this range of obstacles when it is a matter of fidelity to the locatedness of cultures and their ‘lieux de memoire’ (Nora, 1984), pointing once more to what is untranslatable and to an immanent undecidability in translation. By the same token, and also for the reasons I have noted above, the problem of translation opens every language to a series of disruption regarding its claim to speak for a consensual community: at the level of national languages, at the level of a universal language, and in terms of the authorizing processes that sanction the proper and the adequate. A politics of translation thus appears, to add to the ethical question about indebtedness and responsibility.

My final remark follows from the last point; it pertains to the models of translation that would respect the ethical implication in the desire to speak to the other that translation makes. Ricoeur (1996: 12), examining the problem from the point of view of the ‘ongoing debate between the right to universality and the demand of historical difference’, suggests three models: that of linguistic hospitality that plays host to the other’s culture, that of the exchange of memories in which the