translator takes responsibility ‘in imagination and in sympathy, for the story of the other’ (1996: 7), and the model of (a non-forgetful) forgiveness. The first involves the ability or willingness to dwell in two languages in order to effect a transference across the ethical and spiritual categories of the other/the addressee; the second calls for ways of narrating and remembering that reconfigure the past of narrator and addressee with the aim of giving new life to the ‘unfulfilled future’ buried in the past of every culture that an ethical telling recognizes and revives; a labour of rememorizing (to invoke Toni Morrison’s term) is involved here akin to a psychoanalytic working through. The third model responds to suffering, one’s own and the other’s, but by proceeding from the suffering of others, so that one imagines ‘the suffering of others before re-examining one’s own’ (1996: 9); this means that ‘the work of forgiveness must be grafted on to the work of memory in the language of narration’ (1996: 11). Underlying Ricoeur’s discussion is the necessity to overcome the repetition of violence that has afflicted the history of encounters within Europe; clearly the same concern applies to encounters and exchanges between Euro-America and the rest of the world, and between new ethnicized publics reconstituted from the legacy of previous colonialisms and subjugations. This repetition is stuck, on the one hand, in the disavowed knowledge of the suffering inflicted, and, on the other hand, because the rhetoric of the nation-state and of ethnic essentialism and egocentric philosophies of the subject induce the forgetting of the fundamental heterogeneity of cultures and the heteronomous character of identities. It is clear that the ethical force in the translation ethos that a commitment to the reduction of suffering in the world motivates must challenge the totalizations and exclusions which monolingualism and monoculturalism produce, whether in the shape of neo-liberal colonization of the lifeworld or in the mimicry that the culture of new Empire breeds.

## References

Derrida, Jacques (1987) The Postcard. Trans. Alan Bass. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Derrida, Jacques (1988) The Ear of the Other. Ed. Christie McDonald. Lincoln, NE and London: University of Nebraska.

Derrida, Jacques (1996) Monolingualism of the Other or The Prosthesis of Origin. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Friel, Brian (1981) Translations. London: Faber and Faber.

Nora, Pierre (1984) Les lieux de memoire, 7 vols. Paris: Gallimard.

Ricoeur, Paul (1996) The Hermeneutics of Action. Ed. Richard Kearney. London: Sage.

Couze Venn is Professor of Cultural Theory, Nottingham Trent University. His latest book is The Postcolonial Challenge: Towards Alternative Futures.

# Translation in China Fan Jinghua

Keywords Jieyongci loanword, fanyi translation, qujing quest for the scriptures, Xixue Western learning

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>translation</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>texts</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>Chinese</sup> <sup>has</sup> <sup>helped</sup>to configure Chinese cultural identities to configure Chinese cultural identities throughout history, and will continue to reconfigure the future of Chinese popular and intellectual culture, perhaps to an extent that has found no equal in the West. Contemporary researchers have customarily divided translation practices into four or five peak periods, each of which has emphasized different genres of writing. These peaks are Buddhist scriptural translations from around the second century to the 11th century, Jesuitical-Protestant translations from the late 16th century to the early 18th century, ‘Western learning’ translations from the mid-19th century to the early 20th century, and fiction translations at the turn of the 20th century, in addition to the current translation of Western social sciences starting in the 1980s.

The cultural effects of translations during these periods function differently, especially in the politico-ethical significance for the translator, the text and the context (referring respectively to the mediator, the message and reception/effects). Research needs to be done on the extent to which the historicities of the socio-cultural context determine which translations are enacted, and how they operate, and the degree to which the tangible and symbolic presence of the translator and the author function in the reception of the translation. This presence, which may be considered to be symbolic when the translator can preface or footnote, and tangible when the translator can orally interpret the original texts, is of great significance in ‘empowering’ or elucidating the text in the target language.

The early translation of Buddhist texts into Chinese was mostly done by local religious practitioners, whose presence should be seen as a form of the message embodiment, as both author and on-site interpreters of the texts. In the sense that they made every effort to utilize expressions from Taoism to interpolate Buddhist scriptures and integrate the religion into Chinese culture, they were double betrayers due to their in-between cultural position. This double betrayal is argued to have established Chinese Buddhism (in contrast to Buddhism in China), from which Zen was developed. The more ‘faithful’ Sanskrit-loaded translation by Xuan Zang (602–664 AD) came later at a time when the cultural ‘capacity of tolerance’ and confidence would subject any foreign cultural influx to domestication and naturalization, or at least allow the translated texts to be rendered into what Benjamin termed as die reine Sprache.

The ambivalent function of the translators is privileged in the figure of Xuan Zang, whose monastic name Tripitaka might be literally translated as ‘Buddhist scripture oeuvre’. While the configuring function of Buddhism in Chinese cultural identities cannot be overestimated, Buddhism has not reached a hegemonic status in Chinese thought and intellectual history, no matter how well it has been acculturated and incorporated. Since Xuan Zang’s journey to ‘the West’, which was popularized and secularized later in the novel A Pilgrimage to the West (The Monkey King) (Wu, 1965, 1977–1983), the ‘quest for the scriptures’ has come to mean ‘learning the way of accomplishment’, which may imply a voluntary effacement of subjecthood. This implication is found in various expressions in later periods, especially when China experienced politicocultural crises, most notably in the late Qing dynasty and post-Mao period when conservative reformism and radical Westernization kinked in a dead knot.

In contrast to that of Buddhist texts, the translation of Christian texts did not share the same fate. The presence of the missionary-translators, who were both interpreters and practitioners in the truest sense, did not achieve the status of the Buddhist practitioners, partly because of the cultural diffidence in the Ming-Qing Dynasty that crippled a fuller introjection of Christianity into

Chinese culture as a complementary way of life. Matteo Ricci, despite his personal charisma and the successfully appeasing manner of his practice, was essentially acclaimed as a translator of natural science texts (that seemed to be more urgently needed at that time in China) and as a translator of Chinese classics into Latin in the West.

Later in the 18th century, the declining national power reached an extent that intellectuals began to describe Chinese culture in terms of its inferiority. Some of these thinkers turned to the West, and later to Japan after the Meiji Restoration (1868–1912), for possible ways to restore the nation to its previous status. Again, translation became analogous to Xuan Zang’s ‘quest for the scriptures’, but this time the texts were mostly works of the social and natural sciences. This period of translation from the beginning had a very practical application, generally devoid of religious implications, whether of Buddhism or Christianity. The translators aimed primarily at the social elite, although the Enlightenment spirit was part of their motivation. The explication of terms was thus of great significance, since the translators’ absence from these texts (compared with religious works) demanded their intelligibility. This wave of translations might be said to have started the ‘modernization process’ of Chinese thought. But the fact that Yan Fu’s famous neologism for Huxley’s ‘theory of evolution’ eventually gave way to Japanese loanwords might be an indication that this Enlightenment period was essentially an incomplete project. Yan Fu’s three standards of translation (fidelity, sanity and elegance), which were in the spirit of scientific precision, were mostly applied to the translation of literary works of the early 20th century. The ‘modernization process’, above all, actualized a wholly new language, the vernacular Mandarin Chinese, whose valence was more apt for the scientific logic in the ‘West Learning’. In this sense, a new writing system had actually transcended the entailing debate over the role of ‘the scriptures’ or the foreign ways of accomplishment.

The dispute over the standards of translation can be seen as yet another evidence of the translatability of not only the language but also the culture that was integral to the scientific spirit and the social system that stood behind it. However, after the collapse of Imperial China, the need to resort to literary works to establish a modern Chinese language hijacked the impetus for the re-excavation of classic Chinese. The easily available Japanese kanji and other semantic loanwords, therefore, made classic Chinese literally obsolete. The subversive function of translation wrapped in the Enlightenment Project was carried forward after the Cultural Revolution period in Communist China. Since the

1980s the intellectual elites have been synchronously translating different schools of Western social thought, for a time rendering the Chinese thinkers ‘muddled’ or wavering in influence. With the increasing virtual (co-)presence or simulacrum of (co-)presence of the author and translator ‘actualized’ (for example by the prefacing author for Chinese versions and the translators’ apprenticeship under Western eyes), translation in contemporary China is becoming an instrument for subverting the institutional and cultural power bases, and for struggling for discursive power. The current scene is also complicated by the mixture of the ‘enlightenment project’ with the ‘subversion project’, which is part of the hard-to-die ‘revolution complex’. This situation is rendered even more complex in light of the faltering divisions between indigenous Chinese and exogenous Western thought, whether in terms of language or philosophy.

## References

Wu, Cheng’en (1965) Monkey: A Folk-tale of China. Abridged trans. Arthur Waley. London: George Allen & Unwin.

Wu, Cheng’en (1977–1983) Journey to the West, 4 vols. Trans. Anthony Yu. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Fan Jinghua (BA, Beijing Normal University; MA, NUS) has been teaching in Nanjing Southeast University for over 10 years and is now a PhD student in the Department of English, National University of Singapore (NUS). Among his various book translations are Mark Poster’s The Mode of Information (Commercial Press, 2000) and The Second Media Age (Nanjing University Press, 2000).

# Logic(s)

Bryan S. Turner

Abstract Logic is concerned with the design or structure of arguments. It describes the forms of valid argument and is concerned with the public presentation and reception of arguments. Hence it has a close connection with politics and the public sphere, and with rhetoric as the science of persuasion. Philosophers have analysed the objective conditions of validation, that is, the justifiability of assertions about the world. This quest for objective and scientific validity in argumentation about the nature of reality dominated much of the development of logic in the 20th century. Logical arguments are held to be successful as a result of the ‘force of reason’ rather than because one’s opponents have been bribed or coerced. Logic involves the study of the abstract, deductive moves in argumentation rather than an empirical study of how actual arguments are conducted. However, there is also a tension between rhetoric and philosophy; Plato drew a clear distinction between knowledge and persuasion. Logic is intended to give security to the former. The historical drift of logic is towards abstraction, especially the use of mathematical forms of representation. The study of logic is an important component of any project on encyclopaedic knowledge, that is, with knowledge that circulates in the public sphere, but the globalization of culture has raised an important problem about the universalistic claims of (western) traditions of logic, namely, are there different forms of logical reasoning?

Keywords language, logical atomism, logical positivism, mathematics, rhetoric

## On the Singularity of Logical Argument

The recognition of the public or indeed political character of the validation of argument immediately raises a question about the universality of valid forms of logic. In Max Weber’s sociological studies of the conditions of modernity, a variety of social arrangements (rational law, a money economy, the autonomous city, an ascetic ethic and so forth) were held to differentiate occidental from oriental cultures. Although Weber did not undertake a study of logic, one can easily imagine a sociological account of the history of logic that showed how the science of the forms of valid argument contributed to the historical rationalization of western civilization. This reference to Weber’s notion of rationality raises the problem of whether one requires a history of logic or logics. In classical Greece, early philosophical discussions of logic recognized logics as a plurality. There were different ways of reasoning, particularly between formal and substantive analysis. The western development of reasoning has been to reduce its inherent richness, that is, to reduce it to a singularity as in our use of the term ‘logic’. This shift in meaning is one further reason for connecting this discussion with the historical sociology of Weber, because we can treat the history of logics as an example of the routinization of knowledge.

Historical accounts of western civilization typically start with an inquiry into its Greek origins. Logic, for Aristotle, was an aspect of this inquiry into logos (word, account or reason) whereby thought could arrive at the truth of being. Logos (plural logoi) or word, speech and reason had multiple meanings in Aristotle’s philosophy; it signified rule or law, account or