quality of snow (in terms of its hardness, coldness and composition). Perhaps an Eskimo could without contradiction believe that ‘it is snowing (of type x)’ and ‘it is not snowing (of type y)’. The logical character of ‘p and not p’ will depend on its ethnographic context and its meaningful contents. This issue was brought out famously in Wittgenstein’s observations in the Philosophical Investigations on the different types of handles that one might find in a locomotive cabin, all of which looked like handles but had very different functions and uses.

Second, from a sociological perspective we might ask whether other human societies are logical. Many of the historical accounts of logic treat logical thought as a peculiarity of the West. In this respect, histories of logic often show some parallels with the Orientalism of Weberian sociology in promoting the uniqueness of Greek origins, the general dominance of the legacy of Aristotle, the failure of Oriental societies to develop a science of logic, and the suppression of analytical thought in the development of ‘Oriental Despotism’. We might also approach this historical problem from the perspective of debates in anthropology about the relationship between magic, science and religion in other cultures. Are other systems or mentalities genuinely irrational or simply non-rational? The research of Bronislaw Malinowski in Magic, Science and Religion (1948) showed that the Trobriand Islanders made a clear distinction between the practical knowledge required to build canoes and the magical practices that were employed in situations of risk and uncertainty. Magical beliefs were not philosophical mistakes; they were practical responses to uncertainty.

In contemporary anthropology and sociology, there has been a general reluctance to accept the ethnocentric bias of earlier explanations from 19th-century ethnography. It is often held that, when understood in their context, apparently absurd or inconsistent views are intelligible. The famous illustration is from Edward Evans-Pritchard, who argued that the proposition ‘cockatoos are twins’ makes sense when we interpret it as an effort to legitimate the traditional practice of killing twins. Evans-Pritchard (1965: 111) came to argue that concentrating on the origins or nature of (magical) beliefs was somewhat pointless. The issue was to understand beliefs in relation to other institutions and beliefs. Some anthropologists, however, have argued that this form of contextualism is too charitable, because it means that nobody can ever be irrational. Ernest Gellner (1970) argued that functionalism (‘all beliefs make sense in their context’) prevents anthropology from developing a critical reflection on contradictions in society. One might conclude from this debate that (a) all societies must be able to share common logical assumptions, for example that contradictions undermine the validity of arguments, but (b) different societies have different formulations of logic that are related to the grammatical structures of their language. This debate may therefore require some solution to the issues raised by Noam Chomsky with respect to the existence of a universal grammar. However, Chomsky’s language theory rests on the notion of a genetically determined language facility that is shared by all humans, but sociologists and anthropologists want to argue that language is a shared institution that works because there are commonly held norms that arise from socialization.

Finally, can logic be divorced from rhetoric? Because logic has become a feature of mathematics and computer science, its public role in dispute and persuasion has been abandoned, or at least obscured. Rhetoric, in the classical Aristotelian sense, is rarely taught in universities, and where it survives rhetoric is typically an aspect of the study of literature rather than politics. The connection between logic, rhetoric and the public sphere has been broken. The arts of persuasion in a postmodern, information society are associated with research on focus groups and the impact of the mass media on political opinion. The discipline of rhetoric in Athenian democracy has been replaced in modern society with the theory of public relations.

## Conclusion: Enter Derrida

The analysis of logic and our historical understanding of it depend, therefore, on our understanding of the nature of language and its relationship to public persuasion. These issues have been central to the philosophy of Jacques Derrida, whose philosophical work is an attack on ‘logocentrism’. The Greek notion of logos was both an account of the principles of validation and an analysis of the structure of reality by grasping its origin. Aristotle’s Nichomachean Ethics distinguished between the rational logos of the soul and the irrational desires of nature. Derrida has criticized the western philosophical tradition for making logos or speech the origin of truth, thereby privileging the phonetic over the graphic side of communication. Speech is the rational expression of a subject who is self-sufficiently rational and conscious, and hence logocentrism assumes that speech is a perfectly adequate vehicle for the expression of pre-existing truths whereas writing is merely an addition or supplement to speech. For example, the linguistic theory of Ferdinand de Saussure (and subsequent structuralist philosophy) assumed a perfect relationship or correspondence between a sound (signifier) and an idea (signified). Derrida’s philosophy came to be known as ‘post-structuralism’ and his method of deconstruction was employed to show that meaning is never transparent or ‘self-present’, but is always delayed or deferred. Meaning always requires further supplementation through an endless chain of deferred signifiers. Derrida’s deconstructive strategies are designed to expose these supplements. Meaning can never be complete because it is, as it were, waiting for the next supplement.

Derrida (1978) has also developed the idea of ‘phonocentrism’ to describe an aspect of ethnocentrism in which western phonetic alphabets are given cultural and political privileges over against other systems, which has the consequence of making western logos triumphant over other systems of meaning. The growth of western science can be interpreted as a movement to suppress the reflexivity and creativity of language in order to understand nature without the confusion of the playfulness of language. Hence Francis Bacon, in developing an inductive empirical science, argued that scientific progress required ‘plain and simple words if the idols of the mind were to be banished. This quest for a simple transparent language has dominated much of western philosophy, culminating in the 20th century in the logical positivism of the Vienna Circle. Philosophers like A.J. Ayer (1936) held that the problems of philosophy were basically problems of language, and logic, as developed by Frege, was the method by which these problems could be solved. Truth has its origin in simple statements (or Bacon’s plain and simple words) that can be traced back to empirical facts. Derrida’s deconstruction of western logos attempts to show that logic cannot perform this task, because meaning, rather like letters in a postal system, is deferred in a chain of delivery.

## References

Ayer, A.J. (1936) Language, Truth and Logic. London: Gollancz.

Bacon, F. (1888) Novum Organum. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

De Vaux, C. (1931) ‘Astronomy and Mathematics’, pp. 376–98 in T. Arnold and A. Guillaume (eds) The Legacy of Islam. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Derrida, J. (1978) Writing and Difference. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Dummet, M. (1981) Frege: Philosophy of Language. London: Duckworth.

Evans-Pritchard, E. (1965) Theories of Primitive Religion. Oxford: Clarendon.

Gellner, E. (1970) ‘Concepts and Society’, pp. 115–49 in D. Emmet and A. MacIntyre (eds) Sociological Theory and Philosophical Analysis. London: Macmillan.

Heidegger, M. (1962) Being and Time. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Heidegger, M. (1989) What Is Philosophy? Plymouth: Vision.

Kojève, A. (1996) Introduction to the Reading of Hegel. Ithaca, NY and London: Cornell University Press.

Malinowski, B. (1948) Magic, Science and Religion and Other Essays. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

May, R. (1996) Heidegger’s Hidden Sources: East Asian Influences on his Work. London and New York: Routledge.

O’Leary, D.L. (1949) How Greek Science Passed to the Arabs. London: Routledge.

Parkes, G. (ed.) (1987) Heidegger and Asian Thought. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

Taylor, C. (1975) Hegel. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wittgenstein, L. (1921) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Bryan S. Turner is Professor of Sociology at the Asia Research Institute at the National University of Singapore and has recently edited The Blackwell Companion to Social Theory (2000).

# The Logic of Possible Worlds

Neil Turnbull

Keywords global culture, logic, world

or the pre-Socratic philosophers of ancient product of a primordial ‘harmony’ between an emergent inquiring mind and the wider cosmos in which it was embedded. Thus for the pre-Socratics, ‘knowing’ was always a matter of engagement with a deeper ontological process – the logos – and was, in large part, a cosmological form of engagement. If the early Greek philosophers had any idea of logic at all, it was very far removed from the highly mathematical notions of ‘correct reasoning’ and ‘truth-preserving calculation’ that have been dominant in modern western philosophy since the 19th century. In fact, Greek philosophy probably did not have an explicit and separate idea of ‘logic’ or ‘the logical’ in the modern senses of these terms, and if we can unearth a vague sense of either in ancient Greek philosophy we can see that logic was closer to something that we would now call ‘intuition’ and associated with what we would now term ‘ethics’. This was not only true of ancient Greek thought but also of Confucianism, where logic was understood as a form of thinking that allowed human intelligence to map the ‘intelligence of heaven’ and achieve spiritual enlightenment. Interestingly, this was also true for Roman Stoics, for whom logic was the means for attaining a state of tranquilitas (Hadot, 1995).

It is only with the emergence of mathematical science and its philosopher apologists in modern rationalism and empiricism that we begin to see the emergence of a purely technical, formal and calculative logic. Since the 19th century, and in Anglo-American analytic philosophy in particular, this technical logic has developed in two ways: into a formal logic that is perhaps closer to mathematics and computing than philosophy, and a philosophical logic that claims that the study of logic can reveal necessary truths about the nature of mind, meaning and the world. These two logics were not, and are not, entirely separate disciplines however; and innovations in formal logic have given rise to a repository of new logical techniques and artificial languages that, in turn, have allowed for metaphysically revisionist claims of various kinds. And in addition to the predicate calculus of the 19th century, analytic philosophers have gone on to invent a wide array of new non-standard logics: tensed logic; epistemic logic; doxastic logic; deontic logic and – perhaps the most important of all – modal logic. These new formal logics have made possible innovations in philosophical logic and, ipso facto, have allowed new kinds of philosophical problem to be posed and old philosophical problems to be posed in new ways.

Modal logic is the logic of possibility, contingency and necessity. Interestingly for students of globality, modal logicians have created a technical trope to frame and test their logical intuitions: the idea of a possible world. In modal logic, the world as it currently exists is known as the actual world, and possible worlds are seen as modalities, or states, of the actual world. For some modal logicians, most notably David Lewis, possible worlds are seen as real in that they are understood to represent latent ontological possibilities existing in actuality (Lewis, 1986). In modal terms, there is a possible world where I can speak in Sanskrit, but not one where I am in two places at the same time. In this view, all possible worlds exist ‘logically side by side’, some worlds being logically accessible to each other, some not. Thus modal logic allows us to conceive of ‘the world’ as the totality of possible worlds existing in logical space.

This idea has its roots in the Enlightenment philosophy of Leibniz, but has been recently extensively developed by Saul Kripke and Hilary Putnam. In the discourse of possible worlds, an idea/statement is necessarily true – cannot not be true – if it is true in all possible worlds. Likewise, an idea/statement is possibly/contingently true if it is true in at least one possible world. For example, according to Kripke, there is a possible world in which Aristotle was not the teacher of Alexander – this being merely a contingent truth – but there is no possible world in which Aristotle is not the person that he is: that is, where Aristotle is not Aristotle (Kripke, 1984).

Thus modal reasoning has been used to argue for a kind of biological essentialism. According to Kripke, in every possible world in which a particular person exists, that person is essentially related to the sperm and ovum from which they were conceived. Thus, in Kripke’s view, there is no possible world in which any person has a different genetic makeup from the one they now have. If they did, they would not be the person that they are. Putnam has used similar modal arguments to put forward a kind of scientific essentialism where the essences of substances are given by their chemical composition. Thus, for Putnam, the fact that water = H<sub>2</sub>O is true in all possible worlds in which water exists, and hence is a necessary truth about water (and so modal reasoning, in this case, demonstrates the ‘truth’ of scientific realism).

Modal logic has thus resurrected the mediaeval notion that there are de re necessities (necessary properties of things). This represents something of a revival of metaphysics, especially Aristotelianism, in contemporary analytic philosophy, and runs counter to the Enlightenment doctrine – typified by Hume’s philosophy – that necessity is ‘all in the mind’. However, the idea of possible worlds may have other, less metaphysical, uses. For if we accept that the idea of a world is never simply a logical notion but always a cultural and a historical one, then one way of conceiving the conceptual terrain of global culture is to see it as grounded in a set of interlinking possible worlds – some of which are ‘accessible’ from worlds geographically and/or culturally adjacent to them, some of which are not.

If the epistemology of global culture is conceived as requiring a cultural-ontological mapping of the interrelations between possible worlds, then the problems involved in understanding the architectonics of global knowledge can be stated somewhat differently: is there a possible cultural world ‘without logic’? When conceived anthropologically the answer is probably ‘yes’. But can there be a reflexive theoretical understanding of world-knowledge without an organizing logic? If we equate an understanding of world-knowledge with its conceptual mapping, then we must concede that some organizing logic is necessary. Thus logic, as a normative standard for thinking about thinking, may retain its status as a cognitive necessity in global contexts – even though we may be forced to accept that the topos of conceptual encounter, wrought by the global flow and counter-flow of ideas between accessible cultural worlds, will, in time, give rise to new logics.

## References

Hadot, P. (1995) Philosophy as a Way of Life: Spiritual Exercises from Socrates to Foucault. Oxford: Blackwell.

Kripke, S. (1984) Naming and Necessity. Oxford: Blackwell.

Lewis, D.K. (1986) On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Blackwell.

Neil Turnbull is currently Senior Lecturer in Critical Social Science at Nottingham Trent University. His current research interests centre around philosophy, religion and globalisation.

# The Religious Roots of Mathematics

C.K. Raju

Keywords Buddhist logic, Jaina logic, logic and culture, mathematics, quantum logic

PAnd mathematics has always been closely And mathematics has always been closely connected with religious beliefs in the West. Thus, Plato, in his Republic, advocates the teaching of mathematics for its beneficial effects on the soul, and expressly not for its practical applications. (For Plato’s thought that ‘geometry will draw the soul towards truth’, see Republic VII, 527, in Plato, 1996.) Likewise, Socrates’ demonstration of the slave boy’s intrinsic knowledge of geometry was explicitly intended by Socrates to prove the existence of the soul, and how its recollections could be elicited by a philosopher acting as a midwife (Plato, Meno 179–80, in Plato, 1996).

Proclus, the alleged source of the single vague remark that gave rise to the strong rumours about the existence of ‘Euclid’, explicitly asserts in his commentary on the Elements that the real function of mathematics is to turn the attention of the student inward, towards his soul, and thus make him realize universal oneness – hence most of the propositions in the Elements are about equality of apparently dissimilar things. (Proclus’ explanation of the etymology of the word ‘mathematics’ as the science of learning, or the science of the soul, is at the end of his Prologue, part 1, in Proclus, 1970.)

These beliefs about mathematics were so strong a force in Islamic rational theology that even staunch opponents like al Ghazali allowed that even God was bound by the laws of logic. This concession was seized upon not only by al Ghazali’s opponent Ibn Rushd (Averröes) but also by the school-men who inherited his legacy, and whose trivial curriculum did not include practical mathematics (until Clavius introduced it in the Jesuit mathematical syllabus c. 1570). Accordingly, Christian rational theologians regarded mathematics not as a means of practical calculation but as teaching a ‘universal’ means of argument and proof aimed at those who did not accept an appeal to their scriptures as a means of proof. They also accepted al Ghazali’s contention that the empirical world had to be contingent to allow for the creation of the world by God – although they denied his belief in continuous creation, held also by the Dunsmen, whom they labelled dunces, and subscribed instead to the belief in one-time creation.

It is against this theological background that western thought reached the peculiar conclusion that only metaphysical procedures (like logical deduction) can incorporate necessary truth (truth valid in all possible worlds, truth that binds God), though any empirically based truth must remain forever contingent (true in only some possible worlds, truth not binding on God).

In present-day (formal) mathematics, the locus of this belief in necessary truth has been shifted from theorems to mathematical proof, regarded as completely divorced from the empirical. That is, according to formal mathematics, even though neither the axioms nor the theorems of a formal theory incorporate any necessary truths, the connection between axioms and theorems does: that is, for a formal theory, there may be worlds in which its axioms are false, and worlds in which its theorems are false, but any world in which the axioms are true is a world in which the theorems are true.

This is also the belief underlying Popper’s criterion of refutability (falsifiability), which supposed that any number of experiments could not verify a theory (since this process was inductive, and probabilities are not ampliative), while a single experiment could refute a theory. The point here is not merely that the process of refutation is also inductive (as I have pointed out earlier), but that refutation is believed to refute the physical hypotheses underlying the physical theory, rather than the mathematics that connects the physical hypothesis to the empirical conclusion. If mathematical proof does not represent certain or necessary truth, and if it were to be accepted that mathematical proof is also fallible (even when correct), there is no basis for this belief, for our actual world may happen to be the world in which the physical hypotheses of the theory are true, but its conclusions are false.

The completely cultural nature of the belief that metaphysics is somehow superior to physics, that deduction incorporates certain or necessary truth, becomes crystal clear the moment one turns towards Buddhism or Jainism. Both use logics that are different from the logic culturally assumed in western thought. Therefore the inferences drawn using these logics will be different from the inferences drawn using two-valued logic, e.g. many proofs by contradiction would fail in Buddhist or Jaina logic. (The Buddha’s use of the logic of four alternatives is in the Brahmaja¯la Sutta of the Dı¯gha Nika¯ya. The very readable English translation by Maurice Walshe is not so clear on this point, and neither is the older English translation by T.W. Rhys Davids.) An interesting (but not necessarily correct) interpretation of the Jain logic of Sya¯davada is provided by J.B.S. Haldane’s ‘The Syadavada System of Predication’ (1957; for more detail see Raju, 2003).

But what decides the nature of logic to use? If decisions about logic are purely cultural, why should one use one logic rather than another? In any case, it is hard to understand how cultural decisions can be regarded as infallible! Both Buddhism and Jainism, like all other Indian schools of thought, incidentally, accept the empirically manifest (pratyaksa) as the first means of proof, while also accepting it as fallible. Therefore, if, on the other hand, decisions regarding logic are empirical (and based on beliefs about the nature of time), they are bound to be inductive, and fallible. In either case, deduction turns out to be more fallible than induction.

The incorrect belief that deductive inference, divorced from the empirical, represents certain truth, provides an important example of how deep-seated cultural assumptions are woven into the content of present-day mathematics, scientific theories, and also the philosophy of mathematics and science. Indian mathematics, by contrast, permitted the use of empirical procedures, and aimed towards practical calculation rather than claims of a universal and necessary truth; however, it is, on that ground, deemed not to be mathematics at all. (In fact, curiously, it is deemed to be neither mathematics nor physics!)

These cultural assumptions also underlie present-day technology. For example, the above assumptions about the nature of logic are also built into the present-day theory of computation, and are incorporated in common computer chips. As shown by quantum computers, using the structured-time interpretation of quantum mechanics, an alternative technology of computation based on alternative logics, like Buddhist logic, is feasible. (For the structured-time interpretation of quantum mechanics, see Raju, 1993; for further amplification and formal proofs see Raju, 1994: ch. 6b.)