## References

Al Ghazali (1958) Taha¯fut al-Fala¯sifa¯, trans. S.A. Kamali. Lahore: Pakistan Philosophical Congress.

Dı¯gha Nika¯ya, Hindi trans. (2000) R. Sa¯nkritya¯yana and J. Ka¯shyapa, Delhi: Parammitra Prakashan. English trans. (1995) M. Walshe, Boston: Wisdom Publications.

Haldane, J.B.S. (1957) ‘The Syadavada System of Predication’, Sankhya, Indian Journal of Statistics 18: 195–200.

Plato (1996) The Dialogues of Plato, trans. B. Jowett, Great Books of the Western World, vol. 6. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica.

Proclus (1970) A Commentary on the First Book of Euclid’s Elements, trans. G.R. Morrow. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. (The original source is in G. Friedlein, Procli Diadochi in primum Euclidis Elementorum commentarii. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner, 1873.)

Raju, C.K. (1993) ‘On Time. VIB: Quantummechanical Time’, Physics Education (India) 10(2): 143–61.

Raju, C.K. (1994) Time: Towards a Consistent Theory. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.

Raju, C.K. (1999) ‘Mathematics and Culture’, pp. 179–93 in D. Krishna and K. Satchidananda Murthy (eds) History, Culture and Truth: Essays Presented to D. P. Chattopadhyaya. New Delhi: Kalki Prakash. Reprinted in Philosophy of Mathematics Education 11 (1999). Available online at: http://www.ex.ac.uk/\~PErnest/pome11/ art18.htm

Raju, C.K. (2002) ‘The Mathematical Epistemology of S<sup>´</sup>u¯nya’, pp. 168–81 in A.K. Bag and S.R. Sarma (eds) The Concept of <sup>´</sup>Su¯nya. New Delhi: IGNCA, INSA and Aryan Books International.

Raju, C.K. (2003) ‘Postscript on Culture, Rationality and Logic’, pp. 395–405 in The Eleven Pictures of Time. London: Sage.

C.K. Raju is based at the Centre for Studies in Civilizations, New Delhi & Centre for Computer Science, MCRP University Bhopal.

# Logic of Knowledge John Phillips

Keywords enunciation, knowledge, logic, mind, proposition, senses

## Logic One

At least provisionally, where logic is concerned, it will pay to be precise. In the philosophical sense logic concerns the rules according to which we use our understanding in thought and knowledge, in so far as we can think of these rules independently of their application to objects of knowledge and experience. Logic concerns the formal conditions for the use of understanding without concern for the matter of knowledge or for practical ends. It concerns not what can be known but how knowledge in the abstract is possible. The science of logic therefore deals with necessary rules of thought rather than contingent ones. Necessary rules are those without which knowledge would not be possible. Contingent rules would apply in the practice of particular kinds of knowledge (e.g. mathematics, ethics or social sciences). So traditionally logic concerns the necessary rules for all thinking in general.

Logic emerges as a specific domain in western philosophy with Aristotle, whose concern was to identify connections and differences between all the domains of knowledge, establishing an analogical basis for the otherwise distinct fields of episteme (science), praxis (action) and poiesis (production). Aristotle inherited during his time as a member of Plato’s academy the sense of a quest for the unification of all branches of knowledge and thus for what we now refer to as Metaphysics, the name (meaning ‘after the physics’) that later editions give to Aristotle’s book on general philosophical questions. The Metaphysics examines the possibilities of thought thinking itself in abstraction and it offers a technical consideration of beings qua being, thus anticipating modern philosophy’s rediscovery of fundamental ontology, particularly in Martin Heidegger’s Being and Time, which takes Aristotle as its starting point. Furthermore, Aristotle’s contributions to the systematic development of a science of logic, in the Prior and the Posterior Analytics and the Topics, help to bring this project about by establishing the logical structure of knowledge and its conditions of possibility. The Prior Analytics, for instance, details the conditions according to which one can reason from general premises to conclusions (the syllogism as the form for a deduction) or from particular cases to general knowledge (reasoning from particulars, or induction).

In a modern development, René Descartes establishes a strict distinction between logical operations of the mind and what he understands as the mechanics of sense perception. The distinction is based on the difference between res cogitans (intelligible things, or ideas) and res extensa (bodies and sensations). Mechanics can explain the movements and functions of bodies, including those of animals and machines and all the operations that occur in humans that do not require reason. For animals, machines and humans the world is a sensible screen of fleeting phenomena that drift across the frame of the gaze, a potential infinity of shapes. For humans alone, though, this potential infinity especially characterizes the life of the mind. Knowledge is constituted by an abstract geometrical power that is infinitely capable of replacing sensible impressions with abstract figures. This is the power of the Cogito, the ‘I think’, which cannot be known by analogy because it already just is the power of analogy: it is the principle of substitution per se and functions through its little letters, p, q, a, b, and is reminiscent of the classical chiasmus, the subject ‘X’.

Descartes’s establishment of what is in effect a semio-logical universe for rational subjects implies a profound qualitative distinction between the logical mind and the passionate senses. Pierre Gassendi in his ‘Objections’ to the Meditations takes Descartes’s method of doubting the senses literally; he complains that while the innate force of understanding does have an essential place in knowledge, there is no need to be distrustful of the senses. On the contrary, he argues, senseexperience must be taken as the criterion of truth on which all judgements in knowledge should be based. Gassendi reserves for logic these functions: forming clear ideas; clarifying propositions; making inferences; and organizing thoughts. The combined values of coherence and clarity form the art of clear thinking and can thus be applied to any branch of knowledge. The nascent empiricism in Gassendi’s logic, especially in his response to what he reads as an unreasonable distrust of the senses, may be compared with counter-rationalist trends that emerge remarkably often in philosophy throughout world history (e.g. in Chinese as well as in Indian philosophy).

A radical alternative to classical logic would not be discovered in a particularly non-western logic, if logic is understood as having to do with the formal rules of thought. Various uses of logical reasoning are suggestive of deep cultural, sociological and institutional differences, but insofar as logic remains wedded to the form of the proposition (the phrase, the sentence, the statement, the relationship between major and minor premises, the conclusion), and so long as the proposition remains reducible to a symbolic logic of operators (e.g. if p then q), then its relation to knowledge – where applicable – remains restricted to the work of predication and the truth of correspondence. Modern symbolic logic indeed represents a considerable development of this sphere with an undeniably global reach.

## Logic Two

An alternative logic does emerge, however, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, in the wake of several diverse cultural strands, including: the French avant-garde; Martin Heidegger’s revision of phenomenology; psychoanalytic experiment; and the structuralism inspired by the linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure. Saussure, for instance, shows how language can be analysed according to two different poles, or axes, which relate to the difference between what he calls parole (the utterance or proposition) and langue (the language system). On the syntagmatic axis are found the visible or audible elements of the utterance itself. On the paradigmatic axis the utterance remains tied to and governed by the system out of which it is generated.

To the distinction between langue and parole there corresponds a further distinction between the subject of the énunciation (the exercise of language) and the subject of the énoncé (the statement made). Traditional logic would be restricted to operations at the level of the statement, to concerns with sense and reference, truth and falsity, and to what attributes or qualities are predicated of what subject. For instance the statement ‘this table is green’ perhaps predicates some actually existing piece of furniture with a green colour and can thus be tested against the actually existing table for truth or falsity. The subject of the statement is thus the subject of both the ‘knowing’ and the ‘knowledge’. The table is green and I know that this is true.

A shift of emphasis onto the mode of enunciation, away from merely what is being said, would instead look at how, by saying it, the speaker is constituted institutionally in some way or another according to value and status. Focus shifts to the performance or the practice of speaking in this way or that – the role it plays in constituting, perpetuating or even subverting a particular world of discourse. The speaker is no longer a subject with autonomous feelings and thoughts but, rather, is constituted as this or that according to a repeatable modality of discourse.

In psychoanalytic theory the distinction can be mapped onto that between consciousness and the unconscious. Jacques Lacan argues that since the subject comes into being through language he does so through the exercise of signifying articulation. As soon as he comes into being he finds himself not as he is (what Lacan would call the truth of his being) but as he imagines himself to be – that is, as a representation (at the level of the statement). In order to discover the subject of the unconscious the analyst must focus on the level of enunciation (performance, expression) in order to recognize the truth of the subject in the articulation of language, its enunciation. So the relation between statement and enunciation (the said and the saying) actualizes the divided structure of the psychoanalytic subject and helps to clarify the difference between the imaginary (fixed and complete image of the person) and the symbolic (the constitutive function of language). The distinction between the symbolic and the imaginary thus maps onto that between langue and parole, on the vertical and horizontal axes respectively. Lacan also argues that metaphor and metonymy, also located on the paradigmatic and syntagmatic axes, correspond to Freud’s accounts of the condensations and displacements of dreams. A displacement censors the latent content of a dream by substituting relatively harmless images or objects for those more likely to cause anxiety. Condensation merges images and places them together, confusing them.

Michel Foucault develops the notion of enunciative modalities in order to avoid evoking the synthetic unity of the rational subject of knowledge. In the influential Archaeology of Knowledge, he attempts to analyse a kind of historical or institutional a priori that would manifest the dispersion of subjectivity, which he distinguishes from both the notion of a subject as a rational authority, the knower, and to the notion of the subject as an empirical function of knowledge (Foucault, 1972: 54). Discourse, in that book, refers not to the phenomena of expression but to the ‘field of regularity’ that accounts for limited subject-positions and the relations between them (e.g. the relative positions of doctor and patient in medical discourse). This enunciative logic, no less than propositional logic, refers to formal conditions of possibility for knowledge but does so in a radically different way.

This is activated further by Deleuze and Guattari, who revise the distinction between the proposition and the enunciation to considerable effect via their mobilization of the notion of assemblage [agencement]. The distinction, dispersed throughout Mille Plateaux as an organizational principle, between the so-called agencements machiniques de désir [‘machinic assemblages of desire’] and agencements collectives d’énonciation [‘collective assemblages of enunciation’] corresponds rather precisely, if perversely, to the distinction between parole and langue, though they obviously prefer Hjelmslev (and his notion of process) to Saussure (and the less fluid notion of utterance). The revision manifests a relationship of logic to knowledge that no longer operates between the rational subject and his concepts (on one side) and the world of objects (on the other). The assemblages of desire follow the horizontal axis of the syntagm (an assemblage of two or more verbal or non-verbal elements, connected metonymically). The assemblages of enunciation constitute elements on a vertical axis, connected metaphorically (some would say symbolically) by whatever synchronic system prevails at any time. Knowing (no longer a knower) is thus connected to the ‘outside’, to its objects, both syntagmatically and paradigmatically – is constituted as a part in the chain or multiplicity – as part to part (synecdoche or metonym) within the permanent hallucination of a whole.

The extension of this previously linguistic schema so that it includes everything – bodies, objects, individuals, collectives – has wide-ranging applications. It is important to see that it functions no less as logic than propositional or predicative logic does. The tension between modes of organization that favour the syntagm (identified by the rhizome in Mille Plateaux) and those that favour the paradigm (pattern, model, instance, for example, but identified as tree in Mille Plateaux) is restless but inevitable. Deleuze and Guattari’s ‘City/State’ meditates on two different modes of centralized power, that of the town and that of the state. The town ‘exists only as a function of circulation and of circuits . . . towns are points-circuits, which enter into counterpoint along horizontal lines’, while the state operates ‘by stratification: in other words, it forms a vertical, hierarchized aggregate that spans the horizontal lines in a dimension of depth’ (Deleuze and Guattari, 1992: 199). The structure exactly replicates the interaction of the syntagmatic and paradigmatic axes in structural linguistics, but unfolded in world historical contexts. If the town (rhizome, synecdoche, immanence) gets the upper hand in the end (a result that would seem to be the one many would want in their democratic and cosmopolitan opposition to empire), then Deleuze and Guattari have bad news: ‘if it is the modern state that gives capitalism its models of realization, what is thus realized is an independent, worldwide axiomatic that is like a single city, megalopolis or “megamachine” of which the States are parts or neighbourhoods’ (Deleuze and Guattari, 1992: 199). According to Deleuze and Guattari, then, the logic of global knowledge is constituted in this way. Global knowledge would be a function of the capitalist (economic and military) redistribution of states, which have become neighbourhoods of the global city.

## References

Aristotle (1984) The Complete Works of Aristotle, ed. Jonathan Barnes. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Deleuze, G. and F. Guattari (1980) Mille Plateaux. Paris: Minuit.

Deleuze, G. and F. Guattari (1992) ‘City/State’, trans. Brian Masumi, Zone 1(2): 195–9.

Descartes, R. (1984) Philosophical Writings of Descartes, trans. John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff and Dugald Murdoch. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Foucault, M. (1972) The Archaeology of Knowledge, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith. London: Tavistock.

Lacan, J. (1977) Écrits: A Selection, trans. Alan Sheridan. London: Tavistock.

John Phillips is Associate Professor in the Department of English Language and Literature at the National University of Singapore. He is the author of Contested Knowledge: A Guide to Critical Theory (Zed Books, 2000) and has published articles on linguistics, psychoanalysis, deconstruction, philosophy, literature, urbanism, postmodernism, critical theory and aesthetics.