unpublished manuscript). This is an effort to write systematically about the emotional qualities of everyday life for ordinary people in the contemporary United States. In a sense, Stewart’s career-long ethnographic work has been a effort to develop frames and vocabularies for communicating a sense of this place-based experience through her fieldwork participations. In a background and referenced way, Stewart has been very influenced by her reading of Deleuze and Guattari in writing this manuscript. Her occasional reference to assemblage arises in this context:

This is a story of an everyday life buoyed and pierced by surging affects. Its obsession is with countless points of intensity that twist and turn with the forces at work in ordinary lives: volatile imaginaries, dense materializations, and the direct excitation of the senses. . . . It takes place in a United States caught in a long, still-unfolding present that began some time ago. A time when a wide mix of disparate forms and realms of life – technologies, sensibilities, flows of power and money, daydreams, institutions, dramas, bodily states, modes of attention, and ways of experiencing time and space – began to articulate (and disarticulate) into (and out of) a loose but sensate assemblage. . . . The assemblage of forces at work in the ongoing present was highly abstract and wholly concrete; it was literally constituted in the density and texture of things in their particularity: the affects, the technologies, the bodies, the events.

Stewart is after a particular kind of aesthetics in her manuscript. Assemblage is performed rather than analytically evoked, and it is primarily the perceptual qualities that surround the concept (in the Delueuze and Guattari corpus) in which Stewart is most interested.

4. ‘(Un)masking the Agent: Distributed Cognition in Stanislaw Lem’s “The Mask”’, by N. Katherine Hayles (2006). Hayles is perhaps the premier writer out of literary studies who has been examining the implications of new technologies of life forms for the human (or the posthuman) as this core trope has been developed by the humanities. In her work, she is constantly rearticulating dimensions of modernist sensibilities in considering advances in cognitive, information and biological sciences, and the emergent futures they portend. In this article, Deleuze and Guattari are a strong influence on her. The idea of assemblage informs her expressions of emergent machinic life forms.

## As she says:

. . . we experience the dissolution of subjectivity urged by Deleuze and Guattari and mutate into machines running cellular automat programs. . . . Assemblages are the active enlistment of external objects into the human cognitive system. Although we can still exercise conscious agency, it works in conjunction with preprogrammed routines within and without that also control the outcome, sometimes, decisively. . . . Cognition in the wild is not confined to mind alone but extends outward in flexible arrangements that bear more than passing resemblance to Deleuze and Guattari’s assemblages.

Assemblage serves Hayles as a token of theoretical authority in the sphere of the humanities that links the vision of modernism to the new forms, driven by technology, to which it might refer in the emergent present. The materiality that the idea of assemblage evokes is important for Hayles’ reference to the term, as is the notion of systematic, functional relationships between former incommensurables (humans and machines). The idea that our minds are part of distributed cognitive realities of not fully known dimensions is one with which classic modernism would be basically comfortable (to the extent that it envisions the dissolution of subjectivity), but perhaps not fully into the techno-machinic (post-human) situations in which human cognition is being shaped. Assemblage is both a comfortable and disturbing construct here. It mediates the transition of the categories of old modernist thinking into scenarios of machinic potentials in technological advance.

Not exactly chimerical, the various uses of assemblage do the work of establishing a grounded imaginary for analysis that is true to the components of a modernist aesthetic that has so stimulated ethnography and related genres in recent decades. Yet as such, the employment of assemblage is peculiarly subject to what Jon Elster called ‘by-product states’ – states of mind or existence ‘that can never be brought about intelligently and intentionally because the attempt to do so precludes the very state that one is attempting to bring about’. Sustained analytic or theoretical use of this construct falls to a nervous condition, as we termed it earlier, of trying to stabilize an object or subject state that is inherently elusive (as in the famous ‘all that is solid melts . . .’ comment of Marx on the condition of modernity).

So assemblage is a strategically deployed but passing term that evokes conditions under modernist theoretical influences with structural allusions. If pushed too far, if insisted upon too literally – if it becomes anything more than an allusion – assemblage rapidly becomes a dead metaphor in one’s work. At best, then, extracted from the Deleuzian theory machine and made to do conceptual work in specific projects of cultural analysis and research, assemblage functions best as an evocation of emergence and heterogeneity amid the data of inquiry, in relation to other concepts and constructs without rigidifying into the thingness of final or stable states that besets the working terms of classic social theory. Finally, in current predicaments of theory, assemblage as a conceptual resource has to do with the imaginaries for the shifting relations and emergent conditions of spatially distributed objects of study in the contemporary period of so-called globalization, which has heightened older modernist aesthetics of perception and given them fresh empirical challenges.

## References

Clifford, James and George E. Marcus (eds) (1986) Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of Ethnography. Berkeley: University of California Press.

DeLanda, Manuel (2002) Intensive Science and Virtual Philosophy. London: Continuum.

Deleuze, Gilles and Claire Parnet (1987) Dialogues. New York: Columbia University Press.

Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari (2003) A Thousand Plateaus, 10th printing. Minneapolis: University of Minneapolis Press.

Elderfield, John (ed.) (1992) Essays on Assemblage. New York: The Museum of Modern Art.

Hayles, N. Katherine (2006) ‘(Un)masking the Agent: Distributed Cognition in Stanislaw Lem’s “The Mask”’, in Bill Maurer and Gabriele Schwab (eds) Accelerating Possession: Global Futures of Property and Personhood. New York: Columbia University Press.

Marcus, George E. (1993) ‘What Comes (Just) after “Post”: The Case of Ethnography’, in Norman Denzin and Yvonna Lincoln (eds) Handbook of Qualitative Social Science. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Ong, Aihwa and Stephen J. Collier (2004) Global Assemblages: Technology, Politics, and Ethics as Anthropological Problems. London: Blackwell.

Rabinow, Paul (2003) Anthropos Today. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Seitz, William C. (1961) The Art of Assemblage. New York: The Museum of Modern Art.

Stewart, Kathleen (2004) ‘Ordinary Impacts: The Affective Life of US Public Culture’, unpublished MS.

Waldman, Diane (1992) Collage, Assemblage, and the Found Object. New York: Harry N. Abrams.

George E. Marcus is Chancellor’s Professor, Department of Anthropology, University of California, Irvine.

Erkan Saka is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Anthropology, Rice University, and a teaching assistant, Faculty of Communication, Bilgi University, Istanbul, Turkey.

# A Note on Assemblage

Couze Venn

Keywords autopoiesis, becoming, emergence,

multiple determination, structure

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>concept</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>assemblage</sup> <sup>has</sup> <sup>emerged</sup> <sup>as</sup>one of a series of new concepts, alongside one of a series of new concepts, alongside those of complexity, chaos, indeterminacy, fractals, string, turbulence, flow, multiplicity, emergence and so on, that now form the theoretical vocabulary for addressing the problem of determination, of process, and of stability and instability regarding social phenomena. As with the previous set of concepts in the social sciences, notably the notion of structure, they derive from developments in the natural sciences and mathematics. Their introduction signals an important shift at the level of theorization and methodology, opening analysis to the recognition of the complexity of cultural and social as well as ‘natural’ phenomena, for instance concerning sociality, the living organism, mind and elementary particles.

Structure in the natural and social sciences grounds causal determination within a logic of stability and linear causality. It is a central epistemological element in the work of the grand theorists of social science such as Marx, Durkheim, Weber and Parsons. The notion of discrete and nomological determination, which positivism and various forms of structuralism support, has clear pay-offs from the point of view of homogenizing and predicting social phenomena, and thus for the possibility of intervention and rational governance. However, the limitations of approaches based on this notion of determination have been demonstrated in their failure to account adequately for change, resistance, agency and the event: that is, the irruption of the unexpected or unpredictable. The limitations relate also to their inadequacy from the point of view of co-relating phenomena across different fields, for example between the psychic and the social, the affective and the cognitive, and between matter and form. The problem for theory is that of thinking structure as well as multiplicity and indeterminacy within the same theoretical framework.

The concept of assemblage has appeared in the wake of these critiques and questions. In the recent literature it is mostly associated with the work of Deleuze and Guattari (particularly A Thousand Plateaus, 1987) and clearly explained in DeLanda (2002). One can also retrace its emergence by reference to developments in the physics of small particles, in topology, in molecular biology and generally in the interface between the theorization of emergence and becoming (say in ontogeny and phylogeny), adaptation or autopoiesis and cybernetic systems (that is, open systems with feedback), and post-structuralist mathematics (e.g. chaos, complexity, string). They all emphasize adaptivity rather than fixity or essence, the formal properties of the system rather than the specific instance or individuation, the spatio-temporal dimension rather than quantities, co-articulation and compossibility rather than linear and discrete determination, multilinear time and the temporality of processes such that emergence and irreversibility are brought to the fore, for instance in embryonic development (Prigogine and Stengers, 1984; Bateson, 1980). Deleuze and Guattari translate these themes into a vocabulary that re-codes emergence and becoming, namely, (de/re)-territorialization (in relation to topology), the machinic (in relation to autopoiesis), multiplicity, ‘agencement machinique’ (in relation to differentiation, compossibility).

In the light of the foregoing, assemblage can be seen as a relay concept, linking the problematic of structure with that of change and far-fromequilibrium systems. It focuses on process and on the dynamic character of the inter-relationships between the heterogeneous elements of the phenomenon. It recognizes both structurizing and indeterminate effects: that is, both flow and turbulence, produced in the interaction of open systems. It points to complex becoming and multiple determinations. It is sensitive to time and temporality in the emergence and mutation of the phenomenon; it thus directs attention to the longue durée. Whilst Deleuze and Guattari suggest desiring machines as exemplar, one could instead refer to weather formation and the genome, or, for that matter, to the formation of identity.

Nevertheless, it is important to distinguish between the level of abstract general theory – say, the mathematics of string, topology – and the level of concrete material and social life, and the singular or individual entity. For human beings the meaning of social action and of existence adds a dimension to analysis that cannot be reduced to or derived from the general theory. In any case, intermediate concepts are needed for the analysis of concrete social and natural processes and mechanisms. Thus theory itself can be considered as an assemblage that operates as specific conceptual combinatories in addressing specific problems. The coherence of the particular combinatory would be grounded in the respect for the general principles outlined above. Assemblage is one of the terms that today signals the emergence of a new episteme that would be transmodern.

## References

Bateson, Gregory (1980) Mind and Nature. London: Fontana.

DeLanda, Manuel (2002) Intensive Science and

Virtual Philosophy. London and New York: Continuum.

Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari (1988) A Thousand Plateaus, trans. Brian Massumi. London: Continuum.

Prigogine, Ilya and Isabelle Stengers (1984) Order out of Chaos. New York: Bantam Books.

Couze Venn is Professor of Cultural Theory at Nottingham Trent University. His latest book is The Postcolonial Challenge: Towards Alternative Futures.

# Agencement/Assemblage

John Phillips

Keywords arrangement, assemblage, common notion, Deleuze and Guattari, event, translation

O<sup>ne</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>key</sup> <sup>problems</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>global</sup> <sup>knowledge</sup>concerns the circulation, adoption and adaptation of concepts in translation. The English word assemblage is gaining currency in the humanities and social sciences as a concept of knowledge, but its uses remain disparate and sometimes imprecise. Two factors contribute to the situation. First, the concept is normally understood to be derived from the French word agencement, as used in the works of Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari (who, furthermore, do not use the French word assemblage in this way). Tracing the concept in its philosophical sense back to their texts, one discovers that it cannot easily be understood except in connection with the development of a complex of such concepts. Agencement implies specific connections with the other concepts. It is, in fact, the arrangement of these connections that gives the concepts their sense. For Deleuze and Guattari, a philosophical concept never operates in isolation but comes to its sense in connection with other senses in specific yet creative and often unpredictable ways. This in connection with already provides something of the sense of agencement, if one accepts that a concept arises in philosophy as the connection between a state of affairs and the statements we can make about it. Agencement designates the priority of neither the state of affairs nor the statement but of their connection, which implies the production of a sense that exceeds them and of which, transformed, they now form parts.

Secondly, the translation of agencement by assemblage can give rise to connotations based on analogical impressions, which liberate elements of a vocabulary from the arguments that once helped form it. One of the earliest attempts to translate Deleuze and Guattari’s use of the term agencement appears in the first published translation, by Paul Foss and Paul Patton in 1981, of the article ‘Rhizome’. The English term they use, assemblage, is retained in Brian Massumi’s later English version, when ‘Rhizome’ appears as the Introduction to A Thousand Plateaus. Since then many (though by no means all) translators and commentators have agreed, in a loose consensus, to keep to this early translation of agencement by assemblage, while acknowledging that the translation is not really a good approximation. Agencement is a common French word with the senses of either ‘arrangement’, ‘fitting’ or ‘fixing’ and is used in French in as many contexts as those words are used in English: one would speak of the arrangement of parts of a body or machine; one might talk of fixing (fitting or affixing) two or more parts together; and one might use the term for both the act of fixing and the arrangement itself, as in the fixtures and fittings of a building or shop, or the parts of a machine.

In contrast, the word assemblage in English means more or less the same as its actual French counterpart, assemblage, a word that Deleuze and Guattari use less often and certainly never in a philosophical sense. It has a more restrictive range of uses in English. The French will talk about an assemblage of different grape varieties or ingredients in a recipe and its senses cover blending, collating, gathering and joining. Although it designates a collection of things in English too (as one of the noun forms of assemble), it is conventionally restricted to more technical terminology: as the collection of remains found on an archeological site (in a French pronunciation: a-sa¯-bläzh); and in art theory (in both French and English) it is a term associated with collage and other avantgarde or pop art styles, designating works assembled out of diverse objects (like Jean Arp’s Trousse d’un Da, an assemblage of driftwood nailed onto wood with some remains of old painting).

As an imaginative resource for framing objects and operations of the social sciences, assemblage remains suggestive. Its use as a translation of agencement, though not entirely without justification, is nonetheless in danger of missing what is really forceful with regard to knowledge in Deleuze and Guattari’s usage. The most direct connection that agencement has for Deleuze would be to his work from the late 1960s on the philosophy of Spinoza and the common notion. It also has a very precise correspondence to the notions of event, becoming and sense, which Deleuze discusses at length in other works of the same period. A common notion represents the situation when two or more bodies have something in common. All bodies have in common the states of extension, motion and rest; but when two or more bodies come into contact or otherwise enter into a relationship they form a composition. A common notion is the representation of this composition as an independent unity. The unity, for instance, of a poison and the body poisoned can be regarded as a state of becoming and an event which is reducible to neither the body nor the poison. The body and the poison, rather, participate in the event (which is what they have in common). Deleuze brings together readings of several sources, including Lewis Carroll’s Alice, the philosophy of the Stoics and the writings of surrealist Joë Bousquet, to explore the character of unities like this in terms of their eventness, their sense (sens in the senses of both direction and meaning) and their becoming. While Alice is growing larger she is in a state of becoming both larger than she was and yet not as large as she will be. The state of becoming regarded as a compositional unity thus affixes the two senses of beinglarger-than and being-smaller-than. This being between, and the paradoxical senses it produces, can be brought into contact with the Stoics who regarded, for instance, the state produced when a knife cuts through flesh as a separate, abstract state, which Deleuze develops in terms of the event. The wound as an event which brings the knife and the flesh together can be reduced to neither knife nor flesh. A third sense is produced that corresponds precisely to Spinoza’s common notion, and which gives rise to the second-order conceptual level of ‘adequate ideas’. Knowledge of the world would thus be formed of second-order ideas: concepts that are adequate – a good fit – to the unities composed by bodies in connection.

The implications for knowledge (although these states have powerful implications for ontological questions too) are profound. The traditional arrangement implies a subject of knowledge separated out from his objects, which he transforms by making them his project. But this is a kind of agencement too – an event, a becoming, a compositional unity – with sense and a common notion, to which adequate ideas might be affixed. The sense of such a knowing cannot any longer be attributed to the knower, who participates in a further stage of becoming not reducible to his knowledge. Deleuze and Guattari, first in their 1975 book on Franz Kafka, and then in A Thousand Plateaus, mobilize this sense of agencement and the term itself begins to shift, to break up and to participate in further connections. The ‘collective agencement of enunciation’ designates the language system to which all speakers of a language belong; the ‘social agencement of desire designates the individual’s relation to his objects; and the ‘machinic agencement’ exceeds both the planes of enunciation and desire, recombining them in further enunciative events.

The translation of agencement by assemblage might have been justified as a further event of agencement (assemblage) were it not for the tendency of discourses of knowledge to operate as statements about states of affairs. The statement, as Deleuze and Guattari tirelessly insist, tends to undo assemblages, to take things apart, to divide things from each other, to divide, fundamentally, the subject of the statement (the sense and reference of a statement) from its enunciation (the conditions on which one can make a statement at all). If the sense of the term assemblage gathers to itself the unity and homogeneity of a theoretical concept at the level of the statement (which is what agencement allows) then it is also possible to problematize the term, to hook it back up with the fittings, fixtures and diverse arrangements that help constitute it and help to keep it current.

John Phillips is Associate Professor in the Department of English Language and Literature at the National University of Singapore. He is the author of Contested Knowledge: A Guide to Critical Theory (Zed Books, 2000) and has published articles on linguistics, psychoanalysis, deconstruction, philosophy, literature, urbanism, postmodernism, critical theory, aesthetics and military technology.