# Complexity

John Urry

Abstract The term ‘complexity’ has recently sprung into the physical and social sciences, humanities and semi-popular writings. ‘Complexity’ practices are constituted as something of a self-organizing global network that is spreading ‘complexity’ notions around the globe. There is a new ‘structure of feeling’ that complexity approaches both signify and enhance. Such an emergent structure of feeling involves a greater sense of contingent openness to people, corporations and societies, of the unpredictability of outcomes in time–space, of a charity towards objects and nature, of the diverse and nonlinear changes in relationships, households and persons, and of the sheer increase in the hyper-complexity of products, technologies and socialities.

Keywords emergence, global, hybrid, network, non-linear, self-organization, space– time, structure

## Introduction

The term ‘complexity’ has recently sprung into the physical and social sciences, humanities and semi-popular writings. Describing what it is and how it is organized is difficult since it is ‘present’ within very many scientific, social scientific and semi-popular discourses and practices. Inter alia these include alternative healing, architecture, consultancy, consumer design, economics, defence studies, fiction, garden design, geography, history, literary theory, management education, New Age, organizational studies, philosophy, post-structuralism, sociology, stock car racing, town planning, as well as most of the ‘physical sciences’ over the past two or so decades (Thrift, 1999).

In some ways it has become a global phenomenon and this makes it hard to disentangle its various components. ‘Complexity’ practices are constituted as something of a self-organizing global network that is spreading ‘complexity’ notions around the globe. Complexity researchers deploy the techniques of PR and branding, international meetings with ‘star’ speakers, guru worship, the use of global media and publishing, and networking, especially centred on nodes such as Santa Fe in New Mexico or the various research institutes named after the late Nobel prizewinner Ilya Prigogine (Waldrop, 1994).

There is a new ‘structure of feeling’ that complexity approaches both signify and enhance. Such an emergent structure of feeling involves a greater sense of contingent openness to people, corporations and societies, of the unpredictability of outcomes in time–space, of a charity towards objects and nature, of the diverse and non-linear changes in relationships, households and persons, and of the sheer increase in the hyper-complexity of products, technologies and socialities (Capra, 1996, 2001).

Thus economic and technological studies show there has been a huge increase in the number of components within products (Urry, 2003). The Eli Whitney musket of around 1800 had 51 components while the space shuttle of the late 20th century contained 10 million. Further, there are increases in the cybernetic contribution performed by architectures that integrate components through feedback loops. In 1970 the most valuable products in world trade were simple products produced by simple processes; a quarter-of-a-century later, nearly two-thirds of the products in world trade involve complex processes and complex products, with vast numbers of components, cybernetic architectures and socio-technical systems. This is linked with self-organizing and computerized networks that are continuously self-reproducing themselves across the globe, developing skills and structures necessary to innovate technologies to overcome obstacles or create new pathways.

A complexity structure of feeling brings out the paradoxes implicated in many contemporary processes. Thus the preservation of ‘nature’ seems to destroy many of the very things that nature lovers claim to value (Davis, 2000). There is no such thing as ‘nature’s balance’, no real or primordial nature that would be in equilibrium if only humans had not intruded. The effects of humans are subtly and irreversibly woven into the very evolution of landscape. And any ecological system is immensely complex so that there are never straightforward policies that simply restore nature’s balance, such as fish populations in the seas or rivers. Indeed many ecological systems themselves depend not upon stable relationships but upon massive intrusions of flows of species from other parts of the globe and of fire, lightning, hurricanes, high winds, ice storms, flash floods, frosts, earthquakes and so on. The ‘normal’ state of nature is not one of balance and repose. Such developments can only be seen over very lengthy periods of time, much longer than the lives of particular researchers or of research programmes. Moreover, populations of most species demonstrate extreme unevenness, with populations often rising rapidly when introduced into an area and then almost as rapidly collapsing. Extreme events demonstrate complexity where small changes in driving variables or inputs – magnified by feedback – can produce disproportionate outcomes.

There is no silent, docile ‘nature’, especially when confronted by new forms of ‘culture’. The contemporary complex world seems to involve highly adaptable viruses, such as Aids and ebola, new superbugs, newly lethal pathogens such as prions, and the reappearance of TB, cholera and the bubonic plague. Such a medicalized apocalypse appears to stem from new patterns of global travel and trade, the heightened ineffectiveness of antibiotics that encounter increased ‘resistance’, and the development of new powerful risk cultures beyond and within ‘medicine’ (Van Loon, 2002).

These and other developments seem to herald a relatively new set of hybrid systems – neither natural nor social; neither ordered nor anarchic – that display high levels of complexity. A complexity structure of feeling is underpinned by an apparent lack of proportionality between ‘causes’ and ‘effects’. That we think of these hybrid systems as complex has stemmed from an array of developments within 20th-century science.

## Time and Space

Science, in the 20th century, dismantled elements of Newtonian science and this prepared the way for the complexity turn (Capra, 1996). Pre-20th century science operated with a view of time as Newtonian: invariant, infinitely divisible into space-like units, measurable in length, expressible as a number and reversible. It is time seen essentially as a kind of Cartesian space comprising invariant measurable lengths to be moved along, forwards and backwards. Objects are viewed as contained within such boundaries of absolute time and space.

The sciences dismantled such a notion (Coveney and Highfield, 1990). Einstein showed that there is no fixed or absolute time independent of the system to which it is refers. Time is a local, internal feature of any system of observation and measurement. It varies as to where and how it is measured. It can be stretched and shrunk. Further, Einstein demonstrated that time and space are not separate from each other but are fused into a four-dimensional timespace curved under the influence of mass. Time and space are ‘internal’ to the processes by which the physical and social worlds themselves operate, helping to constitute their powers.

Space and time are now seen as dynamic qualities: when a body moves, or a force acts, it affects the curvature of space and time, and in turn the structure of space–time affects the way in which bodies move and forces act. The beginning of the universe occurred without a pre-existing cause, and its very happening created in that moment both space and time. There is no ‘time’ before the big bang, and if the universe ends in another singular event time (and space) will cease. Space and time have been spontaneously created, part of the systemic nature of the universe. They are switched on.

Quantum theory generally describes a virtual state in which electrons try out instantaneously all possible futures before settling into particular patterns. Quantum behaviour is instantaneous, simultaneous and unpredictable. The interactions between the parts are far more fundamental than the parts themselves. Bohm refers to this as the occurrence of a dance without dancers

Thermodynamics shows that there is an irreversible flow of time (Prigogine, 1997). Rather than there being time-symmetry and indeed a reversibility of time as postulated in classical physics, a clear distinction is drawn between what has passed and what lies in the future. An arrow of time results in loss of organization and an increase in randomness or disorder over time within open systems. This accumulation of disorder or positive entropy results from the Second Law of Thermodynamics. However, there is not a simple growth of disorder. Prigogine shows how new order arises but is far from equilibrium. There are what he terms dissipative structures, islands of new order within a sea of disorder, maintaining or even increasing their order at the expense of greater overall entropy. Prigogine describes how such localized order ‘floats in disorder’.

The irreversibility of time can be seen in the expansion of the universe following the singular event of the ‘big bang’ 15 billion or so years ago. The scientific discovery of the big bang cannot be reconciled with laws of the physical world that presumes time is reversible, deterministic and involving ‘classes of phenomena’. The big bang is a one-off phenomenon like nothing else ever to occur within the known universe. Laws of nature are thus historical and not universal (and hence much more like the laws of society).

The arrow or flow of time results in futures that are unstable, relatively unpredictable and characterized by various possibilities. Time is both multiple and unpredictable. Prigogine (1997) talks of the ‘end of certainty’ as the complexity sciences overcome what he calls the alienating images of a deterministic world and an arbitrary world of pure chance. Complexity repudiates the dichotomies of determinism and chance, as well as nature and society, being and becoming, stasis and change. Systems are thus seen as being ‘on the edge of chaos’. Order and chaos are in a kind of balance where the components are neither fully locked into place but yet do not fully dissolve into anarchy. Chaos is not complete anarchic randomness but there is a kind of ‘orderly disorder’ present within all such systems.

Time flows with minor changes in the past being able to produce potentially massive effects in the present or future. Such small events are not ‘forgotten’. Chaos theory in particular rejects the commonsensical notion that only large changes in causes produce large changes in effects. Following a perfectly deterministic set of rules, unpredictable yet patterned results can be generated, with small causes on occasions producing large effects and vice versa. The classic example is the butterfly effect accidentally discovered by Lorenz in 1961. It was shown that minuscule changes at one location can produce, if modelled by three coupled non-linear equations, very large weather effects very distant from the original site.

## Emergence

Central to dynamic systems analysis is the idea of emergence. It is not that the sum is greater than the size of its parts but that there are system effects that are different from its parts. Complexity examines how components of a system through their interaction ‘spontaneously develop collective properties or patterns, even simple properties such as colour, that do not seem implicit within, or at least not implicit in the same way, within individual components. The flavour of sugar is not present in the carbon, hydrogen and oxygen atoms that comprise it. These are non-linear consequences that are not present within, or reducible to, the very many individual components that comprise such activities.

Such large-scale patterns or characteristics emerge from, but are not reducible to, the micro-dynamics of the phenomenon in question. Thus gases are not uniform entities but comprise a seething confusion of atoms obeying the laws of quantum mechanics. The laws governing gases derive not from the behaviour of each individual atom but from their statistical patterning. Also if a system passes a particular threshold with minor changes in the controlling variables, switches occur such that a liquid turns into a gas or relatively warm weather suddenly turns into an ice age. This can give rise to unexpected structures and events whose properties can be quite different from those of the underlying elementary laws.

In particular, the emergence of patterning within a given system results from ‘attractors’. If a dynamic system does not move over time through all possible parts of a phase space but instead occupies a restricted part of it, then this is said to result from attractors. The simplest attractor is a point, as with the unforced swinging of a pendulum. Everything reaches the single equilibrium point. A somewhat more complex example is a domestic central heating/air conditioning system where the attractor consists, not of a single point, but of a specified range of temperatures. The relationship is not linear but involves a negative feedback mechanism that minimizes deviance. This is a self-regulating and bounded system. In certain systems there are ‘strange attractors’, unstable spaces to which the trajectory of dynamical systems is attracted through billions of iterations and positive feedback occurring over long periods of time. Such a space may be either indeterminate within the boundaries or there may be various sets of boundaries, as with the butterfly shaped Lorenz attractor. Such attractors are immensely sensitive in the effects that they generate to slight variations in their initial conditions. Much science has been concerned to characterize the topology of such strange attractors.

## Systems and Feedback

Early cybernetic research under the auspices of the Macy conferences in the post Second World War period emphasized the importance of negative feedback loops that restored the homeostatic functioning of whatever system was under examination (Hayles, 1999). Such systems of circular causality involved the processing of information that resulted in re-establishing equilibrium and stability through negative feedback (a view that much influenced Talcott Parsons).

However, in later systems formulations, of complexity or the non-linear, positive feedback loops are examined. These are viewed as exacerbating initial stresses in the system, so rendering it unable to absorb shocks and re-establishing the original equilibrium. Very strong interactions occur between the parts of a system and there is an absence of a central hierarchical structure able to ‘govern’ outcomes. Positive feedback occurs when a change tendency is reinforced rather than dampened down as occurs with the negative feedback.

Such positive feedback is involved in analyses of the increasing returns that generate the path dependency found in the history of various economic-technological systems (such as the VHS video system replacing the technologically superior Betamax). Such irreversible path dependence occurs when contingent events set into motion institutional patterns or event chains over time that have deterministic properties through what Brian Arthur (1994) examines as ‘lock-ins’.

More generally, complexity science investigates systems that can adapt and evolve as they self-organize through time. Such complex social interactions have been likened to walking through a maze, the walls of which rearrange as one walks. New steps have then to be taken in order to adjust to the walls of the maze that are adapting to one’s movement through the maze. Complexity thus investigates emergent, dynamic and self-organizing systems that coevolve and adapt in ways that heavily influence the probabilities of later events

Autopoiesis, as explained by Maturana and Varela, involves a process of self-making between the processes of production of those components that make up a system (Maturana, 1981). These continuously regenerate the processes of production through various feedback mechanisms so to maintain the organization per se, although the structure may change. Autopoiesis is to be seen in non-linear laser theory where the co-ordination of the required emissions is carried out by the laser light itself through processes of self-organization. Autopoiesis is also shown in the nature of urban growth where small local preferences mildly expressed in the concerns of individuals, such as wanting to live with those who are ethnically similar, can lead