# Time

Barbara Adam

Abstract The article argues that the relationship to time is at the root of what makes us human and that culture arises with and from efforts to transcend death, change and the rhythmicity of the physical environment. Time can be tracked through systems of time measurement and later transformed from a process of nature into clock time, a time to human design that is abstracted from context and content. In this form time can be traded with all other times. With contemporary science and new information and communications technologies, which operate in a new all-encompassing temporal spectrum that extends from nanoseconds to millennia, clock time is no longer appropriate to the associated present-oriented transactions and futures are traversed in the dual sense of the word. By historically locating temporal relations, the article provides both a new understanding of socio-cultural relations and a perspective on social change.

Keywords time transcendence, time tracking, time transformation, time trading, time traversal

ime is about god and the universe, life and death, knowledge practices and the human condition. The relationship to time is at the very root of what makes us human. All that we recognize as culture arises with and from efforts to transcend the key delimitations of human existence: death, change and the rhythmicity of the physical environment. Once finitude is tempered by cultural means (positing an afterlife, heroism, myths, for example) new ways to engage with change, ephemerality and rhythmicity (such as the arts, agriculture and architecture) can flourish. Time can be tracked through systems of time measurement and later transformed from a process of nature into a time of human design with new characteristics that vastly extend the power of control at the individual and collective, national and international level. This human machine-time of the West is not only traded globally but used for colonizing purposes, defining in and out groups, distinguishing between the developed, developing and ‘non-developed’ world, designating some activities as productive while rendering others invisible. This by now naturalized machine-time, however, sits uneasily with the lived times of everyday life, the reproductive, sustaining and caring work that is primarily the domain of women across the world, and the processes of nature that are transformed by the temporal imposition and colonization. Moreover, ossified in machine form, clock-time is no longer adaptable to the temporal relations that emerge with contemporary science and communication technologies, and operate in the all-encompassing temporal spectrum, which ranges from nanoseconds to millennia, from the speed of light to eternity. As knowledge practices, clock-time relations need to be appreciated as a source of both the major successes and excesses, the power and the failure of the contemporary, globalized, interdependency. This is nowhere more visible than in approaches to the future, futures that are traversed in the dual sense of travelled and colonized on the one hand and negated, spoilt and polluted for successor generations on the other. Neither the dominant Western institutions nor the West’s conceptual tools are any longer appropriate to the conditions of their making. The focus on time and temporal relations can provide us with a different historical perspective, and has the potential to identify openings for change (Adam, 2004).

## Transcending the Earthly Condition

Culture is inescapably tied to the human relationship to time: to death and the boundedness of human existence, to change, transience, ephemerality and contingence, and to the rhythmicity of the physical and living environment. As the archaeologist Christopher Gosden (1994: 9) assures us, in the past 3.5 million years of known human existence, cultural rhythms have been distinct from natural rhythms. Death has not merely been endured but pondered and related to, finitude ritualized and transcended. Confronted with impermanence, humans have created permanence by a variety of means: through burial and ritual, things and representations, myth and hero-worship, belief systems and institutions. With burial of their dead our earliest ancestors transcended their allotted time on earth. Burial ensured the safe journey to the world of ancestors and created social continuity across generations. Hero worship, in contrast, made life worth living. It extended a person’s existence beyond their grave, their deeds to be sung and told for many generations, their lives elevated as shining examples to their successors. With the production of artefacts knowledge was not just objectified and externalized but it survived into the following generations, thus loosening the dependence on copresence for knowledge to circulate. Many of these cultural constructions and creations endured for tens of thousands of years to be marvelled at by us today: burial chambers and stone circles, tools and pottery, cave paintings and written texts, jewellery and mathematical spheres carved from stone. Belief systems, finally, provided comforting responses to ontological fears and insecurities while political institutions ensured the continuity of the collective beyond the bounded existence of its individual members. It is important to note, however, that while the relation to finitude is a cultural universal, the forms it takes are culturally and historically unique.

Equally, there are many ways to respond to the transience, ephemerality and contingency of human existence, numerous means to impose a socio-cultural will on change processes of the cosmos, nature and the body. One of these responses is to make time stand still. Here too, we need to recognize that both the meaning and the forms this takes differ significantly with the particular practices employed, and the historical periods within which they are enacted. As the historian of religion Mircea Eliade (1989/1949) explains, myth and ritual, for example, are primary means to arrest time. In their performance the original deed or decree is enacted in the present and the meaning recreated and preserved in its original form. Through its performance the enfolded past is activated and revealed, ab origine, that is, true to the beginning. Another way of making time stand still relates to the externalization of knowledge through representation, which holds in unchanging form what is moving, changing and interconnected. Thus, for example, art externalizes and fixes beliefs, experiences, expectations, fears and hopes in a form that can be shared (as well as variably interpreted) by many people across generations. Once objectified and therefore stabilized, the artistic creation not only becomes a source for reflection and understanding, but also a way of passing on culture without the need for either the co-presence or even the existence of those who did the communicating. It is a way of accumulating wisdom outside the temporal, finite body and beyond the knowledge of individual persons. Written language shares with art the principal temporal relations of fixing and stabilizing what is transient and ephemeral through the externalization, disembodiment and decontextualization of knowledge.

Not only myth, ritual and art, but also some of the earliest forms of monumental architecture can be viewed as expressions of the human endeavour to create stability and permanence on the one hand and as a quest for the meaning of existence, origin and destiny on the other. Like its temporal counterparts, monumental architecture defines the world from the human centre, provides a place for human beings in the scheme of nature, and offers security and continuity for communal life. We can conjecture that megaliths, for example, enabled Neolithic peoples to maintain contact with that which transcended their own being, that the circular form of these buildings directed attention to a metaphysical source of being. According to the architect Keith Critchlow (1979: 151), the circular structure of megalithic temples is of symbolic significance as the circle is widely recognized as the most sacred representation.

The full circle expresses undifferentiated space and a totality of time. Accordingly, the completed circle has to be seen as a chosen tactic to unify the one with the whole and to gather up, in the now, the whole of time.

The time of the circle, therefore, signifies not the eternal round of seasonal activity, as some social scientists maintain who differentiate between traditional cyclical and modern historical societies. Rather, it constitutes an active creation of eternity in the present. In this enfolding of the origin, we may surmise, lies the power of the temporally extended collective and the source of all future possibilities. Archaic practices that made time stand still thus need to be recognized as creative acts of time transcendence, as collective means to overcome the threat of non-existence, finitude and transience. Equally, other cultural practices, ranging from ancient myths and rituals to modern religions and institutions, are means to transcend the times of earthly existence. Ancient myths from across the known world tell about humanity’s efforts to impose meaning on the transience and finitude of existence, commenting on the role of humans in the wider scheme of things, explaining origin and destiny. As such they provide a window on the world beyond embodied existence, the netherworld from which individuals were thought to emerge and to which they would return after death. They open up a world of gods where fate and fortune are decided. They posit a golden time before the time of earthly toil, a paradise lost due to misfortune or misconduct. Thus, in their quest to transcend finitude, humans have created a world of immortality and permanence, which locates them in a wider scheme of nature, the cosmos and the spirit world of gods.

## Tracking Time and the Quest for Know-how

Alongside efforts to transcend earthly time there developed a multitude of means to track time, to get to know it in its cyclical repetitions on the one hand and its directional processes on the other. This tracking of time involved the vast time scales of gods and the cosmos, the life-span of beings and things, seasonal patterns, even subdivisions of the day and very short time spans such as the beat of a human heart. To give an example, the traditional calendar system of India had subdivisions in the 24-hour system, equivalent to clock-time units of 48 and 24 minutes, 48 and 24 seconds, right down to fractions of seconds. On the other end of the temporal scale, it operated with huge amounts of astronomical time that related to the life of Brahma: one hour in the life of Brahma equals 8.76 million human years (Lippincott et al., 1999: 42–8). In such time-tracking systems the year is just one small unit in the wider scheme of divine intent, cosmic rhythms and cultural efforts to name, count and number temporal and rhythmic processes.

To know and name that which transcends human being was to get closer to the divine, to achieve a measure of predictability in the face of the unknown, and to gain a sense of power over that which functions outside human control. Often, the tracking of time has been rooted in the capacity to identify patterns associated with difference: light and dark, day and night, summer and winter, hot and cold, dry and wet, periods of drought and flooding, fertility and dormancy, or cycles of growth and decay, life and death, presence and absence. The ability to count, name, number and quantify change processes and repetitions facilitates predictability of the seemingly unpredictable. It allows for anticipation and planning. Thus, time reckoning, the getting to know temporal processes and rhythmic patterns, is also knowledge for practical use. It is know-how knowledge for the structuring, ordering, synchronizing and regulating of social life. Moreover, it is knowledge that engenders a sense of ownership and control. As such, time tracking produces not only knowledge that locates humans in the wider scheme of things but also results in useful know-how, that is, in-order-to knowledge for the maintenance and enhancement of power, be this a sovereign’s, the church’s or an employer’s power.

Not surprisingly, therefore, calendars, as the most complex of time-tracking systems, were first developed at the behest of sovereigns and religious leaders. As the historian David Landes explains with reference to ancient China, knowledge of temporal patterns and the establishment of calendar systems was the exclusive prerogative of the sovereign.

Knowledge of the right time and season was power, for it was this knowledge that governed both the acts of everyday life and decisions of state. Each emperor inaugurated his reign with the promulgation of his calendar, often different from the one that had preceded it. His court astronomers were the only persons who were permitted in principle to use time keeping and astronomical instruments or to engage in astronomical study. His time was China’s time. (Landes, 1983: 33)

Calendar systems date back to ancient times and have taken many different forms. Some of the earliest known systems prioritized lunar patterns over solar ones, while others, like the Mayan calendar (and that of its Mesoamerican predecessors), integrated not just the incompatible movements of moon, sun and Venus but combined these with ritual cycles – each important in their own right and in their relation to all the other cycles (Adam, 2004: 108–10; Aveni, 1980; Thompson, 1974). This hugely complex system allowed the keepers of time to determine festival periods, auspicious and unlucky days as well as right and wrong times for specified activities. It enabled them to forecast eclipses, conceived as periods of great danger, and it legitimated them as keepers of a collective memory. In this calendar system, which operated routinely with dates and numbers extending to five digits and more, deities and heavenly bodies, religion and history, daily practice and mythical past were brought into a coherent whole. Here, the sacred was implicated in the profane and vice versa. The explicated always included that which was not the explicit focus of attention. Physical phenomena were suffused with the spirit world of deities and demons. Ritual practice was implicated in bureaucratic regulation. Administrative practices were in tune with ritual prerequisites. In their mutual implication, all the components of this multiplex time-reckoning system constituted the historically and contextually unique cultural system.

Multiplex time-tracking systems, such as the ones mentioned above, are not easily encompassed by contemporary social science approaches to social time and calendar systems, such as Eviator Zerubavel’s Hidden Rhythms and The Seven-day Cycle. Much of this contemporary work is rooted in Émile Durkheim’s The Elementary Forms of Religious Life. In that treatise Durkheim (1971/1912: 23) suggested that: ‘A calendar expresses the rhythm of the collective activities, while at the same time its function is to assure regularity.’ Clearly, from the examples above we can see that social coordination, synchronization and temporal regulation need to be located in a temporal framework that transcends the specific society, in something bigger than the society that is employing temporal know-how to organize its life in time and space. Neither the similarities nor the differences in calendar systems, past and present, across the world, we can safely insist, are reducible to representations of difference in social organization and social function. The sociologist Norbert Elias took an approach that deviated from the functionalist perspectives on time reckoning systems when he focused on the capacity to integrate incompatible elements.

The calendar’s unrepeatable succession of numbered years symbolically represents the unrepeatable succession of social and natural events. It thus serves as a means of orientation in the great continuum of change which is at once the natural and the social world. (Elias, 1992: 6)

Elias’s work directs us to the importance of the synthesizing process, which he suggests is a precondition to any kind of time reckoning.

In summary to this brief sketch of time tracking we can say that affordances, power and performance rather than function; complexity and multiplicity rather than antinomy; implication and integration rather than cultural evolution, sequence and hierarchy would be some of the more appropriate key concepts to understand the tracking of time and its associated know-how that affords owners of this knowledge power and a certain measure of control over the uncontrollable temporality of existence. In addition, we need to recognize that any given social organization is always embedded in a wider universe of meaning that fundamentally transcends the system of its creation. And, finally, it is important to note that a key achievement of time-tracking systems was the coming to terms with variability and the capacity to integrate incompatible elements of cosmos,