# Social Time Sebastian Olma

Keywords Albert Einstein, Henri Bergson, intensive capitalism, Peter Lynds, time

he publication of Einstein’s On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies in 1905 revolutionized our understanding of time. What was to become the most famous paper of 20thcentury physics created turmoil in ‘God’s sensorium’, which, according to Newton, constituted the proper place of time. Time no longer served as an absolute repository of mechanical movements but became the numerical multiplicity of space–time relations, determined by rulers and clocks. Now Peter Lynds, a 27-year-old broadcasting school tutor from Wellington, New Zealand, has published a paper in Foundations of Physics Letters that has stirred up the international physics community once again. Lynds attacks physics for maintaining at its very foundations what in his assessment is a nonsensical notion of time: time as a succession of precise static instants. So far, the reception of Lynds’ paper has been as frantic as it has been controversial (the media frenzy has somehow avoided Britain but entering ‘Peter Lynds’ into an Internet search engine not only generates a host of international press reports on the phenomenon Lynds but also a variety of heated debates within physics discussion forums). The spectrum of reactions ranges from comparisons to Einstein through to musings as to Lynds potential non-existence. Among those sympathetic to Lynds’ analysis is John Wheeler of Princeton, collaborator of both Albert Einstein and Richard Feynman.

Lynds attacks physics for maintaining at its very foundations what in his assessment is a nonsensical notion of time: time as a succession of precise static instants. If there were such things, Lynds argues, it would logically follow that the world remained frozen at a precise instant, ‘as though stuck on pause or freeze frame on a motion screen’ (Lynds, 2003a: 1). This could not be changed by postulating a continuous sequence of further instants, since it is the logical nature of precise instants not to have duration. Thus, in its own understanding of time, physics prohibits continuity and motion to take place.

The solution Lynds offers lies in the fairly outrageous claim that time does not exist at all – or at least not in a way that can be grasped by conventional physics. Time has no existence as physical quantity. This elusion of time, however, is far from being a distinctly modern phenomenon. In fact, Lynds is able to hark back to Zeno of Elea’s motion and infinity paradoxes to demonstrate the historical proportions of the conceptual illusion that he believes to have unveiled. What Zeno’s paradoxes seemed to reveal was the impossibility of motion. A tortoise challenges Achilles to a race, gets a 10-metre head start, and claims Achilles can never pass her. When Achilles has run 10 metres the tortoise has moved a further metre. When Achilles has covered that metre, the tortoise has moved 10 centimetres and so on ad infinitum. In the dichotomy paradox, Zeno maintains that one can never reach a goal, as in order to get there, one must first travel half of the distance. After having covered that distance, one must still traverse half the remaining distance, and half again, and so on. The final paradox that Lynds refers to concerns a flying arrow that will never reach its target because of it being stationary at each instant of time.

Lynds now argues that Zeno’s problems are paradoxes only as long as it is assumed that the respective position of a travelling object, Achilles or the arrow, can be precisely determined:

[T]he solution to all of the mentioned paradoxes . . . is that there isn’t an instant in time underlying the body’s motion (if there were, it couldn’t be in motion), and as its position is constantly changing no matter how small the time interval, and as such, is at no time determined, it simply doesn’t have a determined position. (2003b: 8, original emphasis)

By arguing thus, Lynds clearly and rather surprisingly echoes Henri Bergson’s century-old critique of time’s quantification. For Bergson, Zeno’s paradoxes were due to the illegitimate equation of movement with the space upon which it supposedly takes place (Bergson, 1998 [1907]: 308 passim). The latter is extensive and quantifiable whereas the former is intensive and qualitative. What is being attacked by the unlikely couple Bergson–Lynds is precisely the confusion of intensity (movement, quality) with extensity (space, quantity) to which even relativity theory falls prey. Notwithstanding Bergson’s shortcomings in dealing with general relativity, he correctly reproached Einstein for reinforcing this confusion (Bergson, 1999 [1922]). Although relativity theory did away with the idea of absolute time (time independent of things), it introduced the idea of a multiplicity of mathematically discrete space–time blocs/events, thus upholding an essentially spatialized notion of time (Deleuze, 1988). According to Bergson, physics thus missed the opportunity to depart from a pulverized concept of time toward an understanding of what he called real duration, that is time as lived becoming, as virtual creative flow that is beyond measure.

With Lynds, Bergson’s critique re-emerges in the midst of 21st-century science. What are the implications – we have to ask – of Lynds’ involuntary memory of Bergsonism in our own ‘present’? If there is anything to be learned from this strange encounter, it would seem to begin with the fact that rather than being shunned as an apostate gone over to the side of the crazy philosophers, Lynds has met with an overwhelming response from the physics community (Adam, 2003). In the beginning of the 20th century, it was rather easy for Einstein to denounce Bergson’s proposition of real, qualitative time or real duration as ‘philosopher’s time’ allegedly resting on a dubious blend of physical and psychological time (Bergson, 1999 [1922]: 159). It took almost a century but the heterogeneous reaction to Lynds’ intervention seems to suggest that physics’ attitude is changing.

If time is not a succession of instants, no more is the time of physics determined by a succession of masterminds. It would be more sensible to hypothesize that a particular society’s historical conception of time emerges out of that very society’s material practice. Einstein, far from being the detached, other-worldly genius of popular myth, was of course not only firmly embedded in the cultural and technological Zeitgeist of mature industrial capitalism but was also among the foremost experts on time-keeping and synchronization technology due to his work in Bern’s patent office (Galison, 2003). Consequently, Einstein’s time emerged at the heart of a historical movement characterized by an ever tightening disciplinary grip on time (Foucault, 1977). To put it somewhat schematically, Einsteinian time was the time of the confinements, confinements that needed co-ordination. Factories, hospitals, colonies, prisons, etc. formed veritable space–time blocks whose relative position to one another was of vital importance for the workings of the system as a whole. In retrospect, the disciplinary society at its apex seems rather likely to have propelled the emergence of a notion of time as ‘being kept in an assemblage of space–time containers.

From such an historical perspective, then, the re-emergence of Bergson’s critique of quantification and extensity is today far from surprising. It coincides with the completion of the longue durée of capitalist extension. Globalization has ended some decades ago, followed by an accelerated intensification of capitalism that Negri, Lazzarato, Virno and others have begun to describe. The end of globalization also signals the end of space as pure quantity and its re-emergence as problem, as something that is now invested with time/quality but not as a succession of concrete, confined blocs but as virtual flow. As modernity’s confinements are collapsing, time/quality does not lend itself so easily anymore to spatializing imagination. The phenomenon Lynds is thus isomorphic with postdisciplinary ontology as it finally hits the last bastion of modern epistemology, that is science. In this sense one could understand quantum mechanics as the link between Einstein and Lynds: the ‘smearing out’ of (subatomic) space–time containers as the physical analogy of time/quality (Foucault’s pouvoir-puissance) beginning to leak out of the porous walls of modern confinements. Perhaps such an immediate understanding of ontological isomorphism is pushing it a bit far. In any case, what these analogies try to suggest is that Lynds’ problematization of time appears in fact to be rather timely. It coincides with capital’s increasing virtuosity in managing the problem of the immeasurability of social creativity (Lazzarato, 2002). The biopolitical machinery of unmediated appropriation is already successfully operating on the virtual flows of social creativity – one might think of the project-form that organizes most of today’s immaterial labour, the flows of virtual value on the global finance markets, or simply the productivity of Internet consumers. Even such a cursory glance over some contemporary dispositifs of production highlights capital’s practical adoption of the Bergsonian conception of time that forms the metaphysical background of Lynds critique. As modernity’s four-dimensional space– time blocks mutate into the non-spatial intensity of today’s capitalist production, the socius is liberated from Euclidian prisons in order to be hijacked into vitalist custody.

Lynds seems to articulate this shift for the world of science. His attempt to drive space out of physical time is not dissimilar to the management consultant who tries to drive hierarchy out of the organization. Both are trying to get ‘closer to the flow of qualitative duration. And this is perhaps where the significance of the phenomenon Lynds lies: if Einstein’s actual ‘time revolution crystallized a notion of time that had long been inherent to the material practice of disciplinary capitalism, maybe Lynds’ Bergsonian attempt to unmake this notion indicates that science has once again begun to catch up with material social practice.

## References

Adam, Peter (2003) ‘The Strange Story of Peter Lynds’, The Guardian, 14 August.

Bergson, Henri (1998 [1907]) Creative Evolution. Mineola, NY: Dover.

Bergson, Henri (1999 [1922]) Duration and Simultaneity. Manchester: Clinamen.

Deleuze, Gilles (1988) Bergsonism. New York: Zone.

Foucault, Michel (1977) Discipline and Punish. Birth of the Prison. London: Allen Lane.

Galison, Peter (2003) Einstein’s Clocks, Poincaré’s Maps. London: Sceptre.

Lynds, Peter (2003a) ‘Time and Classical

# Event

Mariam Fraser

Keywords Deleuze, event, Stengers, White head

A As a philosophical concept, it exists in relation to a specific set of problems, including the problem of how to conceive of modes of individuation that pertain not to being, or to essences and representation, but to becoming and effectivity. Event-thinking can be understood to be part of an anti-reductionist project that seeks to describe the relations between actual things, bodies and happenings, and the independent reality of these events in themselves. It is thus an especially relevant concept with regards to the problematization of knowledge, and in particular to the philosophy of science. The concept of the event brings with it implications for (among other things): the relation between language and the world; conceptions of substance and materiality; ethics.

The event preoccupied the French philosopher Gilles Deleuze for much of his career, during which time he ‘renew[ed] and recreat[ed] a metaphysical tradition that extends from the Stoics through Leibniz to Bergson and Whitehead’ (Patton, 1996: 12). From the Stoics, Deleuze distinguishes between two kinds of entities. On the one hand there are bodies which exist in space and in time (in the present) with their corresponding ‘states of affairs’, while on the other there are incorporeal beings or transformations. Incorporeal

Quantum Mechanics: Indeterminacy vs. Discontinuity’, Foundation of Physics Letters 15(3): 1–7.

Lynds, Peter (2003b) ‘Zeno’s Paradoxes: A Timely Solution’. Available at: http://philsciarchive.pitt.edu/archive/00001197/

Lazzarato, Maurizio (2002) Puissances de l’Invention. La Psychologie Économique de Gabriel Tarde Contre l’Économie Politique. Paris: Les Empêcheurs de Penser en Rond.

Sebastian Olma is finishing a PhD on intensive capitalism at Goldsmiths College. He lives in Amsterdam.

beings, Deleuze (2004: 7) writes, ‘are not things or facts, but events. We cannot say that they exist, but rather that they subsist or inhere’. They subsist or inhere, for example, in the expressed of the proposition, which Deleuze (2004: 22) calls sense, that is, ‘an incorporeal, complex, and irreducible entity, at the surface of things, a pure event’.

In The Logic of Sense, Deleuze adds a fourth dimension to the three generally agreed upon relations of the proposition. These three are: denotation, which is the relation of the proposition to an external state of affairs; manifestation, which is the relation of the proposition to the person who speaks and expresses themselves; and signification, which is the relation of the word to universal or general concepts (Deleuze, 2004: 16–18). Unlike the circle which characterises the proposition – ‘[f]rom denotation to manifestation, then to signification, but also from signification to manifestation and to denotation’ (2004: 20) – Deleuze argues that sense should be understood as the boundary between propositions and things, that it is ‘the coexistence of two sides without thickness (2004: 25). Sense subsists in the proposition but it does not merge with it, nor with the state of affairs or the quality which the proposition denotes: ‘It is this aliquid at once extra-Being and inherence, that is, this minimum of being which befits inherences’ (2004: 25). Significantly, Deleuze’s use of the Stoic conception of the event enables the relation between language and the world to be reconfigured: denotation and manifestation do not found language, but are rather made possible with it, and what renders language possible is the event. Indeed, in The Logic of Sense Deleuze argues that language, when it operates actively and creatively (as it does in some literature), not only expresses but also extends the transformative power of an event.

For Deleuze, the relation of events to states of affairs is not that of the possible to the real, but of the virtual to the actual. The world is actualvirtual, and as such maintains the power of virtuality; the capacity of a thing to become differently. This point is particularly well expressed by the infinitive verb, which has two dimensions: on the one hand it is virtual and incorporeal, it is a potentiality or becoming, while on the other hand it indicates a substantive relation to a state of affairs which, as noted above, takes place in a physical time characterized by succession. This is why the infinitive is so important to Deleuze’s conception of the event. It indicates that an event is not bound to a particular space and time, but may be experienced whenever and wherever it is actualized anew. It is because an event can be actualized in multiple ways that it retains an openness to reinventions (or re-eventalizations). The concept of the event, informed by the concept of the virtual, not only contributes to an explanation of the relations between things therefore, but also accounts for the inexhaustible reserve or excess that produces novelty.

Deleuze’s (1995: 160) problematizaton of things is especially clearly laid out in The Fold (2001) in which he turns to (or perhaps more accurately, inhabits) the work of Leibniz and Whitehead. Both Leibniz and Whitehead rejected substance as the basic metaphysical category and chose instead to privilege continuity. Theirs is not the continuity of rectilinear tracks or of lines that could dissolve into independent points however, but of an infinite series of individuated monads (Leibniz) or of actual entities or occasions, coalitions of prehensions (Whitehead). Although there are significant conceptual differences between monadic and prehensive units, they nevertheless share one striking feature. In each, all the elements in the same world are in contact with or connected to each other; there are no gaps, and there is no outside. This challenge to absolute theories of time, space and matter, and the role of the event in posing that challenge, finds special relevance with regards to the philosophy of science and in particular to recent developments in contemporary social science studies of science in which there has been renewed interest in the work of Alfred North Whitehead (Barry, 2005; Haraway, 1997: 146–7; Latour, 2004; Stengers, 2002). It is worth pausing here briefly therefore to consider Whitehead’s take on the event and how both Deleuze and Whitehead’s work has influenced at least one contemporary philosopher of science, Isabelle Stengers, before returning to the main thesis of (and problems with) The Fold.

For Whitehead (1920), the recourse to time and space as a means of unifying nature – for example the claim that the redness of the fire and the agitation of the molecules occur at the same time and in the same space – cannot suffice as an explanation, for it demands that time and space be apprehended independently of the events that occur in time, or of the objects that occupy space. The concepts of time and space cannot therefore provide a metaphysical starting point. Whitehead argues instead that they (along with subjects and objects) are abstractions, reified entities that are to be explained by the contingent, changing, but nevertheless concrete elements and events from which they are abstracted. In contrast to the notion that time is an ordered succession of instants without duration and that space is a system of points without extension, Whitehead suggests that duration is the field of the event: points and instants, spatial and temporal divisibility and extensiveness, are the ‘properties’ of a duration. Duration ‘is the old-fashioned “present state of the world”’ (Whitehead, 1978: 320). Time is a succession of durations, and it is by ‘becoming temporal’ that a duration incurs the realization of an enduring object (Whitehead, 1985: 159). In short, an event (a concert, or a sound, or a molecule) does not move through time and space and nor do changes occur in space and time. Instead, motion and change are attributable to the differences between successive events, each with their own durations. ‘There is a becoming of continuity’, Whitehead (1978: 35) writes, ‘but no continuity of becoming’.

There are undoubtedly some points of resonance between Deleuze’s understanding of sense as ‘aliquid’ – as both extra-Being and inherence – and Whitehead’s concept of an eternal object. Eternal objects, for Whitehead, are ‘the pure potentials of the universe’ (1978: 149). They can be qualities, such as colours or sounds, or figures, like pyramids. As such, they come close to being universals – ‘though not quite’, Whitehead adds (1978: 48). The point in the context of Whitehead’s work is that eternal objects are neither delusions nor secondary qualities (like the red of the fire) that a mind mistakenly perceives to be an attribute of matter. On the contrary, the perceiver of the colour red is also part of (is enfolded into) the event. Indeed Whitehead conceives of each ‘perceiver’ or element in an event to be a relation, or rather a prehension, which is by definition constituted by its prehension of and by other prehensions in a nexus (an event). Thus, as Deleuze (2001: 78) explains, ‘[t]he eye is a prehension of light’ and ‘seeing’ is an achievement conditioned by the event. Nevertheless, although prehending and being prehended are important dimensions of process, they are not sufficient (they do not deliver meaning) in themselves. It is the manner in which prehensions are received – their ‘subjective form’ – that shapes the character of the entity: ‘how an actual entity becomes’, Whitehead (1978: 23) writes, ‘constitutes what that actual entity is’. The singularity of an event is based not simply on the coming together of prehensions therefore, but on their becoming together in a particular way. The question as to whether an entity – a scientific artefact or work of art for example – is ‘real’ or whether it is a ‘representation’ is thus displaced in favour of the question as to what it can do. What does this particular set of relations and this specific mode of belonging-together problematize?

Although the contemporary Belgian philosopher of science, Isabelle Stengers, does not conceive of an event in exactly the sense that Deleuze and Whitehead do, her understanding of it is certainly informed by a similar interest in problems. For Stengers, a scientific experiment is an event only if it makes a difference between a before and an after, that is, if it is able to invent new practices, and new ways of thinking and feeling about a problem. This is precisely why Stengers puts modern science under the sign of the event, for by inventing ‘the power to confer on things the power of conferring on the experimenter the power to speak in their name’ (2000: 88) a new relation between fact and fiction was introduced. The event constitutes one of the most important and valuable aspects of Stengers approach to science, because it enables her to respect the singularity of modern science without confirming its privilege on this basis. For although the event is the creator of difference, it does not identify in advance for whom it will make a difference, or in what way. It is not the bearer of signification. Instead, ‘[t]he scope of the event is part of its effects, of the problem posed in the future it creates’ (Stengers 2000: 66). All those who are touched by an event define and are defined by it, whether they align themselves to it or oppose it. Not only does the event have no privileged representative therefore (science is not the domain of scientists alone), it is also impossible for any participant in an event, by definition, to stand outside of it and to pass judgement on it, or to explain it away with reference to a history, culture or geographical area. As in Deleuze and Whitehead’s conception of an event, this is an understanding that foregrounds contingency, ‘without basing contingency on some specific ontological foundation (such as language, discourse, the body, or materiality)’ (Mackenzie, 2005: 9).

In The Fold Deleuze draws on Leibniz and Whitehead in order to emphasize the constant enfolding, unfolding, and refolding of matter, time and space. ‘The unit of matter,’ he (2001: 6) writes, ‘the smallest element of the labyrinth, is the fold, not the point’. In this way, Deleuze delivers a profound blow to any philosophy that rests on a distinction between the knowing subject and the object for knowledge. In Deleuze’s ‘objectless knowledge’ (Badiou, 1994: 67), the object refers not to a spatialized relation of formmatter, but to a temporal modulation, a variation, in a continuum. Correlatively, the subject, which also represents variation, is a ‘point of view’. This does not mean that the subject ‘has’ a point of view (which would imply a pre-given subject), or that the truth varies from subject to subject (which would imply that the truth is relative), but rather that the point of view is ‘the condition in which the truth of a variation appears to the subject (Deleuze, 2001: 20). For Deleuze, truth is variation. And, as an immanent inflection of the continuous, the event is the condition of truth, the condition of what is possible to be true in any local situation (thus the opposite of the truth, in Deleuze’s account, is not the false but the absurd, or that which is neither true nor false). Which is precisely the problem for Alain Badiou. The event, understood by Deleuze as that which emerges out of an ontological univocity, ‘as what singularizes continuity in each of its local folds’ (Badiou, 1994: 56), is too much of the world, is so much a part of the world, in fact, that Badiou feels obliged to call its singularity into question: how is it possible to distinguish an event from a fact if ‘everything is event’? Deleuze’s concept of the fold is so profoundly antiextensional, Badiou argues, so labyrinthine and directly qualitative, that he is unable to account for the singularity of an event or rupture at all.

Perhaps Deleuze’s contribution to eventthinking should ultimately be judged by the extent to which he was able to invent concepts that affirm and extend events. This, he argues in What is Philosophy? (with Guattari, 1994), is the role of philosophy itself: ‘There is a dignity of the event that has always been inseparable from philosophy as amor fati: being equal to the event, or becoming the offspring of one’s own events’ (Deleuze and Guattari, 1994: 158). Being equal to the event means willing the event in a way that involves neither resignation nor ressentiment, that is affirmative, that transforms the quality of the will itself. In this ethical task, Deleuze owes as much to Neitzsche as he does to the Stoics. Indeed in this context, Philip Goodchild (1996: 53) argues