## 132 Theory, Culture & Society 23(2–3)

that the eternal return should be understood ‘not [as] a theory of time, but [as] a technique for living the event’. Less ambitiously however, one might argue that Deleuze’s conception of the event – and particularly his emphasis on the problem, and on the way that the problem, which is conditioned by the event, will always be different and irreducible to the solutions it engenders (just as an event always exceeds the bodies in which it is actualized) – offers a practical orientation for the way that ethics itself, including Deleuze’s own ethics, might be judged. That is: ‘less by the types of solutions that are being proposed for the problems than by the way in which the positioning of the problem and the solutions proposed situate and involve those to whom they are addressed’ (Stengers with Ralet, 1997: 221–2). This does not involve inventive problem-solving. It involves inventive problem-making.

## Acknowledgements

Thanks to Andrew Barry, Andrew Goffey, Adrian Mackenzie and Alberto Toscano for comments on earlier drafts of this entry. All errors are my own.

## References

Badiou, A. (1994) ‘Gilles Deleuze, The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque’, pp. 51–69 in C.V. Boundas and D. Olkowski (eds) Gilles Deleuze and the Theater of Philosophy. New York and London: Routledge.

Barry, A. (2005) ‘Pharmaceutical Matters: The Invention of Informed Materials’, in M. Fraser, S. Kember and C. Lury (eds) ‘Inventive Life: Approaches Towards a New Vitalism’, special issue, Theory, Culture & Society 22(1): 51–69.

Deleuze, G. (1995) Negotiations 1972–1990. New York: Columbia University Press.

Deleuze, G. (2001 [1988]) The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque. Trans. Tom Conley. London: Athlone Press.

Deleuze, G. (2004 [1969]) The Logic of Sense. London and New York: Continuum Press.

Deleuze, G. and F. Guattari (1994) What is Philosophy? London and New York: Verso.

Goodchild, P. (1996) Gilles Deleuze and the Question of Philosophy. London: Associated University Presses.

Haraway, D. (1997) Modest\_Witness@Second\_ Millennium.FemaleMan©\_Meets\_OncoMouse TM. New York and London: Routledge.

Latour, B. (2004) ‘Why Has Critique Run Out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of Concern’, Critical Inquiry 30: 225–48.

Mackenzie, A. (2005) ‘The Problem of the Technological: Event and Excess Relationality’, Social Epistemology 19(2/3): 1–19.

Patton, Paul (ed.) (1996) The Deleuze Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.

Stengers, I. (2002) Penser Avec Whitehead. Paris: Le Seuil, L’ordre Philosophique.

Stengers, I. (2000) The Invention of Modern Science. Trans. D.W. Smith. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Stengers, I. with O. Ralet (1997) ‘Drugs: Ethical Choice or Moral Consensus’, pp. 215–32 in I. Stengers (ed.) Power and Invention: Situating Science. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Whitehead, A.N. (1920) The Concept of Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Whitehead, A.N. (1978 [1929]) Process and Reality. Corrected edition. Ed. D.R. Griffin and D.W. Sherburne. New York: The Free Press.

Whitehead, A.N. (1985 [1925]) Science and the Modern World. London: Free Association Books.

Mariam Fraser is a senior lecturer in Sociology at Goldsmiths College, University of London. Her research focuses on facts, values, ethics and process, especially in relation to science and bioethics.

# Chronotope

# Luis Alberto Brandão

Keywords Bakhtin, science, space, theory, time

of a theoretical system, but also by inquiring to what extent, and through which forms, this concept has been diffused beyond the limits of the discipline or area of knowledge in which it was originally proposed. The power of certain categories is connected to the fact that they allow themselves to be translated into the languages, and according to the parameters, of other fields of knowledge. Considering the transformations that have occurred in the passage from one field to another, one can therefore claim that the importance of a concept cannot be disassociated from its ability to generate images and stimulate metaphorical appropriations.

One of the most evident demonstrations of this claim can be found in the way that the category of time–space, introduced in the first decade of the 20th century by the physicist Albert Einstein, was taken up by Mikhail Bakhtin as a reference for his concept of chronotope. In the introduction to his article ‘Forms of Time and of the Chronotope in the Novel’, written in the 1930s, the Russian thinker defines it thus:

We will give the name chronotope (literally, ‘time space’) to the intrinsic connectedness of temporal and spatial relationships that are artistically expressed in literature. This term is employed in mathematics, and was introduced as part of Einstein’s Theory of Relativity. The special meaning it has in relativity theory is not important for our purposes; we are borrowing it for literary criticism almost as a metaphor (almost, but not entirely). (Bakhtin, 1981: 84)

If we take the power of influence of their theories as a criterion, and the fact that they produce a complex set of discourses that have been more or less institutionalized, on several levels of cultural reality, there is no doubt that Einstein and Bakhtin are among the most respected names in western thought. It is unlikely, therefore, that the consonance between the concepts of space–time and the chronotope, as well as the strong effect and the continuing interest they arouse, is fortuitous. It is more reasonable to suppose that both concepts express fundamental questions and problems of physics and the theory of language, which is to say that both concepts efficiently synthesize the attempts to equate epistemological questions considered central to the 20th century, questions related to dissatisfaction with the ways available up to that moment for dealing with notions of time and space, movement and position, duration and extension, change and structure, history and context, possibility and determination.

On the other hand, it cannot be denied that the concepts of time–space and chronotope play specific roles in the histories of their respective areas of knowledge. When these roles are compared, the discrepancies between the two terms become clear. The Einsteinian concept fulfills the function of contradicting common sense in ‘pre-scientific’ thought, which conceives space and time as ‘real things’, directly observable by sense experience, a conception that is to some extent endorsed by Newtonian physics. At the same time, it is opposed to Kantian idealism, which regards space and time as a priori categories. It should be noted as well that time is incorporated into space, is one of its dimensions in a four-dimensional space. The Bakhtinian concept acts as the negation of a formalist tradition, which defines language in terms of intrinsic data. This is a question of foregrounding historical factors, understood as those factors that define a given concrete reality. Although the concept affirms that time and space are inseparable, it is time that is given priority, regarded as synonymous with history.

There is therefore a significant difference. Einsteinian thought explores the consequences of disconnecting what are considered fundamental concepts from the experience of the human senses, which obliges the notion of science to conciliate radical speculation with the need for an experimental demonstration of the facts. For Bakhtinian thought, it is a matter of defending a positive conception of knowledge, based above all on the primacy of the notion of history as a concrete instance of reality to the detriment of idealistic interpretations, which make use of transcendental presuppositions, especially concerning aesthetic questions, from which is derived the great emphasis given to the body as material reality of the world.

It must be said that the conceptual-metaphorical play developed in Bakhtin’s work, despite the explicit admission of being inspired by Einstein, does not privilege a debate associated with the transformations of classical physics within those of modern physics, but mainly the confrontation between a Ptolemaic model of language, in which a unique linguistic consciousness and the centripetal character of social forces prevail, and a Copernican model (also referred to as Galilean), marked by centrifugal forces and by a relative, plural, dialogic linguistic consciousness. It is possible to suppose that the Einsteinian inspiration arises from the appropriation, in a very broad sense, of the notion of relativity, understood as a generic opposition to everything intended to be absolute. In Einstein’s theory, however, relativity only makes sense when the velocity of light is regarded as an undisputed constant. It is not a question of opposing relative to absolute, but of determining to what systems these values can or cannot be applied.

It is tempting to suppose that, in the ambivalence of Bakhtin’s concept relative to Einstein’s, the ambivalence of a good part of the field of humanities in the first part of the 20th century is revealed. This field seeks to claim its scientific basis in two conflicting ways: in one, by drawing near to the natural sciences as a model of positive and socially legitimated knowledge; in the other, by distancing itself from them through the attempt to establish theoretical and methodological specificity. This duplicity explains why, on a fairly regular basis, concepts are shared by disciplines, even if, owing to the particularities they take on, they can be regarded as metaphors in relation to another discipline’s theoretical context. Independently of the degree of fidelity or freedom in the passage from one context to another, the concept-metaphors make up a common field of interest whose theoretical productivity and power of imaginative suggestion are seen in the developments appropriate to the limits and openings of each area of knowledge.

If chronotope is ‘almost but not entirely’ a metaphor of space-time, one may ask if such irrefutable ambivalence does not indicate the very difficulty of distinguishing the metaphorical from the conceptual operation. In Bakhtin’s theoretical model, the chronotope acts as a concept to which specific features are attributed and, at the same time, as a metaphor that evokes aspects of the Einsteinian concept. And yet, a rigorous separation between the two uses cannot be established either; to what extent the term aspires to generality, with its foundational and propositional function, and to what extent it does not have its own meaning, but merely operates in a diffuse and suggestive way by analogy, cannot be defined.

Time–space and chronotope meet, conceptually and metaphorically, in a common epistemological field that has selected as a basic problem the human determination of knowledge, which includes the debate over the universal and the particular, absolute and relative, fact and discourse, what can be demonstrated and what can be imagined. The thought of Einstein and of Bakhtin share, even though in different senses, the tension between the acceptance of a human scale for knowledge – in which its historicity is primary, to which the limitations and potentialities that ground it in a specific context are connected – and the transposition of this scale, the search for which is beyond the human capacity for perception and conception.

## Reference

Bakhtin, M.M. (1984) The Dialogic Imagination. Ed. Michael Holquist. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.

Luis Alberto Brandão is an Associate Professor in the Department of Literary Theory at the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil.

# Contingency Márcio Seligmann-Silva (Translated by Thomas Burns)

Keywords catastrophe, dialectical images, expectation, experience, fortune, memory, necessity

T<sup>o</sup> <sup>think</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>contingency</sup> <sup>today</sup> <sup>means</sup> <sup>to</sup>reflect on a series of other concepts, such as chance, accident, rupture, shock, catastrophe, chaos, fortune, luck, indetermination and freedom, and to dialectically confront them with as many others, such as necessity, fate, experience, rationality, continuity, progress, historia magistra vitae, teleology, order and determination. From Aristotle to Derrida (1972) – by way of poets like Mallarmé with his ‘Un coup de dés,’ which ends with the phrase: ‘Toute Pensée émet un Coup de Dés’ – the number of authors who think about the question of contingency is large. Here, we shall analyze this question on the basis of a few ideas of Walter Benjamin. First, however, it is important to quickly recount some of the uses of the term contingency and the conceptual context in which it is encountered.

A distinction has been made since Aristotle between events that are necessary (cf. anankê, necessity) and those that occur by chance (Physics II, 5–6). From chance occurrences, he also distinguished between good and evil fortune. His definition is important: ‘Chance and what results from chance are appropriate to agents that are capable of good fortune and of moral action generally. Therefore necessarily chance is in the sphere of moral actions.’ The ‘deliberate intention’ is decisive in this case. He also established a hierarchy that has become standard: ‘no incidental cause can be prior to a cause per se’. Chance, tyche, is a type of efficient, or incidental cause, that is differentiated from ‘spontaneity’, where there is no rational choice. Aristotle writes: ‘an inanimate thing or a lower animal or a child cannot do anything by chance, because it is incapable of deliberate intention; nor can “good fortune” or “ill fortune” be ascribed to them, except metaphorically. . . . The spontaneous on the other hand is found both in the lower animals and in many inanimate objects.’ For the atomists, however, as in the case of Epicurus, fortune is associated with anankê, blind necessity, which operates without a specific end. Men work for the freedom of means to go against this fixed rule: such contingency he understood as the concept of tyche.

This ancient model will partly be followed and partly criticized by the theologians of Christianity. Among the pagan gods, Fortune was the one who had the longest life. St Augustine was ironic in his City of God (IV, 18) when he asked: ‘How is it, then, that the goddess Fortune is sometimes good, sometimes bad?’ For Aquinas, ‘while there are no proximate causes of fortuitous events, there is an ultimate cause’ (Bolwin, 1999: 9). Aquinas argues, to save the moral aspect of action, ‘that we cannot fear that God’s knowledge of the future fixes its character. Rather, we can only say that God knows what we know as future contingents, together with all other things past and present, in a glance, in a flash, in a timeless instant’ (Bolwin, 1999: 10). And the author continues: ‘contingency, chance, and fortune are features of the world because God has willed them there’ (Bolwin, 1999: 11). These arguments are similar to those of Augustine (De civ. Dei XI, 21) and Boethius (De Consol. V 2–6).

In modernity, this theological perspective gradually gives way to a teleology based on the idea of progress that projects a reason and sense of history. The enlightenment optimism of Leibniz and Alexander Pope, co-opted also by theological models that gave meaning to the Theodicy, is shaken after 1755, the year of the Lisbon earthquake, and especially after 1789. Voltaire took advantage of the natural catastrophe, in his Poème sur le désastre de Lisbonne, to criticize both the Christian doctrines that saw in it divine punishment and the optimists who believed they lived in the best of worlds. He offered no meaning for what had occurred, a lack that was something new. If Voltaire sometimes still gave a moralizing reading to history, with the new historiography the desire to include everything in an attempt to rationally comprehend history beyond each isolated fact gradually became established.

During this period and in the 19th century an attempt was made in historiography to overcome the notion of chance and contingency. If Raymond Aron could write in the 20th century that ‘Le fait historique est, par essence, irréductible à l’ordre: le hasard est le fondement de l’histoire’ (1981: 21), in the previous centuries the opposite occurred. The young Friedrich the Great had written in the 18th century: ‘La fortune et le hasard sont des mots vides de sens’ and Montesquieu and Gibbon were not less critical of those concepts. The teleology of nature, in Kant, and of the spirit, in Hegel, was gradually taken over by a concern for a ‘scientific historiography that would be impartial before the facts. On the other hand, we may think that the distance between experience (Erfahrung) and expectation (Erwartung) increased so much in modernity that we can no longer construct experience, tending to live enclosed in the present and in the expectation of new events. Experience is no longer sufficient to ground expectation. Benjamin was recognized to have theorized this fact with his concept of the end of experience (Erfahrung).

Walter Benjamin did not directly employ the notion of contingency, but we may regard him as the theoretician of history who went furthest in thinking about contingency. The theory of allegory that Benjamin developed in his book on German Baroque drama emphasizes the role of that trope in the destruction of the ‘false appearance of totality’ (Benjamin: I 352), which enlightenment historiography and historicism tried to defend. This destruction is correlated with the ‘cult of ruins’ (Benjamin: I 354) and of the fragment:

When, with Baroque drama [Trauerspiel], history is staged, it becomes so in the form of writing. The word ‘history,’ with its transitory characters, is found on the face of nature. The allegorical physiognomy of nature-history, which Trauerspiel stages, is effectively present as ruins. . .What is encountered there in the form of débris is the highly significant fragment: this is the material of Baroque creation. (Benjamin: I 353–4)

For the Baroque man, we might say, to use an extreme expression, life is summed up by the production of the cadaver. The world of Baroque drama is not the only one dominated by the sad, ambiguous figure of the sovereign who ‘holds in his hands the historical event’ (Benjamin: I 245). In fact, in the 17th century, the stage also penetrates history and one of the ways to perceive this phenomenon is to consider the new concept of sovereignty during this period. The Baroque man ‘is obsessed with the idea of catastrophe as the antithesis of the historical idea of Restoration. It is on this antithesis that the theory of the State of Exception (Ausnahmezustand) is built . . . if the religious man of the Baroque holds on so tightly to the world it is because he feels himself being dragged by it toward destruction. The Baroque is not aware of any eschatology; what exists in itself is a dynamic that joins and exalts all earthly things before they are given up to consummation (Benjamin: I 246). It is this dynamic that is at the basis of the Baroque allegory as an exercise of infinitely resignifying a world/signified ‘disenchanted and emptied from any totalizing meaning.

Allegory in the 19th century, or more precisely Baudelairean allegory, emerged from the sense of the transitory and contingent that is rooted in the advent of the modern city. The law of the city – the law of Hausmann, the mayor of Paris who wanted to redesign the face of the city – is that of constant destruction and construction. The photographer Eugène Atget – whose photos of Paris, in which the city appears uninhabited, enchanted not only the surrealists but Benjamin himself – documents and witnesses a city transformed into the ruins of itself: in the texts that came with the prints of his photos, he noted ‘va disparaître’. The Baudelairean cult of images is precisely the response to constant and irreparable loss: ‘What you know you will no longer have before you turns into an image’, Benjamin writes in his ‘Das Paris des Second Empire bei Baudelaire of 1938. This feeling of the ephemeral nature of the world creates melancholy, the ‘spleen’ that Benjamin defines as ‘the feeling that corresponds to permanent catastrophe’ (Benjamin: V 437).

Benjamin also asserts that ‘the experience of the allegory, which fixes itself on the ruins [Trümmern] is properly that of the eternal ephemeral’ (Benjamin: V 439). Instead of the feeling of the continuity of time, one has the sensation of drowning in the avalanche of seconds: ‘the minutes cover a man like snowflakes’, he (2003: 335) says, and goes on to write: ‘This time is historyless’. The modern individual who has missed the streetcar of history remains at the station, paralyzed. ‘Why speak of progress, Benjamin asks, ‘to a world that sinks into a deathly rigidity? . . . The concept of progress should be founded upon the idea of catastrophe. It is not the always imminent but the always given’ (Benjamin: V, 592; I 682–3). The historian/allegorist of Benjamin is the one who turns to the ruins of history/catastrophe to collect its fragments. In this vision of history, there is no longer a place for traditional, representational, historiography, which presupposes a ‘distance’ and an ‘impartiality between the historian and his/her ‘object’, as well as the corresponding figure of the historian as someone who himself firmly grips the reins of his knowledge.

In the essay ‘On Some Motifs in Baudelaire (1939), Benjamin developed a conception of the present time as a time of shock. In modernity, what was once the exception – shock – has now become the rule. Starting from a reading of Freud’s text Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1921), Benjamin points out the incompatibility in our psychic economy between perception/consciousness and memory. Quoting Freud, he claims that ‘emerging consciousness takes the place of a memory trace (Benjamin, 2003: 317). It is not the place here to recount the Freudian theory of trauma, but only to note how Benjamin translates into Proustian terms the equation derived from it: ‘Only what has not been experienced explicitly and consciously, what has not happened to the subject as an isolated experience [Erlebnis], can become a component of mémoire involontaire’ (Benjamin, 2003: 317). The modern world would be the world of shocks and its inhabitants would be totally mobilized to protect themselves from them and, in such a way, prevent the destruction of the ego. For Benjamin, such attentive vigilance would also prevent the building of authentic experience [Erfahrung], in which ‘certain contents of the individual past combine in the memory with material from the collective past’ (Benjamin, 2003: 316).

He detects the experience of shock in the member of the crowd, as well as in the experience of the worker at his machine or the pedestrian in traffic. For him: ‘The catastrophe [must be seen] as a continuum of history’ (Benjamin: I 1244), or even, in a wry mood, ‘Catastrophe is progress, progress is catastrophe’ (Benjamin: I 1244). If he gives a definition of ‘the present as catastrophe (Benjamin: I 1243), it is precisely because ‘The ideal of the experience of shock is catastrophe (Benjamin: I 1182). On the other hand, for Benjamin, the time of genuine experience is that which is deduced from the rhythm of handiwork; in his world, activities that correspond to this kind of experience are, in addition to the work of the artisan, agriculture and travel. The mémoire involuntaire, however, cannot restore this organic time of the world of experience; it too is ‘historyless’.

The act of the historian/allegorist, who also freezes the past in images, corresponds to this interruption of history. Benjamin’s most famous concept, the dialectical image, is the result of this conception of historiography as the destruction of the ‘false appearance of totality’:

Both the paralysis of thought [Stillstellen] and its movement belong to thought. Wherever thought is paralyzed in a constellation loaded with tensions there appears the dialectical image. It is the caesura in the movement of thought [Es ist die Zäsur in der Denkbewegung]. Naturally, its locale is not arbitrary. It must be sought, in a word, where the tensions between dialectical oppositions are found at their greatest. Thus, the dialectical image is the object itself, constructed by the presentation of historical materialism. It is identical with the historical object; it justifies its removal outside the continuum of history’s path. (Benjamin: V 595)

Just as for the allegorist the world rid of all ontologically determined meaning was transformed into a set of images that should have been reinvested with meaning, in the same way the historian/collector sees history fall apart in images loaded with tensions: he revives them starting from his now. (Benjamin: V 578.)

The dialectical images are also defined by Benjamin as ‘the involuntary memory of redeemed humanity’ (Benjamin: I 1233). That is, the ‘now that is at the basis of the knowledge of history establishes the ground for the recognition of an image of the past that, in fact, is an ‘image of memory. It looks like the images of the past itself that rise up before people at the moment of danger’ (Benjamin: I 1243). Instead of the search for the (mimetic) representation of the past ‘just as it was’, as the traditional historicist and positivist positions on history supposed it (that is to say: representationalists and enemies of the concept of contingency), Benjamin wants to articulate the past historically by appropriating it ‘from a reminiscence’. The historian must have a presence of spirit (Geistesgegenwart) to pick out these images at the moment they offer themselves: in this way he saves them by paralyzing them (Benjamin: I 1244). This history, built on the basis of the involuntary memory, rejects and eliminates the ‘epic moment of the exhibition of history’, its representation according to a monologically ordained narration. ‘Involuntary memory never offers . . . a path but rather an image (from which comes ‘disorder’ like the imagistic-space of involuntary memory) (Benjamin: I 1243). This image is read by the historian and therefore is a hieroglyphic image, a kind of writing: ‘Reading what was never written’. These words of the poet Hugo von Hofmannsthal that Benjamin quotes might serve very well as an epigraph for his work.

To this reading guided by the chaotic rhythm of involuntary memory corresponds a fragmented historiography (which is not a simple mimesis of the omnipresence of shock and the trauma of modernity, since the historian aims his knowledge toward a political intervention in his present). Benjamin incorporates into this historiography – guided by the principle of similarity, which rules memory – the main artistic principle of the vanguard, namely, montage/collage (Benjamin: V 574). What gives way to the destructive force of the principle of montage/collage is a certain modality of tradition, namely, that of the Würdigung als Erbe, the apology of the past as heritage and continuity, which Benjamin calls a catastrophic modality of tradition, to the extent that it conceals the fragile moments where continuity can be broken (Benjamin: V 591s.; I 1246).