## References

Aron, R. (1981) Introduction à la philosophie de l’histoire. Essai sur les limites de l’objectivité historique. Paris: Editions Gallimard.

Benjamin, W. (1972–2000) Gesammelte Schriften, Vols I–VII. Ed. R. Tiedemann and H. Schweppenhäuser. Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp.

Benjamin, W. (2003) Selected Writings, vol. 4. Trans. Edmund Jephcott and others. London: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Bolwin, J. (1999) Contingency and Fortune in Aquinas’s Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Derrida, J. (1972) ‘Signature, Événement, Contexte’, in Marges de la philosophie. Paris: Seuil.

Derrida, J. (1984) ‘My Chances/Mes Chances: A Rendezvous with Some Epicurean Stereophonies’, in J.H. Smith and W. Kerrigan (eds) Taking Chances: Derrida, Psychoanalysis, and Literature. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.

Jokisch, Rodrigo (n.d.) ‘Evolution’. Available at: http://www.tu-berlin.de/\~society/Jokisch\_ GB\_Evolution.htm

Koselleck, R. (1989) ‘Der Zufall als Motivationsrest in der Geschichtsschreibung’, in Vergangene Zukunft. Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp.

Rorty, R. (1989) Contingency, Irony and Solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wellbery, D. (1992) ‘Zur literaturwissenschaftlichen Relevanz des Kontingenzbegriffs. Eine Glosse zur Diskussion um den Poststrukturalismus’, in K.W. Hempfer (ed.) Poststrukturalismus-Dekonstruktion-Postmoderne. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner.

Márcio Seligmann-Silva completed his PhD at the Freie University of Berlin. He is Professor for Literary Theory and Aesthetics at the Department of Literary Theory in Campinas University, Brazil.

# Space

Nigel Thrift

Abstract The turn to space is best understood as part of a more general struggle to produce a material thinking that has preoccupied social theory over the last 20 years or so. Its effect has been to multiply both the number of inhabitations that are understood to exist and the sensory registers through which they can be characterized. Most particularly, this proliferation of inhabitations has meant that nearness has been replaced by distribution as a guiding metaphor and ambition. The paper is in three parts. Using the work of Julie Mehretu as a guide, the first part considers the different ways in which space makes a difference. The second part then uses three vignettes to understand the range of spaces that can be produced and how they become attuned. Finally, there is a brief conclusion.

Keywords materiality, process, space

## Introduction

During the last 20 years or so, a ‘spatial turn’ has made its way across the social sciences and humanities. It has arisen from all kinds of theoretical and practical impulses, but its effect has been clear enough: the identification of what seems like a constantly expanding universe of spaces and territories, each of which provides different kinds of inhabitation – from the bordering provided by the womb, through all the things in the home that are just out of reach, through the corporeal traces of buildings and landscapes that provide a kind of half-remembered poetics, through the ways in which vast political and commercial empires – and the resultant wealth and misery – can be fashioned from the mundane comings and goings of ships and trains and now planes, through all of the billions of invisible messages that fleetingly inhabit the radio spectrum and each another dimension on to life.

There are no doubt many reasons to believe that the spatial turn will prove to be of lasting significance. But, in the final analysis, or so I would claim, the ‘spatial turn’ has proved to be a move of extraordinary consequence because it questions categories like ‘material’, ‘life’ and ‘intelligence’ through an emphasis on the unremitting materiality of a world where there are no pre-existing objects. Rather, all kinds of hybrids are being continually recast by processes of circulation within and between particular spaces. The world is made up of all kinds of things brought in to relation with one another by this universe of spaces through a continuous and largely involuntary process of encounter and the often violent training that the encounter forces. This material schematism that has had some obvious forebears in the social sciences and humanities. I think of Gabriel Tarde’s micrometaphysics, Pitirim Sorokin’s forays into sociocultural causality, Torsten Hägerstrand’s time-geography, or Anthony Giddens’s expeditions around social theory in the late 1970s and early 1980s. It has achieved more grip of late because of theoretical developments like actor-network theory, and the consequent rediscovery of authors such as Tarde and Whitehead, as well as the influence of the writings of authors like Deleuze and Guattari. As and probably more importantly, a whole series of fields have been constructed out of the resurgence of what Paul Carter (2004) calls ‘material thinking’, the ‘performative’ working methods and procedures of writings (and, very importantly, other methods of exposition) that emphasize how the whole business of praxis and poiesis is wrapped up in the stubborn plainness of things, in ‘tool-being’ (Harman, 2002). These fields must necessarily emphasize the materiality of thinking, and include the study of material culture, the sociology of science, performance studies from dance to poetry, site-based art and architecture, various aspects of archaeology and museum studies, some of the excursions into interaction design, as well as various developments in cultural geography like non-representational theory. In particular, they have been forced to take the energy of the sense-catching forms of things seriously (Critchley, 2005) – rather than see things as mere cladding – because of their object of enquiry and, as a result, have begun to forge a new approach to ‘theory’, one which is both more and less abstract, more and less empirical.

In this short piece, I can only begin to outline why the processual sensualism that a material schematism provides is so important and how the study of the spaces of the world is now changing to accommodate that fact. So, I will begin by listing some of the dos and don’ts that this sense of space dictates. Then, I will move on to suggest three ways in which space makes more than a difference. I will argue that space opens up whole new worlds by making it possible to write about life without falling back into a romantic quest for a place of safety and about society without falling back on to static categories and about knowledge of being without falling back on the recondite. Finally, there is the briefest of conclusions in which I foreshadow the possibility of new a-wherenesses.

## Why Space?

I am a great admirer of the intricately layered, flickering topographies of Julie Mehretu, the Ethiopian-American artist. Though one can see all kinds of echoes in her work – the historical push of Delacroix and Goya, the geometric swirls and abstractions of Kandinsky, Klee, Malevich and Mondrian, the enveloping wash of colour field painting, the various iconic and graphical moments that act as the frames of popular culture, such as brands and comic books and tattoos, the kinds of excerpt protest represented by practices as different as those of graffiti artists, propagandists and situationists, and the poetics of contemporary architects like Hadid or Ando – I think she also produces something new, a sense of what high-velocity hybrid landscapes made up of many kinds of actor and of plural events happening at many locations might look/feel/work like.

Mehretu’s canvasses try to incorporate many kinds of spaces, many kinds of dynamics, many kinds of existences, many kinds of imagination, holding each of these spaces in tension and never trying to resolve them: collisions, concordances, cataclysms, they are all here, along with ‘speed, dynamism, struggle and potential’ (Mehretu in Fogle and Ilesanmi, 2004: 14). Instead of resolution, she sees her task as trying to produce a sense of trajectory which is probably the nearest thing to what used to be called history that social theory can now offer.

It seems to me that four closely related principles underlie her moves, principles that should be at the root of any approach to space. The first is that everything, but everything, is spatially distributed, down to the smallest monad: since the invention of the microscope, at least, even the head of a pin has been seen to have its own geography. Every space is shot through with other spaces in ways that are not just consequential outcomes of some other quality but live because they have that distribution. It is a bit like modern biology, which has discovered that the process of cell growth relies on a sense of where things are to produce particular parts of an organism, a sense that is more than just the provision of a map but rather is a fundamental part of the process of growth, built into the constitution of organ-ism itself. This is much more than complexity. Rather, it harks back to the insights of Gabriel Tarde on complex composites: that small can be as complex as large, indeed that the smaller can be the bigger entity, that the world is heterarchic through and through with the same method pertaining at all levels, and that the big therefore foregrounds some of the features of the small (Latour, 2002).

Second, there is no such thing as a boundary. All spaces are porous to a greater or lesser degree. For example, bodies caught in freeze-frame might look like envelopes but, truth to tell, they are leaky bags of water, constantly sloughing off pieces of themselves, constantly leaving traces – effluent, memories, messages – through moments of good or bad encounter in which practices of organization and community and emnity are passed on, sometimes all but identically, sometimes bearing something new.

Third, every space is in constant motion. There is no static and stabilized space, though there are plenty of attempts to make space static and stable. Process (or perhaps, more accurately, force-being) is all in that it is all that there is, process arising out of informed or ‘transducted’ material and the lines of force of invention that result from ‘creating a novel entity other than the entities given in disjunction’ (Whitehead, 1978: 21). In this Whiteheadian microphysics ‘the world is a flux of vectors, vectorial connections actualized in the events through which it pluralises itself by expressing its own energetic activity in variable configurations’ (Alliez, 2004: 2). (Such an emphasis on creative self-determination as a sacrament of expression could no doubt be associated with many other neo-monadological positions: for example, Tarde’s micrometaphysical institution of the social, or Deleuze’s cartography of the movements and rhythms of thought, with its underlining of the concept as an open, consistent and intensive multiplicity, or equally his work on the movement-image as a material image that the biology of the brain discovers with its own means.)

Fourth, there is no one kind of space. Space comes in many guises: points, planes, parabolas; blots, blurs and blackouts. Some want to have it that the meeting is the thing. Others that it is scaling. Others that it is emergence. Others that it is translation. Truth to tell, all these things exist – and none – as part of the tuning of local variant systems (Levinson, 2004). In a world without levels, the words are necessarily approximations of the right size of the world that chime with the finding that the fundamental fact of human communication is its variability, co-evolutionary construals that are a part of how we learn to environ the world and how the world learns to environ us (Wagner, 2001).

What Mehretu’s work also simultaneously represents is a turning away from four other ways of thinking space. One is as part of a search for authenticity achieved. The literature is still replete with notions of space as a place in which everything comes together, if only for a little while, in a centred space in which things are co-located in such a way that presentations can come into alignment, thereby producing a sense of well-being which also confirms certain values. Even many convinced non-humanists have a longing for some kind of transcendence, be it an aesthetic, a synthesis, or even certain kinds of immanence which when triggered can expose a latent subjectivism which restricts referentiality to the ‘human’ (Harman, 2002).

The second turning away is from a search for a space that lies outside metrics. Mehretu’s work takes measuring, dividing and calculation in general as simply other ways of spacing out the world, with their own magic: indeed, in her projection of her drawings on to larger canvases, she is one of a long line of artists who have shown that measurement is not the enemy of art but a fundamental part of how art is made (Steadman, 2002). But, too often, essays on space have tried to picture the world as though the history of metrication is the polar opposite of creativity. Yet metrics have added in as much as they have taken away, producing not only new practices and apprehensions of motion but also fertile sources of conflict, as in the case of recent conflicts around post-socialist land, which have produced the phenomenon of the ‘vanishing hectare’; vanishing ‘as diminutions of people’s expected allotments, as false entries on property deeds, as reduced sites of personhood and economic value, and as diminished grounds for the experience of locality’ (Verdery, 2003: 32).

The third turning away is from space as a site separated from movement, in which mind and body can come to rest, an idea in all probability fostered by a sedentary perception of the world mediated by the allegedly superior senses of vision and hearing which arise with modern modes of transport and with the modes of seeing adopted by the cinema and television. This kind of perspective is currently being challenged by a ‘wayfaring’ perspective which stresses movement, both in terms of the many vicissitudes and sensory registers of travel-encounter and in terms of the stress on the movement-image, as Mehretu’s paintings show so well (Ingold, 2004). Thus, every place is regarded as a knot tied from the strands of the movements of its