transnational form. One needs to ask the question: Do transnational mobilities always work to the benefit of individual transmigrants attracted to the city? Or do the resources and cushioning effects provided by transnational connectivities somehow make it even easier for the cities to extract labor power from transmigrants while abdicating responsibility for their social welfare? Such abdication of responsibility – the lack of provision for rights and resources – is often justified by dint of the fact that transmigrants are non-citizens who have roots and networks anchoring them to the sending nations elsewhere (Yeoh et al., 2004).

The experience of upper-end skilled/ professional migrants in the global city (‘foreign talent’ as they are referred to in Singapore) is also not necessarily one of centrality and consolidation as far as the social spheres of life are concerned. Often, in order to circulate from one global city to the next, family forms have to be made flexible. Being in the city often means being away from the family as in the case of Hong Kong ‘astronauts’ and their families (the so-called ‘astronaut wives and parachute kids’ syndrome). Against the centering, inclusive effects of city-living, there is also the need to recognize the simultaneous embeddedness in the ‘city’ and ‘elsewhere’, and the need for constant mobility in linking the two in order to sustain social and cultural institutions such as the transnational family.

The importance of grappling with the way ‘centering’ and ‘mobility’ work with and against each other in specific contexts is implied in Michael Smith’s (2001) Transnational Urbanism where he uses the ‘transnational optic’ as a counter to the globalization perspective, as a bifocal lens which brings into view bodies – disposable labor or embodiments of talent in circulatory flows – and at the same time frames them within contested historical and geographical contexts as socially and spatially situated subjects. As Ryan Bishop communicated to me before, ‘the tension between storage/archive/consolidation on the one hand and circulation/amnesia/dispersal on the other reveals the inherent urbanism operative on both sides of the tension’ (pers. comm.). In the city, sedentarist administrative procedures and disciplining border controls have an in-built tendency to immobilize human bodies; at the same time, other contradictory impulses to move, circulate, defy fixity and transcend boundaries are equally powerful.

## Costs?

As already implied, there is nothing inevitable about the simultaneous impulses of centering and connecting in the shaping of globalizing cities. Feminists, for example, have insisted on giving attention to the politics of transnational urbanism. Not only has mobility across borders intensified in complex ways, there has been a feminization of many of these flows as a result of changing production and reproduction processes worldwide. Globalization processes, in which production activities are relocated from core economies to those of the periphery to take advantage of cheaper input costs, have drawn on the preexisting gender relations and targeted cheap and flexible female workers – many from countries with declining employment opportunities – to enter factory employment in export processing zones and industrial parks in rapidly industrializing countries. The other numerically more important form of female labor migration is linked to reproductive activities, such as domestic service and the sex industry. Major accounts of cultural globalization to which the transnational framework is linked tend to be masculinist, for they ‘make no attempt to identify the processes that increasingly differentiate the power of mobile and non-mobile subjects’ (Ong, 1999: 11). In traversing transnational space, men often feature as entrepreneurs, career-builders, adventurers and breadwinners who navigate transnational circuits with fluidity and ease, while women are alternatively taken to be missing in action from globalized economic webs, stereotyped as exotic, subservient or victimized, or relegated to playing supporting roles, usually in the domestic sphere or as a trailing spouse (Yeoh et al., 2000). As Freeman (2001: 1018) observes, ‘travel, with its embodiments of worldliness, adventure, physical prowess, and cultural mastery, is widely constructed as a male pursuit.’ In short, that ‘women stay home and men go abroad’ is a takenfor-granted expectation (Clifford, 1997: 6).

We also need to be suspicious of the claims that the transnational subject embodies liberatory potential that could challenge ‘oppressive nationalism, repressive state structures, and capitalism’. Aihwa Ong (1999: 15) reminds us of the ‘diverse forms of interdependencies and entanglements between transnational phenomena and the nationstates’ which trouble any easy assumptions equating mobility with emancipatory impulses. Indeed, the hypermobility and the easy transgression of national borders in today’s globalizing world may well be liberating or emancipatory for the individuals involved, but may also reinforce existing social ideologies, including those of the nation-state. It is important in a feminist approach to transnationality not to somehow attribute a sense of inevitability in thinking about transnational processes but to look them squarely in the eye and ask the all-important question as to who reaps the gains and who bears the costs of rapidly developing transnational social practices in global cities. Is it the transnational subject himself or herself, in subjecting his or her body to the constant state of being ‘neither here nor there’? Or are transnational families at risk, and does the cost fall mainly on women who often bear the emotional costs of holding the family stretched across countries together? Or do those outside the transnational project, such as the poor and those with little access to networks, bear the brunt of growing transnationality as a privileged discourse?

## References

Beaverstock, J.V., R.G. Smith and P.J. Taylor (2000) ‘World-City Network: A New Metageography?’, Annals of the Association of American Geographers 90(1): 123–34.

Clifford, J. (1997) Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth Century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Freeman, C. (2001) ‘Is Local:Global as Feminine:Masculine? Rethinking the Gender of Globalization’, Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 26(4): 1007–37.

Ong, A. (1999) Flexible Citizenship: The Cultural Logics of Transnationality. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Short, J.R. (2003) ‘Three Urban Discourses’,

pp. 18–25 in G. Bridge and S. Watson (eds) A Companion to the City. Oxford: Blackwell.

Short, R.S., C. Brietbach, S. Buckman and J. Essex (2000) ‘From World Cities to Gateway Cities: Extending the Boundaries of Globalization Theory’, Cities 4(2): 317–40.

Smith, M.P. (2001) Transnational Urbanism: Locating Globalization. Oxford: Blackwell.

Thrift, N. (1997) ‘Cities without Modernity, Cities with Magic’, Scottish Geographical Magazine 113(3): 138–49.

Yeoh, B.S.A., S. Huang and T. Devasahayam (2004) ‘Diasporic Subjects in the Nation: Foreign Domestic Workers, the Reach of Law and Civil Society in Singapore’, Asian Studies Review 28: 7–23.

Yeoh, B.S.A., S. Huang and K. Willis (2000) ‘Global Cities, Transnational Flows and Gender Dimensions: The View from Singapore’, Tijdschrift Voor Economische En Social Geografie (Journal of Economic and Social Geography) 2(2): 147–58.

Brenda S.A. Yeoh is Professor, Department of Geography, National University of Singapore and Research Leader (Asian Migration cluster) at the University’s Asia Research Institute.

# Junk Space

# Bobby Chong Thai Wong and Ryan Bishop

Keywords architecture, modernization, multicultural space, urbanism

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>rapid</sup> <sup>growth</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>urban</sup> <sup>areas</sup> <sup>that</sup> <sup>began</sup> <sup>in</sup>the 18th century led to numerous theories and practices about the proper and rational use of space. Often the terms ‘proper’ and ‘rational’ emerged from specific historical and intellectual traditions peculiar to European nations. The categories and standards to be pursued for urban space on a global scale were carried forward by imperial enterprises and later international capital and organizations. Usually deviations from these are dismissed as underdeveloped, chaotic or irrational ways of conceptualizing space. What these evaluations ignore, of course, is the larger spatial context in which any specific space occurs. We wish to use two student projects from studios run by Bobby Wong at the National

University of Singapore’s Department of Architecture to explore descriptions and evaluations of urban space at the end of the 20th century made by Rem Koolhaas. Specifically we are interested in exploring his provocative concept called ‘junkspace’, which he claims to be a ubiquitous global phenomenon.

This space has come about through the process of modernization (including globalization) that cannibalizes itself or has exhausted itself or become the apotheosis for the disenfranchised and the dispossessed. Koolhaas (2004) uses the analogy of space junk (that is, debris in outer space floating free of any context or control) to describe this coagulation. ‘If space junk is the human debris that litters the universe, junk-space is the residue mankind leaves on the planet’ (p. 162). The two student examples reveal the strengths and limitations of Koolhaas’ concept, and to modify and supplement this concept we will use the work of Walter Benjamin (1996, 1999) to provide a more nuanced sense of the use of urban space than that allowed by Koolhaas.

Koolhaas’ captions and writings implicitly bestow an abstract quality onto all junk-spaces, rendering them more or less equivalent. But before such ‘abstractness’ totalizes junk-space, we wish to explore some hypothetical projects that would simultaneously support and render problematic the totalizing dimensions of Koolhaas’ analysis. The first is a racetrack town proposed along the Malaysian North–South Highway, a scheme developed by a group of students led by Paul Chang. The studio was investigating ‘Anywhere’ architecture occurring sometime in the mid-1990s, the height of the real estate boom that griped Southeast and Northeast Asia, and the moment as well as sites of numerous examples of junk-space upon which Koolhaas draws. The ‘Anywhere’ architecture, in fact, explicitly manifests the qualities of junk-space insofar as it deploys a range of architectural strategies and assumptions peculiar to modernism without taking into account the context in which the building materializes, as well as ignoring notions of scale and fit. The scheme proposed by Chang’s team zoned strips of land, of approximately four kilometers in width, parallel to and on either side of the Highway as land possible for real estate development. In this space would be built the racetrack town.

The scheme was premised on a reality occurring at the time of immense profits to be made from real estate development, made possible by the construction of the North–South Highway, Peninsula Malaysia. The actual site of placement was irrelevant, befitting Anywhere architecture. The natural topography and vegetation offered no obstacles because they could be overcome by technology. Similarly, knowledge of actual racetrack construction could be overcome simply by copying and transporting virtually in digital form a given track and overlaying it across the said terrain. The Monte Carlo racetrack was chosen. The racetrack forms the basic armature to lay out the other urban elements of the town: mechanical garages, car show rooms, hotels for weekend getaways and so on. Similarly the various urban technologies upon which great profits could be generated from real estate speculation along a major new artery of international transport were replicated and modified in the site. The highway links the flows of goods, vehicles and peoples between nations while the racetrack depends upon the use of automobiles and expenditure of natural resources for no instrumental purpose of transportation, but merely going about in circles with limited traffic. The scheme, therefore, pushes the ‘noble’ profession of architecture into recycling its body parts; signs that are correlated with modern architectural elements (flat roofs, transparency, wall planes and columns as points on plan) that were once thought authentic and original were now constantly being reused, recovered and rearranged. Similarly the term Monte Carlo, which invokes the authenticity of space and its use, is decontextualized and ‘transported’ into a part of the world other than its own site, the racetown. Renamed the Marlboro Race Town, to further link language, space and corporate branding, the town takes on a character oddly reminiscent of but quite unlike that of the original.

The town embodies important elements of Koolhaas’ junk-space through its appropriation, replication, decontextualization and improper use of space/architecture that forces a rethinking of accepted standards and practices in a creative manner. Koolhaas’ junk-space, as exemplified in this project, resembles Benjamin’s notion of inscription as articulated in ‘Painting, or Signs and Marks’ (1917). Inscription reveals a de-historical use of space, one that discounts context and tradition within a given site. The inscription presumes the space as capable of conversion into a tabula rasa, which can be inscribed and erased at will. The racetown reveals such an inscription while also revealing a counter-historical understanding of space. That is, one can attempt pure erasure and pure replication but within the process of replication change occurs. What Chang’s team shows us is a latent and unavoidable political project inherent in even the modernist, ahistorical, apolitical strategies of universal architectural practice. Koolhaas’ junk-space, unlike Benjamin’s notion of inscription, seemingly ignores or downplays these ineluctable aspects of replication and recontextualization.

But there are spaces that might be labeled, pejoratively as ‘junk space’ by Koolhaas that reveal a complexity of embedded local knowledge interacting with global modernity and commenting upon it in ways not grasped by an outsider. Such a fecund, critical use of space can be detected in the second student example: a shopping centre in Singapore located along North Bridge Road on a site between Peninsula Plaza and the Capital Cinema. The scheme, a Master’s thesis by Lim Fun Kit, is driven by a thematic issue called ‘Unveiling the Verses’ and came into being mainly as a result of a number of coincidences. In the first place, there is a coincidental axis of entrances to two important religious structures: Masjid Burhani mosque and St Andrew’s Cathedral transept. These two elements face one another. In the wake of the 9/11 attacks in the USA and the Jamal Islamia incidents in Singapore, the scheme’s deployment of this coincidence between mosque and church took on added significance. The Dawoodi Bohras, members of an Islamist sect hailing from Gujarat and custodians of the Masjid Burhani, while practicing a highly orthodox form of Islam (in matters relating to dress, prayer, physical comportment and food), are also merchants (‘Bohra’ means ‘to trade’) who want to trade and exchange. The confluence of trade and worship, regardless of religious or ideological background, carries particular resonance in Singapore’s history. The proposal examined building a shopping complex with the thought that while exchanging goods and services for money, the building could also become an instrument of the faithful to share Islamist values. This additional form of exchange to be carried out on the site reveals the long historicity of exchange between Islam and Christianity from colonial times to the present while also taking advantage of the import of trade and exchange within Islam itself.

To highlight these levels of exchange, Lim adopted several strategies. First, he had the mosque and the cathedral look at each other by adopting and transposing the morphological structure of the cathedral nave and its columns such that its sectional symmetrical center coincides with the axis, thus framing in perspective the façade of either building depending on the direction of one’s gaze. The use of the Christian motif of the cross interacting with an Islamic site of worship (and trade) does not stop there. Lim goes further by mapping repeatedly the diagram of the cruciform (nave, two aisles and with transepts turned 90 degrees inward in alignment with the nave) from one end of the site to the other. Extensive use of an abstracted crucifix in the design of the shopping complex would be acceptable for Islamic worshippers, because shopping in its 20thcentury guise of mass consumption is largely a global capitalist enterprise which links it to Christian uses of capital and trade that differ from those dictated by Islamic law.

The replications of the transept can be used in various ways to structure space. In total, there are six of these replicated transepts, two of which are used in the plan to form two reflective pools. They are placed in a symmetrical relationship to each other in the mosque/transept axis, and therefore, frame the entrance to the rear of the mosque. The remaining four replicated transepts are transformed into volumetric containers. One of these houses the madrasah while another houses the library.

Because the plan highlights exchange at many different levels, Lim uses the metaphor of the hjab (the dress that veils the Muslim females) to articulate barriers to exchange in the midst of shopping as an activity while at the same time providing the possibility of transgressing barriers. The library walls are formed by transparent glass partitions, with the perimeter book stacks lining the inner sides of the partitions. The many changing gaps found amongst books within each book stack provide visual cues for shifts between the inside and outside of the library. Similarly the space for the Madrasah exposes and transgresses barriers, except it does so aurally rather than visually. The container is made up of solid dense concrete with a perimeter opening that separates the wall from the ceiling. As a result, readings of the Quran can be heard, though not seen, in and amongst the shoppers immediately outside the Madrasah. The architectural metaphor of the hjab is also used in the department store to screen areas specifically dedicated for women’s clothing and lingerie. Within that space, Muslim women can do away with their hjabs without transgressing their accepted practice. Because it is away from the male gaze, women, whether Muslim or non-Muslim, can shop with a sense of privacy.

‘Unveiling the Verses’ operates in a densely allusive and complex environment, and if its appropriation of modernist architectural practices was deemed ‘junk-space’ by Koolhaas for its apparent lack of modernist context, then it would only highlight the fact that every site – every space – contains a range of invisible contexts that shape the visible space in very specific, often contested, ways. What is of further interest in these two schemes, themselves junk-spaces in Koolhaas’ terminology, lies in their emergence. Each has its own narrative, and when seen together with their own images and drawings, correlations can be made with Walter Benjamin’s idea about signs and marks. Benjamin indicates that signs, whether they are made through graphic lines, geometric or written lines, are lines that are printed, scripted over something, while marks emerge from them. In this sense, then, the racetrack town operates an inscription, the lines found in them mere graphic lines that demarcate a racetrack from a background, which could have been made on any landscape. These graphic lines, following Benjamin, only impress a sign. The shape and pattern of the racetrack may or may not be a copy of the real Monte Carlo, something which was not ascertained at the time. As a result there is an air of ambiguity in the scheme. Building types and forms are vague. Besides the grandstand, buildings are mere blocks in the landscape with vague presupposed functions attached to them. Forms and functions can change as and when the aspects of the symbolic, libidinal or the political economy dictates.

The shopping center site, however, works with the mark in ways Benjamin would find familiar, for