it materializes the political dimensions of the caption that Benjamin thought essential to understanding and conveying the mark. There is something specifically real about this project, which involves guilt and atonement; very much like Benjamin’s description of Belshazzar’s Feast in the Old Testament. The coming together of the mosque and the cathedral after 9/11 and the entire making of the shopping complex centered on an exchange, disguised as shopping, is a way a community can overcome a present by gesturing towards a future, so that the past, present and the future can be magically fused. The reception of this space – with voices reading the Quran, the visual confrontation between cathedral and mosque, the visual separation between two worlds mediated by book stacks and glass partitions – slows down spatial perception in ways that involve the body. In the case of Koolhaas’s aphoristic analyses of ‘junkspace’, the cognitive is privileged. But as these two sites reveal, the body, the imagination, the mind, space, and local-global context and interaction are more deeply intertwined than Koolhaas’ ‘junkspace’ often allows, despite its provocative potential. Koolhass claims a ubiquity of ‘junk-space’ at the turn of the century and, to a certain extent, bemoans its existence. But the category remains so large and elastic as to perhaps outstrip its usefulness, especially when one delves deeper into the trajectories at play in any specific site.

## References

Benjamin, W. (1996) Selected Writings Vol 1. 1913–1926. Ed. Richard W. Jennings. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Benjamin, W. (1999) Selected Writings Vol 2. 1927–1934. Ed. Richard W. Jennings.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Koolhaas, R. (ed.) (2004) Content. Koln: Taschen.

Bobby Chong Thai Wong is Associate Professor of Architecture at the National University of Singapore.

Ryan Bishop teaches at the National University of Singapore in the Department of English and has published on urbanism, military technology, critical theory, avant-garde aesthetics and international sex tourism.

Science

Celia Roberts and Adrian Mackenzie

Abstract How could social scientists and cultural theorists take responsibility in engaging with science? How might they develop an experimental sensibility to the links between the production of knowledge and the production of existence or forms of life? Critically outlining key fields in the social and cultural studies of science, we interrogate a number of approaches to these questions. The first approach tries to make sense of how science operates in relation to economic, political and cultural forces. The second analyses science as a form of embodied work or practice. The third engages with science as collaborative-collective elaboration of events, ranging across cultural theory, contemporary art and participant ethnographies. This outline sketches a vector of responsibility across this diverse range of engagements, suggesting that contemporary movements between science and other knowledges constitute ethical and political imperatives.

Keywords art, experiment, feminism, knowledge, practice, science

## Introduction

What does it mean to live with science? What sensibilities or practices are conducive to living with science? The metaconcept, science, is hardly a coherent formation, whether viewed from within, without or somewhere on the margins. And as anthropologist Paul Rabinow (1999: 181) writes, ‘the present is a good time to desist from employing totalizing categories like epoch, civilization, culture and society’, and it could be added, science. The ways in which sciences are lived and affect lives, human and non-human, are difficult to marshal in any single direction. For the social sciences and humanities, divergent paths head toward and away from the sciences, and these are travelled in very different ways. Sometimes, head-on confrontations occur, as happened in the ‘Science Wars’ of the mid-1990s, when some scientists (Sokal and Bricmont, 1998) argued that much social and cultural theory is mired in poorly understood science. The Science Wars, it might be said, followed in the aftermath of a long series of attempts by philosophy and social thought to unmask science. Today, in the aftermath of the Science Wars (Ross, 1996), and the avalanche of social constructionist explorations of different sciences as themselves local, contingent organization of knowledge, it is important to ask how other knowledges, which themselves do not count as science, stand in relation to science. What kinds of movements between science and other knowledges are possible or desirable?

## Science Operating in Economic, Cultural or Political Fields

A first major task for social and cultural analysis is to make sense of how science operates and meshes with political, financial, commercial and popular cultural processes, ranging from micro-subjectification to global assemblages (Ong and Collier, 2005). The entwining of science with contemporary relations of production is well and extensively analysed, but the modalities of linkage, and the ways sciences take shape, seem to shift constantly. From the

Enlightenment through 20th-century critical thought, the power of science is valorized positively or negatively in terms of reason as an ordering force, marshalling and controlling natural phenomena and discovering laws and regularities. For philosophers ranging from René Descartes, Immanuel Kant and Friedrich Nietzsche to Martin Heidegger, and for recent cultural or historical studies of science such as Barbara Duden (1991) or Lisa Cartwright (1995), the operational power of science stems from its abstract appropriation of existing forms, matters, bodies or relations. Carolyn Merchant (1980: 43), for instance, argues in this vein when she describes the development of modern science as involving ‘a slow, but unidirectional alienation from the immediate daily organic relationship that had formed the basis of human experience from earliest times’. From this standpoint, the task of social and human sciences is to unmask science, to show how science constructs a total world view within which all phenomena are mathematized or mechanized. This world view, precisely because it treats the object of knowledge as fully knowable, ruptures connections between subjects and objects. Indeed it institutes a separation between subjects and objects, between knower and world. It inscribes relations between things in the world as mechanical, as governed by laws of cause and effect.

The objectivity of science, and claims made in the name of objectivity, have been criticized as partial and distorted on several grounds. According to the feminist philosopher of science, Sandra Harding (1993: 8), Western science systematically marginalized individuals and other existing knowledges: ‘European science has progressed primarily because of the military, economic and political power of European cultures, not because of the purported greater rationality of Westerners or the purported commitment of their sciences to the pursuit of disinterested truths’. Science functions as an instrument of power. Feminist analyses have argued that sciences naturalize ‘social-cum-cultural constructs’ of gender, sex and nature (Jordanova, 1989: 5). Scientific ideas and concepts contain, in other words, ‘implications about matters beyond their explicit content’ (1989: 2). ‘The biomedical sciences deploy, and are themselves, systems of representations’ (1989: 5): they contain metaphors, analogies, personifications, images and literary devices that can be analysed as ideological and normative programmes. They serve interests and maintain cultural patterns (1989: 39; cf. Stafford, 1994). Objectification has it own contingent circumstances and effects. The historian and philosopher of medicine, Barbara Duden (1991), for instance, describes how scientific knowledge of human reproduction is lived, encountered and interpreted by women in contemporary America, in contrast to German women of the 18th century. Accounts of different encounters with scientific knowledge show that the scientific world view proceeds unevenly, at different rates and in negotiation with a panoply of other forces. Other theorists examine this question in terms of political economy, regulatory frameworks and scientific policy instruments, investigating the interactions of science, law and state (Jasanoff, 2005).

These critical approaches to science, however, retain a distinction between the practical content and the social context of science, with their analyses focusing on the latter. This means that the power of science is figured as derivative of social forces. The limitations of this figuration are explored, and sometimes overcome, within the field of science and technology studies.

## Science as Practice

Three decades of work in the social studies of science have established an alternative treatment of science. Theorists have repeatedly rejected critiques of science as anti-social or noncultural form. Instead they have argued that even in its most abstruse theoretical constructs or highly technical practice, science turns out to be just as local, particular and contingent as anything else. The efficacy of the sciences, their effectiveness in the world, their translatability or universality, can be shown to be historically produced and culturally specific because they are cultural or social. Every general attribute of science, ranging from the figure of the scientist (Shapin and Schaffer, 1989), experimental practice, fact (Latour and Woolgar, 1979),