determined objective being, like light and shade, which are not inherent in it but come from a different source. However, we should avoid one misinterpretation; namely that the formation of value concepts, as a psychological fact, is quite distinct from the natural process.

The meaning of value concepts is denied to nature as a mechanical causal system, while at the same time the psychic experiences that make values a part of our consciousness themselves belong to the natural world. Valuation as a real psychological occurrence is part of the natural world; but what we mean by valuation, its conceptual meaning, is something independent of this world.

We are rarely aware of the fact that our whole life, from the point of view of consciousness, consists in experiencing and judging values, and that it acquires meaning and significance only from the fact that the mechanically unfolding elements of reality possess an infinite variety of values beyond their objective substance. At any moment when our mind is not simply a passive mirror or reality . . . we live in a world of values which arranges the contents of reality in an autonomous order. (Simmel, 1978: 59–60)

The polarity between La Mettrie and Simmel’s position is a philosophical one, of monism versus dualism. While it is perfectly correct to ascribe a humanistic approach to many of Simmel’s writings, the first part of his Philosophy of Money goes a long way towards establishing a theory of value in terms of desire which in its terms is defined as the expenditure of energy against resistance. In other words Simmel’s view of the individual is one of a living organism which, like all organisms, expends effort in pursuit of psychic needs. Simmel in talking about life and the human organism is quite prepared to advance naturalistic arguments, but ultimately the sphere of values remain beyond determination. Both Simmel and Max Weber were intellectually open to materialist accounts of psychological behaviour and human attributes, but only up to a point (Whimster, 1995). Simmel drew a philosophical line (which is traceable back to Spinoza), as in the above excerpt. Weber was forced to struggle with the issue, having written The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1904–5) which raised a series of awkward questions about the causal status of Geist: was it psychologically determined, or theologically and socially formed, and was it a causal determinant in its own right? Weber’s solution to these problems was to devise an interpretative science of social reality (which he called sociology) (Weber, 2004). Whatever the extent of the materialist science of the individual and peoples – and he did not exclude cognitive and neurological psychology, social actors interpreted their world (with all its materialist determinations) through values that they constructed and sustained. Today the La Mettrie approach is in the ascendancy. The attempt to reduce consciousness to bio-chemical states is analogous to Mettrie’s dismissal of the soul. Cognitive psychology, evolutionary psychology, behavioural ecology and evolutionary game theory follow the same path that individuals and social outcomes are shaped by material causes beyond our immediate direct control. Hence, it might be worth insisting on a Weberian distinction: there are human sciences and there is also an interpretative science of social reality.

## References

Offray de la Mettrie, J.J. (1960) L’homme machine: A Study in the Origins of an Idea. Ed. Aram Vartanian. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Simmel, G. (1978) The Philosophy of Money. Trans. T. Bottomore, D. Frisby and K. Mengelberg. London: Routledge.

Weber, M. (2004) ‘Basic Sociological Concepts’, in S. Whimster (ed.) Essential Weber. London: Routledge.

Whimster, S. (1995) ‘Liberal Eugenics and the Vitalist Life Sciences: Incongruities in the German Human Sciences in the 19th Century’, History of the Human Sciences 8(1): 107–14.

Sam Whimster is Reader in Sociology at London Metropolitan University. He is the editor of Max Weber Studies. His Understanding Weber will be published in 2006 by Routledge.

# Islam and Knowledge S. Sayyid

Keywords Eurocentrism, historiography, Islam, power/knowledge

he confident expectation among the social sciences late in the last quarter of the 20th century was that Islam would wither away as the global advance of westernization brought secularization and modernization in its wake. Not only has Islam failed to follow the trajectory pursued by variants of Christianity, namely depoliticization and confinement to the private sphere; it has, in contrast, forcefully re-asserted its public presence in the world. This re-assertion is often presented in terms of geopolitical or cultural challenges to the integrity and dominance of the western enterprise. The mobilizations in the name of Islam also present an epistemological challenge for the naturalized order of western hegemony. In other words, the invocation of Islam tests the power/knowledge complex that underpins the western order, questioning not only its power but also the knowledge intrinsic to the exercise of that power. The question of accommodating Islam in the world order and within the domestic policies of states constituted by the current international system has tended to obscure the depth and intensity of the philosophical aspects of this challenge. It is not only that the persisting relevance of Islam suggests that the history of the world cannot simply be reconfigured as a scaled-up version of the history of the West, but the evocation of Islam as a horizon implies a deep decolonisation of western power/knowledge.

The most common role assigned to Islam in narratives of world civilization can be understood through the metaphor of postal workers. The ‘historical’ contribution of Islam is to ‘post’ the classical heritage of Greece and Rome to its rightful heirs in Renaissance Europe. This movement is mapped out with more or less precision from Asia Minor to Andalusia. This mapping of course is also a narration of the identities of Islam and the West in terms of their destiny. Rather than replaying the Orientalist fantasy of such accounts, it might be more interesting to try and sketch out another way of seeing the relationship between Islam and the construction of the world. To this end, it is not helpful to think in terms of contributions in which different communities of literature give something to the common good;

such a narrative betrays a positivist conception of knowledge in which knowledge is objective and its uncovering and recovering can be simply transposed from one culture to another: assumptions such as this lead to rather simple-minded quests for the Zulu Tolstoy or the Muslim Martin Luther.

Muslim sources see the beginning of a distinct body of knowledge with the collection of the Ahadith, the sayings of the Prophet (pbuh) as reported by his close companions and wives. ‘Classical’ Muslim scholarship organized its production of knowledge under various disciplines such as fiqh (jurisprudence), falsafa (philosophy) and tafsir (hermeneutics). It important to make a distinction between Islamic knowledge and Islamicate knowledge. The former refers to the knowledge of the semantic order initiated by the revelations of the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh), while the latter (following Hodgson, 1977) consists of all those working within a political and social order dominated by the signature of Islam. As such they would not have to be Muslims (i.e. those who would identify themselves as part of a community centred on the Prophet Muhammad’s (pbuh) mission).

Both Islamic and Islamicate knowledge were influenced by the way in which the Muslim Ummah came to a dominant conceptualization of the relationship of the Divine with the human, in which the gap between the two could not be closed. As a consequence Divinity and humanity did not necessarily share an ontological space, which meant that no amount of human mapping out reality could threaten the independence and viability of the Divine. It could be argued that the development within dominant strands of Christianity of the possibility of closure between the Divine and the human through the category of incarnation had the effect of establishing a kind of ontological continuity between these realms, which meant that human production of knowledge could subsume (and threaten) the ontological space occupied by the Divine. One of the ways in which the different conceptions of the Divine are played out is that until recent times in the history of the Muslim Ummah, there were few cases in which human knowledge is presented as defiant of the Divine or able to subsume the Divine. The different conception of the relationship between the Divine and the human can be seen as contributing to different epistemological histories that engulfed Islamdom and Christendom.

Islamic knowledge has managed to maintain its institutional linkages and still performs a significant role in Muslim communities as a means of linking readings of the Islamic canonical texts with their selective dissemination in other discourses. Islamic knowledge also includes more recent scholarship that sees in the revelation of Islam and the development of its canon (Qur’an, hadith, sunnah) a methodological and epistemological resource. In other words, the canon is mined for its metaphysical and ethical content, but is also invoked as a scholastic tool. This Islamic epistemology is the product of an episteme that is now confined to narrow corners of medressas, and networks of various tablighs, etc.

The Islamicate production of knowledge came to an end around 1800. It was not replaced through a Darwinian struggle in which better knowledge replaced poor knowledge – it was not the replacement of Islamicate memes with European memes, but the gradual erosion of the political–military complex that sustained that knowledge producing complex. In the absence of the political–military–economic complexes that could undergird the production of Islamic and Islamicate knowledge, we have seen the retreat of these forms of knowledges from being part and parcel of a wider literate culture to isolated sites, where they are institutionally disempowered.

The production of Islamicate knowledge has become more or less colonized by the western/ modern episteme. In the context of the study of phenomena associated with Islam this has meant the hegemony of Orientalism and its alter-ago anti-Orientalism. Orientalism sees Islam as governed by an essence, which is distinct from other cultural formations of its scale. Anti-Orientalism denies any essentialism to Islamic or Islamicate phenomena; this, however, is only accomplished by the implicit and disavowed acceptance of Western exceptionalism as constructed through the disciplines associated with the social sciences. What remains common to both Orientalist and anti-Orientalist accounts is a belief in the idea that the history of the West is the destiny of the world. Thus Orientalism signifies a field of study that sees the transhistorical nature of Islam as its proper object. Anti-Orientalism rejects any possibility that Islam and the Islamicate world that its venture brings into being can have any substantial specificity (Sayyid, 2003: 31–46).

The possibility of breaking with Orientalism (and its alter ego) in order to articulate an Islamicate epistemology is unlikely to emerge from various attempts to use Islamic knowledge as means of establishing an authentic epistemology for Muslims. Such attempts are marred by a positivism which seeks to establish an isomorphic relation between Islam’s sacred discourses (principally, the Qur’an) and the general field of discursivity as accounted for by (western) scientific epistemology. These attempts are often motivated by the desire to present Islamic knowledge as the precursor of contemporary science; however, in the project to demonstrate the primacy of Islamic epistemology, they paradoxically enshrine its secondary relationship to the discourse of science, thus making the sacred text vulnerable to technologization.

Various debates around concepts such as religion, secularism, feudalism have become important sites exposing the limitations of western historiography. Too often representations of Muslims worked within western historiography as counter history which tacitly confirmed the supremacy of the western enterprise. With the abandonment of the project in which history figured as grand narrative, and the abandonment of a western telos (or rather its displacement), the possibility of writing a global history that is not centred on any particular cultural formation beckons. It is in this global history that the semantic universe of Islam demands to be acknowledged with its own distinct trajectory and its own conceptual and analytical vocabulary (see Blankinship’s (1991) proposed outline).

Can there be a distinct Islamicate epistemology that is separated from both the traditional episteme and western episteme? Such an Islamicate epistemology is only possible with the cultivation of a Muslim historical sensibility, in other words, a deep decolonization that resutures Muslim narratives of historical continuity with the past. What Islamicate history might look like after deep decolonization remains a question of speculative fiction or futurology. It will be, however, useful to remember that it is unlikely to be a picking up of narratives which were abandoned in the 19th century, nor is it likely to entail a retreat to the power/knowledge complex that emerged with the compilations of the companions of the Prophet (pbuh). An Islamicate epistemology could only proceed with a postcolonial critique of the ‘Age of Europe’ and thus it could not be a recovery of pristine Islam but rather the articulation of the post-western. It is possible to point to a number of developments which herald the post-western without necessarily being motivated to do so. First, there is the difficult and contested emergence of attempts at a non-teleological world history. Some of this is associated with the ‘California’ school of world history (Goldstone, Pomeranz), and the work of people like Andre Gunder Frank and James Blaut, who have all contributed to unravelling the standard narrative of western modernity and exceptionalism. Second, in philosophy, the rise of post-structuralism has entailed the deconstruction of western metaphysics, including the uncovering of the ignoble disavowals of the ‘great western’ philosophers. Third, the expansion of postcolonial critique has meant a departure from issues of literary and cultural representation towards the analysis of the political institution of social orders. These three developments provide an epistemological conditions of possibility for the articulation of the post-western. Whether this post-western would be formed by a new multiculturalist ecumenical globalism or a world of contending grossraums remains to be seen.

## References

Blaut, J. (1993) The Colonizer’s Model of the World: Geographical Diffusionism and Eurocentric History. New York: Guildford Press.

Berkey, J. (2003) The Formation of Islam. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Blankinship, K. (1991) ‘Islam and World History: Towards a New Periodization’, The American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 8(3).

Chamberlain, M. (2002) Knowledge and Social Practice in Medieval Damascus 1190–1350. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Frank, A.G. (1998) ReOrient: Global Economy in the Asian Age. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Goldstone, J. (2002) ‘Efflorescences and Economic Growth in World History: Rethinking the “Rise of the West” and the British Industrial Revolution’, Journal of World History 13: 323–89.

Goody, J. (2004) Capitalism and Modernity: The Great Debate. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Hodgson, M.G.S. (1977) The Venture of Islam: Conscience and History in a World Civilization. Vol. I. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Pomeranz, K. (2000) The Great Divergence: China, Europe and the Making of the Modern World Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Sayyid, S. (2003) A Fundamental Fear: Eurocentrism and the Emergence of Islamism. London: Zed Press.

S. Sayyid is a University Research Fellow in Postcolonialism and Ethnicity in the School of Sociology at the University of Leeds.

# Enlightenment (Zen Buddhist)

John Whalen-Bridge

Keywords Buddhism, (the) Enlightenment, mind, religion, Rorty, Zen (or Zen Buddhism)

W <sup>hat</sup> <sup>is</sup> <sup>enlightenment?</sup> <sup>Enlightenment</sup> <sup>in</sup>a Buddhist context refers to an individ- a Buddhist context refers to an individual’s awakening to the true nature of mind, but this definition always chases itself since this ‘true nature of mind’ remains ineffable. The Zen tradition – and the Zen tradition of Far Eastern Buddhism has had the greatest influence on contemporary uses of the term – is most insistent about the necessity of a transmission ‘outside of words and letters’, meaning it is important as an experience rather than as an idea. While it is correct to say that Buddhism presents itself as a non-theistic religion, there are in practice many kinds of Buddhists, and one must therefore generalize with caution about what a Buddhist view of ‘enlightenment’ would be. For some practitioners, a reified notion of Buddhist enlightenment corresponds to the belief that through meditation and/or magical purification practices one can, over the course of a certain number of lifetimes, become a spiritual superman who will not undergo rebirth. This belief would seem to suppose a protected, permanent ego and would, thus, be at odds with central Buddhist tenets of impermanence of selfhood or other forms of identity. At the other end of the spectrum of Buddhist beliefs, a process-oriented notion of enlightenment challenges that formation and works with the luminous archetype of total, complete enlightenment as an imaginary standpoint that functions to help human beings live optimally. ‘Enlightenment’ in this sense would designate more a hermeneutical position than an achieved, particular state of mind.

For most Buddhist speakers, the radical contingency of thought described by pragmatist philosophers such as Richard Rorty has long been a given. It is partially useful to examine similarities between Buddhist views and the claims of western skeptical thought. The most important Buddhist doctrine is known as the ‘Four Noble Truths’, and