it is found in the Maha-parinibbana Sutta. These truths are: that dukkha (pervasive unsatisfactoriness) is universal. Second, we experience dukkha because we have not overcome desire: grasping is the origin of suffering. Third, it is possible to extinguish suffering if we can put an end to grasping. Finally, the Eight-Fold path is the set of instructions about how best to end grasping and so to find release from suffering.

The central paradox of Buddhism is that suffering is universal, and yet the cessation of suffering is possible. One understanding of the apparent contradiction between the first and third Noble Truths is to line them up chronologically such that pain is displaced by nirvanic bliss. Another understanding is that ‘pain’ does not disappear whereas ‘suffering’ (the psychological amplification of pain) can disappear. The Vietnam veteran Claude Anshin Thomas (2004) does not present himself as a person who has left suffering behind at all in his examination of his own suffering, At Hell’s Gate: A Soldier’s Journey from War to Peace. Rather, he movingly and convincingly describes the transformation of his relationship to it. Some readers will nevertheless scratch away at the doctrinal point: Can one ever be completely free from suffering? The epigraph to At Hell’s Gate is a ko¯an, case 20 from The Book of Serenity, in which Fayan (known in Japanese as Ho¯gen) says, ‘I don’t know.’ Guichen (aka Kueich’en or, in Japanese, Jizo¯) responds, ‘Not knowing is most intimate.’ In the first chapter, Thomas describes the terror of battle as experienced by a 17-year-old soldier: ‘Soon there were one dead,

# Ignorance

two wounded. I didn’t know whether to shoot or be quiet. I decided to be quiet because I didn’t really know what else to do.’ ‘Not knowing’ goes through a number of incarnations in this text. The passive not-knowing of the boy becomes the active not-knowing of the man. Not knowing means accepting rather than judging or attempting to negotiate with what may be a horrific reality. We shrink from what is horrific, but ‘not knowing is most intimate’. The traumatic paralysis of the frightened soldier becomes, in time and through practice, the acceptance of the sitting meditator. We recall Fayan and note the differences, but we also see the interdependence of two apparently incommensurable moments. Many kinds of ‘not knowing’ are woven into this account, but the waiting and not knowing morph from pain and judgment to a patience that allows for genuine insight.

## References

What is enlightenment? There are many approaches to this word, one of which is to say that knowing not-knowing.

Thomas, C. (2004) At Hell’s Gate: A Soldier’s Journey from War to Peace. Boston, MA: Shambhala Press.

John Whalen-Bridge is Associate Professor of English Language and Literature at the National University of Singapore and Convenor of the Religious Studies Minor Program. He researches Buddhism in relation to American culture.

# Ryan Bishop and John Phillips

Keywords authority, epistemology, knowledge, learning , validity

gnorance (in-gnor-are, not-knowing, from the Greek agnostos) emerges in the early modern period as privation of knowledge, in both the   
specific and general senses. Someone might be   
ignorant of a fact or a state of affairs, in which case   
they would be in want of knowledge; or someone   
might exist in a general state of ignorance. In the   
latter sense ignorance is collocated with sin, along  
side darkness and hell (accordingly one might   
commit an ignorance as one might commit a sin).

The kind of knowledge that ignorance in this sense undermines would thus be that revealed by prophets and sacred texts. The Islamic state, for instance, emerges out of the state of ignorance called ja¯hilı¯yah, the defining characteristic of the period that preceded the teachings of Muhammad.

Moreover there are two quite different kinds of ignorance: ignorance of things that can be known or learned (a state of contingent ignorance that might ultimately be overcome); and ignorance of things that of their very nature cannot be known (necessary ignorance of eternity or of the great plan of providence, or even just the future). By the 18th century trends in materialism and empiricism had emerged that threatened all credulity towards this necessary ignorance, prompting Alexander Pope, for instance, to rebuke the new science in his Essay on Man: ‘The bliss of man, (could pride that blessing find)/Is not to act or think beyond mankind’. The renewed sense of necessary limits to man’s knowledge gestured towards a cruelly unpredictable future in a series of persuasive analogies summed up in the phrase: ‘blindness to the future, kindly given’. Pope’s verse essay is echoed in a famous meditation of Thomas Gray, which has since become a commonplace: ‘Where ignorance is bliss, ‘tis folly to be wise.’ The formula neatly displaces the ancient conception under the sign of an emergent romantic aesthetics that constitutes the other side of the Enlightenment thirst for knowledge.

The standard approach to knowledge after the Enlightenment held that knowledge equals power. This formulation, familiar to almost all readers of this encyclopaedia as well as being a fundamental assumption about encyclopaedias and reference works generally, assumes that through the general spread of information and knowledge, the general populace can learn things to better itself. Through the acquisition of knowledge, the reasoning goes, the standard and quality of life of everyone will improve as the citizenry learns more about the functions of governmentality, economy, polity, technology and nature. The general population will then demand changes in their and others’ interests as well as seek solutions to perceived problems. In this way, knowledge becomes the power through which individual and collective self-improvement occurs in a linear, rational movement toward an increasingly intelligent and harmonious society and world. The politicized strand of this essentially liberal tradition includes William Cobbett, who urged young men to acquire grammar as a branch of knowledge, so that they should be able ‘to assert their rights and liberties’, as well as Lancelot Hogben (1968), who in Mathematics for the Millions declared, in an echo of the ancient superstitions that he abhorred, that: ‘to be disdainful of the great social task of education is as stupid as it is wicked. It is the end of progress in knowledge’.

Few would argue with the basic premises and ideals that surround and contextualize the knowledge equals power formulation. But some have problematized many of the ways in it is articulated in actual practice. Michel Foucault, for instance, examined the sometimes corrosive ways in which power and knowledge operate under the guise of authority (as in, who has the authority and power to constitute some forms of knowledge as knowledge while rendering other forms illegitimate), as well as the corruptive ways in which ‘knowledge’ can be used to propagate power within hierarchically stratified social formations. Over several studies of discursive institutions (concerned with imaginary elements like ‘sex’, ‘madness’ and ‘crime’) Foucault identifies a fundamental transformation of mechanisms of power since the classical age, which no longer involve repressive maneuvers but now consist in increasing, and distributing more widely, specific kinds of power/ knowledge, which work to ‘incite, reinforce, control, monitor, optimize, and organize the forces under it’ (1981: 136). Increasing a population’s expertise in, say, even grammar or mathematics might in fact serve to reproduce more forcefully the hierarchies of power that continue to dominate. Foucault thus opens a general inquiry into the problematic nature of power and how it is instituted.

Taking Foucault in a slightly different direction, Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick (1988) offers a reversal of the ‘basic knowledge equals power’ equation that argues that ignorance, too, is a powerful epistemological ‘site’. Ignorance, she claims, ‘is as potent and multiple a thing as knowledge’. ‘If ignorance is not – as it evidently is not – a single, Manichean, aboriginal maw of darkness from which the heroics of human cognition can occasionally wrestle facts, insights, freedoms, progress, perhaps there exists instead a plethora of ignorances, and we may begin to ask questions about the labor, erotics, and economics of their human production and distribution’, Sedgwick writes. ‘Insofar as ignorance is ignorance of a knowledge – a knowledge that may itself, it goes without saying, be seen as either “true” or “false” under some other regime of truth – these ignorances, far from being pieces of the originary dark, are produced by and correspond to particular knowledges and circulate as part of particular regimes of truth’ (1988: 25).

Beyond being the necessary condition for ‘knowledge’ per se, ignorance, therefore, can be seen as productively producing power in and of itself. Using the provocative phrase ‘the privilege of unknowing’, Sedgwick argues that those who benefit from a range of inequitable relations (economic, material, educational, technological, etc.) can generate systems of knowledge production predicated on ignoring the premises upon which their power is based. Those who wield power within or who benefit from such inequitable relations do not know from whence their privilege emerges because they do not have to know. In this manner, ignorance works as a kind of ethical shield, preventing people within a given power structure from knowing how they have come to benefit from inequitable system relations and casts their privilege merely as ‘natural’ or ‘the way things are’. Sedgwick further claims that there is a danger in believing that ignorance is the enemy we, the enlightened, must fight against. ‘There is a satisfaction in dwelling on the degree to which the power of our enemies over us is implicated, not in their command of knowledge, but precisely in their ignorance. The effect is a real one, but it carries dangers with it’, she warns. ‘The chief of these dangers is the scornful, fearful, or patheticizing reification of “ignorance”; it goes with the unexamined Enlightenment assumptions by which the labeling of a particular force as “ignorance” seems to place it unappealably in a demonized space on a never-quite-explicit ethical schema (1988: 24).

This work is suggestive of an ignorance of a kind that would no longer be subordinated to knowledge. Instead of the agnosticism that predicates ignorance of an unknowable beyond (the transcendental) one would begin to recognize the structural necessity of an ignorance (an inability to know) without which the other kinds of ignorance and their respective knowledges could never have emerged in the politically charged situations in which they always do. This inability to know thus precedes and organizes all kinds of knowledge, whether considered as fact oriented technique or ideologically oriented wisdom. And thus the most basic and forceful resource for knowledge, in the traditional sense, turns out to be its impossibility (an a priori inability to know).

Knowledge, in a strict epistemological sense, is often defined as justified belief. In that case the basic problem of knowledge concerns justification: how do we show that our beliefs are justified? Because justification is always restricted to contingent disciplinary specifics, then we produce knowledge by demonstrating, in widely differing ways, how we arrive at justifications for what we believe. We are thus regularly obliged – in the register of a kind of epistemological doubt – to challenge our modes of justification, and thus to perform the constructive role of scepticism. However, this kind of knowledge is a logical construction that fails to distinguish between the sense of a proposition (its truth content) and the making of the proposition itself. If the proposition (a judgement of knowledge) is oriented towards its sense, then this establishes knowledge in terms of truth and objectivity: the valid sense – or truth – of a judgement. The question of justification nearly always boils down to this. If, on the contrary, it is oriented in the other direction, as an activity or performance of the knower, then an alternative notion of knowledge emerges, in which knowledge means exactly the opposite of a gathering of information or the accumulation of true facts. It means being able to learn. In that case knowledge recedes the more we believe we know. This more nuanced sense of knowledge, or knowing, has gathered force throughout the 20th century. ‘The one who knows’, writes Heidegger in the Introduction to Metaphysics, ‘is the one who understands that he must always learn again, and who above all, on the basis of this understanding, has brought himself to the point where he continually can learn’ (2000: 23). In Heidegger’s sense this knowledge would require a historical self-awareness brought about by questioning and contextualizing, rather than knowledge built on assertions about particular facts. The distinction between ignorance and knowledge would no longer be secure.

## References

Foucault, M. (1981) The History of Sexuality, Vol. 1. Trans. R. Hurley. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

Heidegger, M. (2000) Introduction to Metaphysics. Trans. Gregory Fried and Richard Polt. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Hogben, L. (1968) Mathematics for the Millions. London: The Merlin Press.

Sedgwick, E.K. (1988) ‘Privilege of Unknowing’, Genders 1: 102–24.

Ryan Bishop teaches at the National University of Singapore in the Department of English and has published on urbanism, military technology, critical theory, avant-garde aesthetics and international sex tourism.

John Phillips is Associate Professor in the Department of English Language and Literature at the National University of Singapore. He is the author of Contested Knowledge: A Guide to Critical Theory (Zed Books, 2000), and is currently working in the area of military technology, visual culture, community and politics.

# Discipline

Bryan S. Turner

Abstract There are broadly five interconnected meanings of the noun ‘discipline’. Disciplina were instructions to disciples, and hence a branch of instruction or department of knowledge. This religious context provided the modern educational notion of a ‘body of knowledge’, or a discipline such as sociology or economics. We can define discipline as a body of knowledge and knowledge for the body, because the training of the mind has inevitably involved a training of the body. Second, it signified a method of training or instruction in a body of knowledge. Discipline had an important military connection involving drill, practice in the use of weapons. Third, there is an ecclesiastical meaning referring to a system of rules by which order is maintained in a church. It included the use of penal methods to achieve obedience. To discipline is to chastise. Fourth, to discipline is to bring about obedience through various forms of punishment; it is a means of correction. Finally there is a rare use of the term to describe a medical regimen in which ‘doctor’s orders’ brings about a discipline of the patient. In contemporary society, there is, following the work of Michel Foucault, the notion of increasing personal regulation resulting in a ‘disciplinary society’ or a society based upon carceral institutions.

Keywords carceral, disciplinarity, postdisciplinarity, postmodernity

## Dimensions of Discipline

The social importance of discipline was emphasized by Max Weber in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1930/2002). In his studies of asceticism he noted the significance of discipline for the production of personalities and life orders that have an affinity with the discipline of the labour force in capitalism. However, it was Michel Foucault (1977) who demonstrated how discipline was connected to the detailed regulation of the body in various forms of governmentality. The discipline of the body is a necessary condition for the achievement of a technology of the self, and the cultivation of the self is the precondition of education. Within a traditional curriculum, a discipline may be defined as an organized perspective on phenomena that is sustained by academic training or the disciplining of mind. Like the related notions of cultivation and culture, an academic discipline requires regulatory practices, and a rhetoric of competence, if a specific mentality is to be sustained over time among a community of scholars. Disciplines of mind and body within a monastic context were technologies of the soul. In some cultures, such as Buddhism, these intellectual or spiritual disciplines more explicitly involve the disciplining of bodies.

## Bodies of Knowledge

In terms of a body of knowledge, the university curriculum was organized around a number of foundational disciplines. In medieval systems of learning, the trivium formed the basic structure of the curriculum as a plan of study. Conflicts within the curriculum have reflected wider battles in society as a whole. Kant’s analysis of the relationship between theology and philosophy in his The Conflict of the Faculties (1992) reflected the struggle between the Enlightenment and the Church over the authority of reason and revelation.