Disciplinary boundaries in modern systems of knowledge and information are changing rapidly under the impact of new information technologies, the postmodernization of culture, and above all the changing relationship between the university, the national culture and the nation-state. These social and technological changes are in turn features of the emergence of a global economy and the globalization of culture. We are moving into an environment of postdisciplinarity that corresponds to postmodernity. In this educational context, the authority of disciplines is breaking down and there is a fragmentation of knowledge. The erosion of disciplinary authority has its direct professional consequence in the decline of professorial power in university departments. Notions of overarching paradigms and binding epistemology are now out of fashion.

J.-F. Lyotard’s The Postmodern Condition (1984), Marshall McLuhan’s Understanding Media (1964) and Daniel Bell’s The Coming of Post-industrial Society (1974) were reports on the state of knowledge in the context of new media of communication. Lyotard’s study, which was commissioned by the Conseil des Universités of the government of Quebec, was influential as a marker of the arrival of postmodern knowledge as a consequence of computerization. McLuhan’s educational publication on the impact of the new media on pedagogy, which was developed for the National Association of Education Broadcasters and US Office of Education 1959–1960, was equally revolutionary. The digital cultures of the post-industrial world no longer have the same level of meaningful stability as print cultures. McLuhan’s research suggested that different technologies of communication required different forms of education and training, producing different technologies of the self. The creation of e-knowledge requires flexibility rather than hierarchy and discipline.

## The State and the Curriculum

The rise and fall of disciplines have often been produced by changes in the national culture. The cultivation of folk studies, ethnography and literature was an effect of nation-state consolidation, when political elites sought legitimacy in tradition, or more precisely in the ‘invention of tradition’. At various stages in the rise of nationalism, the development of certain disciplines has been a necessary foundation for the articulation of a national Geist. Writing of culture as the best that can be thought in a society in 1867, Mathew Arnold was in Culture and Anarchy (1969) able to assume the moral authority of English high culture and the role of the intellectual as its spokesman and defender. High culture existed to discipline the nation. The Arnoldian vision of English education assumed that a strong national culture required a powerful state to impose its hegemonic force at home and abroad. In a similar fashion, Lord Macaulay’s educational Minute of 1835 expressed perfectly the self-confidence of an imperial system. Macaulay asserted that one shelf of any European library was worth the entire native literature of India and Arabia. His Minute intitially dismissed Sanskrit from the public domain.

Dictionaries are important in establishing a national project. In the Netherlands, van Dale’s Groot Woordenboek der Nederlandse Taal of 1864, and subsequent editions, was important in defining national boundaries. However, the fragmentation of modern cultures and the growing hybridity of national traditions have reinforced the feeling among public intellectuals not only that there are no final vocabularies, but that all perspectives are partial. The university has become partially disconnected from any national project; it merely serves the economy. The rise of multiculturalism has provoked a significant detachment or decentring from an inherited national culture. Modern university academics may well experience more connection with the lifestyle and taste of youth movements and popular culture than with an establishment. The very idea of a national disciplinary unity is now questioned. The intellectual context of English culture in relation to the rest of the world has changed radically since Arnold’s day, and these changes impact significantly on a cluster of interrelated roles and institutions, in particular the state, the university, the intellectual and disciplines.

Disciplines are artificial constructs; they are not naturally occurring intellectual divisions that might refer to divisions of the mind. They are socially constructed perspectives constituting a particular slice of reality and as such they can always be transformed, relocated or destroyed. With the erosion of religious faith and the decline of training for the priesthood, Christian theology has been partly converted into religious studies, which itself is often seen to be a version of cultural studies. Disciplines can also be merged or integrated with related fields to construct, for example, interdisciplinary studies. While Soviet Studies has largely disappeared from the university system, European Studies is a growing area of teaching and research. Women’s Studies, while often claimed by radical feminists to be a discipline, is in fact a multidisciplinary area of studies rather like the social sciences. Terrorism Studies has emerged since the 9/11 terrorist attacks in New York.

## Globalization

The debate about postmodern methods has indicated a significant context of postmodernization, namely the tensions between the process of the globalization of culture and local resistance to both Westernization and globalization. The postmodern debate in methods and theory can be seen as a consequence of a set of broad changes in world culture that has been described in terms of globalism. At one level, the process of globalization simply means that the world is more systematically connected together by contemporary processes of electronic transformation and communication of information, the development of a world economy, the emergence of world systems of military communication and defence, the growth of global legal arrangements such as the human rights movement, the development of a world system of tourism, and the elaboration of intellectual communication between universities brought together within a system of global education.

The paradox of globalization is that it is closely and inevitably connected with consciousness of localism and localization. That is, the globalization of culture threatens the very existence of local practice and belief, which become engulfed in a unifying process of cultural integration. The need to defend localism is a response to the impact of cultural globalism, particularly through such processes as tourism and multinational investment. The attempt to protect local knowledge, local culture and local practice is thus associated with anthropological postmodernist and hermeneutic emphasis on textuality, locality and indigenous meaning. It immediately establishes cultural relevance and appears to demonstrate in compelling ways what is at stake in the politics of cultural domination and resistance. Indeed, the process of globalization within religious and intellectual systems has given rise to a strong nationalist local and indigenous response. For example, the Islamization of knowledge can be seen as a response to globalization and the integration of Islam into the world system. The reaction to globalization which many believe would produce a unified integrated and universalistic culture is associated with the postmodern emphasis on textuality, localism and indigenous meanings, but it has also become associated with the process of decolonization and the critique of the dominance of Western forms of modernist rationalism.

The processes of decolonization have produced a variety of critical responses to imperial culture and authority. For example, there has been within the Indian subcontinent a profound reaction against the dominance of (English) literary studies, which has imposed a Western canon of literature on Indian culture. The decolonization of literature has involved a critique of this canon, an emphasis on the value of local literary traditions, and the evolution of alternative forms of literary expression. This decolonization of literature was associated with a broader rejection of Western claims to universalism in the work of Edward Said (1978), specifically in his critique of Orientalism, and with subaltern studies. These critical movements in cultural theory are closely related to the debate about postmodernism because they share one basic characteristic in common: a critical rejection of the idea that Western forms of representation and reasoning could be construed as a global or universalistic discourse embracing human culture as a whole. Just as postmodernism has rejected the idea of the legitimacy of the ‘grand narrative’, decolonizing protests have rejected the legitimacy of the Western grand narrative to determine cultural hierarchies and cultural authenticity. The critical literature of decolonization claims that the local tradition has the same stature and value as the imperial tradition, which assumes global significance because imperial power has been able to impose its autonomy.

## Conclusion: The University of Postdisciplinarity

The historic alliance between scientific knowledge and the state of the late 17th century has been partially eroded by globalization and the fragmentation of knowledge, with the result that universities can no longer articulate universalistic values. There is some justification therefore for believing that the postmodernization of knowledge has taken place, thereby intensifying traditional debates about the problem of the relativization of knowledge with the growth of multiculturalism. While this argument is convincing, we need to keep in mind the fact that the university has been, since its medieval foundations, fractured around a contradiction between nationalistic particularity and a commitment to more universalistic standards, and that this tension has if anything increased with globalization. It is unlikely that disciplinary coherence can be maintained in these new circumstances.

## References

Arnold, M. (1969) Culture and Anarchy. London: Faber.

Bell, D. (1974) The Coming of Post-industrial Society. New York: Basic Books.

Foucault, M. (1977) Discipline and Punish. The Birth of the Prison. London: Tavistock.

Kant, I. (1992) The Conflict of the Faculties. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

Lyotard, J.-F. (1984) The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

McLuhan, M. (1964) Understanding Media: The Extension of Man. Toronto: McGraw-Hill.

Said, E.W. (1978) Orientalism. New York: Vintage.

Weber, M. (2002) The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Harmondsworth: Penguin. (Orig. 1930.)

Bryan S. Turner is Professor of Sociology in the Asia Research Institute at the National University of Singapore and with Craig Calhoun and Chris Rojek edited The Sage Handbook of Sociology (2005).

# The Knowledge Apparatus

Ryan Bishop and John Phillips

Keywords argumentation, authority, knowledge, representation, rhetoric

A <sup>cademic</sup> <sup>writing,</sup> <sup>more</sup> <sup>evidently</sup> <sup>than</sup>other kinds, has evolved in ways that cannot be separated from the apparatus of the knowledge that it is supposed to serve. The apparatus (from the Latin ap-parare, to ‘make ready’ or ‘prepare for’) consists in several things that together maintain the conditions preparatory for all knowledge. The components of the knowledge apparatus function like appendages, arrangements, mechanisms and even kinds of equipment; yet their evident prosthetic character would be misleading if knowledge was regarded as something essentially independent of its apparatus.

If academic writing reveals the apparatus of knowledge more clearly than do other kinds of writing, then this does not mean that it is absent from other kinds of writing. On the contrary, the knowledge apparatus would be at least implicit in any claim to knowledge (e.g., in journalism, autobiography, or web-logs [blogs]). Knowledge would be nothing without the arrangements, classifications and kinds of assemblage that make it possible, prepare for its emergence, produce it, maintain it and critique it. The conventions, for instance, by which the title and author of a work are identified play very specific functions in preparing for knowledge, as do the several kinds of documentation, attribution, citation and copyright. Where a work neglects any or even all of these conventions, they very often remain implicit, and all the more marked in their absence.

The apparatus of academic writing is homologous in some ways to the functions of the archive, museum, library and other institutions of knowledge, to which we must add rapidly developing kinds of electronic archiving. Conventions, colloquia, workshops and conferences of all kinds play indispensable roles in maintaining and performing the functions of the apparatus. Delving into established historical archives we find that knowledge is indistinguishable from its many forms of documentation in books, proceedings, papers, journals, encyclopaedias, dictionaries and proliferating forms of electronic storage and access. The function of the ‘edition’, and the several, often very specific, kinds of scholarship dedicated to producing the so called authoritative editions of the works of knowledge, cannot be overestimated.

Sources like the internet – which offers free web space for virtually unrestricted global dissemination of data, knowledge and ideas – can illustrate negatively the conditions that the conventions of the knowledge apparatus are supposed to protect. Electronic technologies, though, introduce nothing new to the problem of knowledge. Rather, they exacerbate conditions that always seem to have applied. Knowledge is problematized when people dissimulate or feign the appearance of knowledge by using exactly those conventions that evolved as ways of protecting knowledge from this kind of dissimulation. The rhetorical procedures of citation and the associated ways of documenting proper attribution are evident amongst the oldest surviving manuscripts. Moreover, such manuscripts are themselves responsible for the preservation of previous knowledge by means of citation and attribution. Accordingly the history of knowledge includes, in every era, instances of false attribution, misquotation, plagiarism of many kinds, and spurious appeals to authority. It is, in these ways, always possible to invent a convincing case for knowledge that has little or even no substance in fact, a situation often parodied in fiction, which is in principle free of the truth criteria traditionally leveled at epistemological statements. Nevertheless, without the knowledge apparatus, which constitutes the means by which knowledge is passed on and by which it evolves and mutates, there would be no knowledge. Knowledge might thus be regarded as simultaneously possible yet problematic at the level of the apparatus itself and so knowledge per se – if we were to accept a notion of knowledge somewhat abstracted and thus protected from the random contingencies of its dissemination – ought first of all to be regarded as an awareness of the means of knowing.

By focusing on the apparently marginal and contingent textual procedures by which the apparatus is realized, we draw attention to the basic preconditions of knowledge, its organization and arrangement. A certain level of self-reflexive paradox is inevitable. The preconditions for knowledge cannot easily be made the object of knowledge. It is a matter of making evident (making known) the structures of knowledge itself, which emerge in ways that provide definitive proof of the imperfectability of knowledge. This is not a misfortune. A knowledge constructed and prepared for, always in advance, remains nonetheless open to permanent revision. Attempts to operate outside or beyond, or even without, the conventional knowledge apparatus take the risk of repeating its most sedimented (mystical, hidden) forms, perhaps constructing or reproducing myths of freedom or origin. Or, instead, such risks may pay dividends in the creative disruption of conventional arrangements, revealing (but we hope not too much) the arbitrary element in knowledge production. Global knowledge depends, on the one hand, on the repeatability of the knowledge apparatus, without which knowledge would not travel; but on the other hand, global knowledge is problematized more forcefully where the knowledge apparatus undergoes subtle transformations.

The common notion of the academic text would be that of the paper or lecture presented at a conference or seminar, published in an appropriate specialist journal or bound in the form of a book. The contemporary idea of the book is limited by the historical development of books as we know them: that is to say, bound editions of lengthy written works. This is unreasonably narrow because the Teutonic bóc or ‘written tablet from its earliest known usages was also used to translate the Greek (especially biblical) Biblos and Latin Liber (both ‘written account’). We may thus use book to denote, as the OED suggests,

any treatise written on any material (skin, parchment, papyrus, paper, cotton, silk, palm leaves, bark, tablets of wood, ivory, slate, metal, etc.), put together in any portable form, e.g. that of a long roll, or of separate leaves, hinged, strung, stitched, or pasted together.

Thus today we speak of e books, note-books and i pods, which clearly fill the global criteria. There is no scientific distinction by which we define a book today, but we tend to refer to shorter works by other names, like tract, pamphlet, sketch, or essay. The common element of the book – in whatever sense we grasp it – would be the grammata, the writing. The notion of book thus develops into the modern sense of a treatise or literary work contained in the numerous leaves fastened at book’s back, and which can be accessed at any arbitrary point. The object itself is also a book, without reference to its contents – a sheaf of papers protected by covers and bound (thanks to the art of book-making) – the form into which