some specific content of subject matter may be written or printed. Knowledge can thus be dissimulated in the form of a well stocked library. The book itself is similar in status and function to the grammata, the written marks, which it supports. Written marks also supposedly embody the words and ideas that inform them with sense, but – as a basic principle of their possibility – written marks cannot guarantee the safe transfer of sense. The written mark (which is simultaneously a mental and physical phenomenon) could thus be regarded as the minimal unit of the knowledge apparatus.

The apparent particularity of academic discourse, which tends to make the complexity of the knowledge apparatus more evident than do other kinds of discourse, is an illusion at the structural level – a determined one with several different effects (variously privileging and debasing academic discourse depending on one’s perspective). The apparatus that conventions and devices make evident functions across academic disciplines, universities, academies and schools. There would be in principle a corresponding yet differently assembled apparatus functioning at the level, for instance, of the Chinese wu kwon, the Japanese gakko, and the Arabic madrasa. Despite the conventional character of the apparatus (which changes alongside other aspects of historical modality) the distinction between the apparatus and its contingently alterable devices functions as a kind of flexibility, or play. The question thus centers on how we use the knowledge apparatus, how we bring it to light and mobilize it today. We cannot effectively even problematize knowledge without making use of its apparatus.

## The Title

The academic text, as a whole, exemplifies and participates in the perpetuation of a knowledge apparatus. That is, there are formal, constructional components to academic writing that are the apparatus of knowledge itself, not just its articulation. In order to problematize knowledge, global or otherwise, one should have a working knowledge of how knowledge is performed through the various dimensions of the apparatus. The title is the first and most apparent of all textual devices that partake of, while also constructing, the knowledge apparatus. So starting with the title, we notice that it signals a particular relationship between the text (as well as author) and readers. Both a part of the text and separate from it, the title provides the first interpretational strategy for readers to make sense of a text. The title bears a special responsibility, therefore, toward the reader by being simultaneously inviting (welcoming the reader to the text) and controlling (seeking to impose, from the outset, a specific mode of engagement of reader with text). The title of a text is not unlike the title of the aristocracy, in that an aristocratic title reveals specific information about hierarchical, inherited power relations within a society. Similarly the title of a text reveals specific information about reader relations to the power and authority of the text (and author) to which (and whom) readers must submit.

The title also bears the legal burden of a text’s existence, for while the fictional status of the character Hamlet or the theoretical status of the concept of property rights remain relatively free of copyright laws, the text whose name is Hamlet and the scholarly article ‘Property Rights’ are nonetheless bound up with the most complex legal ties. For this reason a title, while it may consist in the same linguistic string as a sentence or phrase found in the work itself (as in Franz Kafka’s ‘Before the Law’, which begins, ‘Before the law there stands . . .’), nonetheless operates according to laws of meaning that are quite independent of those that govern its exact double in the text it names.

## Epigraph

Avoid haphazard writing materials. A pedantic adherence to certain papers, pens, inks is beneficial. No luxury, but an abundance of these utensils is indispensable. (Walter Benjamin)

The epigraph, a short quotation placed at the beginning of a book, chapter or article, might indicate its theme. The term is also used to describe the short inscriptions on buildings or coins. From epi- (upon) -graphein (writing) the epigraph is related to the epigram: a short witty expression originally in verse. The epigraph (cited) from Walter Benjamin’s (1996) ‘One-Way Street is one of his 13 theses on the writer’s technique. The theses (echoing perhaps Karl Marx’s much cited thesis ‘On Feuerbach’, included amongst which is the famous epigram about the point being to change the world rather than just to understand it) provide witty observations on the apparatus of the work’s production, the techniques, tools and modes of labor constitutive of scholarly writing. Normally one would not need to add a glossing commentary on an epigraph, for if it is carefully chosen it will resonate with the text appended to it. Nor does an epigraph imply acceptance of the authority of its writer; in fact it might serve to give notice of a critical reflection, revision or even an outright demolition. An epigram can thus be a form of irony. The epigraph on coins would be inscribed on what is called the exergue, a part on the coin’s reverse for inscriptions. From ex (out) ergon (work), the exergue often names another conventional part of the work that is strictly outside the work: the preface.

## Preface/Exergue

A preface can precede a scholarly work by explaining the author’s intention, why the book was written, and by indicating its context in earlier or contemporary works treating the same topic. G.W.F. Hegel’s famous ‘Preface’ to The Phenomenology of Spirit (1977) rejects the customary assumptions that are protected by the conventional apparatuses of knowledge as inadequate to a work such as The Phenomenology, which is concerned essentially with truth. Hegel is rebelling against the way conventions of academic discourse tend to frame the statements of a work, thus undermining its deeper intellectual processes. Framed in terms of its statements, a philosophical system would be evaluated by the criteria of truth and falsity and thus, inappropriately, regarded as something that can be accepted or rejected. Hegel wrote the preface to The Phenomenology in the way many prefaces tend to be written, that is, after the main work had been completed. Many regard it is a considerably more elegant and coherent restatement of the great work that we now find appended to it. Many scholars have since taken Hegel’s frustration at conventional framing techniques further. Jacques Derrida (whose work more fully interrogates in its practice the conventions of scholarly framing) constructs his Glas, a book on Hegel and Jean Genet, so that it both dispenses with yet includes every convention of the knowledge apparatus: the title does not amount to a full word; the text begins in mid sentence and ends without completing its final sentence; it proceeds in two columns that are related to each other only by chance from time to time; and it is constructed from sections of commentary and argument with glosses, citations, reflections and asides embedded haphazardly throughout. Despite the deliberately chaotic dispersal of the knowledge apparatus, the text nonetheless includes some of the most lucid and sustained critical reading found in his oeuvre.

## Subheading: Rubrics and Lemmata

Dividing a text into categories and subcategories is yet another function of the apparatus that shapes both the physical and intellectual constitution of the academic work: the subheading. Not a title but rather a title beneath the title and contained in the body of the text, the subheading both guides readers to follow the argument and organization of a text in specific ways and creates specific emphases on ideas demarcated by the subheading. The subheading functions as means for creating a taxonomy within any text, showing how its categories and subcategories relate to one another and the knowledge being constructed in the text.

In that case we have a difficulty that reaches into every domain where interpretations are made, or theories applied. We can start by attempting to define and delimit the field of our inquiry. We thus begin with a rubric, a heading, the headword (literally a red head). In that delimitation we make a distinction. On the one hand there is the field to be interpreted, the basic components of a present and practical experience – the rubrics are multiplying – the contents of a perhaps empirical knowledge. On the other hand there are the headings, rubrics and lemmata, concepts, ideas, notions that are from the beginning already setting up the expectations into which the field of our empirical experience must fall.

A lemma in the main sense is ‘something taken’. For instance, in Logic, a lemma is a statement taken as true, an assumption; especially a premise in a syllogism. More generally a lemma is the matter, substance, or argument of a sentence. The ancient sense includes the idea of a burden laid on one, or commission received.

## The Footnote

Another essential element of the knowledge apparatus is found at the opposite end of a page or even a text from the title. It is the footnote or endnote.<sup>1</sup> The footnote or endnote indicates additional information that would be of use to the reader while not wishing to interrupt, or impose its will on, the flow of the prose in the text.<sup>2</sup> Often this form of additional information is a reference or set of references indicating where the author has found substantiating scholarly accounts.<sup>3</sup> The footnote does yeoman duty in specific disciplines, particularly the humanities: the most text-bound of all disciplines within the university.<sup>4</sup> Many authors disciplined in specific disciplines would find it awkward if not impossible to write a piece for general academic consumption without notes, feeling such a piece would be so lacking in substantiation and rigor as to risk counting as mere journalism. Such is the case despite the fact that the sciences relegate the most piddling of information to the note as to render it virtually insignificant when placed next to its humanities counterpart.<sup>5</sup>

## Bibliography/Works Cited

The bibliography provides a list of academic articles and books the author has consulted when writing the text readers have in hand. Rather like the footnotes, it indicates erudition, thoroughness, and democratic openness to knowledge formation.

The bibliography offers readers a glimpse into the range of materials on a given object of scholarly inquiry while, at the same time, indicating how the author has delimited the object, for there is no absolute end to what should and should not fall under the purview of an author on any subject. The bibliography is essentially limitless but limits must be maintained, if for no other reason than printing expenses and expediencies. However, also like the footnote, the bibliography can be used to quell opposition to the author’s argument and conclusion through the very act of displaying erudition, thoroughness and democratic openness.

The works cited list differs from the bibliography in that it indicates only those texts addressed directly in the body of the article/book itself. These addresses can be in the form of citation, quotation, paraphrase, contextualization, agreement, dissent, partial agreement coupled with partial dissent, and numerous other modes of engagement associated with the production of knowledge. While the bibliography is free to include any number of ‘extra-textual’ sources (that is, works with some relationship to the subject of the author’s work), the works cited is limited only to those actually used in the composition of the piece. Because of the exponential growth in published academic materials and the expenses/expediencies of the academic publishing industry, the works cited is quickly becoming the preferred form of citation, especially for articles.

## Quotations/Paraphrases

Scholarly texts rely on quotations and paraphrases of other texts related to the topic under investigation. As an important means of documenting and legitimating knowledge, the quotation uses the exact words of other authors/scholars to either undermine the point they make or to provide further support for the argument proposed by the author of the text performing the quotations. Sometimes a quotation serves both purposes at once. The quotation, rather like the footnote and the bibliography, also provides the author greater authoritative status by revealing an intimacy with, and deep understanding of, the important texts on the subject about which the author is writing. Of course, any quotation is completely removed from its original context, and is therefore subject to manipulation and misrepresentation. Academicians, however, try their best not to manipulate others’ words for their own ends, as advertising, political rhetoric or journalism might, and work hard to represent the ideas of others as accurately and fairly as possible. The paraphrase functions like a quotation but is a summary of what another author has said without directly using the exact words used by the cited author. Jean Baudrillard (1994), in his epigraph to ‘The Precession of Simulacra’, uses the convention of citation in an ingenious way. The citation reads as follows:

The simulacrum is never what hides the truth – it is truth that hides the fact that there is none.

The simulacrum is true.

Ecclesiastes

Eager students have searched for months in obscure apocryphal archives yet no trace has ever been found of an original version of this bogus citation. It can be grasped as a postmodern version, perhaps, of the paradox of the Cretan liar. The Cretan who states, ‘Each statement I make is false is lying, unless he is telling the truth, in which case he is lying. The quotation is thus a simulacrum of a quotation (rather than the conventional kind) and its reference is (thus) to itself. ‘The simulacrum’ is ‘this simulacrum’, which is true because it hides the fact that there is no truth hidden in the bogus reference. Baudrillard may, of course, have been thinking of the poem by Francis Ponge that begins: ‘This is the word that begins this poem/whose first line tells the truth.’ More skeptical students in this way are provided an insight into Baudrillard’s more general argument about how simulacra operate in the contemporary world.

## Publishers’ Imprint

The status of the publisher of a given academic work also lends credibility to the power and persuasiveness of the text. Just as certain academic institutions have higher status accorded to them, academic publishers do as well. Although most scholars will say publicly that the relative standing of an academic press or publisher has little bearing on the quality of a given work, most scholars privately believe it does.

## Notes

1. The endnote appears at the very end of a text while the footnote appears at the bottom of the individual printed page. We can also note here that the organization of a book is based on the body for its organizing principle. Thus, the bottom of the page is the foot and the top is the head. We speak of the corpus of an author to indicate the entire works that s/he has written. (Books might even have an appendix.)

2. The note, end- or foot-, is one of the most important pieces of the knowledge apparatus, despite its apparent understated nature. It is the academic hallmark par excellence, indicating scholarly thoroughness, authenticity and erudition. It therefore provides citation

and gestures to readers to perform follow-up research of their own, while also signaling that if they did so, they would invariably reach the same conclusion as the author; hence the ease with which the supposed transparency of scholarship is offered.

3. This kind of footnote is meant to quell any objections about the author’s argument/information by showing that s/he has exhaustively researched the issue at hand, consulted all extant authorities, and arrived at the apotheosis of scholarly opinion in the text that readers hold in their hands.

4. The length of the section devoted to footnotes can rival the length of the text itself, and the number of footnotes for a short article on history can number in the hundreds. Providing notes of this number and length allows the author to pursue sub-arguments and alternative views of a given point while not impeding the flow of the argument/analysis at hand. The sciences, however, and technological fields do not deploy the note nearly as often as the humanities or social sciences due to their deployment of a knowledge apparatus dependent on experimental and quantitative data, therefore including graphs, charts and formulae. At various times, and still to a certain extent within some social sciences, the humanities and social sciences have envied the look and authority of the sciences, especially post-Second World War, and have appropriated some of these same graphic markers of authoritative knowledge from the sciences.

5. For example, a science article might simply provide details of an experimental environment in a note if the article had notes at all.

# A Note on Knowledge Couze Venn

Keywords Bachelard, Canguilhem, epistemological history, norm, order, positivity, technical city, truth

W <sup>ithin</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>field</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>science</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>technology</sup>studies, the question of knowledge studies, the question of knowledge today is readily signposted by terms such as power/knowledge, actor-network theory,

## References

Baudrillard, J. (1994) ‘The Precession of Simulacra’, in Simulacrum and Simulation, trans. Sheila Faria Glaser. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Benjamin, W. (1996) ‘One-Way Street’, trans. Edmund Jephcott, Selected Writings, vol. 1: 1913–1926. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of the Harvard University Press.

Derrida, J. (1986) Glas, trans. J.P. Leavey Jr and R. Rand. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

Hegel, G.W.F. (1977) The Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A.V. Miller. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Kafka, F. (1999) The Complete Stories, ed. N.M. Glatzer. New York: Vintage.

Marx, K. (1972) ‘Theses on Feuerbach’, The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. R.C. Tucker. New York: Norton.

Ponge, F. (1965) Oeuvres, Vol. 1, trans. J. Phillips. Paris: Gallimard.

Ryan Bishop teaches at the National University of Singapore in the Department of English and has published on urbanism, military technology, critical theory, avant-garde aesthetics and international sex tourism.

John Phillips is Associate Professor in the Department of English Language and Literature at the National University of Singapore. He is the author of Contested Knowledge: A Guide to Critical Theory (Zed Books, 2000) and has published articles on linguistics, psychoanalysis, deconstruction, philosophy, literature, urbanism, postmodernism, critical theory, aesthetics and military technology.

regimes of truth, associated with the names of Foucault and Latour. Furthermore, different conceptual frameworks for theorizing the interrelation of the natural and the social, matter and form, have appeared that continue in a new language the venerable desire to find an overall or implicate order or coherence in the world. In the social sciences, the work of writers like Prigogine and Stengers, anchored in the soil of scientific practice, and that of Deleuze and Guattari, located in philosophical interrogations, represent different avenues that many have found useful in the attempt to understand the process of production of knowledge by reference to wider issues relating to the relation of being to world. A challenging and complex approach reworks the notion of techne, drawing from Heidegger’s work, to try and theorize what lies underneath the Foucauldian standpoint of the positivity of knowledge, linking the questioning of science and technology to philosophical issues that go to the heart of the theory of being. Techne of course needs to be located within the Heideggerian form of questioning, particularly relating to the ideas of bringing-forth or of revealing what lies concealed, and to the presencing of truth or aletheia. Techne thus is understood not on the terrain of technology but on that of poiesis. These concepts construct an episteme that regards science and technology as the enframing of ways of challenging ‘nature’ in order to unlock, transform, store, distribute, switch about which are all ways of revealing (Heidegger, 1977). In the background to the standpoint of techne one finds the questions about what endures and about the danger inherent in all knowing and inventing that alerts us to the fundamental stakes about existence that directs one’s questioning concerning knowledge.

At about the same time as Heidegger was elaborating his philosophy, in France Bachelard, and then Canguilhem, opened up a way of interrogating the process of producing knowledge that has had a profound, if mainly unrecognized, effect on the later discourse, via the work of their students, Althusser and Foucault. They both start out with the conviction that in order to speak about the sciences one has to situate oneself inside their practice, thus marking a break with the conventional ‘history of ideas’ approach that does not include within its purview the point of view of the science’s own questions. Their work is consciously set against the parasitical ‘epistemology of philosophers’ and against the (then) academic establishment, for example, Bergson and Brunschvicq, and against naive objectivism, which assumes that modern science investigates a reality which is already given or ‘natural’, out there. Instead Bachelard asserts that science breaks with common sense, and must do so in order to better interrogate a reality that its own enquiry specifies, discussing as example the concept of mass which in everyday language connotes the massive and size, whereas in physics it is consistent with the notion of the tiny, the particle, and even of negative mass (Dirac). Mass in physics is understood by reference to an apparatus of concepts and a practice – of force and acceleration in the Newtonian system, of time and speed and energy in relativity theory, of the mathematical understanding of propagation, spin, threshold, multiplicity in Dirac’s problematic of the particle – that constitute it, each time differently, as a concept of physics. Negative mass is a concept beyond 19thcentury philosophies. Bachelard uses the idea of epistemological break to refer to the incommensurability between the conceptual frameworks that constitute concepts in different problematics, ideas that Althusser disseminated in his analysis of science and Marxist theory. As one can surmise, a problematic in Bachelard refers not only to the conceptual framework and the practice of producing concepts and theoretical objects – or indeed of inventing them, since the scientific imagination ‘dreams’ – but refers also to the specific mode of questioning and the technical apparatus, operating in the ‘technical city’, that enables questions to be posed and investigated in their ‘positivity’; a problematic, then, circumscribes how concepts are ‘technically normed’ (see Bachelard, 1940, 1951; Venn, 1982).

This is not the place to undertake a critique of Bachelard, but some elements indirectly appear when one turns to Canguilhem, who developed his thoughts in part because the displacements that the former had operated had freed a space for his own research, and in part as a polemic against some of his ideas. For instance he wanted to restore to error a productive function in the emergence of knowledge, rather than its consignment in Bachelard’s thought to the outdated history of what has been overtaken by the progressive history of scientific rationality (which he distinguishes from the rationality of the philosophers). Other important differences include the focus in Canguilhem’s work on the sciences of life, and on a micro-history of the concept, in contrast to the broad canvas of Bachelard’s historical epistemology.

What emerges from the careful epistemological history of Canguilhem is the provisional and tentative character of scientific findings and work; he establishes that attention to the domain of investigation in which a particular concept emerges, that is, its problematic, reveals the specificity of the discursive rules that regulate its use, and the productivity of errors, for it is only retrospectively that a history of emergence can name error. In the Normal and the Pathological he shows that the normal is the result of a whole series of interventions that ground in precise techniques the norms of normality, as in medicine. His studies show that the normal and the normative, error and the pathological, are the two indissoluble and irreducible sides of a whole apparatus of normalization. Crucially, it is by reference to the idea of an order that both error and pathology can be correlated. For example the concept of the organ,