sentiment without being reflective. So, the stronger and more pervasive the support the nationalistic discourse gains from public opinion, the less and weaker the critical public sphere becomes. This is the desperate condition of the public sphere in contemporary Japanese society.

## Towards a New Critique in the Future

It is apparent that both hihyô and hihan are in profound crisis at the present time in Japan. Though the majority of the public recognize and acknowledge that there are a lot of socio-political problems that should be resolved, their concerns and anxieties cannot find the way to critically and self-reflexively look at the cause of those problems. Instead, the ambiguous fear shared among the public sentiment is easily channelled towards the discriminative and racist direction by the pseudo-critical nationalistic discourse.

In this difficult age of critique in Japan, the theoretical and practical task for those who still engage in the critical studies of society and politics in the broader sense is to envisage a new paradigm from which we can shed a new critical light on the socio-political conditions of contemporary Japanese society. In other words, we have to reconsider and re-invent the imported, Western notion of ‘critique’ in a more vernacular way. Of course, it does not mean to essentialize the tradition of hihyô and hihan. Contrary to that, the ‘vernacular critique’ aims to contextualize and domesticate the critical tradition of Western thought in conjuncture with the Japanese tradition of hihyô and hihan in order to grasp the everwidening economic and socio-cultural divisions, in which not a few people living in Japanese society are put under hard and inhumane life conditions.

For the resurgence of critique in Japan, Kojin Karatani’s Transcritique seems to be very suggestive. In his book, originally published in Japanese in 2001, Karatani tried to form ‘a space of transcodings between the domains of ethics and political economy, between the Kantian critique and Marxian critique’ (Karatani, 2003: vii) in his own way. His discourse of ‘transcritique’ can be understood as an intellectual challenge that combines the critical traditions of hihyô and hihan in both more vernacular and orthodox ways.

It seems that hihyô and hihan are in serious and profound crisis in Japan. However, it is possible for critical discourse to make its voice heard in the public sphere and to show the future direction of society only when the critique can survive the crisis of the harder era.

## References

Ara, M. (1984) Simin Bungaku-ron (Civil Literary Theory). Tokyo: San Ichi Shobô.

Dower, J. (1999) Embracing Defeat: Japan in the Wake of World War II. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

Fukuda, K. (2000) Kûhaku no Syûen e (Toward the End of Emptiness). Tokyo: PHP.

Karatani, K. (2003) Transcritique: On Kant and Marx, trans. Sabu Kohso. London: MIT Press.

Oguma, E. (2002) Minsyu to Aikoku (Democracy and Nationalism). Tokyo: Shinyo-sha.

Otuka, E. (2001) Sengo Minsyu-syugi no Rehabiriteisyon (Rehabilitation of Postwar Democracy). Tokyo: Kadokawa Syoten.

Sugiyama, M. (2001) Sengo Nihon no Minsyusyakai (Civil Society in Postwar Japan). Tokyo: Misuzu Shobô.

Kiyoshi Abe took his PhD in sociology from the University of Tokyo. He is Professor of Media and Culture at Kwansei Gakuin University in Japan.

# Poetic Knowledge

Rajeev S. Patke

Abstract Whether poetry gives knowledge or not is a question that has been debated from a variety of perspectives, depending on how a society or a culture defines knowledge, and on the function it ascribes to poetry in relation to that definition. The civilizations of Asia and the Middle East have generally taken the line that poetry deals primarily with affects, emotions and feelings. The West has had a more complicated history of responses. One way of making sense of this history is to map rival claims as split over the idea of scientific knowledge, where it affects notions of the poetic function. The mapping, through all its manifold branches, gives clear indications that claims to knowledge – both those made on behalf of poetry, and those denied to poetry – depend more on assumptions, predispositions and cultural conditioning than on rational argument or critical debate. The resulting variety also suggests that the cultural relativism that affects such debates is unlikely to arrive at resolutions except of the contingent kind.

Keywords cognitive poetics, language and epistemology, poetry and knowledge

## 1 The Context for Debates about Poetic Knowledge

Debates about the relation between poetry and knowledge are a significant feature of the diversity that characterizes all human civilizations. In any given system of belief that individuates a person, a community or a culture, the idea of poetic knowledge entails a conscious or involuntary preference for one of two mutually incompatible beliefs: that poetry is a form of knowledge (Position A); that poetry and knowledge correspond to different human faculties, which entail activities and produce results whose values are either complementary (Position B1), or opposed (Position B2).

The claim for poetic knowledge in its weak form merely alludes to the fact that poetry can transmit forms of knowledge derived from other domains; in its strong form, poetry is claimed to produce or embody knowledge uniquely. Position B1 sustains a tension between the relative worth ascribed to two differing conceptions of knowledge; Position B2 dissolves the tension in favour of one or the other conception. To think of poetry as a form of knowing integrates knowledge into wisdom, while it diversifies the idea of truth into a manifold that includes the spiritual and the aesthetic (Position A). To think of poetry as distinct from knowledge (Position B) turns the idea of knowledge away from the claims of religion and the arts towards an ideal of truth derived from mathematics or symbolic logic, ‘the true’ split off from ‘the good’ and ‘the beautiful’. Each position ascribes a nature and function to poetry in relation to an idea of knowledge and a corresponding evaluation of either. Position A values an idea of knowledge that gives central place to poetry, while Position B splits poetry from knowledge and produces two divergent off-shoots: one regards each as apt to its sphere (Position B1), the other disparages one at the expense of the other, giving us a view of poetry as useless or worse in matters of serious thought or knowledge (Position B2–), or a view that defends poetic knowledge as complete and accuses science of being limited in its approach to the idea of truth and blind to the ideals of religion or spirituality (Position B2+).

The simplest way of distinguishing between whether the idea of poetic knowledge functions in a given belief system as an article of faith or as a sterile oxymoron is to recognize how the weight of beliefs is distributed across a see-saw which tilts on the question of whether knowledge is defined as knowledge-of-x (Quine calls it knowing-that) or knowledge-as-y (Quine calls it knowing how), where both x and y are functions of value, x refers to propositions with global applicability (as in mathematics and science), and y refers to mediated representations whose applicability is bound by context and historicity (as in the arts). The metaphor of a ‘tilt’ can be applied in another sense, as an ongoing contestation in which knowledge is a field fought over by rival ideas of ‘the true’, ‘the beautiful’ and ‘the good’. Any claim concerning knowledge entails as its predicate an idea of truth that is evoked either solemnly, as in the equation between truth and beauty in Keats’s ‘Ode on a Grecian Urn’, or as in the sardonic wryness of Wallace Stevens’s ‘The Man on the Dump’, who evokes the object of what might well be a chimerical pursuit as ‘the the’. An Introduction to Arab Poetics (Adonis, 1990), for instance, claims with reference to an Arab poem, ‘the knowledge in this text is not about certainties, nor is it an answer, as is the case with the knowledge offered by religion or philosophy. On the contrary, it is a questioning’ (1990: 69).

Position A supports a notion of knowledge that does not differentiate between the imaginative, the rational and the spiritual dimensions of consciousness or experience. It alludes to an origin for poetry in oral cultures, where it embodies as well as transmits knowledge, combining knowledge-of with knowledge-as. Oral poetic forms serve multiple functions. They are at once expressive, affective, communicative, didactic and cognitive in their use of language, rhythm and form; and they articulate shared beliefs concerning the nature of reality and of human existence through songs, symbols, myths, legends, historical narratives, incantations and rituals. Orality held the linguistic articulacy central to poetry close to the imaginative, speculative and regulative reason of ancient religion and philosophy. As poetry moves away from its origins in collective and anonymous orality, defenders of the idea of a unified field for poetry and knowledge face increasing opposition from the division of intellectual labour that subsidizes the development of science.

Position B can sometimes appear to share part of its conception of knowledge with the endorsement of poetic knowledge in oral cultures; but on the whole, and especially as we slide on the see-saw from Position B1 to Position B2–, it prefers to give knowledge a very different emphasis, as referring primarily to an archive of abstract and universally applicable propositions produced by human reason as descriptions of whatever is included in the idea of the physical universe. This archive is subsidized by a belief in the innate order of the ‘reality’ alleged to underlie sensory phenomena, whose principles are treated as amenable to rational explanations, as an end in itself, and also as means to varying degrees of power over the ‘reality’ whose properties they formalize into scientific knowledge. This latter function has ensured the usefulness of science to society, and its commensurate power, which includes the power to persuade society to its system of values and the place assigned to poetry in that system.

The history of the equation between science and a specific conception of knowledge is characterized by a progressive subdivision of intellectual endeavour, which began with the separation of science from speculative philosophy and religion. The subsequent division into the various ‘hard’ sciences (astronomy, chemistry, physics and the life sciences), and the development of the social sciences (economics, sociology, anthropology, psychology, linguistics, etc.) has extended the scope of scientific (and quasi-scientific) inquiry into various aspects of human experience. At the same time, the application of scientific methods to the study of human nature and society has had to moderate the ‘truth’ recoverable from such projects by the limited degree to which the social sciences are amenable to reason, susceptible of orderliness, and able to sustain claims to knowledge as something other than the local outcome of ongoing contestations between interpretive ideologies. For example, Jean Rancière (1994) remarks that the modern revolution in historical scholarship brought about by the Annales group ‘consists in knowing how to recognize, in the siren song of the scientific age, the threat of ruin of