Heidegger, M. (1971) Poetry, Language, Thought, trans. Albert Hofstadter. New York: Harper and Row.

Lakoff, G. and M. Johnson (1999) Philosophy in the Flesh. New York: Basic Books.

Maritain, J. (1995[1932]) The Degrees of Knowledge, ed. Ralph McInerny, trans. Gerald B. Phelan. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.

Miner, E. (1990) Comparative Poetics: An Intercultural Essay on Theories of Literature. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Murray, L. (1997) A Working Forrest: Selected Prose. Potts Point, NSW: Duff and Snellgrove.

Nietzsche, F. (1989[1873]) ‘On Truth and Lying in an Extra-Moral Sense’, in Friedrich Nietzsche on Rhetoric and Language, ed. Sander L. Gilman, Carole Blair and David J. Parent. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Preminger, A. and T.V.F. Brogan (eds) (1993) The New Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Quine, W.V. (1987) Quiddities: An Intermittently Philosophical Dictionary. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Rancière, Jean (1994[1992]) The Names of History: On the Poetics of Knowledge, trans. Hassan Melechy, foreword by Hayden White. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Richards, I.A. (1926) Science and Poetry. London: Paul, Trench, Trubner.

Ricoeur, P. (1977[1975]) The Rule of Metaphor, trans. Robert Czerny. Toronto and Buffalo: University of Toronto Press.

Shelley, P.B. (1977) ‘A Defence of Poetry’, in Shelley’s Poetry and Prose, ed. Donald H. Reiman and Sharon B. Powers. New York: Norton.

Rajeev Patke teaches at the National University of Singapore. Forthcoming publications include Postcolonial Poetry in English (Oxford University Press, 2006) and the co-edited Historical Companion to Postcolonial Literatures: Continental Europe and its Empires (Edinburgh University Press, 2007).

# Everyday Knowledge

Michael E. Gardiner

Keywords everyday life, Heller, knowledge, Lefebvre, modernity

E<sup>veryday</sup> <sup>knowledge’</sup> <sup>(or</sup> <sup>more</sup> <sup>precisely</sup>knowledges) is a sociocultural universal. knowledges) is a sociocultural universal. All human societies build up a repertoire of shared and embodied norms, techniques and interpretive frameworks. Such ‘stock knowledge at hand’, as the phenomenologist Alfred Schütz (1967) has described it, allows for the formation of personal identities, facilitates mundane social interactions, and enables practical engagements with the material world. This realization led Agnes Heller to suggest that the everyday represents society’s most fundamental ontological category, which she characterizes as the shared ‘life-experience on which our intersubjective constitution of the world rests’. It is within this sphere that a human being acquires certain skills and competencies, via acculturation and socialization, that allow one to become a full participant in social life, especially through what Heller identifies as the crucial media of language, tools and norms. Although the actual content of these knowledges is subject to enormous historico-cultural variability, we can, nevertheless, point to several key features: typically (though not inevitably), everyday knowledges are ruled by emotion and affect rather than formal logic; they tend to be repetitive, prone to analogical forms of reasoning and over-generalization; and they are pragmatic, based upon immediate perceptions and experiences and subordinated to the requirements of mundane tasks. Everyday knowledges are a form of doxa, legitimated by commonsensical opinions and not reliant on ‘certainty’ in any scientific sense.

In most premodern societies, such everyday knowledges were complexly intertwined with their more specialized counterparts, to the point where it becomes difficult to separate them. In tribal societies, for example, practical knowledges are imbricated fully with a wider gamut of mythopoetic, festive and religious rituals, symbols and discourses. These integrated activities, objects and knowledges constitute an overarching totality, a distinctive ‘style’ of common existence that is permeated with poetical and aesthetic qualities that shape every aspect of sociocultural life. In the premodern context, as Henri Lefebvre (1987: 8) observes, ‘the smallest tool to the greatest works of art and learning possessed a symbolic value linking them to meaning at its most vast’.

What seems to be largely peculiar to the Western world, at least since the time of the ancient Greeks, but especially with the advent of modernity, is a heightened reflexivity vis-à-vis the boundaries that delineate everyday from more formalized knowledges. Insofar as asymmetries of power are brought to bear on any exercise of boundary-maintenance, this has, historically speaking, involved a tendency to valorize the formal and specialized at the expense of the prosaic, the mundane and the practical. Western history has occasionally been witness to a creative osmosis between the everyday and more specialized knowledges (both Heller and Mikhail Bakhtin mention the Renaissance in this context). However, modernity is generally characterized as a form of social organization wherein human needs and actions become increasingly subordinated to the technical requirements of a rapidly expanding and centralized apparatus of commodity production, distribution and consumption, instead of being rooted in the more ‘organic’ rhythms and textures of daily life in the premodern world. Within ‘learned’ discourse, everyday knowledges became the target of ridicule and vilification. Descartes, for instance, argued that the paradigm of certain knowledge lay not in the evidence of the embodied senses, but in the abstract and timeless propositions of mathematics. These axioms were located within a purely mental space surveilled by the imperious, rational Mind, the (in)famous cogito. As Lefebvre has argued, this Cartesian mind–body dualism, like similar idealist philosophies, represented a systemic denigration of everyday knowledges and the aforementioned ‘intersubjective constitution of the social world’. Evoking Marx, for Lefebvre such an outlook had a distinct sociohistorical origin: it was an expression of alienation, a loss of control over elemental human capacities and powers, which are banished to a nebulous fantasy world of rarified ideas instead of being rooted in the lived, intersubjective experience of time, space and the body. Everyday knowledges ‘came to be thematized from the standpoint of a “truth” which then defined this life as void of truth’ (Heller, 1985: 80).

It is therefore not surprising that everyday knowledges have only rarely been considered worthy objects of study during the last two and a half thousand years of Western thought. One exception was the emergence of such social philosophies as hermeneutics, existential phenomenology, and Verstehen sociology in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Max Weber, Wilhelm Dilthey, Schütz and other sociologists sought to develop the necessary conceptual and methodological tools for a systematic analysis of the everyday Lebenswelt or ‘lifeworld’. (There were parallel developments in philosophy, such as Ludwig Wittgenstein’s attempt to conceptualize pragmatic usages of language within specific ‘forms of life’, helping to spawn an entire genre of Anglo-American ‘ordinary language philosophy’.) Heller argues that these intellectual developments were premised on two key assumptions. First, the everyday was perceived as separate and distinguishable from specialized knowledges and practices; and, second, everyday life was thought to be problematic, mainly because it is widely felt that modernity represented a distinct threat to the integrity of the everyday, insofar as daily existence was subjected to an extensive process of economic and bureaucratic restructuring, rationalization and commodification. As Mike Featherstone (1992: 162) puts it,

science, art, philosophy and other forms of theoretical knowledge originally embedded within everyday life become progressively separated and subjected to specialist development, followed by a further phase whereby this knowledge is fed back in order to rationalize, colonize and homogenize everyday life.

Viewing the everyday and its requisite knowledges as both distinct and ‘problematic’ has compelled particular strains of modern social and philosophical thought to be aware of the existence of ‘everyday life’ as a central ontological component of the social world. For example, theories such as Schützian phenomenology or ethnomethodology celebrate the ongoing accomplishments and practices of everyday life, but they do so in an uncritical and essentially descriptive fashion. In part, this is because they tend to conceptualize the underlying structures of the lifeworld as essentially ‘taken-for-granted’, and therefore an unchanging and immutable stratum of human existence. These theories therefore reproduce, rather than subvert, the pervasive hierarchy between specialized and non-specialized knowledges, thereby bolstering what André Gorz (1993) has called the ‘expertocracy’.

There is, however, another significant approach to the understanding of everyday knowledges, which, arguably, does not fall prey to the descriptively ethnographic, empiricist and covertly positivist orientation of various phenomenologies and micro-sociologies. This refers to a group of theorists, which would include the likes of Bakhtin, Walter Benjamin, Michel de Certeau, Heller, Lefebvre, Michel Maffesoli and others, who view the everyday in more complex and nuanced terms. Rather than interpret everyday practices and knowledges as either trivial or merely ‘problematic’, these theorists set out to actively problematize everyday life, to expose its myriad contradictions, effects, determinations and hidden potentialities. This is accomplished through various techniques of estrangement or ‘defamiliarization’ that aim to disrupt the state of habitualized ‘dreaming’ or distraction that constitutes the everyday life of modernity, and jolt it into a state of (relative) wakefulness (see Highmore, 2002). So whereas for mainstream sociological approaches the everyday is the realm of the ordinary, the alternative sketched out by Lefebvre et al. is to treat it as incipiently extraordinary. The ordinary can become extraordinary not by eclipsing the everyday, or imagining we can arbitrarily leap beyond it to some ‘higher’ level of cognition, knowledge or action, but by fully appropriating and activating the possibilities that lie hidden, and typically repressed, within it. Such an enriched experience can then be re-directed back to daily life in order to transform it. The goal here is to elevate ‘lived experience to the status of a critical concept – not merely in order to describe lived experience, but in order to change it’ (Kaplan and Ross, 1987: 1).

Although everyday life does display routinized, static and unreflexive characteristics, as Schütz and others have argued, the work of Lefebvre and others has led us to realize that it is also capable of a surprising dynamism and moments of penetrating insight and unbridled creativity. And insofar as everyday lives and knowledges evince an irreducibly imaginative and dynamic quality, they cannot simply be written off as the realm of the trivial, inconsequential and habit-bound (see John O’Neill, 1995). Many aspects of daily life remain hidden and obscure, beyond the understanding of the fully legible ‘Cartesian space’ that scientific rationalism strives to construct and enforce. It is the very ‘messiness’ of daily life, its unsystematized and unpredictable quality, that helps it at least partially escape the reifying grip of nomothetic social science and technocratic planning (see de Certeau, 1984). In the minutiae of everyday life, therefore, we find a polysemy of gestures and symbols the very ‘banality’ of which is worth savouring; for, as Maurice Blanchot (1987: 13)

suggests, the everyday constitutes ‘a utopia, and an Idea, without which one would not know how to get at either the hidden present, or the discoverable future of manifest beings’. If this is so, then the task of the critical theorist of everyday life conforms to what Rob Shields (1999: 188) has usefully termed a ‘utopian humanism’: it celebrates the intrinsic but oft-hidden promises and possibilities of ordinary human beings and the inherent value of commonsensical forms of knowl edge, but recognizes shortcomings in the mundane world as it is currently constituted, and is attuned to the transgressive, sensual and incandescent qualities of everyday existence, whereby the entire fabric of the daily social world can take on a festive hue and be considered akin to a ‘work of art’.

## References

Blanchot, M. (1987) ‘Everyday Speech’, Yale French Studies 73: 12–20.

Certeau, Michel de (1984) The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Featherstone, M. (1992) ‘The Heroic Life and Everyday Life’, Theory, Culture & Society 9: 159–82.

Gorz, A. (1993) ‘Political Ecology: Expertocracy vs. Self-Limitation’, New Left Review 202: 55–68.

Heller, A. (1985) The Power of Shame: A Rational Perspective. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Highmore, B. (2002) Everyday Life and Cultural Theory. London and New York: Routledge.

Kaplan, A. and K. Ross (1987) ‘Introduction’, Yale French Studies 73: 1–4.

Lefebvre, H. (1987) ‘The Everyday and Everydayness’, Yale French Studies 73: 7–11.

O’Neill, J. (1995) The Poverty of Postmodernity. London and New York: Routledge.

Schütz, A. (1967) The Phenomenology of the Social World. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.

Shields, R. (1999) Lefebvre, Love, and Struggle: Spatial Dialectics. London and New York: Routledge.

Michael E. Gardiner is a Professor of Sociology at the University of Western Ontario, Canada. His single-author books include Critiques of Everyday Life and The Dialogics of Critique, and edited works include Bakhtin and the Human Sciences, Rethinking Everyday Life and Mikhail Bakhtin (4 vols). He is currently working on a book on utopia and social theory.

# Tacit Knowledge

Rod Watson

Keywords ethnomethodology, knowledge, phenomenology

A knowledge originates in the work of Edmund Husserl (1962). In writing of ‘the natural standpoint’, i.e. the inter-subjective, constitutive sphere we inhabit, Husserl subjected to examination the mundane frame of reference within which ordinary persons routinely apperceive our phenomenal world. Within this frame of reference, which is experientially paramount, we take it for granted that we encounter things ‘as they are’, as self-given. In ordinary circumstances, any doubt about this is routinely suspended.

This taken-for-grantedness involves ‘active apperception, e.g. in facing the front of a house we tacitly assume, from our perspectival standpoint, that the house has side and rear elevations too, even though we cannot actually see them: we simply ‘know’ what houses are like – they have figured in our past experience, and so on.

Husserl devised what he termed ‘phenomenological reductions’ whereby the essential features of such taken-for-grantedness might temporarily be subjected to explicitation. Through such operations, we could turn our apprehension of the house into an explicit object of enquiry, i.e. how – through what intersubjective, experiential procedures – the house figures in the temporal course of my experience. The reductions strip away the tacit nature of our apprehensions in the natural standpoint (or attitude).

Alfred Schütz (1967) applied and extended Husserl’s approach, both to the social world and to social-scientific theorizations of that world. He conceived of society members as apprehending and acting in their lived world as a phenomenal domain constituted through an intersubjectively held framework of ordinary commonsense knowledge as built into lay members’ practical actions. Such knowledge included a set of typifications of persons, actions and settings, and of predicates such as motives. This framework is taken-forgranted and its constituents were incorporated into the production of sensible actions in an unstated, unquestioned way. This corpus of mundane knowledge also comprised tacit provisions for its own deployment, e.g. ego’s taking it for granted that were alter to occupy her position, then her apperception of a given object would be just the same. Similarly, it is tacitly accepted both by ego and alter that they apperceive the same object in the same way irrespective of each actor’s biographical experience; for a series of views on how such phenomenology bears on sociology, see Hinkle et al. (1977).

This taken-for-grantedness is, typically, morally compelling though not invariably so. Special circumstances may emerge where it may be – strictly temporarily – suspended, and what is normally understood and presupposed by members is subjected by them to explicit attention. This fact helps distinguish the notion of the ‘tacit’, the ‘unstated’ or the ‘taken-for-granted’ from psychologistic conceptions such as the ‘subconscious’ where explicitations might well not be amenable to such contextual explicitation. Instead, the tacit might better be conceived in terms of an ‘agreement’ akin to Durkheim’s ‘noncontractual elements of the contract’, whereby the formal terms of a contract might only be deemed feasible if there exists a ‘background scheme’ of understood moral agreements concerning proper adherence and the like.

An example of such a background scheme may be drawn from D.L. Wieder’s (1974) ethnomethodological (EM) study of inmates agreed ‘convict code’ in a parole institution. The maxims of the code – ‘don’t co-operate with staff ’, etc. – were seldom if ever explicitly stated, and certainly not as a ‘complete’ set, but they still routinely informed people’s actions in the institution. Thus, when an inmate said to staff, ‘You know I can’t organize a baseball team’, this is heard as indexing the code of non-cooperation, as a ‘telling’ of the code. The tacitly known-incommon code thereby furnishes a set of ‘hearing rules’ for particular tellings, and Wieder specifies the laic experiential procedures whereby hearers tie a telling to the code – procedures he glosses as ‘the documentary method of interpretation’ (DMI – a concept now rescinded by EM). The DMI involves the back-and-forth determination and redetermination of apprehended particulars and gestalt-like pattern. These reflexive procedures are transformed by Wieder into a topic for analysis in their own right, whereas for the institution’s personnel, they are left tacit, as, essentially, of no practical interest. Consequently, it was not just the set of maxims that was left unstated but also the