procedures for their practical relevancing in particular instances. This is a classic case of (tacit) knowledge-in-action.

The DMI brings us to a crucial distinction concerning any corpus of knowledge – propositional/’substantive’ as opposed to procedural/ methodic knowledge. The distinction is one made by Gilbert Ryle, between ‘knowing that (something is the case)’ and ‘knowing how’, i.e. how to make sense of a given situation and how therefore to act competently within it. It is most typically procedural knowledge that is tacit. Even when some item of substantive knowledge is explicitly avowed or ascribed by members, the procedural vehicle for its competent avowal or ascription is deployed in a tacit way. The significance of this is encapsulated by Garfinkel’s observation that the sense of what is said depends on how it is said. Such knowledgeable ‘production procedures’ or ‘laic techniques’ are typically left unremarked – ‘seen but unnoticed’, as Garfinkel puts it – both by members and (therefore) by normative or mainstream sociologists themselves. The technique and skill that ‘go into’ mundane practices normally remain unstated and unexplicated.

However, propositional knowledge can, of course, also be tacitly assumed or presupposed, not only by lay society members but also by professional sociologists of the ‘mainstream varieties. As Rose (1960) and Garfinkel (1984, 2002) have amply demonstrated, these sociologies are built upon a tacit, unexplicated commonsensebased ‘natural sociology’. They are reliant upon a primordial natural language describability that involves both ‘knowledge that’ and ‘knowledge how’. The aim of EM and other phenomenologically based sociologies is to transform these tacit resources into topics to be explicated in their own right. In this view, the notion of tacit knowledge takes us to the heart of mainstream sociologies and reveals their most debilitating vulnerability, namely their deep confusion of explicit topic and unexplicated resource.

For those sociologies such as EM that wish to avoid such incoherence, the question remains: ‘how does one analytically explicate such a tacit knowledge-base?’ Those mainstream sociologies which are methodologically ironic (i.e. which set themselves up in competition with lay members knowledge) characteristically employ some variant of what Kenneth Burke termed a ‘perspective by incongruity’: that is, they use a variety of redescriptive tropes such as metonymy to ‘force tacit knowledge into visibility’, to ‘raise it into the foreground’ and ‘afford it a fresh view’. However, in effectuating such redescriptions such a project risks falsifying the intrinsic phenomenal integrity of the very knowledge it seeks to reveal. It must also be said that many professional sociologies simply do not notice the stratum of tacit knowledge in the first place.

Instead, phenomenologically based approaches such as EM have sought to exhibit the tacit in nonironic ways somewhat akin to phenomenological reduction. This was, in part, brought about by the taking of a praxiological turn, to treating of knowledge-in-action. However, since the knowledgebased production procedures for particular actions are themselves highly likely to be tacit, both buried from view and disattended (though nonetheless, of course, utterly relied upon), devices are still required to bring them to the explicit attention of the analyst. Such devices included Garfinkel’s well-known, though rapidly rescinded ‘breach’ interventions (Garfinkel, 1963), and the study of naturally occurring practices such as ‘explicative transactions’ and of interactions with those conceived as ‘mentally ill (Pollner, 1987), or the study of naturally occurring ‘anomalies’ in the attitude of everyday life such as the case of an intersexed person (Garfinkel, 1967): this last study had a profoundly methodological intent.

The tacit is often conceived according to a spatial metaphor: ‘background’ versus ‘foreground’. This metaphor derives from gestalt approaches and locates the tacit in a kind of ecology of mind. This metaphor has its pitfalls, however, and more recent studies have attempted to recast the conception of the tacit, e.g. Jalbert’s exemplary study of the procedural work of tacit presupposition, elision, passivisation and agentdeletion in televized US news reports on the Israeli invasion of Lebanon: again, such praxiological approaches can show us the active work that the unstated can do.

## Bibliography

Garfinkel, H. (1963) ‘A Conception of, and Experiments in, “Trust” as a Condition for Stable Concerted Interaction’, in O.J. Harvey (ed.) Motivation and Social Interaction, pp. 187–238. New York: The Ronald Press.

Garfinkel, H. (1984) Studies in Ethnomethodology. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Garfinkel, H. (2002) Ethnomethodology’s Program: Working Out Durkheim’s Aphorism. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.

Hinkle, G., H. Garfinkel, J. Heap, J. O’Neill, G. Psathas, E. Rose, E. Tiryakian, D.L. Wieder and H. Wagner (1977) ‘When Is Phenomenology Sociological?’, Annals of Phenomenological Sociology 2: 1–40.

Husserl, E. (1962) Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology. London: Collier.

Jalbert, P.L. (1994) ‘Structures of the “Unsaid”’, Theory, Culture & Society 11(4): 127–60.

Pollner, M. (1987) Mundane Reason: Reality in Everyday and Sociological Reasoning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Rose, E. (1960) ‘The English Record of a Natural Sociology’, American Sociological Review 25(2): 193–208.

Schütz, A. (1967) The Phenomenology of the Social World, trans. G. Walsh and F.J. Lehnert. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.

Wieder, D.L. (1974) Language and Social Reality: The Case of Telling the Convict Code. The Hague: Mouton.

Rod Watson teaches Sociology at Manchester University, is a former holder of the Francqui International Chair in the Human Sciences, and has published extensively in ethnomethodology, conversational analysis and analytic/linguistic philosophy.

# Gendering Knowledge Ann Brooks

Keywords epistemology, gender, modernity, reflexivity

## Introduction

The intersection of gender analysis and global knowledge by social, gender and feminist theorists has given rise to new epistemological frameworks. A number of conceptual and theoretical problems central to these new epistemologies are raised in the process. These include: relationships of intimacy in late modernity; reflexivity and gender identity; relationships between sex, gender and embodiment; and masculinities and sexualities.

## Reflexivity, Modernity and Specific Gender Practices

Gender was always framed within a collectivist set of epistemological paradigms along with class, race, ethnicity and nationality. However, as Beck and Beck-Gernsheim (1995: 5–6) observe, ‘as people are released from roles, especially gender roles, that modern capitalist society prescribed, they are encouraged more and more to build up a life of their own’. Within what Beck defines as a ‘new modernity’ is a fragmentation and differentiation of life patterns and an erosion of conventionalized life careers and relationships.

The conceptualization of this ‘new modernity’ in socio-cultural and gender terms as understood by Beck and others is a highly Westernized notion of modernity. Beck (2000) distinguishes between a ‘first modernity’, signalled by collective full employment and the existence of both nationstates and welfare states, and a ‘second modernity’, in which increased individualization, gender revolution and globalization come about.

In this Western conceptualization of the ‘new modernity’ traditionally conceived notions of gender, of feminine and masculine, are breaking down, which poses additional challenges to relationships of intimacy. There are now multiple masculinities (Connell, 1996) and femininities and new epistemological frameworks to accompany them. Plummer (2003) formulates a sociology of intimacy based on an understanding of choices about gender and a reconceptualization of traditional gender categories such as masculinity and femininity. Far from a positive representation of relationships of intimacy as suggested by Beck and Giddens, Plummer shows how gender relationships have very negative connotations including:

‘gender wars’ as men and women seem increasingly incapable of living with each other . . . side by side with this, newer concerns over bisexuality and polyamory [described by Plummer as relationships where there is multiple love], gender benders and gender blenders, queers, lesbian daddies, dykes . . . and transgender warriors. (Plummer, 2003: 6)

Conceptualizing modernity in non-Western contexts produces a very different understanding of reflexivity and gender identity. As I have noted elsewhere (Brooks, 2003), in Southeast Asia, the intersection of gender, family values and multiculturalism is a pervasive phenomenon impacting on reflexivity and identity. Religion and ethnicity give a further inflection to the debate. The underlying issues around religion, ethnicity and class intersect with gender and impact on the debate around both ‘Asian’ family values and gender identity. The rhetoric emerging from many of the governments in Southeast Asia has deliberately tied issues of gender identity to debates around ‘Asian family values’, nation building and questions of national identity. Whether the particular inflection is Confucian or Islamist, modernity, reflexivity and gender identity has a different frame of reference.

Thus modernity within non-Western contexts lends itself to a very different conceptualization of gender and a very different framing of gender identity. Within non-Western contexts a more appropriate model to understand gender may be that of ‘divergent modernities’ or ‘multiple modernities’. Within an Asian context, Asian women are creating non-Western conceptualizations of modernity. As Roces and Edwards (2000: 4–5) note, in doing so ‘it reaffirms the distinctiveness of a particular national subjectivity from a putative hegemonic Westernising identity’. An expression of this can be seen in Malaysia where the use of the veil has been seen as an attempt to embrace modernity in non-Western terms (Stivens, 1998).

Problematizing the relationship between modernity, reflexivity and gender, Gole (2002: 174) considers: ‘The public visibility of Islam and the specific gender, corporeal and spatial practices underpinning it’, through the practice of veiling. In writing about the contemporary veiling practices of Muslim women, Gole highlights the significance of gender in the public visibility of Islam and shows how women become important religious and political agents through the emergence of the veil as the symbol of politicized Islam. Gole (2002: 181) shows that:

The Islamic headscarf is deliberately appropriated not passively carried and handed down from generation to generation. It is claimed by a new generation of women who have had access to higher education . . . Instead of assimilating to the secular regime of women’s emancipation, they press for their embodied difference (e.g. Islamic dress) and their public visibility.

As Gole points out, Muslim women find themselves a visible representation of ‘difference’ from both a sometimes hostile West and a confused and divided Islam. Gole (2002: 183) maintains that the practice of veiling does not reflect a subjugation of Muslim women to traditional religious practices: ‘On the contrary, it bears a new form, the outcome of a selective and reflexive attitude that amplifies and dramatizes the performative signs of “difference” . . . the new covering suggests a more rather than less potent Islam.’ Traditionally denied any visible presence in the public sphere, Muslim women’s representation of contemporary Islam has redefined both gender roles and representations of women. The relationship between gender, Islamization and religious practice has had a strong impact on reflexivity and gender identity. In countries in Southeast Asia and elsewhere, modernist versus traditional Islamist positions can be seen to be played out around issues of marriage, polygamy and embodiment. As Stivens (1998: 113) notes, ‘the subtext of these contests is that women have been deployed as bearers of correct religious dress and behaviour and as keepers of a revivified private sphere, “the family”’. Such reconceptualizations of gender and identity have posed serious challenges to conventional epistemological frameworks and to contemporary theorizing around reflexivity and identity.

## Deconstructing Sex, Gender and Embodiment

Reconceptualizing sex and gender has been a relatively recent development among gender and feminist theorists and activists, characterized by significant epistemological shifts. These reconceptualizations of the relationship between sex, gender and embodiment have problematized conventional understanding of such relationships. In fact it was not until gender had become more established as a category that sexuality became more amenable to investigation. In addition, sexuality itself came to be seen as another axis of inequality. The relationship between sex and gender became increasingly seen as a sphere of epistemological conflict, particularly within feminist and gender theorizing. Debates raged initially over sex and sexuality (see below); however, the emphasis shifted to the interrogation of both sex and gender. Some argued that questioning sex as well as gender facilitates a more complete social understanding of the distinction between women and men. Other theorists maintain that the sex/gender distinction is no longer useful and that if both sex and gender are social constructions, we should return to using the term ‘sex’ (Grosz, 1995).

In Volatile Bodies (1994), Grosz argued for a re-examining of notions of female corporeality and for interrogating the body within sexuality and ethics. Grosz (1994: 58, 187) holds a view of the materially sexed body, maintaining that ‘the body is constrained by its biological limits’, and also notes that ‘the kind of body inscribed’ makes a difference to the meaning and functioning of gender that emerges. However, she also observes that social norms structure our perception and understanding of male and female identities. As Shilling (2005: 68) notes: ‘We are left with a body that is positioned by, and unalterably tied to, the sexual norms of society.’ Shilling correctly acknowledges that Grosz does not overstate the significance of the ‘body’s “malleability” (as with Giddens’s focus on individual reflexivity) or its determination (as with Bourdieu’s notion of the habitus)’ (Shilling, 2005: 67). However the problematic inherent in Grosz’s model is her failure to establish criteria on which to judge between the two positions. Regardless of Grosz’s emphasis on an autonomous ‘sexed corporeality’, Shilling observes that she shares with Bourdieu a perspective on the body’s positioning in society which ties into the dominant structures of social class or sexuality, and hence to a substantially modernist view of gender identity. Elsewhere, Grosz (1995) argues for an explicit ‘sexualization of knowledges in order to explicate the impact that ‘sexed corporeality’ may have on how we understand knowledge, as well as how governing knowledges are codified and understood. Thus, for Grosz, sex, as well as gender, is an important dimension in the problematics of epistemological frameworks.

The construction of gender identity, gendered subjectivity and the gendered body is a major area of interest for gender knowledge. Judith Butler’s (1990) deconstruction of sex and gender is the most influential epistemological contribution to the debates. Butler shows that once sex and gender