to describe the rhizomatic nature of the lines of Foucault’s dispositif:

These apparatuses, then, are composed of the following elements: lines of visibility and enunciation, lines of force, lines of subjectification, lines of splitting, breakage, fracture, all of which criss-cross and mingle together, some lines reproducing and giving rise to others, by means of variations or even changes in the way they are grouped. (1992: 162)

As he puts it elsewhere, the analytic task is to follow the tangle of the assemblage. ‘We have as many tangled lines as a hand . . . What we [Deleuze and Guattari] call by different names – schizo-analysis, micro-politics, pragmatics, diagrammatism, rhizomatics, cartography – has no other object than the study of these lines, in groups or as individuals’ (2002[1977]: 125). Amidst these paths will be those of the ‘line of flight . . . of the greatest gradient’: ‘this line appears to arise [surgir] afterwards, to become detached from the two others, if indeed it succeeds in detaching itself ’ (2002[1977]: 125). This line of flight is a movement of creativity within the tangle of lines of the dispositif.

What is at stake here is how one understands this creativity. For this creativity does not seemingly replace or contradict co-extensivity in Deleuze’s understanding. There are still lines of light, knowledge, power and subjectification that encircle and produce the effect of interiorities. These must remain in the analysis. But it certainly means that for Deleuze and Guattari following movements of becoming – or, to use the Bergsoninflected language, attempting to trace the path by which a differing, a specific becoming, is actualized – is also to trace the path of a creative relationship to self which, insofar as it is posited as a relationship of the thing to itself, implies a version of interiority and a critique of the mantra ‘no interiority, only co-extensivity’. What has been, if not denied, then bracketed, namely the creativity of things, their self-activity, indeed the very insistence of life, is put back into the frame.

## References

Austin, J.L. (2004[1962]) ‘How to Do Things with Words’, pp. 162–76 in J. Rivkin and M. Ryan (eds) Literary Theory: An Anthology. Oxford: Blackwell,.

Boyarin, D. and J. Boyarin (1993) ‘Diaspora: Generation and the Ground of Jewish Identity’, Critical Inquiry 19: 693–725.

Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trouble. New York: Routledge.

Butler, J. (1997) The Psychic Life of Power. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Butler, J. (2004) Undoing Gender. New York: Routledge.

Deleuze, G. (1988) Foucault, trans. S. Hand. London: Athlone.

Deleuze, G. (1992) ‘What is a Dispositif?’, in T. Armstrong, Michel Foucault: Philosopher. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.

Deleuze, G. (2002[1977]) Dialogues II. London: Continuum.

Foucault, M. (1977[1975]) Discipline and Punish, trans. A. Sheridan. London: Penguin.

Hamera, J. (2005) ‘The Answerability of Memory: “Saving” Khmer Classical Dance’, in A. Abbas and J. Erni, Internationalising Cultural Studies. Oxford: Blackwell.

Patraka, V. (1999) Spectacular Suffering: Theatre, Fascism and the Holocaust. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Vikki Bell is Reader in Sociology at Goldsmiths College, University of London. Her publications include Feminist Imaginations: Genealogies in Feminist Theory (Sage, 1999) and Culture and Performance (Berg, forthcoming 2007).

# Matrixial Trans-subjectivity

Bracha L. Ettinger

Keywords aesthetics, borderspace, co-emergence, ethics, m/Other, pregnancy, prenatal, psychoanalysis, transmissive transformational potentiality

P<sup>sychoanalytic</sup> <sup>theory</sup> <sup>has</sup> <sup>struggled</sup> <sup>to</sup>overcome the limitations imposed on the understanding of the formation of subjectivity because of the reliance on the Freudian theory of the unconscious which privileges the phallus as signifier of the dynamic between lack and desire, and which supports the model of repression based on the castration complex and its male perspective. In the relational intersubjective perspective, after Klein, Winnicott and Kohut many contemporary psychoanalysts with objectrelations, intersubjective, and self tendencies are increasingly developing our understanding of the intersubjective field that is opened in the relations between the caring adult (mother) and the baby and revealed between analyst and anlysand. In my work, I have tried to think about a model that breaks with both the Freudian-Lacanian paradigm and the intersubjective as a field of communication, rethinking desire and the unconscious by reference instead to the transgressive encounter between I and non-I grounded in the materne womb/intra-uterine complex and a notion of affective economy that avoids phallocentrism. The point is to understand the passage into the symbolic kingdom outside the paradigm of castration and the role of the symbolic phallus in it, particularly the way in which it has theorized the pre-Oedipal impulses linked to the archaic Other/mother, and to the objet a as signifier of desire based upon primordial loss. A different affective economy then emerges by which one is able to think of an-other kind of loss or separation which is not attributed to rejection, ‘castration’ or abjection. This perspective opens up a nonpsychotic connection between the feminine and creation, and thus points to an artistic practice that reconnects with an enlarged symbolic in which the feminine (neither male nor female) is fully active and informing knowledge and the ethical realm.

In order to postulate another kind of objet a we must elaborate a psychic layer from which it may emerge. I have called such a layer the matrixial stratum of subjectivization and proposed that one can regard the matrixial subjectivity-as-encounter as a beyond-the-phallus feminine field (in both men and women) related to the female real, which has an imaginary and a symbolic impact. I have named matrixial borderspace the psychic sphere which is trans-subjective and sub-subjective even if and when it arises in the field of the separate individual self and even if and when it operates in the intersubjective relational field. It is a ‘feminine dimension based on pregnancy pattern. Subjectivity here is an encounter between I and uncognized yet intimate non-I neither rejected nor assimilated. If we conceive of traces of links, transindividual transmissions and transformatinal reattunments, rather than of relations to and communication with objects and subjects, in terms of a transgressive psychic position in which the coemergence and co-fading is prior to the I versus others, a different passageway to others and to knowledge arises – suitable for transformative links that are not frozen into objects. This passage, that I have called metramorphosis, is a non-psychotic yet beyond-the-phallus web of links. The matrixial draws a special connection between analytical practice as an ethical working-through and artistic practice as an aesthetical working-through.

As a feminine sexual difference, the matrixial designates ‘woman’ not as the Other but as coemerging self with m/Other, and link a rather than object a not as lack or a figure of rhythmic scansion of absence/presence but as a borderlinking figure of differentiation in co-emergence. Relations-withoutrelating and distance-in-proximity preserve the coemerging Other as both a subject and an object without turning the Other into an object only. They also preserve the ‘woman’ as both subject and Other, and not as Other or object; not as an entirely phallic subject yet not as embodiment of the price of culture and absent to her-self (Lacan).

Trans-subjective unconscious transmission, resonance and co-production of knowledge are recognized according to specific parameters. The key concepts of this theoretical complex – matrixial borderspace, metramorphosis, m/Other, transformational potentiality, borderlinking, copoiesis, differentiating-in-co-emergence and co-fading, wit(h)nessing, relations-without-relating, distancein-proximity, potential shareability, severality, trans-scriptions, cross-imprinting, matrixial time, trans-subjective transference, screen and gaze, fascinance, com-passionate hospitality – serve to describe and explain the trans-subjective unconscious web that, though usually foreclosed, precedes and sometimes overrides unconscious traces of the separate subject in self identity and is always working-through under intersubjective relationality and communication. By severality (and not multiplicity) I intend an ensemble of subjective instances arising in different individuals by way of traces spread in a web composed of several participants that are transformed and transforming one another in a shareable eventing, whose traces are inscribed both directly and in a crossed manner in the one and in the other and over to other webs. Thus, the matrixial psychic space concerns shareability yet evades collective community and organized society. The several is a specific configuration. Not ‘one’. Not ‘two’ in symbiosis or intersubjective relations, not Oedipalizing ‘three’ and not ‘collective unconscious’.

We discover here particular mechanisms of bonding and a particular mode of difference – an originary feminine difference that evades the dichotomy between masculinity and femininity. Jointness-in-differentiating is originary. The matrixial difference is a swerving differentiating between several partial-subjects where, for each two, differentiation is not awaiting the third. Contrary to descriptions of the prenatal psychic space as non-differentiation, difference occurs in originary borderlinking. Thus, the matrixial-feminine difference emerges neither as ‘essential’ or biological nor as a social construct or gender. In the feminine, a trans-subjective figure is interlaced. Its psyche is not confined to one body. It transgresses individual boundaries and is spread in the several; it is a weaving of affective and mental strings.

With the matrixial apparatus I put the question of same-sex difference as the first and most persistent sexual difference for women. Men too are tremendeously preoccupied matrixially with the question of same-sex difference, though for a man the questions of son/father, boy/man difference develop after questioning the son/mother difference. The sexual difference of any human being (female or male) is first of all staged with and against a female m/Other-woman figure and in matrixial parameters. The matrixial woman-towoman difference labours before the formation of separate subjects, whole objects and personal identity; this difference is not a question of gender identification and has to be dealt with in terms of the primary impressions at the earliest psychic phase and position. Matrixial potentiality, however, does inform gender on a secondary level.

The matrixial borderlinking and desire apply to both women and men even though they are based upon the archaic resonating with a femininematernal body-psyche. Therefore, a matrixial transference that co-arises beyond transferential repetitiveness is forever bound to the mystery of the invisible inside of the female body. Prenatality and pregnancy as virtual or real, as process, as image and as symbol inform an unconscious borderspace woven from affective and mental strings that are reattunable. Matrixial co-transformation-in-difference is asymmetrical. Matrix supplies the symbol and an image by which we can access and recognize the moves of the transgressive subjectivity beyond the moves of the differentiated subject and draw the activity of a specific Eros with aesthetical and ethical consequences. Metramorphosis is the ensemble of transmission and reattunment by which I and non-I co-emerge, co-change and co-fade within a shareable web. Copoiesis (departing from Varela’s notion of autopoiesis) is the aesthetical and ethical creative potentiality of a metramorphic weaving in subjectivizing matrixial moments.

The matrixial borderspace is a sphere of encounter-events where intensities and vibrations as well as their imprints and ‘memory’ traces are exchanged and experienced by fragmented and assembled experiencing partial-subjects who are reattuning their affective frequencies. I and non-I are linked in trans-subjectivity on a sub-subjective level in a mental resonance ‘camera obscura’. The psychic cross-imprinting of events and the exchange of traces of mutually (but not symmetrically) subjectivizing agencies, occurring via/in a borderspace where two or several becomingsubjectivities meet, create singular trans-subjective webs of copoiesis composed of transformations along psychic strings stretched between the participants of each encounter-event. Thus, a matrixial borderspace is a mutating copoietic net. Matrixial co-emergence has a healing power, but because of the transgression of individual boundaries that it initiates and entails, and because of the selfrelinquishment and fragilization it appeals to, it is also potentially traumatizing. Therefore, to become creative, the aesthetical transgression of individual borderlines, which occurs in any case with or without our awareness or intention, calls for the awakening of a specific ethical attention, responsibility and extention. In artworking it calls for generous self-relinquishment. In art, the aesthetical working-through bends towards the ethical with matrixial co-response-ability and wit(h)nessing; in psychoanalysis the ethical working-through bends toward the aesthetical realm.

The matrixial borderspace is modelled upon a particular conception of feminine/prebirth intimate sharing. The womb/matrix is conceived of here not primarily as an organ of receptivity or ‘origin’ but as the human potentiality for differentiation-in-co-emergence. Its space is not a maternal ‘container’, its time is not the inaccessible chronological past. It is the space and time of subjectivization in co-emergence. Before birth, the co-emergence potentiality arises and operates alongside potentialities for a fusing symbiosis. After birth, the co-emergence potentiality arises and evolves alongside potentialities for a fusing symbiosis and rejection. Matrixial potentiality does not replace the phallus; it operates along a different unconscious track. Composite partial subjectivities produce, share and transmit assembled, hybrid and diffracted psychic objects, links and traces, via originary psychic conductible strings. In the prenatal co-emergence with-in a female body-and-psyche, distance-in-proximity is continuously reattuned. A mental path for inscriptions of traces of such reattunements in new encounters where separating-in-jointness reoccurs is opened. The pre-subject that thus emerges in jointness develops primal trans-subjectivity before being a ‘separate’, ‘whole’ subject. Later on, alongside one’s identity as a whole subject, I(s) and non-I(s) continue to interlace their borderlinks in metramorphosis on the matrixial resonance field.

Matrixial trans-subjectivity hosts moments of co-emergence-in-differentiation that organize their own time zone – a matrixial bordertime. The metramorphic psychic net is created by, and is further creating – together with, and induced by matrixial affects – relations-without-relating on the borders of presence and absence, among partial-subjects, and between them and their trans-subjective-objects (subjective-objects in the sense of Winnicott) and selfobjects (in the sense of Kohut). I therefore view the feeling of oceanic immersion in the world (Freud) not as fusion or undifferentiation but as borderlinking-in-differentiation in a compassionate resonance chamber. When, with growth, we arrive at a subject’s position, underneath this position where each subject confines its psyche to the boundaries of her individual being, shareable psychic strings continue to emerge, and metramorphic clusters continue to weave relations-without-relating between me and the stranger that unknowingly affect me and are attached to me beyond intention or communication.

Memory traces circulate in the trans-subjective zone by matrixial affects, frequencies and intensities – which I have named the erotic antennae of the psyche – that disperse different aspects of jouissance and of traumatic events between me and the other who thus becomes ‘my’ intimate anonymous partner, and inscribe them along psychic matrixial paths and strings that have been opened by each particular borderlinking between ‘I’ as partial-subject and ‘non-I’ as its archaic m/Other that, encountered in the Real of the archaic ongoing encounter-event, will become the always-already forgotten yet forever unforgettable and looked-for originary aesthetic environment. This environment is transformative, but since it is evolving within prematernal hospitality, its aesthetics is always also bound to ethics of hospitality (in a Levinasian sense). The matrixial is therefore an aesthetical and ethical compassionate environment which is, for each becoming-subject (in the sense of Deleuze and Guattari), the Cosmos. Primary modes of sense-giving depend on this resonant environment, modes in which the very psychic emergence of the I depends on the particular quality of the capacity I have named wit(h)nessing: witnessing while resonating with an-Other in a trans-subjective encounter-event.

Copoietic transformational potentialities evolve along matrixial aesthetic and ethical paths all throughout life. As during infancy, all throughout life, when I cannot fully handle events that concern me profoundly, since they have been a part of some co-emerging metramorphosis, the would transform or fade during a new transformation with-in the matrixial dimension, with an other that would become, by that very process or operation and through her compassionate hospitality, the non-I who can m/Otherly wit(h)ness the I. If because of a highly traumatic value of an event, I cannot even contain ‘my’ own wounds at all, since in the matrixial psychic sphere ‘my imprints are trans-scribed and cross-imprinted as traces in the other, ‘my’ matrixial others might process for me traces of ‘my’ traumatic events. Such is the co-response-ability of artworking and of a durable psychoanalytical healing. Such a meaning-donation through the other occurs not only in ways similar to those described by Bion by the maternal ‘alpha’ function (which depends on relational preverbal postnatal communication) but also in trans-subjective attunement, similar to that by which the pregnant m/Other metabolizes archaic encounter-events and a whole spectrum of intensities, frequencies and vibrations for the premature and fragile presubject, who precisely through this shareability with-in a m/Otherna psyche is becoming a partial-subject in jointnessin-difference with-in her. Similar reattunement continues in the postnatal relational sphere, and with other m/Others. During co-emergence and co-fading, both the presubject (I) and the m/Other (partial-subject, non-I) are transformed, in different but related ways. Mechanisms of sense-giving that are fit to describe postnata exchange and communication (first with materna and paternal figures) are not sufficient to describe primary and prenatal processes. The matrixial processes continue to form, inform, ‘exform’ and transform us throughout life, though the matrixial space-time is usually foreclosed or infolded inside more phallic dimensions and ignored. We can understand the matrixial borderspace and its mechanisms as both the earlier psychological stage and an evolving originary position.

Thus, we are dealing with the mark of the m/Other or archaic feminine-other in the bodypsyche and with an immense invisible transmissivity that is foreclosed from the phallic domain (Lacan) but that also evades the field of ‘schizophrenic’ endless multiplicity (Deleuze and Guattari) and the symbiotic or autistic Oneness. The body-real doesn’t stand only for the irreducibility of instincts, impulses and drives. It indicates the appeal of the body-psyche for closeness (‘attachment’). Like for Bowlby, Winnicott, Ogden, Tustin, Kohut and others (‘intersubjective and ‘self ’ theoreticians), the desire to draw near is recogized on its own merit and not as subsidiarily leaning on other needs (such as for nourishment) and drives (such as the oral drive), but there are three major differences: first, matrixial borderlinking in differentiation occurs inside an already trans-subjective sphere that does not follow and does not depend on autistic or symbiotic positions (though these positions might result from unbearable pain); second, the first psychic traces are considered as prenatal and as inscribed by psychic mechanisms that are different from those designed for understanding post-natal attachment; and, third, psychic transmissions (noticed by Freud) transgress intersubjective relations and form a creative potentiality of resistance to repetition. The feminine-matrixial difference treasures a particular Eros of compassionate alliance with otherness on the borderlines between non-life and life. When this Eros goes astray, the psychic damage caused by the matrixial potentiality is enormous, since it is in this sphere that the Other is a trauma to the subject (Levinas).

The separate self has a vague affective knowledge of the matrixial, yet one might, under certain aesthetical circumstances and ethical occasions (and by surrendering in a floating attentiveness, like Bion’s maternal ‘reverie’ and Freud’s ‘floating attention’), access its forces at work, by joining them. The concept of metramorphosis calls for rethinking empathy, intuition, inspiration, telepathy and even initiation – this invisible unconscious trans-subjective aspect that is not yet recognized as a part of the psychoanalytic process. Initiation occurs when in a way similar to that by which my mind translates intensities, wavelengths, frequencies, vibrations and all kinds of resonance and signals arriving from my own ‘internal’ sources and perceptions, into feelings, images and thoughts, my mind also con-cepts and reattunes itself to elaborate and translate similar waves that arise in the mind of the matrixial other into affective preconceptual knowledge, images and thoughts.

Matrixial responsibility creates knowledge without domination of and in the Other. Becoming responsible for traces of the other as if they were mine is a matrixial ethical move. Working them through when compassionate hospitality meets with fascinance is an aesthetical gesture. I have called the transformational subjectivizing potentiality of a matrixial link a or object a (gaze and voice (Lacan), and also touch, movement, and mental objects/links that do not depend on the five senses or on bodily orifices): fascinance. Fascinance is an aesthetic affect that operates in a prolongation and delaying of the duration of an encounter-event, which allows matrixial transference and copoiesis. The artist who is working through the cross-inscribed traces works her art that is an aesthetic-in-action as a healing that is an ethics-in-action.

The same-sex difference operates in asymmetrical reciprocity by the matrixial transformational potentiality. While an ‘immature’ or fragmented I emerges towards being in aesthetical modes, a ‘mature’ non-I (m/Othernal figure) evolves in an ethical as well as aesthetical sense, as she enlarges her capacity for fragilization, compassionate hospitality and wit(h)nessing. In differentiating-injointness she makes room for the other not only with-in herself but with-in larger subjective clusters and other matrixial webs of which she is a part, though the principle of severality, and not infinite multiplicity, is kept, and each supplementary I is borderlinking only when the matrixial subjectivizing potentiality opens up. Copoietic knowledge is created by artworking and is transmitted as initiation by the spiralic matrixial transmissive transference beyond the analytical repetition-transference relations.

Metramorphosis as an originary human potentiality for reciprocal yet asymmetrical crossing of borderlines between I and non-I and between virtuality phantasm, jouissance and trauma, induces instances of co-emergence and co-fading as knowledge. In the realm of art, trans-scription and cross-imprinting are means for thinking the enigma of the imprints of the world and the cosmos on the artist, of the artist’s potentiality to join traumatically and by joy the consciousness of things and to artwork through them and transform the world’s hieroglyphs into knowledge. The viewer’s capacity to join in the aesthetic effects of such transformative events is also aroused by metramorphic threads. Metramorphosis is a conaissance – a transformational knowledge of being born together with the other whereby each individual becomes sub-subject in subjectivity that surpasses her personal limits, and whereby an other might become for me not only a sign of my archaic m/Other but also an occasion for