## 222 Theory, Culture & Society 23(2–3)

transformation. The knowledge of transformation-by-borderlinking is not cognitive; it is accessed by aesthetical and ethical joining-indifferentiating and working-through. Matrixial differentiating creates an invisible aesthetical ‘screen’ on the border of the ethical, a screen which by art and in the psychoanalytical ongoing continual encounter becomes accessible. It becomes that which is woven and touches me behind the visible and the audible on the borders of the thinkable, a knowledge with the other and in the other, and the other’s knowledge with-in me, which can only be reached by some kind of non-defensive self-relinquishment and by creating or participating in a subjectivizing occasion by compassionate hospitality or generosity on the one pole and by fascinance on the other. Affects are transferred across the entire psychic borderspace of severality; traces are emitted, transmitted and redistributed, opening new affective passageways for reception and transmission, shareable by resonance.

## References

Ettinger, Bracha L. (1992) ‘Matrix and Metramorphosis’, in Trouble in the Archives, special issue of Differences 4(3): 176–208.

Ettinger, Bracha L. (1996) ‘Metramorphic Borderlinks and Matrixial Borderspace’, in John Welchman (ed.) Rethinking Borders,

pp. 125–59. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Ettinger, Bracha L. (1997) ‘The Feminine/ Prenatal Weaving in the Matrixial Subjectivityas-Encounter’, Psychoanalytic Dialogues VII(3): 363–405.

Ettinger, Bracha L. (1999) ‘Trauma and Beauty’, Fatal Women, Journal of the Center for Women’s and Gender Research, Bergen University, 11: 115–28.

Ettinger, Bracha L. (2000) ‘Art as the Transport-Station of Trauma’, in Bracha Lichtenberg Ettinger: Artworking 1985–1999, pp. 91–115. Ghent: Ludion.

Ettinger, Bracha L. (2005) ‘The Art-and-Healing Oeuvre’, in Catherine de Zegher and Hendel Teicher (eds) 3 X Abstraction, pp. 199–231. New York: The Drawing Center.

Pollock, Griselda (2004) ‘Thinking the Feminine: Introduction to Bracha Ettinger’, Theory, Culture & Society 21(1): 5–64.

Bracha L. Ettinger is an artist, clinical psychologist, psychoanalyst and theorist in the fields of female sexuality, Lacanian and inter-subjective psychoanalysis, and aesthetics. Her paintings have been exhibited in major international museums of contemporary art. She is the author of The Matrixial Borderspace (Minnesota University Press, 2006).

# Body

Bryan S. Turner

Abstract Contemporary academic interest in the human body is a response to fundamental changes in the relationship between body, economy, technology and society. Scientific advances, particularly new reproductive technologies and therapeutic cloning techniques, have given the human body a problematic status. Ageing, disease and death no longer appear to be immutable facts about the human condition. The emergence of the body as a topic of research in the humanities and social sciences is also a response to the women’s and gay liberation movements, and environmentalism, animal rights, anti-globalism, religious fundamentalism and conservative politics. Further, the human body is now central to economic growth in various biotechnology industries, in which disease itself has become a productive factor in the global economy and the body a code or system of information from which profits can be extracted through patents. In modern social theory, the body has been studied in the contexts of advertising and consumerism, in ethical debates about cloning, in research on HIV/AIDS, in postmodern reflections on cybernetics, cyberbodies and cyberpunk, and in the analysis of the global trade in human organs. The body is a central feature of contemporary politics, because its ambiguities, vulnerability and plasticity have been amplified by new genetic technologies.

Keywords bio-economics, bio-politics, bio-tourism, genomics, post-human future

## The Body and Embodiment

There are two distinctive and possibly separate traditions in the anthropology and sociological study of the body. There is either the cultural analysis of the body as a system of meaning that has a definite structure existing separately from the consciousness and intentions of individuals, or there is the phenomenological study of embodiment that attempts to understand human practices or the performativity of the body. These two perspectives are distinct, but not necessarily incompatible. The study of dance and dancing provides a useful illustration of these two positions. We can clearly study dance as a cultural system, indeed as a language that has a structure and form by which we can interpret the social world. The meaning of the contrast between, for example, ballroom dancing and the classical ballet body is produced by differences between concepts in the discourse of dancing, but the meaning and significance of dancing as a set of practices and performances can only be grasped by understanding embodiment in motion. This is the difference between choreography as a text and the actions of a body in motion.

Social anthropologists have contributed significantly to the analysis of the body as a method of classification. The human body has been a potent and persistent metaphor for social and political relations throughout human history. Different parts of the body have historically represented different social functions. For example, we can refer to the ‘head of state’ without really recognizing the metaphor, while the heart has been a rich source of ideas about life, imagination and emotions. It is the house of the soul and the book of life, and the ‘tables of the heart’ provided a perspective into the whole of Nature. Similarly, the hand occupies an important position in shaping the imagination with respect to things that are beautiful (handsome) or useful (handy) or damaged and incomplete (handicap).

The dominant political concerns and anxieties of society tend to be translated into disrupted and disturbed images of the body, and hence we can talk about the ‘somatic society’ (Turner, 1992). The danse macabre gave gruesome expression to the devastation of the medieval social order that had been brought about by the ravages of the Black Death, and in modern society the scourge of cancer and AIDS has often been imagined in military metaphors of invading armies. Social disturbances are grasped in the metaphors by which we understand mental and physical health. Body metaphors have been important in moral debate about these social disruptions. The division between good and evil has drawn heavily on bodily metaphors; what is sinister is related to left-handedness, the illegitimate side, the awkward side. Our sense of social order is spoken of in terms of the balance or imbalance of the body. In the 18th century, when doctors turned to mathematics to produce a Newtonian map of the body, the metaphor of hydraulic pumps was used to express human digestion and blood circulation. The therapeutic bleeding of patients by knife or leech was to assist this hydraulic mechanism, and to relieve morbid pressures on the mind. Severe disturbances in society were often imagined as poor social digestion. These assumptions about social unrest producing disorder in the gut are reflected in the basic idea of the need for a government of the body. Dietary management of the body was translated into fiscal constraint, reduction in government expenditure and downsizing of public functions. In the language of modern management, a lean and mean corporation requires a healthy management team. In neo-liberal ideology, central government is an excess – a sort of political obesity. The modern idea of government is taken from these diverse meanings of diet that stands for a political regime, a regimentation of society and a government of the body. Regulating the body, disciplining the soul and governing society were merged in political theories of social contract and the state.

Bodily fluids are potent, and they can have both negative and positive effects. Fluids exist in a transient world, and disrupt the stability of categories. The secretions of saintly bodies were collected by the faithful, and their healing properties were used by mothers to protect their children. The Sufi saints of North Africa offered protection from the evil eye through the fluids that flowed from their bodies during religious festivals. In Christianity, Mary’s milk was a symbol of wealth and health, and the blood of Christ was a means of salvation. But blood and milk can also contaminate and disrupt social relations. Red symbolized danger; white, as in Mary’s milk, brought comfort and sustenance. There has been a universal fear among men of female menstruation, because the leaking bodies of women are sources of pollution. In early colonial times, speculation about the reproductive processes of native peoples conjured up strange women who could avoid menstruation by having their bodies sliced from the armpit to the knee. The Puritan Cotton Mather, in his sermons on Uncleanness, located filth with sexual functions and the lower parts of the body, while the soul and the mind were in the upper sections. Moral pollution has been generally measured by physical uncleanness, which is wet and fluid. There was an important correlation between Gandhi’s preoccupation with sex, diet and health reform, which illustrates the connections between the body politic and the individual organism and its management (Alter, 2000).

Bodily fluids that flow from the inside to the outside are dangerous, fearful and contaminating, because external fluids challenge our sense of order and orderliness. When internal liquids appear on the outside, they are certain portents of death, disease or change. Leaking things are a warning of an alien annunciation. The inside/outside and upper/lower divisions combine with wet/dry and red/white dichotomies to demarcate borders of social pollution. For example, the anatomy lesson was long condemned by the Church Fathers as anathema, because it exposed to the human eye what God as creator had chosen not to disclose visibly but to enclose bodily. Where such diabolical anatomical operations took place, they were inflicted on the bodies of criminals as a juridical and political punishment. The criminal body had a double death – first at the hands of the public executioner and, second, under the knife of the investigative surgeon.

## Religious Paradigms of the Body

Religious institutions bind a people by their rituals and customs, and as a consequence religions constitute societies. Just as the swaddling bands of a child bind his or her body to the family, so religion binds the individual to society. The Abrahamic religions (Christianity, Judaism and Islam) were inextricably based on notions of generation and reproduction that occupy their core theologies and cosmologies. These religions were deeply patriarchal, and the contemporary secularization of family life, sexuality and the sexual division of labour have had profound, and largely corrosive, consequences for orthodox religious world-views. In modern secular societies, gay liberation and women’s movements have articulated a range of claims for social equality and access to alternative sexual, familial or coupling arrangements, such as gay and lesbian marriage. These legal and scientific changes create the conditions for experiments in reproductive relationships that constitute a radical challenge to both traditional religion and conventional forms of the family. The rise of fundamentalism can be partly explained as a response to these changes, and it is for this reason that fundamentalists appear to be obsessed with sexual topics – homosexual practice, the role of women in society, the status of women in the family and adolescent sexual behaviour.

There have been, in the history of human societies, a number of important, more or less permanent, connections between religion, the body and sexual reproduction (Coakley, 1997). The core of these cosmological connections is the principle of generation and regeneration of the body. Social struggles over human reproduction have been reflected in controversies between matriarchy and patriarchy as forms of authority over the body, and these political controversies can be discerned even in the historical origins of the tradition of a ‘high God’. There is much academic disagreement, obviously, about the origins of human mythologies. One view is that, with the development of agriculture, the symbolism and cults of Mother Earth and human fertility became socially dominant (Eliade, 1961). An alternative interpretation is that with the growth of agriculture, the plough breaks up the earth and makes it fertile. The plough is a phallic symbol that points to men taking gardening away from women and in ancient Sumerian mythology Enki, the male god of water (semen), became the Great Father. However, the development of the concept of a high god challenged many of these local fertility cults and occurred simultaneously in a number of regions of the world. This creative religious period from approximately 800 to 200 BC was an axial age, because it was the crucial turning point in the formation of civilizational complexes. Confucius, Buddha, Socrates, Zoroaster and Isaiah, whose cosmological views had important common features, shaped the axial age in the emerging agrarian civilizations, where city life began to emerge. It was the cultural basis from which sprang the ethical, prophetic leaders of monotheism, which resulted eventually in the so-called ‘religions of the book’ in which divine revelation was recorded (Weber, 1952). The prophets of the axial age addressed human beings in the name of a divine moral being who could not be represented by an image and who could not be easily constrained or cajoled by ritual or magic. Jahweh, the God of the tribes of Israel, was a jealous God whose Name could not be named. Jahweh was opposed to idols and idolatry, and demanded unswerving commitment through a contractual relationship or covenant.

There is an important mythical role for a generative Father who is the patriarch of nations. In the Old Testament ‘Jacob’ and ‘Israel’ are interchangeable. With the evolution of the idea of sacred fatherhood, a range of problems about the body erupted. How are bodies produced and reproduced? If they fragment and decay, then redemption is a problem (Bynum, 1991). How can bodies be resurrected if they are incomplete? There have been (and continue to be) major political and social issues over the ownership and the authorship of bodies. Who owns bodies? Is there self-ownership (the principal doctrine of liberalism), does God own them (through a divine Fatherhood) or does the state own them (in benevolent despotism)? Matriarchy and patriarchy can be regarded as traditional principles for deciding the legitimacy and ownership of bodies, especially parental ownership and control of children. In these cosmological schemes, there were common homologies between the reproductive work of a creator God, the creative force of nature and reproduction with human bodies in family groups (Eliade,