The final step was to hit the target at a distance of 60 meters. The master warned Herrigel not to take aim at the target. Again he was baffled: ‘How can I hit the target without aiming at it?’ The master replied:

It is not very important to hit the target. What is essential is to shoot in the proper way, that is to say, with the proper posture and in a state of mind free from all ideas and thoughts. Since an arrow shot in the proper way naturally hits the target, you need not, or rather should not, aim at the target.

Herrigel was still not convinced, and so the master demonstrated what he meant by hitting an unseen target in the dark.

In this way they came to trust each other, and Herrigel made great progress. While often baffled by the master’s words, through their practice together, which served as a nonverbal channel of communication, Herrigel gradually came to understand what Awa meant, and in the long run they could construct a deeper mutual understanding (presumably accompanied by some happy misunderstandings). When he left Japan in 1929, Herrigel was granted the fifth dan (grade), to recognize his achievement.

Herrigel’s lecture in 1936 is, in a sense, a story of the grave difficulties in communication between the neo-Kantian philosopher from Germany and the master of a traditional Japanese martial art, and the overcoming of those difficulties. It is clear that the difficulty is based partly on their cultural backgrounds. The teachings of Awa are not necessarily peculiar to him, but rather are rooted in the culture of martial arts in Japan. We can trace this cultural tradition back to such famous texts as The Book of Five Rings (Gorin no Sho, 1643) by Musashi Miyamoto and The Book of Family Traditions on the Art of War (Heiho¯ Kaden Sho, 1632) by Munenori Yagyu, both of which emphasize the importance of practicing ‘an attitude of not dwelling on anything or ‘an empty and free-flowing mind’. Only in this state of mind does one’s body act freely without any conscious effort and ‘one strikes spontaneously and naturally scores’. All the learning and practice are ‘for the purpose of reaching this state. Once you have learned this successfully, learning disappears’ (Miyamoto, 1993).

The difficulty of communication between Awa and Herrigel, however, is not solely attributed to their cultural backgrounds. It is not easy for any culture to explain verbally its embodied habitus, or what Marcel Mauss (1950) termed ‘techniques of the body’. Awa tried to convey ‘the practical sense of kyudo to Herrigel. As Pierre Bourdieu states:

. . . the practical sense, or, if you prefer, what sports players call a feel for the game, as the practical mastery of the logic or of the immanent necessity of a game [is] a mastery acquired by experience of the game, and one which works outside conscious control and discourse (in the way that, for instance, techniques of the body do). (1990: 61)

It is natural that Awa should often murmur at Herrigel’s questions: ‘How should I explain what you can understand only through your experience?

The embodied habitus and practical sense can be viewed as forms of knowledge. Noting that ‘we can know more than we can tell’, Michael Polanyi refers to ‘tacit knowledge’, which is difficult to put into words and often takes the form of ‘practical knowledge’ as seen in ‘the performance of skills, whether artistic, athletic, or technical’ (1966: 4–7).

When we try to explain this kind of tacit, practical knowledge, we tend to seek help from some field of verbally constructed ‘theoretical’ knowledge. As Herrigel noted, Awa often relied on vocabularies of Zen Buddhism, as was often the case in the teachings of the traditional Japanese martial arts. And Herrigel himself tried, in his later book Zen in the Art of Archery (1953), to explain his practical knowledge of kyudo by using the theoretical knowledge of Zen Buddhism. To give another example, in his book Ways of the Hand (1978), David Sudnow used phenomenology and ethnomethodology to describe how his hands came to learn the practical sense of playing jazz piano. He could just as well have referenced Zen Buddhism.

Each field of practical knowledge, ranging from cooking, weaving and pottery to martial arts training, piano playing and so on, has been verbalized and transmitted in many different ways. Not only differences in culture and language but also various sociological factors like social class, gender, generation, education and microsociological networks bring forth a wide variety of ‘local knowledges’. Any optimistic attempt to systematize or ‘centralize’ this bewildering diversity will result in sacrificing the ‘rich localities’ of knowledge in the name of ‘global knowledge’. The plurality and incommensurability of ‘knowledges’, especially of the embodied, practical ones, should be recognized and respected. At the same time, however, we must not ignore the possibility of interchange and interconnection among them, as is demonstrated by the story of Herrigel’s training.

## References

Bourdieu, P. (1990) In Other Words: Essays Towards a Reflexive Sociology, trans. M. Adamson. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Herrigel, E. (1936) ‘Die ritterliche Kunst des Bogenschiessens’, Nippon: Zeitschrift für Japanologie 2(4): 193–212.

Herrigel, E. (1953) Zen in the Art of Archery, trans. R.F.C. Hull. New York: Pantheon Books.

Mauss, M. (1950) Sociologie et anthropologie. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

Miyamoto, M. (1993) The Book of Five Rings, including The Book of Family Traditions on the Art of War by Munenori Yagyu, trans. T. Cleary. Boston: Shambhala Publications.

Polanyi, M. (1966) The Tacit Dimension. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Sudnow, D. (1978) Ways of the Hand: The Organization of Improvised Conduct. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Shun Inoue is Professor of Sociology at Konan Women’s University, Japan.

# Transgender

Constantina Papoulias

Keywords queer theory, transgender, transsexuality

Tsince the early 1990s testify to the faultlines since the early 1990s testify to the faultlines and methodological impasses in the theorization of gender across numerous disciplines. At the same time transgender marks the forging and transformation of alliances and collectivities in political activism. Transgender is one of the latest in a series of terms which, in the social sciences, have sought to name counter-normative materializations of gender on individual bodies, through practices of gender-crossing either in matters of dress and presentation, and/or in terms of body modification. Transgender is an umbrella term, which emerged partly in contestation to the hegemonic uses of the term ‘transsexuality’ in both medical and social science discourse.

Since the work of Harold Garfinkel, the study of transsexual experiences has become a kind of royal road for the theorization of gender as performance by sociologists espousing a version of what would gradually become identifiable as social constructionism. Garfinkel’s study of ‘Agnes’, a young male-to-female transsexual whom he believed to have been intersexual, was at the centre of his work on gender as a ‘doing’, a skilled choreography of micro-interactions (Garfinkel, 1967). Since Garfinkel, the observation of transsexuals’ ‘doings of gender’ has allowed social scientists a privileged insight into the constructedness of normative gender performances. Feminist sociologists Kessler and McKenna used transsexuality to clinch the argument on the social enforcement of gender norms: for Kessler and McKenna, the diagnosis of transsexuality helps stabilize the social construction of gender and essentially licenses the surgical manipulation of bodies so that their unruly materialities can be aligned with the transsexual’s gender performance (Kessler and McKenna, 1978). A number of essays and booklength studies on transsexuality followed from there, arguing that transsexuality is a medicalization and pathologization of gender deviance. In these arguments, transsexuals were seen to collude with a hetero-normative medical establishment insofar as they were only able to obtain sex reassignment surgery if they could pass successfully through stereotyped gender performances, thus reinforcing the gender binary.

In a celebrated 1991 article, transsexual activist academic Sandy Stone called for a resistance to the medicalized normalization of transsexuals and particularly for a refusal to erase their pre-op histories (Stone, 1991). On a similar note others clamoured for a rendering visible of discordant and uneasy histories of gendered embodiment as a retort to the normativity of gender scripts. ‘Transgender activism’ became a site for the making visible of such discordant embodiments. The term ‘transgender’ is usually traced to Virginia Prince, the head of Tri-Ess (a North American cross-dressers’ association): in the 1970s Prince coined the word ‘transgenderist’ in order to differentiate between cross-dressing practices and the then emergent medicalized identity of the transsexual. In its 1990s’ activist reincarnation, transgender came to function as an umbrella term signifying gender non-conformity, so making possible a broad alliance among different gendervariant people, including cross-dressers and transsexuals (see Feinberg, 1992). In the context of postmodern critiques of identity, transgender activism forged a challenge to hegemonic gender binaries and their naturalizing force and invoked the possibility of fluid mobile and provisional enactments of gender. Known for her work on ‘female masculinities’, queer theorist Judith (Jack) Halberstam claimed that ‘the transgender body emerges . . . as futurity itself, a kind of heroic fulfillment of postmodern promises of gender flexibility’ (Halberstam, 2005: 18). Ironically, a lot of the emphasis on transgender practices as exemplifying the pluralization of gender comes from a very particular reading of the work of feminist philosopher Judith Butler, herself a foundational reference in queer theory. As Kessler and McKenna had done, Butler argued that gender is performative, but she then also deconstructed the distinction between gender and the sexed body by suggesting that bodies are produced through uneven repetitions of gender discourses (Butler, 1990). However, in the circulation of her texts for trans activism, the compulsive and compulsory nature of such performances of gender was often dropped in favour of a vision of precisely those ‘postmodern promises of gender flexibility’ of which Halberstam talks.

Transgender studies have found particularly fertile ground in anthropology: here Anglo-American anthropologists have scoured nonwestern cultures for the opportunities they allegedly provide for roles outside the gender binary. The best-studied examples are the berdache (or two-spirit people) in Native American cultures, the hijra in India, the kathoe in Thailand, the xanith of Oman, and the mahu in the Pacific islands (Herdt, 1996). References to such ‘third-gender’ figures have found their way into popular literature where they frequently become decontextualized talismans for Anglo-American transgender activists. Accordingly, while such anthropological research relativizes western hegemonic gender systems and challenges the innateness of gender categories, it has been critiqued for facilitating the appropriation of rich local cultural plots and doing violence to their lived reality, so that they may fit western agendas and preconceptions concerning ‘third genders’.

While queer and postmodern theory is credited with the initiation of transgender activism and studies, a new generation of trans activists and academics are distancing themselves from the queer theoretical emphasis on the mobility and deconstruction of gender, claiming that such perspectives elide the materiality of trans bodies and the practices of embodiment which constitute trans experiences in their specificity. For Jay Prosser in particular, such theorizations of the transgender experience as a challenge to normative gendering ignore the strength and intransigence of what many transsexuals see as their ‘true’ gender identity (Prosser, 1998). Indeed a flourishing ethnographic scholarship is currently beginning to chart the modalities of transgender embodiments (e.g. Ekins and King, 1999).

Additionally, scholars across the humanities and social sciences are being drawn into the gravitational pull of neuroscience for ways of making sense of the materiality of gender. While neuroscience is generating new paradigms for our comprehension of embodied materiality, media coverage of neurobiological findings often works to reinforce a hetero-normative understanding of gender. Thus, the provisional findings of smallscale studies suggesting that gender is hormonally hard-wired in the structuration of the brain have gained enormous publicity and have been used to discredit the scholarship on the social construction of gender. The popularity of such findings notwithstanding, a turn to biology, as the work of Anne Fausto-Sterling has amply demonstrated, need not work as an essentializing gesture: rather than using biology as a bedrock which shores up sex dimorphism, Fausto-Sterling deploys developmental systems theory to argue that brain maps and behaviours are not inborn but emergent qualities, which develop relationally, as part of social systems (Fausto-Sterling, 2000).

It remains to be seen how the emerging empirical work on trans experiences will respond to queer theory’s earlier lionization of practices of transgendering. While queer theorists tended to see trans bodies as manifesting a pluralization of genders, Toril Moi has recently proposed that we eschew the term gender altogether for a phenomenological reading of embodiment as a series of situations in which we relate to the world in ‘the concrete historical and experiencing body’ (Moi, 1999: 75). Some recent work on transgendered embodiment attempts to embrace both a phenomenological and a post-structuralist framework in order to do justice to trans lives. Henry Rubin’s study of female-to-male transsexuals, for example, attempts this difficult negotiation: in part of his study he discusses his subjects’ identities as an effect of hegemonic discourses around gender, while in the other part he listens to the ways in which they inhabit maleness as distinct from gender roles (Rubin, 2003).

While new research on trans embodiment focuses on the materiality of embodiment either through neurobiology or through phenomenology, it is important too to reflect upon the psychological processes through which we invest our bodies with meaning. Psychoanalytic readings of transgender experiences have been roundly denounced by transgender activists as productive of pathologizing discourse, but this is perhaps too hasty a dismissal. While psychoanalysis has often been used to shore up hetero-normativity, psychoanalytic readings of transgendered subjectivity remind us of the unconscious phantasies which participate in our embodiment (see Dean, 2000). In so doing, they propose that embodiment, whether transgendered or not, is a process that no singular language (be it that of neurobiology, phenomenology, or indeed psychoanalysis itself) can fully translate.

## References

Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trouble. New York and London: Routledge.

Dean, T. (2000) ‘Transcending Gender’, in Beyond Sexuality. Chicago: Chicago University Press.

Ekins, R. and D. King (1999) ‘Towards a Sociology of Transgendered Bodies’, Sociological Review “http://www.ingenta connect.com/content/bpl/sore” 47(3): 580–602.

Fausto-Sterling, A. (2000) Sexing the Body: Gender, Politics, and the Construction of Sexuality. New York: Basic Books.

Feinberg, L. (1992) Transgender Liberation: A Movement Whose Time Has Come. New York: World View Forum.

Garfinkel, H. (1967) ‘Passing and the Managed Achievement of Sex Status in an Intersexed Person’, in Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Halberstam, J. (2005) In a Queer Time and Place: Transgender Bodies, Subcultural Lives. New York and London: New York University Press.

Herdt, Gilbert H. (ed.) (1996) Third Sex, Third Gender: Beyond Sexual Dimorphism in Culture and History. New York: Zone.

Kessler, S.J. and W. McKenna (1978) Gender: An Ethnomethodological Approach. New York: John Wiley.

Moi, T. (1999) ‘What is a Woman?’, in What is a Woman? Oxford: Oxford University Press

Prosser, J. (1998) Second Skins: The Body Narratives of Transsexuality. New York: Columbia University Press.

Rubin, H. (2003) Self-Made Men: Identity and Embodiment among Transsexual Men. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press.

Stone, S. (1991) ‘The Empire Strikes Back: A Posttranssexual Manifesto’, in J. Epstein and K. Straub (eds) Body Guards: The Cultural Politics of Gender Ambiguity. New York: Routledge.

Constantina Papoulias is Senior Lecturer in Media, Culture and Communication at Middlesex University. She is currently working on conceptualizations of affect in the humanities and on religious attachments and globalization.

# Body Image/Body without Image

Mike Featherstone

Keywords consumer culture, identity, movement, proprioception, reflexivity

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>double</sup> <sup>character</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>human</sup> <sup>body</sup> <sup>has</sup>often been noted – we are a body and we often been noted – we are a body and we have a body; we see and are seen: our body is the platform from which we see the world and also an object in that world which is seen by others. This simple insight can be taken in a number of directions. On the one hand, this division of the seeing/seen can be used to retain a strong division between body and mind with the assumption that the body can be known and governed by the mind as in the metaphor of the body as a platform for seeing. It is assumed that the mind can actively marshal the body to facilitate the construction of a satisfactory body image which will enhance self-worth and self-identity.

Against this sense of a docile body which can be reflexively monitored, disciplined and altered by the mind, there are those who advocate the investigation of the ways that the mind itself is embodied and delimited by the ‘horizons of the flesh’. Here our basic analytical conceptual knowledge of the world is seen as relying on metaphors which derive from bodily experience and which become embedded in language, suggesting the need to be aware of ‘the body in the mind’ (Lakoff and Johnson, 1999). Yet if we think of the body as generative, the emphasis can shift to the body’s potential to vary, to be inventive, to be always in motion: as something that moves and feels (Massumi, 2002).

This suggests that it is insufficient to see the body as merely a surface to be inscribed, as a carrier of social signs. The body is clearly a potential, in process and movement, something which goes beyond itself. Yet it is also understood as an image – something that is a resemblance or likeness, a mirroring. Indeed it has been argued following Paul Shilder that ‘the body image is essential to the body, which cannot even become a body without this reduplication of itself (Ferguson, 1997a: 6). At the same time, the body image is more than a picture of how we look, a mental construct of our appearance. It is not a fixed projection – rather a variety of images that have accumulated from the past. Indeed if we examine the ‘labyrinth of unfinished cultures’, it is possible to detect in history a range of body images. It has been suggested that more recently there has been a move from the classic bourgeois ego with its closed and singular body image, to an emptying of the body image, the body as a shifting surface on which enigmatic traces are recorded (Ferguson, 1997b). A more ambiguous and open body image is related to a more ambiguous and open sense of self.

This contrasts with influential sociological theories of the body such as that of Anthony Giddens (1991), in which the body, formerly seen as a fixed part of nature, is now in ‘late modernity’ open to ‘colonization’ and reconstitution through a range of technologies and body projects such as plastic surgery, body maintenance, health fitness and diet regimes. Giddens’s assumptions about the reflexivity of actors investing in body projects in order to enhance their self-identity clearly chimes with many of the ways which consumer culture advertising and self-help transformational literature and advice columns present the body (Featherstone, 1982), especially the way the body is objectified and seen as governable by the self within consumer culture. Yet the fact that we are surrounded by images of youth, fitness and beauty within magazines, advertising, television and the urban landscape does not mean that people necessarily believe or follow the naive cause and effect self-improvement logic with its ‘if you look good you feel good’ rationale.

The assumption is that people reflexively evaluate their bodies and appearance and operate with a relatively accurate and coherent body image – in effect the body has been objectified and assessed as ready for transformation. This is akin to the classic bourgeois ego with its closed body image: able to take charge and transform its body and identity, a position central to the narratives of individualism, rational choice and market behaviour. It is interesting here to note that one of the main theorists of identity Giddens draws on is Erik H. Erikson, a strong proponent of ego identity and advocate of our capacity to assess, direct and control the direction of identity development through life.

Yet it would seem that appearance and body image are not always so easily objectified and subjected to the direction of the self. Shelly Budgeon (2003), for example, in research on young women in Britain, mentions that attitudes to cosmetic surgery suggest that altering the body was more about transforming the way the body was lived, not how it looked. There was a greater sense of the lived body as a process, with surgery enhancing the sense of agency, with the emphasis on ‘doing’ rather than ‘looking’. This goes beyond the sense of ‘me the subject’ directing ‘the body as object’ (or project), or calculatingly adopting disciplinary technologies to enhance appearance; a more ambivalent, less coherent sense of embodied self.

It is possible to suggest that there are two main types of body image operating within contemporary consumer culture. Firstly, we have the body image as the physical appearance of the body, based upon the body as object: a static image, in which the movement and unfolding of the body are captured as in a photographic image – a still snapshot. This well-formed image is akin to the photographic proof of one’s body image and correlated self-identity that is made available within consumer culture advertising and publicity of the success of ‘make-overs’ and ‘shape-overs’. This objectively achieved effect is very much in line with the emphasis upon vision to the exclusion of other senses: we are what we look, and physical appearance is everything.

This first type can be related to Massumi’s (2002) discussion of mirror-vision which relates to seeing oneself as others see one and entails seeing various frozen poses of oneself. Massumi contrasts this with a second type, movement-vision. Here there is not a generalizing subject, a self-identical observer who recognizes the object as the same. Rather the subject-object symmetry of mirrorvision is broken and there is the space of movement, of dislocated perspectives and transformation. Massumi sees this accumulation of relative perspectives as involving the transformation of subject–object relations, giving rise to the body without an image. This is not just a nonlinear form of vision, but something which enlists other bodily senses and sensibilities.

Important here is proprioception – not tactile or visceral sensibility, but the sensibility which relates to muscles and ligaments, which register conditions of movement and translate the body’s encounters with objects into a muscular memory of relationality, a cumulative memory of skill, habit and posture. Proprioceptive memory operates within the dimensions of the flesh: we feel the tenseness of muscles, the pull of joints, the pressure resistance from an accelerating vehicle. In contrast to the eyes, which operate within the