space of mirror-vision, and tend not to register movement, but rather interrupt movement to produce formed images, Massumi (2002: 59) argues that ‘movement-vision is sight turned proprioceptive, the eyes reabsorbed into the flesh through a black hole in the geometry of empirical space’. Here vision is far from the ‘all-seeing eye’, but rather acts as a mixed mode of perception which registers both form and movement; for it to enter into the realm of pure movement it must discard form for the flesh, with movement-vision entailing the flexing of the ‘retinal-muscle’ along with other proprioceptive sensations.

Furthermore, if we turn from considering the spatial dimension of proprioception to its operation in time, the body without image entails the eclipse of the subject in emotion as we encounter an interruption, an event. Here the body without image registers via an additional sensibility to that of proprioception: the visceral sensibility (interoception) registers excitations from the five ‘exeroceptive’ senses before they can be fully processed by the brain. We think here of the immediacy of a ‘gut feeling’, which precedes our sense of sight or sound. As Massumi (2002: 61) puts it, ‘movementvision as proprioception subtracts qualified form from movement; viscerality subtracts quality as such from excitation. It registers intensity.’ Viscerality is seen as the perception of suspense, which jolts the body into a ‘space of passion’, to register degrees of intensity. The ‘unit of passion’ resulting from this coupling together of the visceral and proprioceptive sensibilities, Massumi tells us, ‘can be called an affect: the ability to affect and openness to be affected’. He adds:

An emotion or feeling is a recognized affect, an identified intensity as reinjected into stimulusresponse paths, into action-reaction circuits of infolding and externalization – in short, into subject–object relations. Emotion is a contamination of empirical space by affect, which belongs to the body without an image. (Massumi, 2002: 61)

The capacity to move between different registers, between the mirror-image and the movement-image, between affect and emotion, between the subject–object and the sensation of visceral and proprioceptive intensities, then, suggests we need more work to understand the unmediated participation of the flesh in the image. It points to the ways in which body image and the body without image are linked and the inability to recover or salvage the latter into the former. Those who write on embodied habitus such as Pierre Bourdieu, when he talks about the movement of the body in sport; or Inoue Shun (this issue), when he analyses the struggles of the German philosopher Eugen Herrigel in trying to learn and make sense of the embodied habitus needed for the art of kyudo (Japanese archery); or Michael Taussig (1991), when he extends Benjamin’s account of the flâneur to discuss the ‘tactile eye’, have the sense of the body without image and its role in habitus formation and deformation.

If, as Massumi argues, affect is central to the understanding of our information and imagebased contemporary culture, then we also need to address the question of new media. It has been contended by Hansen (2004) that the new digital technologies, far from heralding the elimination of the body to produce a world of disembodied information in which human beings become obsolete, will actually enhance the role of affectivity and the role of the body as the crucial creative filter of images. Hansen draws on Bergson’s discussion of the affective pre-discursive body as the active source of meaning which creatively selects from the external universal flux of images. The importance of the body as a framer of information becomes more central with digital ized media. The new media enhance the capacity for the displacement of vision as the primary sense: in effect vision becomes ‘haptic’, or proprioceptive in the sense mentioned in the above discussion of Massumi. This points to ‘a shift from a dominant occularcentric aesthetic to a haptic aesthetic rooted in embodied affectivity’, as we find in contemporary media art, to the centrality of the body in the framing or ‘forging’ of the digital image (Hansen, 2004: 11). This is a long way from the visual bias and representational mode we find in the concept of body image in the approach generated by Paul Schilder and also the popular psychology of self-help consumer culture reflexive body projects and body image work. It points to the need to conceptualize the body without image and the movement from ocular perception to affectivity and sensory complexity in the formation of our embodied knowledge. The theorization of this process is even more important in a global context in which more people will invariably rely on and use new media, not just as a mode of entertainment, but in the context of their education, work and generation of their means of orientation.

## References

Budgeon, S. (2003) ‘Identity as an Embodied Event’, Body & Society 9(1): 35–56.

Featherstone, M. (1982) ‘The Body in Consumer Culture’, Theory, Culture & Society 1(2) reprinted in M. Featherstone, M. Hepworth and B.S. Turner (eds) The Body. London: Sage, 1991.

Ferguson, H. (1997a) ‘Me and My Shadows: On the Accumulation of Body Images in Western Society Part 1’, Body & Society 3(3): 1–31.

Ferguson, H. (1997b) ‘Me and My Shadows: On the Accumulation of Body Images in Western Society Part 2’, Body & Society 3(4): 1–31.

Giddens, A. (1991) Modernity and Self Identity. Oxford: Polity Press.

Hansen, M. (2004) New Philosophy for New Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Lakoff, G. and M. Johnson (1999) Philosophy in the Flesh. The Embodied Mind and its

Challenge to Western Thought. New York: Basic Books.

Massumi, B. (2002) Parables for the Virtual. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Taussig, M. (1991) ‘Tactility and Distraction’, Cultural Anthropology 6(2): 147–53.

Mike Featherstone is Editor of Theory, Culture & Society. His recent publications include Automobilities (edited with N. Thrift and J. Urry, Sage, 2005) and Consumer Culture and Postmodernism (second edition forthcoming from Sage, 2006).

# The Aesthetic

Richard Shusterman

Abstract First coined in modernity, the aesthetic is a vague, polysemic and contested concept whose complexities arise from the variety of the ways it has been defined in the history of its theorization, but also in its formative prehistory in theories of art and beauty that preceded its modern coinage. After noting key points of that prehistory, the article traces three major modern tendencies in construing the aesthetic: as a special mode of sensory perception or experience that is relevant to life in general; as a special faculty or exercise of taste focused on judgments of beauty and related qualities such as the sublime; and as a theory (or essential quality) of fine art. The idea of aesthetic disinterestedness is critically examined, and contrasts between the concept of art in Western modernity and in pre-modern and Asian culture are also considered.

Keywords aesthetic, art, beauty, disinterestedness, function, sensory perception, taste

## I

Aesthetics is conventionally identified in academia with the philosophy of art and beauty. But despite the considerable consensus on such definition, the concept of the aesthetic remains deeply ambiguous, complex and essentially contested. This is partly because the notions of art and beauty themselves involve such ambiguity, complexity and contestation, but also because the notion of the aesthetic has an especially complicated, heterogeneous, conflicted and disordered genealogy. Though the term was coined by Alexander Baumgarten (1998) in the middle of the 18th century to define his project of a science of sensory perception (aesthesis), the theoretical roots and topics of aesthetics can be traced back to ancient philosophy where they receive their first substantive formulation in Plato’s seminal theories of beauty and of art.

There is already a very strong tension in Plato’s accounts of beauty and art. Beauty plays an extremely positive role in Plato, serving as an exemplar of the very highest level of the ideal Forms and associated with truth and the good. Moreover, beauty is seen as the inspiration and goal of philosophy itself. In the Phaedrus it is characterized as the clearest, most understandable Form, and in the Symposium, Plato describes the philosopher as a master of erotics who ascends from the love of beautiful bodies to the love of beautiful deeds and discourses, and finally to a vision of Beauty itself from which he himself can give birth to the beautiful.

In contrast, art – in our modern sense of the fine arts – fares miserably. Defining such arts as mimesis (typically translated as imitation though sometimes also as representation), Plato (1998) denounces them as an imperfect imitation of the forms of the phenomenal world, which for him are themselves but a distorted imitation of the ideal rational Forms that constitute true reality. Art is thus condemned both ontologically and epistemologically as an imitation of an imitation that distorts the truth it pretends to present. Plato further condemns mimetic art on psychological, ethical and political grounds. By appealing to the lower, emotional part of the soul and inciting it with passions, art disrupts the rational psychological order that should prevail and thus corrupts character and leads to improper behavior. Since political order and justice are intimately interdependent with the order of proper moral psychology, mimetic art (at least of the typical kinds criticized by Plato) represents a political danger; art’s vivid depiction of war’s horrors and love’s delights could, for example, sway soldiers from their duties.

Plato never really considers art on aesthetic grounds for to do so would mean introducing criteria that might give it more autonomy, and art’s autonomy and social prestige were exactly what Plato wanted to undermine in order to establish the hegemony of philosophy. For art, in the form of poetry, held sway as the highest cultural authority for purveying wisdom, a position that philosophy wished to assume. Philosophy, with Plato, defined art in negative terms to make itself look superior and relegate art to the status of a dangerous frivolity that needed to be kept apart from the serious order of life, even to the point of banishment from Plato’s ideal Republic. Defining art as an imperfect imitation not only helped to demean art but also to conceal the fact that Plato’s philosophy itself imitated many aspects of art – the concern for rational form and coherence, the satisfactions of imagination and specularity (that generated a ‘spectator theory of knowledge’), and the interpretation of the meaning of experience and events. In ancient neo-Platonism, notably that of Plotinus, beauty retained its extreme superiority to art, since artworks always involved materiality, which involved a falling off from the higher realm of ideal Forms, and thus to some extent always marred or distorted the ideal beauty that art sought to express.

Aristotle (1968) admirably defended art from Plato’s extreme attack by showing the cognitive value of mimesis (in terms of its being a natural, primary means of learning), by arguing that art imitated the essential and not mere superficialities, and by introducing the doctrine of catharsis to show how art’s arousal of the passions could be a good thing since they are expurgated within the protected context of art’s experience. Just as significant, however, was Aristotle’s explicit introduction of principles for formalistic analysis and evaluation of artworks, most notably works of tragedy. These principles, which refer to the various elements involved in the object represented, the means of representation, and the manner of representation (i.e. respectively plot, character, thought; diction and melody; and spectacle) demonstrated the usefulness of independent, compositional criteria for evaluating art that were not reducible to ontology, epistemology, psychology, morality or politics. The belief in such criteria – significantly linked to properties of form, expression and quality – played an important role in modern theories of the aesthetic.

Despite Aristotle’s theoretical measures to rehabilitate art and mimesis, he continued the Platonic strategy of subordinating art to philosophy, regarding the former as providing only a shallower version of the latter’s truth and insisting on art’s isolation from the serious business of life. As Aristotle’s theory of catharsis emphasized that art should arouse passions only to ensure that they be purged, without harming character or society, so his definition of art as poiesis (poi´!riy) as contrasted with praxis (pqaviy) further isolated art from the sphere of ethics and social and political practice. For Aristotle, art as poiesis meant external making, the creation of objects outside the self (whose end and value were in the objects made), while praxis or ethical action (which has its end and value in itself and in its agent) both derives from the agent’s character and reciprocally helps shape it (Nichomachean Ethics, Book VI, 1140a1–1140b25).

In speaking of ancient theories of art in terms of mimesis and poiesis, we need to recall that the Greek word for art, in its most general sense, was techne (sevmg), which Latin rendered as ars. Both terms go well beyond our modern notion of fine art but instead signified any systematic skill or discipline of knowledge, and this general meaning is still present in English as when we speak of the liberal arts or the martial arts. This same wider meaning is also still present in the German term for art, Kunst (which derives from können, to know), though the term is now, like ‘art’, most often used to designate more narrowly the schöne Künste or fine arts. The same general notion of art as skill or knowledge can be found in ancient East Asian culture, as in the Confucian notion of the six arts (yi ) which includes arts such as mathematics, archery and charioteering (see Ames and Rosemount, 1998). The identification of art with the narrower conception of fine art is the product of Western modernity, which has subsequently been