imported also into modern Japanese and Chinese culture, just as these cultures have imported the Western idea of the aesthetic for which they have had to invent new words.

## II

Historically, one of the major theoretical forces that pushed the concept of art to evolve towards its current identification with fine art was the idea of the aesthetic and the theories and ideologies it engendered. The notion of the aesthetic emerged from a combination of currents in early modern philosophy (in both the rationalist and empiricist traditions), as well as from dissatisfaction with the inadequacies of the traditional discipline of rhetoric and of metaphysically realist accounts of beauty for treating questions relating to the evolving cultural fields of art and taste. While ancient and scholastic philosophy regarded beauty as a real property of things in the world, Descartes’ definition of real material properties in terms of extension and mathematical measurement, coupled with the empiricist insistence on the subjective dimension of our sensory perception, initiated what could be called a subjectivization of beauty.

The notion of beauty came to be primarily explored under the more subject-centered categories of theories of sensory (aesthetic) perception (Baumgarten) and theories of taste (Shaftesbury, Hume, Alison, Kant, etc.) ‘The end of aesthetics’, writes Baumgarten, ‘is the perfection of sensory cognition as such, this implying beauty’ (1998: §14). Moreover, interest in perceived qualities of value other than beauty – such as the sublime (as highlighted especially by Burke, 1998, and Kant, 1952) and the picturesque – and growing worries about whether there existed a special faculty of taste, eventually led to the primacy of the aesthetic as a special mode of perception. Kant’s Critique of Judgement (1952), widely regarded as the most pivotal and influential work of modern aesthetics, centrally deploys and intimately identifies the notions of taste and the aesthetic. ‘The judgement of taste is aesthetic’ and its ‘determining ground [of pleasure or displeasure] cannot be anything other than subjective’, though the disinterested and nonconceptual nature of this pleasure and judgment should, Kant argued, make them universally shared (1952: 41–2). Later, however, the idealist and intellectualist trends of 19th-century philosophy established the clear primacy of the aesthetic over taste as the umbrella concept for explaining our appreciation of art and nature, just as it elevated art above nature as the privileged focus for aesthetic judgment and inquiry. Hegel (1993: 3, 5, 9), who identified aesthetics narrowly as the ‘Philosophy of Fine Art’ (thus excluding natural beauty), was especially important in this privileging of fine art. His idealist, intellectualist ambition could not accept aesthetics as a realm of mere taste but instead conceived it as a ‘scientific’ discipline that addressed the high truths expressed in art. Natural beauty, he argued, did not have the deep meaning and truth that art had, and was also ‘too open to vagueness and too destitute of a criterion’. Fine art, in contrast, along with religion and philosophy, conveys ‘the most comprehensive truths of the mind’ and the ‘profoundest intuitions and ideas’.

In the evolution of aesthetics from Baumgarten to Hegel, we can see three distinct axes for understanding the aesthetic. Baumgarten’s epistemological-scientific approach construed aesthetics as a general science of sensory perception that was involved in discerning and producing beauty. Though beauty was important to the field, the emphasis of the aesthetic (as reflected in its etymological root) was more on its mode of perception or consciousness, and the scope of aesthetics was much wider than art, including not only natural beauty but also our daily practices. Baumgarten thus advocated improved aesthetic perception (achieved through various forms of training) not simply for fine arts but as a way of improving our general, including practical, functioning. In Kant, we find aesthetics as a theory of taste that emphasizes beauty and the sublime in nature (with respect to which judgments of taste were alleged to be purer) and in art (where their purity was marred by representational, conceptual meanings). But Kant sharply distinguished the aesthetic from the realm of truth and from practical or ethical matters. In Hegel, aesthetics is defined as the philosophy of fine art. He notes the perceptual etymology of the term ‘aesthetic’ only to brand this meaning as irrelevant, just as he rejects the term ‘kallistic’ (from the Greek word for beauty, j"kkoy) as too general for designating the aesthetic field, because he claims the science of aesthetics should deal only with ‘artistic beauty’, while making its prime focus ‘the highest ideas’ that art presents through its beautiful ‘sensuous forms’ (1993: 3, 9).

The genealogy of aesthetics thus provides at least three different (though sometimes overlapping) defining themes for this discipline: sensory perception, beauty and similar concepts of taste such as the sublime, and art. The first of these themes has been the least influential in modern aesthetics, and the final topic – art – has, since Hegel, been the most dominant, especially when the 20th century began to display a positive disregard for, or rejection of, beauty. Thus many contemporary aestheticians who have little regard for Hegel nonetheless prefer to identify their field as philosophy of art rather than aesthetics, since the latter still conveys a residual sense of concern for beauty and its manifestations beyond the art world.

However, both the concept of beauty and the idea of the aesthetic as a distinctive mode of perception or dimension of experience are currently experiencing a strong revival in aesthetic theory. Part of this revival reflects contemporary trends that affirm the art of living, the idea of ‘living beauty’ or, in Michel Foucault’s term, ‘aesthetics of existence’ (Foucault, 1984; Shusterman, 1992). These trends are often explained as functions of postmodernism’s aestheticization of life and of its challenging of modernity’s notion of aesthetic autonomy, a notion that sought both to compartmentalize art and the aesthetic from ethics, politics and scientific thought, and to see art narrowly in terms of the allegedly autonomous fine art of elite culture (that was often touted as being pure of practical, economic or political interests). But philosophers as different as John Dewey and Foucault remind us that the ancient Greeks were keen to affirm the art of living and the blurring of ethics and aesthetics, and we can see the same insertion of art and its aesthetic stylization into the core of practical, ethical and political life in ancient Chinese (especially Confucian) culture and in other East-Asian traditions that it helped shape.

These ancient cultures, however, did not employ the technical concept of the aesthetic as used in Western modernity. So when occidental philosophy was imported into East Asia in the latter half of the 19th century (initially in Japan through the great Meiji reform), the modern Western notion of aesthetics had to be introduced and given a Japanese translation. Ultimately, the Japanese term chosen was ‘bigaku’ which means the science of beauty (bi); and the Chinese, whose young intellectuals first imported modern Western ideas through Japan, similarly adopted this strategy in translating aesthetics as meixue (mei being the word for beauty). Some Japanese aestheticians, however, who are aware of Baumgarten’s original meaning of aesthetics, and sensitive to the fact that aesthetics is much more than the study of beauty and that much contemporary art has little to do with beauty, have recently proposed that aesthetics be translated as ganseigaku – the science of sensory perception. Several Japanese scholars are also critical of the way that the dominant occidental ideology of the aesthetic and fine art has tended to declass traditional Japanese arts (such as the art of tea and calligraphy) and relegate them to the realm of geidoh (ways of culture) while reserving the status of art for Western-style art forms (Aoki, 1998; Shusterman, 2004). Although the concept of the aesthetic has historically served as an ideological instrument of occidental cultural hegemony, it does not follow that the aesthetic dimension itself is inherently oppressive and parochially Western. Moreover, the concept of the aesthetic is open and contested, and some of its currently contesting interpretations seem congenial to Asian practices and also to popular Western expressive forms that fall outside the realm of fine art but are nonetheless appreciated for their aesthetic properties and expressive power.

Among the historically key features of the aesthetic as a special mode or attitude of perception is the idea of disinterestedness, that aesthetic perception examines and appreciates its object not in terms of some ulterior motive or function – a desire for possession, power, material or political advantage, or instrumental use – but instead for the intrinsic value or pleasure of the appreciative experience itself. This notion, introduced by Shaftesbury (1999) but reinterpreted and radicalized in different ways by Kant and others, was used to distinguish aesthetic pleasure from mere sensory pleasure and appetite for possession. It thus aimed to justify aesthetic value (and the works of art and nature seen as constituting its domain) by making the aesthetic more intellectual rather than sensual; more refined (hence more aristocratic) than vulgar.

The idea of disinterestedness (partly by being sufficiently vague and polysemic) also served other functions for aesthetics and art in modernity. The idea of freedom from practical interest provided a theoretical justification to help secure a greater measure of autonomy for art from the domination of church and state that had long set the essential agenda for, and limits of, artistic production and consumption. The notion of aesthetic disinterestedness was defined by Kant primarily in terms of lack of desire for the real existence (hence also the real-life practical use) of the contemplated appearance, but it was also understood in the sense that aesthetic contemplation involved the free play of our perceptual and intellectual faculties without subordinating them to a specific determinate concept or practical function. The sense of aesthetic disinterestedness as freedom from practical purpose was carried over into Hegel (1993: 9), who thus defined fine art (as distinct from entertainment and applied arts) as ‘art which is free’. What Hegel really meant by this is freedom from serving mundane practical functions, since he clearly assigns art the function of purveying truth.

The nonpractical nature of disinterestedness paradoxically had some practical advantages for the arts. The notion of disinterestedness as a distanced contemplation of appearances that was not concerned with their reality or real-world functions (and thus not burdened with the desires or concerns that such reality would evoke) helped make it possible for artists to use almost anything as a subject for artistic rendering, thus extending the scope of fine art’s topics. Anything could be made into art or even be an object of beauty in itself, just so long as the disinterested aesthetic attitude was shaping our point of view in regarding that object. Describing this attitude as ‘will-less’, Schopenhauer (1966) argued that when we say a thing is beautiful, we thereby assert that it is an object of our aesthetic contemplation as pure will-less subjects.

Along with disinterestedness and in some ways clearly connected with it, Kant (1952: 80) argued that purposively organized but functionless form (or what he called ‘the form of finality . . . apart from the representation of an end’) was a distinctive feature of the aesthetic. This emphasis on form rather than on sensation, content or function strengthens the intellectual profile of the aesthetic, since appreciation of pure form requires abstracting it from the sensory and semantic contexts and real-world practical purposes in which it is usually embedded. If formalism’s intellectual aspect helps to legitimate the aesthetic among philosophers, the view of the aesthetic as functionless form rather than practical action or truthful content contributes to the notion of aesthetic autonomy – the aesthetic as a world apart, a world of pure appearance. Building on Kant, Schiller (1967) described the realm of art as that of mere appearance (Schein), and argued that the educative function of art and the aesthetic depended paradoxically precisely on their nonfunctional status as play and image, which gives them freedom from the constraints of reality and practical action.

The ideology of the art for art’s sake movement at the turn of the 20th century helped establish the modernist notion of artistic autonomy, reinforcing the aestheticist idea that art serves society best by devoting itself to art’s own ends and freeing itself from any external function. This dialectical argument resurfaces in many contemporary thinkers who care passionately about social and political issues. Adorno, for instance, argues that art’s true and vital function is to be functionless, thus defying our capitalist culture’s overwhelming concerns with utility. ‘If any social function can be ascribed to art at all, it is the function to have no function’ (Adorno, 1984: 322). Other philosophers have also argued that resolute noninstrumentality is necessary to preserve the autonomy of art and the aesthetic, which is in turn necessary to avoid their corruption by real-world politics. Walter Benjamin (1969) famously equated fascism with the mixing of aesthetics and politics, while Hannah Arendt (1961: 215–16) insists that artworks are pure disinterested ends of ‘intrinsic, independent worth’, ‘things which exist independently of all utilitarian and functional references’.

## III

History, however, reveals the anomaly of art for art’s sake; art has had very important social, political and religious functions in pre-modern and non-Western cultures; and these roles have greatly contributed to art’s meaning and aesthetic power. Not surprisingly, there is significant dissent to the Kantian orthodoxy of aesthetic disinterestedness and functionlessness. Nietzsche (1956: 238–40) mordantly mocks the dogma of disinterestedness as an expression of philosophers’ prudishness, innocence and second-hand, spectator’s view of art – contrasting it to the creative, hands-on view of the artist. The power of art and beauty, he argues, derives not from disinterest but rather from ‘the excitement of the will, of “interest”’ [‘die Errgeung des Willes (“des Interesses”)’].

When our estheticians tirelessly rehearse, in support of Kant’s view, that the spell of beauty enables us to view even nude female statues ‘disinterestedly’ we may be allowed to laugh a little at their expense. The experiences of artists in this delicate matter are rather more ‘interesting’; certainly Pygmalion was not entirely devoid of esthetic feeling.

From the apparent absence in aesthetic matters of our common practical interests, the Kantian tradition wrongly concludes that aesthetic experience is entirely disinterested. This fails to recognize that there also may be special interests that are distinctively artistic and aesthetic, such as the desire for beauty, or the intensity and harmony of sensory experience, and that such interests are deeply connected to other, more practical life-serving interests and ends.

John Dewey’s pragmatist aesthetics makes a related point about function. Though art’s aesthetic experience cannot be reduced to a specific, narrow and mundane instrumentality, it does not follow that art has no significant functionality that adds to its value and indeed enriches its intrinsic appreciation in aesthetic experience. Dewey instead maintains that art is distinguished not by any single use but by its wide-ranging functionality, which includes the life-enhancing pleasures of aesthetic experience. ‘The work of esthetic art satisfies many ends. . . . It serves life rather than prescribing a defined and limited mode of living’ (1987: 140).

The idea that aesthetic consciousness can and should be autonomously compartmentalized from the rest of life as a pure and functionless island of delight is also challenged by other important theorists of various persuasions. Though T.S. Eliot initially earned fame for his formalist practice and theory of poetry, he came to realize that the appreciation of poetry and art in general were inextricably entwined in the real world and its social and practical contexts, which in fact also impacted on the very shaping of the forms of art (Eliot, 1964; Shusterman, 1988). Hans-Georg Gadamer (1965) similarly argues against the compartmentalizing ideology of what he calls ‘pure aesthetic consciousness’ [reine ästhetische Bewusstein] by showing how it cannot do justice to art’s meaning, claims to truth, and lasting impact on our lives and world. Pierre Bourdieu (1979) offers a complex critique of the ideology of the aesthetic, showing how its Kantian notion of disinterested and functionless contemplation actually serves undeniable social interests of affirming hierarchical distinction. Not everyone can afford to take the sort of disinterested, nonfunctional, formalist perspective recommended by the Kantian aesthetic; only classes of people who enjoy enough wealth and leisure not to worry about their material needs and interests can afford to acquire and exercise it. So the adoption and display of this disinterested disposition is an assertion of one’s membership in this sociocultural elite. Bourdieu does not deny a relative degree of autonomy to the aesthetic field (just as he accords a kind of autonomy to the field of science). But he shows that the aesthetic field is shot through with interests, functions and social struggles that are embedded in larger social contexts and struggles.

Finally, analytic philosophy has also been critical of the idea of a special aesthetic attitude that is wholly disinterested (Dickie, 1974). One reason is the lack of clarity about what disinterested contemplation of an artwork really means. Is this a distinct mode of perception or does disinterestedness merely refer to a lack of motive for our perception? If it seems hard to identify (introspectively or physiologically or conceptually) a special disinterested mode of perceiving, it is equally hard to argue that the mere fact of having different motives