television, the space age, the information age, the knowledge age and so on. Embedded in these designations is an understanding of the distinctiveness of ‘modernity’ equated with the technological achievements of ‘the West’. While technological achievements of 'the West'. While

modern transport and communication technologies were fundamental to projects of colonial expansion and imperial administration in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and underpin the global market of the 21st, the presence or absence of specific technologies has often been read as a marker of cultural [T]he clock has been the foremost machine in modern technics; and at each period it remains in the lead: it marks a perfection towards which other machines aspire. (Mumford, 1934: 15)

‘backwardness’. Interrogations of Western ethnocentrism in relation to technology are recent and still limited. Most accounts of technology, whether critical or uncritical, focus on developments within the West, or the impact of those developments ‘on’ other cultures. Technology is something that comes from the West and does something to other people in other places, such as the ‘Third World’ – a framework which, even when well-intentioned, denies both agency and contemporaneity to the ‘other’. My account here is shaped by this history, even as it tries to sketch its historical limitations.

While it is easy to dismiss designations such as the ‘steam age’ or the ‘information age’ for their obvious failings, particularly their deterministic tendency to repress the constellation of forces – political, economic, cultural – underlying technological transformation, it is neverthe-

less important to recognize them as symptomatic of the increasing centrality of technology to modern life. Metaphor and rhetoric have long been conditioned by prevailing technologies. However, when Descartes characterized the universe as a clock and God as an Eternal Clockmaker, he was proposing a mechanistic ideal far removed from both the limited technological accomplishments and the

A person is not a head and arms and legs. That’s trivial. A person is a very large microprocessor with a million ties, a million small parts, and these are arranged as a thousand computers. (Minsky, 1999[1996]: 244)

collective experience of the 17th century. When contemporary proponents of artificial life, such as Langton, describe the universe as computational, or the human body is conceptualized as an information processing system, these references draw on technological forms which have already substantially reworked the lifeworld that many people experience.

The increased centrality of technology became evident in the post-Second World War discourse as concern shifted to what Habermas dubbed the ‘scientization’ of technology, what Latour called ‘technoscience’, or what others call ‘technoculture’. When technology no longer refers only to machines, but to media forms and ‘machines that think’, as well as to biotechnology, nanotechnology and ‘artificial life’, we have reached the threshold of what Scott Lash (2002) aptly calls ‘technological forms of life’. This threshold lays bare something that is implied in every historical iteration of technology: defining the technological not only activates the border between nature and culture, but goes to the heart of what it means to be human.

## III

Writing in the mid- to late 19th century, Marx is characteristic in not using use the term ‘technology’. Nevertheless, the advent of machine production is critical to his materialist conception of historical dynamism. While Marx argued that capitalism emerged at least a century prior to widespread industrialization, The Communist Manifesto (1848) stresses the revolutionary impact of technological innovation in manufacturing, agriculture, transport and communication:

I operate as a man–machine interface – that is, as a technological form of natural life – because I must necessarily navigate through technological forms of social life. . . . Because my forms of social life are so normally and chronically at-a-distance, I cannot navigate these distances, I cannot achieve sociality apart from my machine interface. (Lash, 2002: 15)

The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has created more massive and more colossal productive forces than have all preceding generations together. Subjection of Nature’s forces to man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, steam-navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole populations conjured out of the ground – what earlier century had even a presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap of social labour? (Marx and Engels, 1977: 48)

While Capital contains detailed descriptions of the deleterious social effects of machine production and the factory system on the worker, Marx’s structural division between the forces of production and the relations of production favours a relatively neutral conception of technology in which the key issue is political control over surplus. Yet there is an ambiguity running through Marx’s understanding of technology which is noteworthy insofar as it sets a pattern that recurs throughout the next century.

On the one hand, his early formulations at times seem deterministic, deriving complex social changes from technological thresholds. In The Poverty of Philosophy (1847) he famously asserts:

In acquiring new productive forces men change their mode of production; and in changing their mode of production, in changing the way of earning their living, they change all their social relations. The hand-mill gives you society with the feudal lord; the steam-mill, society with the industrial capitalist. (Marx, 1976: 165)

Counteracting this ‘mechanical materialism’ are Marx’s later insights into the way commodities – including technology as ‘capital instruments’ – assume an enigmatic appearance of autonomy from their producers. If ‘all commodities are only definite masses of congealed labour time’ (1887: 46), this social relation is concealed by the fetishization of exchange value that characterizes commodity relations within mature capitalism. While subsequent critiques of the Marxist theory of labour value have often noted its failure to adequately theorize the productivity gains enabled by technological change, Marx’s analysis of the manner in which modern technology appears as something external to human effort, and therefore outside social control, remains active.

‘Neutral’ understandings of technology, in which the central problem is not so much the ‘essence’ of technology but the need for its rational use according to new forms of political control, were dominant in the West at least up until the Second World War. Not surprisingly, this stance informs the ‘scientific management’ theories of Taylor, published in 1911, which sought to facilitate the adaptation of the inefficient worker to machine production. It also underpins the more critical views of those such as American political economist and sociologist Thorstein Veblen, for whom technological change necessitated the end of the market system and private property in favour of central planning by an engineering technocracy. Even Lewis Mumford’s (1934) magisterial history of technics, written in the United States at the height of the great Depression and prior to the advent of the ‘New Deal’, treats technology in relatively neutral terms, opposing Veblen’s engineering technocracy with the advocacy of rational planning informed by humanist values. While Mumford treats the ‘paleotechnics’ of the 19th-century factory system almost entirely as a regression in terms of the ‘good life’, he is still hopeful that better planning can alleviate the crisis. His conclusion forecasts a ‘Neotechnic’ era, based on long-distance transmission of electricity, allowing decentralization of production and the dispersion of the concentric industrial city into modern garden cities. A similar hope informs Siegfried Giedion’s monumental Mechanization Takes Command (1948), which investigates the technological transformation of areas such as housing, furniture and food. However, for Mumford this potential was to remain unrealized; by the time of The Myth of the Machine (1967–70), he was far less sanguine about the technological future.

## IV

In the post-war period, significant changes in the concept of technology accrue into a critical mass in two directions. One is marked out by Norbert Wiener’s Cybernetics, which stands as a tutor text for a new paradigm in which, as he put it, scientists had ‘become aware of the essential unity of the set of problems centering about communication, control and statistical

mechanics, whether in the machine or in living tissue’ (1948: 19). The cybernetic model depended on two related shifts: first, understanding information as a purely quantitative and probabilistic entity entirely divorced from semantics and, second, understanding human neural structures in terms of binary information flows. Wiener’s radical move was to equate living systems and machines, displacing the

From that time it became clear to us that the ultra-rapid computing machine, depending as it does on consecutive switching devices, must represent almost an ideal model of the problems arising in the nervous system. (Wiener, 1948: 22)

classical paradigm of clockwork automata whose mechanical regularity exposed human fallibility in favour of information processing machines capable of modelling the complex behaviour of organic systems. Like many other technological developments, this shift had been vastly accelerated by the demands of total warfare: Wiener’s work at MIT on anti-aircraft systems capable of predicting the evasive patterns of enemy pilots in the US was complemented by the code-breaking research of Turing and others in England.

The cybernetic paradigm has exercised continuing influence over contemporary scientific understanding, notably in underwriting subsequent developments in biotechnology. The success of the Human Genome Project in garnering massive research funding, which led to the earlier

than expected completion of its mapping phase in mid-2000, depends on a cybernetic understanding of the lived body as a computational system running on a genetic program in which DNA figures as ‘the code of codes’. This conception of the body as a complex system made up of sub-systems that can, in principle, be taken apart and re-assembled effectively supports a ‘montage’ theory of human evolution, along the lines elaborated in Richard Dawkins’ The Selfish Gene (1976), where genetic programs are assimilated to

In this vein, Walter Gilbert, author of The Code of Codes (1992), looks forward to the day when ‘Three billion bases of a sequence can be put on a single compact disc (CD), and one will be able to pull a CD out of one’s pocket and say, “Here’s a human being; it’s me”.’ (Gilbert, 1992: 96)

computer programs and ‘selection’ is presented as an algorithm. In fact, these models effectively reverse Wiener’s earlier attempts to humanize the machine in favour of a mathematical concept of the human. They also largely ignore later developments in cybernetics, such as Maturana and Varela’s (1980) autopoiesis, which theorized decentralized and distributed control and feedback systems, in favour of a model reinstating central control.

## V

If cybernetics, with its ambition of uniting diverse scientific fields including mathematics, neurophysiology and engineering, marks one major post-war paradigm for thinking technology, its opposite was the increasing scepticism towards the form of rationality manifested in modern technological life. A key text is Heidegger’s 1955 essay ‘The Question Concerning Technology (1977), inspired by a communication from Ernst Jünger who once declared technology to be the metaphysics of the 20th century. In it, Heidegger develops ontological themes shared in some respects by others, including Marcuse (1964, 1998), who was Heidegger’s student from 1928 to 1932, Ellul (1967) and Habermas (1971).

Heidegger (1977: 4) argues that regarding technology as neutral means ‘we are delivered over to it in the worst possible way’. Famously asserting that the ‘essence of technology is by no means anything technological’, Heidegger (1977: 4, 13) treats technology as a stance towards the world – what others might call an ideology – insofar as it constitutes an instrumental ‘mode of revealing’. Unlike the bringing-forth of classical poeisis, modern technology is a challenging forth (Herausforrden, meaning to summon to action, to provoke). This challenging of nature transforms it into what Heidegger dubs a ‘standing-reserve’ (Bestand) in which every element is calculable, orderable and substitutable.

The earth now reveals itself as a coal mining district, the soil as mineral deposit. . . . Air is now set upon to yield nitrogen, the earth to yield ore, ore to yield uranium, for example; uranium is set upon to yield atomic energy, which can released either for destruction or peaceful use. (Heidegger, 1977: 14–15)

It is from this perspective that Heidegger can characterize the essence of technology as Gestell (enframing), and reverse the common-sense chronological relation between science and

Ellul’s La Technique was published in 1954, while Marcuse’s essay on ‘Modern Technology’ dates from 1941. However, Heidegger’s essay deserves precedence insofar as he began exploring related themes in 1936–38, in the wake of his notorious ‘commitment’ to National Socialism.

technology: modern physics is not modern because of its technological apparatus, such as the glass for test-tubes and lenses that Mumford (1934: 124–31) identified as crucial, but because it conceptualizes nature as ‘a coherence of forces calculable in advance’ (Heidegger, 1977: 21).

Heidegger’s transhistorical characterization of modern technology as the ‘destining’ of a tendency present since the inception of metaphysics can be felt in the work of Marcuse (1998: 48) when he writes of a ‘technological attitude’. It can also be felt in Ellul’s (1967: xxvi) all-embracing concept of ‘la technique’ defined in 1963 as ‘the totality of methods rationally arrived at and having absolute efficiency (for a given stage of development) in every field of human activity’ (emphasis in original). But where Ellul deliberately subsumes all other social and political

Capitalism did not create our world; the machine did. . . . At the present time, technique has arrived at such a point in its evolution that it is being transformed and is progressing almost without decisive intervention by man. . . . There is but one method for its use, one possibility. Lacking this, it is not a technique. (Ellul, 1967: 5, 85, 97)

determinations into the efficient logic of technology, Marcuse retains a more dialectical account. The ‘technological attitude’ has transformed the function of individuality – which at its inception in the Enlightenment had a critical edge because the society into which it was born was ‘not yet rational – into a conformism destructive of individuality. Marcuse (1998: 46) gives the example of a car journey, organized by the logic of maps, signposts and travel guides: ‘Giant advertisements tell him when to stop and find the pause that refreshes. . . .

Business, technics, human needs and nature are welded together into one rational and expedient mechanism’. Foreshadowing his influential One-dimensional Man (1964), Marcuse stresses that the totalizing nature of the technological system means the individual cannot choose to ‘opt out’:

There is no personal escape from the apparatus which has mechanized and standardized the world. It is a rational apparatus, combining utmost expediency with utmost convenience, saving time and energy, removing waste, adapting all means to the end, anticipating consequences, sustaining calculability and security. (1941/1998: 46)

Rather than being the handmaiden of the established apparatus, beautifying its business and its misery, art would become a technique for destroying this business and this misery. (Marcuse, 1964: 239)

Marcuse’s analysis of the conversion of technology from means to end shares much with the image of a technologically homogenized ‘mass society’ proposed by other members of the Frankfurt School, including Habermas (1971) for whom technology formed a second strand of administration complementing

the bureaucratic domination analysed by Weber. Like Adorno, but also like Heidegger, Marcuse locates the potential critique of this limited rationality in art: recovering the richness of an older form of techne is positioned as the key to overcoming the narrowness of the technological attitude.