been aesthetic or religious satisfaction’ (Price, 1964: 13). With reference to such automata integrated into clocks, it is noteworthy to examine the automata developed by Islamic engineers between the 10th and 13th centuries AD, specifically the works of al-Jazari. In his The Book of Knowledge of Ingenious Mechanical Devices, written between 1202 and 1204 and subsequently published in 1206, al-Jazari proposes a variety of pneumatic and hydrostatic automata including water-clocks, clepsydra-type trick vessels, phlebotomy devices and musical automata as well as some amazing wine arbitrating and serving automata. In al-Jazari’s water-clocks, he incorporates a variety of elaborate automata that are synchronized to become animated at regular intervals of time. These automata, however, were not merely incorporated to accompany and possibly even vivify what must have been an otherwise more abstract reckoning with time as numerical constants. It is also plausible that insofar as they were early attempts at time reckoning, they were still contending with the novelty of the time reckoning experience and the lovely spectacle created by the automata presented more enticing ways of coming to terms with time’s passing than our modern notions of accuracy and predictability. This spectacularization of time constituted automata as the very embodiments of temporal experience where the automotive pleasures elicited by their movements provided one with a sense of the passing of time as such rather than an accurate indicator of the specific time of the day. It is also useful to contextualize these automotive pleasures of reckoning time in relation to the nature of Islamic thought and philosophy during this period best characterized by the poetic algorithms of al-Khwarizmi and the Epicurean poetry of Omar Khayyam.

The history of automation, however, has recorded these many automata developed for pleasure as interesting but useless distractions that merely postponed what was the teleological direction of such automation – to develop an instrument/process for the gradual and effective substitution of human labour. It is crucial to supplement and punctuate this instrumental history of automation with the multiple histories of the many sensory pleasures that the automata and its movements have always provided.

While it is true that the prohibitively high price of sushi drives makes it a relatively precious item compared to the cheaper and standardized memory drives, the pleasures of owning a sushi drive that embodies a distinct aesthetic and quirky appeal to young and old seems to be keeping its prices and value to owners high. The sushi drive is not memory drive first, then replica food secondarily. It is not an instrumental object first and then a pleasurable object also. It is not functional first and formally interesting as a supplementary aspect. Its functional capacity as a portable memory drive issues from and is indistinguishable from the fun that it represents formally. The sushi drive is a gadget – a technological object that is useful because it is fun!

## References

Al-Jazari (1974) The Book of Knowledge of Ingenious Mechanical Devices, trans. Donald Hill. Boston, MA: Dordecht Publishers.

Derrida, Jacques (1987) The Truth in Painting trans. Geoff Bennington and Ian McLeod. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.

Hero of Alexandria (1851) The Pneumatics, trans. Bennet Woodcroft. London: Taylor, Walton and Maberly.

Kant, Immanuel (1911) Critique of Aesthetic Judgement, trans. James C. Meredith. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Price, Derek J. de Solla (1964) ‘Automata and the Origins of Mechanism and Mechanistic Philosophy’, Technology and Culture 5: 9–23.

Tiffany, Daniel (2000) Toy Medium: Materialism and Modern Lyric. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Gunalan Nadarajan is an art theorist and curator whose research interests are in art and biology, robotic arts, toys and virtual reality. He is currently Associate Dean of Research and Graduate Studies in the College of Arts and Architecture at Penn State University.

# Information

Shunya Yoshimi (Translated by David Buist)

Abstract Although the concept of information is an inherently qualitative entity implying the capacity for meaning creation, in the historical development of this concept there has been a consistent emphasis on quantitative aspects. The generalization of the information concept from a specialized military term to a concept of broad social application occurred during the period when society as a whole became militarized in the 1930s and 1940s. After the Second World War, with the development of systematic information theory and the spread of computers in society, the military associations of the information concept gradually became obscured. But the popularity of information society theory in Japan and the USA indicates a need to review the military associations of its key concept. Today, with the development and spread of numerous global and local media, the information phenomena are experienced in a manner that far outstrips the narrow confines of the concept’s history. So the concept of information needs to be understood as a field of struggle in which different definitions confront each other leading to the creation of new practices and alternative concepts.

Keywords information, knowledge, wisdom

he development of the concept of ‘information’ in the 20th century is paradoxical in one very striking respect. Considered derivationally, and also theoretically, ‘information’ necessarily implies the creation of meaning. However, under the growing influence of Shannon’s information theory, this inherent aspect of meaning creation has been lost. In the present day, ‘information’ has come to be understood primarily as the central element of capitalistic database processing systems. As its derivation suggests, ‘information’ originally referred to the process of imparting ‘form’ – of imbuing a spirit – to some entity. Information is the process of ‘giving form to something’. It involves finding patterns or reading messages in the objects of observation (whether these be natural or social phenomena). Such ‘patterns’ or ‘messages’ are not reducible to mere ‘data’. They are educed recursively by observing the actions whereby life forms select meaningful patterns from within their environment. ‘Information’, therefore, cannot be reduced to bit units. The concept of ‘information’ has its basis in the life process whereby difference is discovered in the environment.

Thus, information is an inherently qualitative entity implying the capacity for meaning creation. Nevertheless, in the historical development of this concept, there has been a consistent emphasis on quantitative, rather than qualitative, aspects. ‘Information’ clearly has a place among other related concepts, such as ‘symbol’, ‘representation’, ‘language’, ‘knowledge’ and ‘wisdom’. However, there is a tendency to see ‘information’ as the most superficial and ephemeral of all these concepts. Information is generally denied any profundity of meaning.

Let us consider, for example, the concept of ‘knowledge’ to which ‘information’ is often compared. Knowledge is generally understood as something capable of accumulation or storage. When the knowledge possessed by an individual or collectivity increases, this is understood to mean that the subject concerned has accumulated more knowledge. In other words, there has been an increase in the knowledge held in stock and available for use. The concrete symbol of knowledge is the library, or the collection of books owned by a learned person. As this metaphor implies, the concept of knowledge is profoundly related to writing. Of course, knowledge itself pre-dates the Guttenberg Bible, and existed well before print media became widely available to the public. Nevertheless, before the printing press, the distribution of knowledge was severely limited and largely monopolized by monarchical and priestly authority.

In contrast, ‘information’ is essentially conceived as a ‘flow’. It is something that circulates from one place to another, but is not necessarily stored anywhere. Information is associated with ‘news’ about persons and events brought to us from a distance. The word is often used in reference to enemy ‘secrets’ obtained through espionage. The typical manifestations of ‘information’ are such things as bulletin boards, posters, or magazine supplements. Even in ancient times, people did treat certain forms of knowledge as ‘flow’ rather than ‘stock’. To this extent, information is not a new phenomenon. However, it was only with the development of capitalism that information surpassed knowledge and assumed a central position in the world of human consciousness, rather than being left on the periphery of knowledge as before. This reversal of the hierarchy between ‘knowledge’ and ‘information’ was promoted most especially by the development of electronic communications and mass media.

In this context we also encounter the concept of ‘wisdom’ – the third element of the triad I am considering here. Generally speaking, wisdom is something neither stored nor circulated. It is something that is simply discovered by individuals or groups. In some cases, it may exist inherently in the environment. Wisdom is often passed on from one generation to the next as a form of inheritance. It is embodied symbolically in the elders and storytellers who pass it on. If knowledge is something that is gradually stored up, and information is something that flows and circulates, then wisdom can be characterized as that which for ever returns. Wisdom is something to which people constantly return in their search for truth (Burke, 2000). In ‘folk societies’ – what Lévi-Strauss called ‘cold societies’ – wisdom is the normative form of knowing. Indeed, wisdom – not knowledge or information – has been the dominant element during most of the history of human consciousness (Lévi-Strauss, 1962). The supporting medium of wisdom is to be found in neither telecommunications nor in books, but in the culture of face-to-face oral transmission.

## The Military Use and Development of the Concept of Information

What I have said up to this point is valid so far as concerns the concept of ‘information’ as generally understood today. However, my purpose is not to pursue further the present-day meaning of the concept, but rather to clarify the socio-historical context through which it came into being. Concepts are inherently historical by nature. They cannot exist independently of the context from which they derive their meaning. The purpose of my investigation is therefore to find out how, and by whom, the word ‘information’ has been used. How has its meaning been fixed amid the complex web of discourse, and to what forms of technological or policy practices has it been linked? These are the questions I seek to answer through a concrete historical analysis.

Since ancient times, information has been assiduously collected and managed by state authorities. Monarchs of pre-modern states were often very keen to gather information on every region within their domain. In commercial towns of the ancient and medieval periods, it was generally understood that the flow of information and the trading of goods were inseparably connected. As shown by Peter Burke, numerous surveys were undertaken to gather information on the native inhabitants in the New World territories colonized by Spain in the 16th century. At around the same time, merchants in Genoa, Venice and Florence were exchanging massive quantities of information through the medium of letters. Later, the Dutch East Indies Company built up an international information network. Throughout history, the collection of information has been one of the main activities of dominant political and economic powers (Burke, 2000).

However, it is only comparatively recently that information has come to be understood as a legal or policy concept, as opposed to simply being an item gathered, managed and traded. The formal organization of information in this way seems to be a relatively recent phenomenon. Before the present period, modern states were more concerned with the organization and management of ‘knowledge’, rather than ‘information’. Numerous institutions were set up for this purpose, including libraries, museums, archives, encyclopaedias, maps and statistical compilations. These are all very characteristic features of modernity and have spread throughout the world since the 19th century (Anderson, 1983). However, since the early 20th century, states have shown an increasing propensity to focus on the conceptualization and management of the ‘flow’ of information, rather than the ‘stock’ of knowledge.

I will now demonstrate this historical process by outlining the development of the ‘information’ concept in Japan. The concept of ‘information’ is usually translated as ‘jouhou ’ in the Japanese language. However, the history of the formation of this concept in the various countries of Asia, including Japan, is far from simple.

The most influential proponent of ‘western civilization’ in late 19th-century Japan was Fukuzawa Yukichi. (He was also the founder of Keio University.) In a book he wrote in 1879, Minsei Isshin (Renewing the Life of the People), he asserted that ‘information technology’ was the very essence of modern civilization. ‘Information technology’ at that time was represented by four things: the steam locomotive, the telegraph, the printing press and the post office. According to Fukuzawa, the concept of ‘knowledge’ embraced not only theoretical reflection, but also a dimension of broad observation and experience. This horizontal dimension of knowledge he referred to as ‘information’. Through the medium of the aforementioned ‘information technology’, the world would become smaller and the social perception of time would be transformed. Fukuzawa claimed not only that ‘the telegraph would shrink the surface of the earth’, but also that ‘if steam were added to the telegraph, time would shrink, things would become more plentiful, and human life prolonged’. He believed that the modernization of a small Far Eastern country could be attained by bringing about the penetration of all areas of its society by ‘information technology’ (Fukuzawa, 1959[1879]).

Fukuzawa might thus be described as the first ideologue of the ‘information society’ in Japan. However, it was Mori Ogai who actually introduced the use of the word ‘jouhou ( ) to translate the western concept of ‘information’. Mori is well known as one of the most illustrious figures in modern Japanese literature. At the same time, he was extremely active in military affairs, rising to become the territorial army’s chief medical officer (thanks largely to his adeptness at German). In 1901–3, he published a Japanese translation of Carl von Clausewitz’s On War, in which the following definition is given: ‘Jouhou ( ) is the totality of knowledge about the enemy and enemy nation, and it is therefore the foundation of our country’s plan and action in war’. Even before Mori, the army had used ‘Jouhou ( )’ as a translation for the French word ‘rensainument’ in an 1876 translation of a French military treatise (Nakamoto, 1993). Other words, such as ‘chouhou ( )’ and ‘houchi ’, were frequently used in the Japanese military to convey the same sorts of meanings as ‘Jouhou ( )’. The Japanese interest in ‘information’ clearly began among the military.

However, for ordinary Japanese people, ‘Jouhou ( )’ had for a long time simply conveyed the meaning of a ‘report on a situation’. Jouhou is a compound word represented by two Chinese characters. The first character, pronounced ‘jou ’, originally included such meanings as ‘mind’ or ‘soul’, ‘condition’ or ‘appearance’, and ‘pity’ or ‘sympathy’. The second character, ‘hou ’, embraced a diversity of senses, including ‘retaliation’, ‘reporting’ and even ‘secret relations’ (i.e. adultery). Other words containing the character ‘jou ’ also refer to matters relating to intimacy between the sexes: a ‘joujin ’ is a ‘lover’; ‘jouyoku ’ means ‘sexual desire’, and ‘joushi ’ is a suicide pact between lovers. It is perhaps these associations of the component characters of ‘Jouhou ( )’ that have discouraged its use as a translation for ‘information’ in the Chinese language. In Chinese, ‘information’ is generally rendered as ‘xinxi ’, and is written with completely different characters from ‘Jouhou ( )’.

However, until the early 20th century, ‘Jouhou ( )’ was not the most commonly used