word to express the idea of a ‘report on a situation’ (although its use in this meaning had begun to increase). Until that time, the word ‘shinbun ’ was more frequently employed (Yoshimi, 2000). Nowadays, the word ‘shinbun ’ is used exclusively to mean ‘newspaper’, but it used to have a broader meaning embracing all forms of news and reporting. ‘Shin ’ means ‘new’ and ‘bun ’ means ‘hear’. When compounded, these two characters expressed the meaning of ‘something newly heard’. With the growth of the newspaper industry, the sense of ‘hearing’ was gradually lost, and the word came to apply only to the printed medium of news. Over the course of the 20th century the boundaries between concepts such as ‘Jouhou ( )’, ‘shinbun ’ and ‘houchi ’ gradually shifted.

During the 1920s and 1930s, in Japan as elsewhere, the concept of ‘information’ came to be closely associated with the aspect of military ‘intelligence’. This change of emphasis was largely a product of the system of all-out warfare instituted in the First World War. During this time, the warring countries of Europe all set up intelligence bureaus with the aim of manipulating the flow of information for strategic purposes. The Japanese government quickly learned to follow this trend, and set up its own department for the management of ‘Jouhou ( )’. This was eventually elevated to cabinet-level status and became one of the central organs of state power. Under the wartime system built up in the 1930s (and first half of the 1940s), all aspects of ‘information’ were comprehensively managed in accordance with the aims of war. This included everything from print media, radio broadcasting, film and posters to rumour, personal correspondence and graffiti. At the same time, other countries, including Germany and the US, also rapidly developed agencies for the management of information in accordance with military objectives. The formation of the ‘information’ concept was thus linked globally with the system of all-out warfare.

Indeed, not only in Japan, but also in the US, the growth of the ‘information’ concept was based principally in the military structures of the Second World War. Claude Shannon’s information theory, Norbert Wiener’s theory of cybernetics, and the foundations of computer science laid by John Von Neumann all grew out of American military research, which had been conducted for the purpose of guided missile technology or code-breaking.

It was from such a historical context that ‘information’ came to be chosen as a key concept embracing not only military intelligence in the classical sense of espionage, but also the whole field of communications and computer technology. Social scientists also came to be involved in mass communications research at the same time, but this research too was linked to military propaganda objectives, focusing especially on the use of the new medium of radio broadcasting (Hardt, 1992).

## From the Military Concept of Information to the Theory of Information Society

When we examine the history of the information concept in Japan, we detect a general shift in the principal area of application from the military to the economy. Even before the modern era, information had flowed in the towns and roadways through the media of books, print, letters and rumour. The period of early modernization then witnessed the rapid development of what could be called an ‘information system’ consisting of museums, libraries, cartography and statistics. However, until the early 20th century, no clear distinction was drawn between ‘information’ and ‘knowledge’. It was only then that the word ‘Jouhou ( )’ attained any special status and eclipsed other related words such as ‘shinbun ’ and ‘houchi ’. It was the systematization of knowledge for wartime mobilization that raised the specific social importance of ‘information’. What had once been no more than military ‘knowledge about the enemy’ came to be seen as a matter of crucial strategic importance for society as a whole.

The concept of the so-called ‘information society’ developed almost simultaneously in both Japan and the US during the 1960s and 1970s. As is well known, this idea was advocated by such people as Fritz Machlup (1962), Daniel Bell (1973) and Alvin Toffler (1981). Each of these promulgated their own key phrases, such as the ‘knowledge industry’, ‘post-industrial society’ and the ‘Third Wave’, and each contributed in their own way to what eventually came to be known as the ‘information society’. There is little need for me to go into details about these theories and their popularization as visions of the future for the masses over a span of nearly two decades, mostly in the US. I will focus instead on the development of the ‘information society’ concept as it unfolded in Japan. From the 1960s to the 1980s, there were a series of cyclical booms in the popularity of this concept in Japan. These did not necessarily reflect any influence of ideas from the US, but rather occurred simultaneously against the background of similar historical conditions in the two countries.

Japanese ‘information society’ theorists are fond of the assertion that ‘information society was conceived independently in Japan and has nothing to do with Machlup or Bell. ‘Information society’ is promoted as an export from Japan to the rest of the world. Indeed, the origins of the Japanese discourse on ‘information society’ go back as far as 1963, with the publication of articles on the ‘information society’ by Umesao Tadao in the journals Housou Asahi and Chuuou Kouron. Umesao employed a biological analogy to characterize the transition from ‘industrial society’ to ‘information society’. The physical structure of an animal can be divided into three parts: the endoderm (digestive and respiratory organs), the mesoderm (skeletal, muscular and reproductive organs) and the ectoderm (brain, neural and sensory organs). According to this model, industrial society was said to be founded on the ‘mesoderm’ of ports, transportation and construction, while ‘information society’ would involve a shift to a basis in the ‘ectoderm’ of information, communication, mass media, education and culture (Umesao, 1988).

Around the years 1967 and 1968, words like ‘informatization’ (jouhouka ) and ‘information society’ (jouhou shakai ) came to be employed strategically by futurologists, economists and the government. In 1968, Masuda Yoneji published Jouhou Shakai Nyuumon (An Introduction to the Study of Information Society). In 1969, Hayashi Yujiro published Jouhouka Shakai (Informatized Society). The latter sold over 100,000 copies and became a best seller. The ‘information society’ boom in Japan thus pre-dates the popularity of that concept in the US. In 1971, a group of leading social scientists and information society theorists collaborated in the production of a 20-volume series called Kouza: Jouhou Shakai Kagaku ( Lectures on Information Social Science). The inherently optimistic nature of information society theory seemed to capture the generally optimistic mood of the times. Japan had entered the era of high economic growth, having overcome the hardship of postwar recovery, and had just witnessed the Osaka Exposition, which was the ultimate symbol of the newfound prosperity. Discourse on the ‘information society’ not only dominated the mass media, but was increasingly incorporated into Japanese public policy-making.

Against the background of this popularization of the ‘information society’ concept in Japan, it began also to be exported to other countries. Of all the proponents of this idea, it was Masuda who became the most internationally famous. Not only was he the first to coin the term ‘information society’, but it was also his particular vision of what this word meant that was diffused wherever he travelled on his many international lecture tours (Masuda, 1968). With the development of new communications systems and computers in the 1970s, the concept of ‘information society’ came to be used in Europe and North America by such people as Bell and Toffler. This reflected a trend that had already become well established in Japan before the beginning of the 1970s.

Of course, when viewed from a wider perspective, the popularity of ‘information society’ theory in Japan can be seen as a response to the emergence in the US of theories about the ‘knowledge industry’ and ‘post-industrial society’. As many critics have already pointed out, ‘information society’ theory suffers from a number of serious deficiencies both in its American and Japanese versions. The first problem is that it tends to ignore the qualitative dimension of information. It views everything in terms of social changes measured in quantitative terms, such as the increase in the amount of information flowing in society, the information industry’s rising proportional contribution to total economic output, or the growing size of the information sector in the employment structure. These quantitatively measured changes are seen as the causal factors behind major overall socio-structural transformation. This approach can be challenged from two perspectives. First, it can be said that information society theory fails to give due attention to the potentially conservative effects of quantitative changes, simply reinforcing the existing social order. Secondly, one may wonder whether the increasing influence ascribed to ‘information’ should really be seen solely in quantitative terms. There are qualitative differences among the various forms of information that cannot be reduced to the variables of capital and labour power. This surely has crucial implications for our understanding of ‘information society’.

The second limitation of information society theory is of course its tendency toward technological determinism. Notwithstanding a small minority of pessimistic theorists, the ‘coming of the information society’ is almost universally greeted with great optimism. It is generally assumed that information technology alone can fundamentally alter society. The exact nature of the technology cited as the explanatory variable has changed with the times. At one time it was television; later it was the main-frame computer; then it was the computer network, and most recently, mobile media. Despite this variation in which technology was cited as the greatest cause of social change, the idea that ‘new information technology’ would bring about a more advanced ‘information society’ has remained constant. Since the 1970s, many empirical studies on the social structuring of technology have been carried out. These demonstrate the fundamental social embeddedness of all technology, thus undermining the notion that technology can be viewed as an independent variable causing social change. By the 1980s, it is safe to say, the presupposition of technological determinism underlying information society theory had collapsed.

The third problem with information society theory is its reliance on a unilinear and teleological conception of social development. Theorists such as Daniel Bell and Masuda Yoneji presented stage theories of social change that were so clear-cut and schematic that they could almost be caricatures: agricultural society was succeeded by industrial society, which in turn was about to be overtaken by the post-industrial ‘information society’. The transition from industrial society to ‘information society’ was seen in terms of simplistic dichotomies: from steam engine to computer, from factory to information network, from physical production to intellectual production, from market economy to the work-sharing economy, and from labour movement to citizens’ movement. Bell simplified history into three stages: pre-industrial, industrial and post-industrial. He saw a transition from ‘games between nature and man’ to ‘games between man and man’. This, he asserted, would lead to an expansion of mental labour in specialized technological services.

## ‘Information’ as an Arena of Struggle

I have just outlined the principal characteristics and problems of information society theory in the 1960s and 1970s. To put it in a nutshell, information society theory reduced quality to quantity, saw social change as being determined by technological change, and adhered to a unilinear stage model of history. What is striking is that these are precisely the characteristics that embody the industrialization and modernization process since the 19th century. Through the principles of mass production and scientific management, modern industrial society has succeeded in reducing ‘quality’ to ‘quantity’. It has consistently made investments in technology and pursued economic growth through technological advancement. Furthermore, this modernization process is both the result and the cause of the teleological model of developmental stages. Clearly, there is nothing ‘post-’ modern about information society theory. It is no more than a faithful reproduction of the principles of ‘modern’ industrialism adjusted to fit the ‘new’ conditions of information technology. Inherent to information society theory – in all its varieties, from Bell and Toffler to the Japanese theorists – is the very modern idea of centralized control from above.

This may be related to the fact that the concept of ‘information’ was originally disseminated in the context of military control and manipulation. As I have already noted, the establishment of the concept of ‘Jouhou ( )’ in Japan occurred in concert with the formation of a system for all-out warfare, with the Cabinet Information Office (Naikaku Jouhou B ) at its summit. ‘Information’ was therefore from the outset heavily associated with such things as military ‘intelligence’ and ‘propaganda’. This association between ‘information and the military is not unique to Japan. It can also be seen in the formation of information theory in the US. The generalization of the information concept from a specialized military term to a concept of broad social application occurred during the period when society as a whole became militarized in the 1930s and 1940s. With the development of systematic information theory and the spread of computers in society, the military associations of the information concept gradually became obscured. It thus took on the appearance of an inherently neutral and universal concept.

The popularity of information society theory in Japan and the US since the 1960s indicates a need to review the military associations of its key concept. To the extent that the information concept is still understood within the framework constructed by Shannon, Neumann and the information society theorists, a continuity clearly exists with the military intellectual history of the Second World War. Just as the life of the wartime system was prolonged under the ‘quasi-war’ conditions of the Cold War, so too the concept of ‘information’ retained its wartime ideological connotations even after it had been put to wider use in the ‘postwar’ era of the Cold War (Robins, 1999: 131–46).

With the development and spread of numerous global and local media, the information phenomena of the present day are experienced in a manner that far outstrips the narrow confines of the concept’s history (Lash, 2002). Even in the field of information science, there is a trend toward redefinition of the information concept in such a way as to include the dimensions of meaning and value, thus avoiding the problem of quantitative reductionism. Nowadays, much of the knowledge linked to the concept of information does not fit neatly within the traditional boundaries of computer science. The concept of ‘information’ is now being linked with concepts of the humanities and social sciences, including language, signs and symbols, texts and images. Thus, the information concept is being applied to a wider area of knowledge and daily practice than before, and in the process its meaning is expanding beyond the takenfor-granted horizons of military and information society theory (Nishigaki, 2002).

I began by outlining a concept of ‘information’ as the action of life ‘giving form’ to things. This is a very different concept of information from the military and industrial use of the term. This suggests that ‘information’ is not something that can be reduced to some common origin or definition. Information needs to be understood as a field of struggle in which different definitions confront each other leading to the creation of new practices and alternative concepts. Indeed, the reason why it is worthwhile for us today to pursue the concept of ‘information is not so much because it has so many different possible definitions, but rather because of the relations of struggle among the hegemonic dimensions of this concept formed within the modern military-industrial system. There is a constant need for reflection on the conceptual foundations underlying the discourse of ‘information’ in contemporary society. We must be vigilant about exactly what is happening in the conceptualization process when diverse phenomena are categorized and highlighted as forms of ‘information’. As the information concept comes to embrace more and more areas of society, it necessarily acquires greater and greater complexity. This complexity will then provide further opportunities for diverse discursive strategies, including both struggle and accommodation.

## References

Anderson, Benedict (1983) Imagined Communities, 2nd edn. London: Verso.

Bell, Daniel (1973) The Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture in Social Forecasting. New York: Basic Books.

Burke, Peter (2000) A Social History of Knowledge: From Gutenberg to Diderot. Oxford: Polity Press. Clausewitz, Carl von (1901) Vom Kriege, ge,

. (Mori Ogai, Military Academy of the Japanese Territorial Army, trans., Taisen Gakuri [Science of War]. Tokyo: Gunji Kyoiku-kai, Tokyo, 1901–3)

Fukuzawa Yukichi (1959[1879]) Minjou Isshin, pp. 13–62 in Fkuzawa Yukichi Zenshu [Renewing the Life of the People] in Fukuzawa Yukichi Collection, Vol. 5. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten.

Hardt, Hanno (1992) Critical Communication Studies: Communication, History and Theory in America. London: Routledge.

Lash, Scott (2002) Critique of Information. London: Sage.