Lectures on Information Social Science (20 vols) (1971–79) Tokyo: Gakushuu Kenkyuusha (in Japanese). Lévi-Strauss, Claude (1962) La pensée sauvage. Paris: Librairie Polon.

Machlup, Fritz (1962) The Production and Distribution of Knowledge in the United States. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Masuda, Yoneji (1968) Jouhou Shakai Nyumon [Introduction to the Study of Information Society]. Tokyo: Perikan-sha.

Nakamoto, Hideshiro (1993) Jouhou wo Kangaeru [Considering Information]. Tokyo: Maruzen.

Nishigaki, Touru et al. (eds) (2002) Jouhougaku Jiten [The Encyclopedia of Media and Information Studies]. Tokyo: Koubundo.

Robins, Kevin (1999) Times of the Technoculture: From Information Society to the Virtual Life. London: Routledge.

Toffler, Alvin (1981) The Third Wave. New York: Bantam Books.

Umesao, Tadao (1988) Jouhou no Bunmeigaku [Civilization of Information]. Tokyo: Chuoukouron-sha.

Yoshimi, Shunya (2000) ‘Media wo Kataru Gensetsu’ [Media Narratives], pp. 177–237 in Naiha suru Chi [Undermining Knowledge]. Tokyo: Tokyo University Press.

Yujiro, Hayashi (1969) Jouhouka Shakai: Hado na Shakai kara Sofuto na Shakai e. Tokyo: Koudanhsa.

Shunya Yoshimi is Professor of Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies, University of Tokyo, and is working on cultural studies/history of popular culture. His publications (in Japanese) include Dramaturgy of City (1987), Politics of Exposition (1992), Cultural Sociology in the Media Age (1994), Voice of Capitalism (1995), Realities in Transit (1996), Cultural Turn, for the Politics of Cultures (2003), Expo Syndrome (2005) and Tokyo Studies (2005).

# Copyright

Anne Barron

Keywords authorial individualism, books, ‘digital rights’, droit d’auteur, intellectual property, print logic, public sphere

t is generally accepted that the modern institution of copyright first took shape with the enactment of the English ‘Statute of Anne’ in 1710 (the ‘1710 Act’). The context from which this legislation emerged is instructive. The beginning of the 18th century had marked the end of a 30-year period in which the publishers’ guild, the Company of Stationers, had progressively lost its monopoly over the book trade and its capacity to act as the agency for official censorship of books, both of which dated back to the guild’s royal charter of 1557. As newcomers to the trade began to turn an easy profit through the reprinting of books formerly reserved to members of the guild, the latter campaigned vigorously for legislative recognition of the exclusive printing and publication rights to which the guild’s internal regulations had previously, in practice, entitled them. Tainted as their claim was by a history of associations with monopoly privileges, censorship and the absolutist

conceptions of royal power that had supported both, it met with trenchant political resistance; and when the House of Commons elected in 1705 finally acceded to the demand for regulation of the book trade, it insisted that exclusive printing rights be vested in authors, not publishers, in order to prevent the perpetuation of the established publishers’ monopoly of valuable old works such as those of Shakespeare and Milton (Rose, 1993). In 1710 an Act was duly passed giving to the author of a ‘book’ the exclusive and assignable right to ‘print’ and ‘reprint’ the book for a period limited to a maximum of 28 years from the date of its first publication.

The potential (and potentially adverse) socioeconomic significance of copyright has been evident to lawmakers in this area from the beginning. The 1710 Act, for example, was entitled ‘An Act for the Encouragement of Learning’, and it opened with a preamble explaining the goals of the legislation as follows: authors suffer detriment when their writings are printed and sold without their permission, and the new authorial printing right is necessary ‘for preventing such practices for the future, and for the encouragement of learned men to compose and write useful books’. Given that the authorial right was alienable, it must have been understood that publishers’ investments in publishing texts they had purchased from authors would also be underwritten by the legislation, and indeed the immediate practical impact of the 1710 Act was to ensure that publishers of newly authored books who had purchased the copyrights in these books from their authors could veto the sale of rival (cheaper) editions. The legislative calculation evidently was that any adverse effects of this interference with economic competition – such as restrictions on supply or ‘artificially’ high prices – would be offset by the social benefits of the continued literary production and distribution thought to be guaranteed by the right’s existence. Nonetheless, the Act put in place further safeguards against its abuse: for example, the right was limited in scope (at least initially, it was understood to be a right to prevent the printing of facsimile editions of books – not a right to prevent copying or communication in general, and not a right to veto the printing of abridgements, translations, adaptations, etc. of literary material); it was limited in time; and if it was shown that publishers were abusing the right by charging ‘high and unreasonable’ prices for books, the Act provided a mechanism for forcing these prices down.

Subsequent legislation in this area has been characterized by a similar attempt to ‘balance’ new incentives for creators and investors against guarantees of access for users of cultural materials. Yet this essentially utilitarian approach to the design of the copyright system is plagued by its own indeterminacy: to quote one commentator, ‘[t]he more desirable a work is, the greater is the need to ensure the creation of the work and the greater the need to ensure its widespread dissemination. . . . [Thus] incentive and access always oppose each other with exactly equal force’ (Lunney, 1996: 486). Nonetheless, the 1710 Act’s title and preamble ‘enunciate the policy that became the essential rationale for both English and American copyright laws: copyright is an incentive to authors to create so that the public may have access to and be enriched by their works’ (Ginsburg, 1990: 998). Article I(8)(8) of the US Constitution, drafted in 1787, provides the constitutional foundation for Federal copyright (and patent) laws to this day, in terms that echo the consequentialist tone of the English Act – ‘Congress shall have Power . . . to promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries’ – and the copyright created by the first Federal Copyright Act of 1790 was similar to its English predecessor in terms of its subjects, objects, scope and duration.

In France, meanwhile, although all privileges (including publishers’ printing privileges) that had depended on an exercise of the royal prerogative were abolished in 1789, the post-Revolutionar National Assembly passed a decree in 1793, dubbed the ‘Declaration of the Rights of Genius’, which inaugurated the modern droit d’auteur as an authorial property right, lasting for the author’s life plus ten years, and subsisting in ‘writings of all kinds’ and ‘all productions of the beaux arts’ Although as initially conceived, this measure – like the Anglo-American copyright initiatives that had preceded it – was understood as a means to the end of encouraging the dissemination of ‘learning’, it subsequently acquired a markedly different character: the droit d’auteur came to be seen as the realization, in positive law, of a natural authorial right to respect for the bond between an author and his or her work considered as the mirror of his or her creative personality. To a greater or lesser extent, this conception of the philosophical basis of authors’ rights (indebted in no small measure to Kant: see Kant, 1785/1998) is shared by jurists of the so-called ‘civil law tradition generally. (‘Civil law’ is a catch-all term generally used by English-speaking commentators to accommodate all legal traditions deriving not from the English common law but from Roman law. Exemplary civil law traditions would be those of France, Germany, Scandinavia and their respective former colonies and zones of influence.) The copyright systems of the world, then, are generally understood as falling into two broad categories: the Anglo-American, with its understanding of copyright as an instrument for ‘incentivizing’ the production and dissemination of cultural goods and the civilian, with its understanding of the author’s right as founded in the ‘natural’ autonomy of the human creator. However, in practice these differences have counted for little as economic forces – marshalled by the WTO and its client states of the industrialized West – have pushed national intellectual property regimes towards ever-closer alignment during the last decade or so

One view of global developments in this field since the 18th century is that the early English, American and French initiatives outlined above set in train a process of legal-conceptual evolution that gradually but inexorably: broadened the range of persons qualifying as subjects of exclusive rights in cultural materials (from writers in the 18th century to e.g. record companies in the 20th); broadened the range of entities qualifying as objects of these rights (from texts in the 18th century to e.g. films in the 20th); lengthened the duration of these rights (to as much as 70 years from the death of the human author); and expanded their scope (from a printing right in books to a bundle of rights to control all kinds of reproduction and public communication, including communication through digital networks). Yet these developments, far from being propelled by a logic internal to legal doctrine, have been thoroughly entwined with parallel developments in information and communication technologies (ICTs); in the theory, practice and criticism of the arts; in the culture industry; and in the regulation of the public sphere generally. Because of this, and because copyright law is implicated with such processes as the institutionalization of familiar cultural hierarchies (author/reader; thing/action; work/texte and so on), it is now a focus of theoretical inquiry across a number of disciplines beyond law.

Much has been made of the fact that copyright law operates with a conception of the cultural artefact as a bounded expressive form originating in the creative efforts of some individual: a fixed, reified work of authorship. For those whose thought has been shaped by the philosophy of deconstruction associated with Jacques Derrida, or by the semiotics of Roland Barthes, the affinities between this category and the aesthetic conception of the organic work that emerged in the wake of the Romantic movement in the early 19th century are proof that copyright law gives juridical form to a Romantic aesthetic. This (extravagant) claim is frequently accompanied by the companion argument that the Romantic paradigm – including its legal manifestation, the copyright system – is threatened by practices of cultural appropriation and remixing (e.g. digital sampling and appropriation art), and that these practices manifest an alternative ethic/aesthetic of ‘intertextual’ cultural production that will one day displace the possessive authorial individualism embedded in copyright law. Others (more plausibly) have noted that the original, individuated, complete and inviolable work presupposed by copyright law, if not exactly a ‘Romantic’ conception, is certainly specific to a particular time and location: the modern West. As such, it screens out forms of cultural expression that proceed from collective – often orally transmitted – traditions and articulate a dialectic of repetition and variation of the elements constituting those traditions. Whole swathes of creative activity from the American blues to Australian Aboriginal art are difficult if not impossible to accommodate within the modern copyright system for this reason (e.g. Jaszi and Woodmansee, 1996).

It would, however, be a mistake to see copyright law as necessarily oriented towards institutionalizing any particular aesthetic as such, not least because before it was ever perceived as regulating the arts it was a mechanism for regulating the printing press. Historians of print and publishing have argued that the advent of printing in 15thcentury Europe was of fundamental importance, not only for the economics of the book trade but because it revolutionized conceptions of literary form: it triggered a shift from variable manuscripts to exactly identical texts as the form in which written material was reproduced and disseminated, and this in turn generated both a conception of the text as a static, fixed object, and the assumption that a determinate individual was not only the writer of this text but its author (e.g. Eisenstein, 1983). Commentators adopting this perspective tend to see copyright law’s historical role as that of institutionalizing this ‘logic of print’, but there are several varieties of this tendency to explain the institution by reference to the technological means of cultural production and dissemination. The tendency is understandable: the role of the 1710 Act, for example, was indeed that of regulating the uses to which printing technology was put, and the Act even borrowed its modes of identifying the object of copyright (the ‘book’), as well as its understanding of what it would mean to trespass upon this object (‘printing’ the book), from concepts made thinkable by the technology of moveable type and the activity of trading massproduced books in the marketplace. Yet the tendency veers towards technological determinism, and as such has fed some of the wilder claims of those concerned to theorize the relationship between copyright and the emergence of the Internet as a medium for the distribution of digitized content in the 1990s.

The Internet initially focused attention on the threat posed by the digital revolution to copyright law’s norms, conceptual distinctions and enforcement mechanisms. A popular strategy in some quarters in the early 1990s was to explain the nature of this threat by combining ‘cyber-theory with post-structuralist semiotics. This approach emphasized the incompatibility between the electronic ‘text’ (any digitized data) experienced in digital networks, and the ‘work’ presupposed by the law – electronic texts were said to be multivocal, manipulable, linked electronically to vast networks of other related texts, and detached from their authors; whereas works are unified, inviolable, discrete objects of authorial control – and highlighted the similarities between the virtual space of the Internet and the Barthesian space of ‘textuality’ (Bolter, 2001). It was assumed that copyright law’s writ simply could not run in this space; that the (technologically induced) death of the author would soon also herald the death of copyright. More recently, however, this assumption has been overtaken by new technico-legal innovations: encryption and other similar measures can now re-enclose the very content that had earlier been freed up by digitization, thus reinforcing the protection given by copyright law with the virtual equivalent of physical fences; and these fences in turn are now legally guaranteed against circumvention.

As commentators have tried to make sense of these latest developments, technological determinism has entered a new alliance with welfare economics. For the economist, technological change has indeed been a significant factor in the development of copyright, but for the specific reason that it has brought progressively into view the ‘public good aspect of informational and cultural ‘resources’. (Thus when printing technology made texts easier to copy, the vulnerability of the text to appropriation without payment began to be problematized as an invitation to ‘free-riding’.) From this perspective, ICTs are significant, not in themselves, but because they have prompted initiatives – such as copyright legislation – oriented towards turning public goods into privately appropriable goods. Within the incentive-access economic paradigm outlined above, copyright was nonetheless traditionally regarded with suspicion as a monopoly right, and it was always thought economically desirable to limit its reach, and to ‘balance’ private rights with safeguards for competing producers of cultural commodities and for end-users. Within the now-dominant neoclassical paradigm, these concerns have been marginalized: property rights, it is said, should ideally extend to every conceivable valued use of informational and cultural resources, and it should be left to the market (not the state) to devise mechanisms for ensuring their optimal supply and dissemination. Digital ICTs are now seen as facilitating the emergence of such mechanisms (e.g. pay-per-use ‘click-through contracts between right-holders and individual users), and the desirable future from this perspective is thus one of ever-expanding copyrights (to capture all value), digital fences (to secure these entitlements) and ‘digital rights’ (to deter fencecutting) (Ganley, 2004).

One questionable assumption (among others) underlying welfare economics is that the economy can be understood as a separate domain. Critical political economists, by contrast, seek to situate markets within a wider ‘totality’ of social, political and cultural processes. Further, their central focus is not on the sphere of exchange but on relations of production, and how these generate particular configurations of ownership and power. The understanding of copyright this generates, while not denying that cultural and informational commodities have public good characteristics, foregrounds copyright enforcement as one strategy, among others, through which media/entertainment corporations attempt to circumvent the obstacles these characteristics pose to the valorization of capital. Hence this approach theorizes the past, present and future of copyright law as bound up with the evolution of a distinct sector of capitalist production: the culture industry. Other critics of the view that copyright is to be understood solely as a device for alleviating market failure take inspiration from Habermas’s theory of the ‘public sphere’: a sphere of public communication that is both independent of institutionalized centres of political power, and capable of challenging their dominance. That sphere is said to have first emerged in the 18th century, sustained by printed materials – newspapers, pamphlets and books – that were financed not by official patronage but by the reading public. Hence it was a space for airing the views and values of a wider community beyond the prevailing political elites. It has been argued that the modern copyright system arose with and contributed to the emergence of this printmediated public sphere: with its introduction, authors could for the first time hope to earn a living from the sale of their works through independent publishers who stood apart from the censorial arm of the state and the interference of aristocratic and ecclesiastical patrons. On this view, copyright’s primary role was, is and should remain the support of a democratic culture (Netanel, 1996).

The current trend, however, is undoubtedly one of using copyright law to privatize and enclose what remains of the public domain of culture and information (for an analysis of what the public domain means in this context, see Boyle, 2003). This process of enclosure entails the re-characterization of this domain as a pool of ‘resources’ to be allocated via the market to those who value them most as indicated only by their ‘willingness’ to pay.

## References

Bolter, Jay David (2001) Writing Space: Computers, Hypertext and the Remediation of Print. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Boyle, James (2003) ‘The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the Public Domain’, Law and Contemporary Problems 66: 33.

Eisenstein, Elisabeth (1983) The Printing Revolution in Early Modern Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ganley, Paul (2004) ‘Digital Copyright and the New Creative Dynamics’, International Journal of Law and Information Technology 12(3): 282–332.

Ginsburg, Jane (1990) ‘A Tale of Two Copyrights: Literary Property in Revolutionary France and America’, Tulane Law Review 64: 991–1031.