is the cyclist’s body. Since energy and matter are two manifestations of the same phenomenon, in this definition of media it makes no difference whether one is transmitting information on a wire or electromagnetic waves or sending things via a transport medium. Electric light is a medium, because it extends vision in time: it lets us see something for longer in what would otherwise have been the dark (for longer than a candle, and with a greater range). The same is true of glasses where age is concerned: glasses lengthen the active life of an intellectual (reading, writing, observing, teaching) by decades.

Spoken language is a phenomenon at the boundary of nature and technology. It is part of the body as well as an extension of that body into the public domain. Our power of speech enables us to reach others and be reached by others without leaving our bodies. The same goes for sign language and other forms of nonverbal communication. Unamplified – without loudspeaker or signal flags – these are not media, but bodily abilities. Media are means of amplifying input from the world within our bodies, but also, inversely, of expanding our bodies’ potential for action in the world. With media, traffic is always two-way. This is true of all technology. On the one hand, technology allows us to get to know the world better or differently than we could without its support; on the other hand, it provides us with a means of intervening in that world. The simplest way of getting to know the world is always to reach out, change it, and see what happens.

## Media and Modernism

Historically speaking, awareness of the medial nature of all human expression and perception was late in coming, somewhere at the end of the 19th or the beginning of the 20th century. Impressionism and cubism in painting were among the first artistic movements to confront viewers with the fact that when they looked at a painting, they were seeing a painted piece of canvas, a construction dreamt up and executed by a painter. Regarded as a medium, a painting is no more than that: paint on canvas, set down as fields, lines and points. Paintings were no longer intended to create the illusion of representing something other than themselves, a space containing a person or a landscape, or else a representation of the painter’s unique vision of these phenomena outside the painting.

A painting is not a natural representation of something else, something spatial with a third dimension reaching deep into the canvas. The painting is two-dimensional: its inside and outside, front and back, top and bottom and all the rest lie on a flat plane. The point is not to look at the canvas bit by bit; you must take in the whole thing at one glance. Then you will see, as if for the first time, that you are looking at a medium instead of a message, instead of a so-called representation of something in the ‘real’ world. That real world is an illusion in painting; only the painting itself is real, as a medium. After studying cubism Marshall McLuhan came up with his slogan, ‘The medium is the message’. This statement proved applicable to all media.

Marshall McLuhan got the essence of his media theory from the cubists, who were among the first representatives of what became known as Modernism in art. Modernism is the will to be modern – that is, the will to connect to the latest media. According to McLuhan, the cubists linked their painting to the medium of film, which was still new at the beginning of the 20th century. All modernist 20th-century art – poetry, literature, sculpture, music, ballet, film, photography, video art, and so on – links the medium through which it manifests itself to a more modern medium, in the hope of discovering what is unique and irreplaceable about its own, older medium. Modernist art legitimizes itself not through building on an illustrious past, but through the special, authentic characteristics of the medium in which it is created. Modernist art is art that seeks to engage the medium itself – written language, clay, bronze, notes, movements, poses, pictures. Modernist artists try to get the medium to propagate a message no person ever would have hit on – an extra-human message, because it is purely medial. Modernist art is art that seeks to make its medium its message.

## Media and the Extramedial

The sentence ‘The medium is the message’ is the core of media theory, but at the same time it is a joke, a distortion of the central thesis of information theory, which holds that communication occurs when a sender sends a message through a channel to a receiver, who then either responds or does not. Information theory and media theory both try to answer the question of what exactly is being transmitted or exchanged when we communicate and use media. According to information theory, this is a certain precisely quantifiable amount of data, diluted with a certain equally quantifiable amount of noise. Information is measurable regardless of the medium in which it is sent. According to media theory, there is much more going on in communication than just an exchange of information: the medium influences the sender as well as the receiver. Information theory pays no attention to how it does this. But every medium influences both poles of communication in its own characteristic way.

In the first place, the medium determines what information can and cannot be transmitted. In fact, most information sent through a medium says more about the characteristics of the medium itself than about anything else. This aspect of communication was expressed by McLuhan in the aphorism ‘The medium is the message’. In the second place, the medium evokes in the sender as well as in the receiver a certain more or less definable environment – a mental space or sphere of interest in which users of the medium can understand each other because they share a way of seeing, pre-formed by the medium, while those unconnected to it have no clue what’s being talked about. McLuhan summed up this aspect in another aphorism: ‘The medium is the massage’.

All media begin as a potential in our bodies, expand into the public domain, creating a world – and finally end again in the body, as a way of being, a range of feeling, a worldview, a belief system. We are our media. And because we are never the only ones using a medium, as media users we are always part of a crowd. With some media, this crowd appears literally, such as with lectures, concerts, theatrical performances or film. With others, it remains imaginary: we must imagine it as we use the medium. With television, the crowd appears in the form of ratings; with radio, in the form of listeners who phone in; with youth TV stations, as e-mailing or texting viewers; with newspapers, as circulation figures; on websites, in the page hit count. We read books alone, but it makes us part of a language community. In the media we are never alone.

Modernism tried to divest itself of the illusions that sprang from the traditional representational use of media. At the same time, Modernism gave rise to its own illusion when it claimed that media could only speak about themselves (and that what they had to say was brilliant, moving, profound, tragic, real). The modernist illusion called upon a scientific worldview in which reality consisted only of matter and energy. Anything else we believed we saw sprang from the imagination. This conception of scientific knowledge was Newtonian and, in that sense, antiquated, though the modernists embraced it blindly. The world consists not only of matter and energy but also of information. Information refers to the form in which matter and energy manifest themselves. A picture is an accumulation of matter or light in which something else can be discerned besides that matter or light, namely the thing that the image is depicting, referring to. This something else is information. Information is everything in an image that one knows could have looked some other way.

Every human creation refers to something else. Even music refers to more than the sounds that make it up; perhaps we should say that there is more at play in music than the instruments it is made with. If there were not, it would move no one. Music has a much more direct connection to the body than any image – it follows the rules and dialogues of feeling rather than those of reason, and it tells us more about the rhythmic and melodic passage of time than about the extent of space. Thus, words are groups of sounds or letters that refer to something other than the sounds and letters themselves – they refer to life, in us and outside us. This reference to life is not so much the meaning of the words as the reason we are willing to use them in the first place – willing to speak, or to read what another has written.

In every medium, there is something that touches the outside, the extramedial – that which the medium is about and yet is outside the medium’s reach, though it can be evoked, suggested, extolled. The extramedial, by definition, cannot be represented with media; if it could, it would be intramedial. Yet the extramedial can only be experienced thanks to media; we feel its presence before we have understood anything of the meaning of a work. Some poems have it, as do some photographs, some music, some installations. Other art does not. Or might suddenly if one returns to it later. But only when the extramedial is there can we summon up the energy to study a photograph, savour and ponder a poem, give a piece of music our attention instead of letting it wash over us, or take up the challenge of engaging with an interactive installation.

Only after one has noticed the extramedial does one ask questions like: ‘Why is this word here and not another?’ or ‘Why do those trees and bushes hang under the line of the horizon like that in this photograph?’ or ‘Why that hiccup in the melody, or that slightly too-short beat after that held note?’ With skilfully made poetry, photography or music, we feel admiration for the creator’s or performer’s craft, but with ‘really good’ work, we begin to feel grateful for the existence of life itself. The meaning of sentences, images and sounds is secondary; the extramedial charge is always experienced first and transcends the experience of what we have seen or read, until . . . well, until what exactly? The extramedial is not matter, energy or information. It is a fourth element that is called forth by means of mediation.

Media theory cannot describe all of reality. Media-theoretical description finds its limits in the certainty that there is a domain outside the media which remains inaccessible to media and media theory. Acknowledging the extramedial will prevent media theory from developing the totalitarian tendency to try to explain everything, and thus to control and change it. Only our existence in the media can be controlled and changed; nothing else can. The media have their limits. Past those limits, even media theory can do nothing.

## ‘The Media’

‘The media’ did not exist before the beginning of the 1980s. What did exist was the press on the one hand and public opinion on the other. The press encompassed all journalists, whether they wrote for daily or weekly papers, filmed footage for television or independent documentaries, or made recordings for radio. These reporters kept to a strict journalistic ethical code which said they should report current events as objectively as possible and influence those events as little as possible through their presence and reporting. Subjective interpretation and politically tinted opinions were reserved for editorial commentaries, opinion pages and current affairs programmes. There, journalists themselves as well as people involved in current events could give their readings of those events. From this position, ‘opinion leaders’ tried to influence public opinion, and this opinion – sometimes archaically designated ‘the voice of the people’ – was the only entity not directly involved that was allowed to influence the events that made the news.

The contrast between objective newsgathering and subjective or ideologically tinted propaganda proved to be unsustainable in the 1980s. When the TV cameras were brought into parliament buildings, MPs began behaving differently. Instead of making dull speeches and impassioned arguments, they began to deliver performances. As in any performing art, these were evaluated on how they came across to the audience. The validity of the arguments was pushed further and further into the background. The journalists could only conclude that reporting was equivalent to exerting influence. Ever since this discovery, whenever press conferences and other staged events are reproduced, images of the photographers, camerapersons and radio microphones involved in the reporting of the event are always shown. The press’s image of its own product has become an integral part of the information presented. Journalism no longer considers itself a mirror of reality or the truth behind public opinion. News is a product which is manufactured, like any other, by means of a creative-industrial process. The value of the product depends on its speed, uniqueness and aesthetic qualities – in short, its topicality – and is proven by viewer ratings, or entertainment value. If an event is to appear in the media – to become infotainment – it must meet the criteria of topicality and entertainment.

This development led to a different way of dealing with the press among people who for one reason or another wanted to get into the news. The fact that it was the presence of journalists that made an incident into a media hype necessitated a heightened awareness of how the performance would come across among those who caused that incident, whether it was an official opening, a protest demonstration or a public appearance by a politician, artist or musician. For example, while it had previously been said that NGOs – known as ‘action groups’ in the 1980s – should not use or provoke violence because it would turn public opinion against them, now the press and public opinion were experienced as a single block, known as ‘the media’: if you wanted to get into the media, a little violence or other conspicuous behaviour wasn’t a bad idea at all. While in the past the media had been used as a mouthpiece or megaphone to communicate one’s own small message to the masses, from now on the media themselves were the target at which actions were aimed, for the media and public opinion were indistinguishable.

‘The media’ is less and less a collection of machines and their operators – formerly known as journalists – and increasingly a mentality: namely, the realization that everything is recorded but only a few fragments will end up as items in news broadcasts, current affairs and entertainment shows, and magazines. To become an item, one must provide mediagenic images or provocative statements. It has also become commonplace for reporters to ask, ‘Can you sum up this issue (an award-winning novel, a fight between segments of the population in an urban neighbourhood, an unhappy childhood) in one sentence?’ The answer ‘No, it’s too complicated’ spells the end of the item. What was once seen as an independent press is now regarded by all sides in any social conflict as one of the weapons to use in fighting, discrediting, ‘criminalizing’ or even ‘demonizing’ (as it is called in newsspeak) each other. One no longer fights for a good cause; one stages one’s resistance so that the media will pay attention, not in order to stir the masses with their public opinion to resistance or revolution, but in order to have been in the media.

## Media and ‘Situations’

The absolutization of the media in the 1980s led to a great media aversion in all those who remembered a time when journalists reported what happened rather than shaping ‘media events’. Cultural critics rediscovered the old Situationist manifesto The Society of the Spectacle, and observed with dismay that its prediction had come true: any event on earth would henceforth be found interesting only if it presented itself as a spectacle. In the original French, the word ‘spectacle’ actually means nothing more than ‘something that is merely visible’: spectacular television programmes such as game shows with lavish sets and dozens of extras were not a cause for concern for the Situationists. They were worried about the fact that all experiences involving the entire body, experiences in which one ‘lived directly’ – such as parties, drinking sprees and wanderings – were increasingly being displaced by experiences reserved for the eye alone (display windows, advertising, photographs, films, television).

The Situationists of the 1950s and 1960s invented methods of generating authentic, complete experiences that could not be represented in images. When these were successful, and a series of crazy incidents ended in a general party feeling, then, they said, a ‘situation had been created. The main methods for creating ‘situations’ were ‘dérive’ (wandering through unfamiliar cities to the point of trance) and ‘détournement’ (distorting texts and images to breathe new life into them). ‘Situations’, it turned out, could be bigger than the first rather lonely generation of Situationists had experienced. Every generation since has witnessed moments when a demonstration, concert or protest action suddenly turned into a ‘situation that later assumed legendary proportions. Examples are the May 1968 student protests in Paris that ended in rioting, the concert at Woodstock in 1969, the 1980 squatters’ riots in Amsterdam, Berlin and Zürich, and the anti-globalization ‘Battle of Seattle’ in December 1999. These events were reported in the media at length, but exactly what had happened to the