participants who created these situations was something it was impossible for the media to grasp.

For it could not be seen; it had to be experienced through participating oneself: the party (for this is how situations are experienced) was extramedial, fundamentally unimaginable. People who knew each other barely or not at all suddenly recognized each other as old friends and got together, instead of simply passing each other anonymously, as is usual in the city. They met and got down to work, with no need for lengthy discussions about the hows, whys and wherefores. Out of these situations or ‘happenings’ were born social movements that combined ‘direct actions’ (or in some cases, nothing more than illegal dance parties) with special behavioural codes, fashions and lifestyles. Every social movement of the last 20 or 30 years found itself confronted with the question of how it could maintain the ‘real’ or ‘directly experienced’ communality of the original event once the media had discovered it and turned it into spectacle.

## New Media

The computer, so goes an oft-repeated proposition, remediates all preceding media – look around on a few websites and you will find not only written and printed texts, photographs, film and video, television, and security cameras (webcams), but also scanned paintings, drawings, etchings and so on. Through computer speakers one can listen to LPs, CDs, MP3s, radio programmes and film scores. One can send letters by email, and even telephone through the net. Once all media were moved to digital carriers, the computer became a metamedium, a repository in which a user can jump from medium to medium with the proverbial click of a mouse. But this is not so much a remediation of all old and new media as a hybridization, a merging of different kinds of media into a new entity. This unity is symbolized by the laptop and mobile phone, in which all media are brought together and become mobile, portable, playable and usable everywhere. How do the various media bear up under this hybridization? Can the separate elements still be recognized on the basis of their historic origins, or has something new been created? And to understand it, is a knowledge of history unnecessary, perhaps even a hindrance?

## Excursion: TV

An earlier example of the hybridization of two media shows how much ‘monomedia’ change in such a merging. Television is an example of a medium that is mainly supposed to remediate older media but has become something completely different in doing so. We can, of course, see films, documentaries, plays, videos, photographs, illustrated radio programmes and telephone conversations on television. But we view all these remediated ‘media’ differently on television than we do in their original settings. A typical televisual form such as the news differentiates itself from the medium of video by means of live reports, which are designed to prove that there has been too little time to manipulate the image. Live broadcasts guarantee the cinematic truth of what we see, though it is not cinema since film is never live. Other televisual forms such as soaps and sitcoms are definitely not film either, although they are made according to cinematic principles. The difference between a series and a film is that one must watch a film from beginning to end to understand it, but one can start watching a television series at any point in any episode. A series is not a film in serial form: series consist of chains of ideas which neither drive each other nor cancel each other out, as they would in a movie, but merely alternate. The suspense of television lies in seeing what the next link will look like. Who did what in previous episodes is not important. The ideas speak for themselves.

On television one watches programmes: that is, one follows the programmes the characters act out. These can be banal – programmes of grouchy fathers and quiz contestants – or refined and complex – ones of metaphysically inclined special agents and confessed gambling addicts. TV programmes are often dependent on a situation: a wedding, a competition, a prison, a police station or a news situation such as a plane crash or a political conflict. The only reality depicted in the television image is that of the programmes of the characters and the situations they find themselves in. Television does not show who they are, where they are going or who they will become, as photography, film and video respectively do. Every TV episode, whether it is of a soap or a current affairs show, shows in an instructive manner how programmes function somewhere and how they affect each other and how one can hold one’s own in a particular environment. Television is not good at telling us why: why would one want to hold one’s own? That is more of a task for literature and the movies. There are no people to be seen on television: we see only the conceptual structures within which they move. This allows the television image to be totally transparent and understandable while always keeping a distance and remaining strange. Television can at once bore us and fascinate us.

The purpose of television is to show that the viewer can enter any imaginable programme at any moment: as a fashion model or a mother, an artist or a manager, a child or a senior citizen. Anyone can make a television programme their own, while not everyone can become a film or pop star. And yet film stars on TV are nothing more than programmes themselves, whether they are acting in movies or appearing on talk shows. On talk shows they perform the movie star programme; in films shown on TV, the actor programme. The same is true of pop stars who appear in videos and interviews. If you are going to appear on television, you should ask yourself: which programme should I make of myself, and how? Show how you do whatever it is you have been invited to be on TV for, and make immediately clear by means of a tormented or sympathetic expression that there is something behind it (you need not explain what).

The fact that every TV season, as exceptions to prove the rule, there are one or two series about ‘real people’ (as real, that is, as the actors in a good movie), as opposed to programmes, caricatures and stereotypes, demonstrates that the present state of affairs is not really so bad. Too much reality would make television an unbearable medium, one you could watch for an hour a week at most. Documentary photography, which depicts a misery the viewer always knows has really taken place or is still going on, becomes depressing if you look at too much of it. If the audience wishes to engage enjoyably with a medium, a healthy dose of silliness is called for.

## Digital Emulation

The point of media use is not to remediate something old into something new or to make something new reappear in something old, but to allow the old and the new to hybridize into something unprecedented, and then go a step further so that one must reorganize one’s whole internal order in order to process the information streams, thereby becoming something unique and characteristic of oneself and the generation one is a part of. This notion brings us back to computers, and to the practice of emulation. Emulation is the translation of hardware into software. Emulation makes it possible to run not only every old and yet-to-be-developed PC program on the average computer, but also every version of Apple and Atari and their applications; everything for PlayStation, Nintendo, Vectrex, Gameboy; and the arcade and slot machine programs of the past, present and future – in short, all the hardware of every time and everything it ever was, is and will be capable of doing. Because the entire digital universe is made up of ones and zeros, it can be called forth on a single machine. The fact that there are different types of hardware is an expression of the economic boundaries between the different computer companies. These economic boundaries are a consequence not of the traits of the computer medium but of historical circumstances – from designers’ ambitions to business people’s need to earn money. Emulation is the translation of this accidental digital segmentation back into one universal code that can run on any hardware.

When emulation ruptures the artificial boundaries between hard and software companies it wipes out the economic and cultural history of the computer medium. Paradoxically enough, emulation is at the same time the only means computers have of safeguarding and unlocking their own history, what with one antique format after the other being lost. Emulating all the hardware and software of the past is the only way computer history can be written on the computer itself. Social and financial reality outside the computer do not appear in this version of history, but everything computers themselves were ever capable of does. In emulating games, the post-historical generation of computer fans can preserve all its past experiences and trances, now and for ever. And this answers the question of whether the computer is something totally new or just a collection of remediated older media.

## Beyond Media Theory

If it is true that even a computer’s hardware can be converted into software, and all other ‘media’ remediated on computers are nothing more than software packages, then there is no longer any point in speaking of media when we talk about computers. Nor does ‘new media’ make sense, even if the word ‘media’ is used in the singular despite being a plural form. Anyone wishing to understand the digital universe need not try to discover what exactly is new about various applications, and which of their functions have existed before in analogue form: the language of new media is written not in words or pictures but in zeros and ones. Looking around the computer’s digital universe, one sees hardware, software, networks, objects, environments, situations and spaces, but no media – for everything there communicates, and when everything is a means of communication, the word ‘medium’ loses its explanatory power. In the digital sphere, everything ultimately is or can be converted into software. History, too, is software – a network of databases along with a series of search engines. What the computer age needs is a unified software theory. That is beyond the reach of media theory.

## References

McLuhan, Marshall (1964) Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New York: New American Library, Times Mirror.

McLuhan, Marshall and Quentin Fiore (1968) The Medium is the Massage. New York: Touchstone.

Arjen Mulder is a media theorist, who works with V2\_ in Rotterdam, Holland. His publications include Adikno: Cracking the Movement (with Geert Lovink, Autonomedia, 1994), Media Archive (with Geert Lovink, Autonomedia, 1998), Book for the Electronic Arts (V2\_/De Balie, 2000) and Media Theory: Language, Image, Sound, Behavior (V2\_/Nai, 2003).

# Media Theory

Mark B.N. Hansen

Abstract Poised on the cusp between phenomenology and materiality, media institute a theoretical oscillation that promises to displace the empirical-transcendental divide that has structured western meditation on thinking, including the thinking of technics. Because media give the infrastructure conditioning thought without ceasing to be empirical (i.e. without functioning as a transcendental condition), they form the basis for a complex hermeneutics that cannot avoid the task of accounting for its unthematizable infrastructural condition. Tracing the oscillation constitutive of such a hermeneutics as it serves variously to constitute media theory in the work of critics from McLuhan to Kittler, from Leroi-Gourhan to Stiegler, my interrogation ultimately conceptualizes the medium as an environment for life: by giving concrete form to ‘epiphylogenesis’ (the exteriorization of human evolution), concrete media find their most ‘originary’ function not as artifacts but via their participation in human technogenesis (our co-evolution with technics).

Keywords information, meaning, mediation, technical life, technogenesis, temporality, transduction

‘M<sup>edia</sup> <sup>determine</sup> <sup>our</sup> <sup>situation.’</sup> <sup>So</sup> <sup>runs</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>opening</sup> <sup>line</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>Friedrich</sup> <sup>Kittler’s</sup>important and influential theoretical historicization of media, Gramophone, Film,<sub>Typewriter</sub> <sub>(1999).</sub> <sub>In</sub> <sub>supplementing</sub> <sub>Foucault’s</sub> <sub>concept</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>historical</sub> <sub>a</sub> <sub>priori</sub> <sub>with</sub> important and influential theoretical historicization of media, Gramophone, Film, Typewriter (1999). In supplementing Foucault's concept of the historical a priori with a concrete exploration of mediatic materiality, Kittler radicalizes the pre- or anti-hermeneutic dimensions of Foucault’s work in a way that bears decisive significance for contemporary media theory. Put schematically, Kittler’s critical position institutes a fundamental division between two types of approach to media: one that explores the experiential dimensions of media, including new media, and another that excavates the technical logics of media, logics which – for Kittler at least – are only contingently and impermanently synchronized with the ratios of human perception. What results from this division, itself the legacy of a certain (arguably contestable) assimilation of information theory, is an ineliminable oscillation between the materiality and the phenomenality of media. Without necessarily betokening the impasse of incompatibility, this oscillation does seem to impose the necessity for perspectival shift, such that the media critic must choose whether to foreground the infrastructure conditioning experience (media materiality) or the experience thereby realized.

This oscillation, I would like to suggest, comprises the most fundamental theoretical challenge posed by media to the cultural theorist. In one sense, it seems to constitute an updating for our media age of literary (and philosophical) deconstruction: like the many oscillations in Paul de Man (or Derrida) – oscillations of enumeration and metaphorization, of materiality and phenomenality, and so on – this properly mediatic oscillation seems to impose a constraining, but also enabling, frame on hermeneutic practice. In another sense, this oscillation can be understood as a new kind of transcendental condition for experience, though it is one that, because of its anchoring in concrete or material technicity, would appear to disturb traditional divisions between the transcendental and the empirical. In this way, as I have already suggested, it resembles Foucault’s historical a priori but also Gilles Deleuze’s transcendental empiricism: like these, it proffers the conditions for real experience without exceeding the domain of experience, without being, properly speaking, transcendental at all.