movements and of new frequency interferences. And while both emergences – human and machinic respectively – are only possible through the perturbation introduced by the other, each occurs solely through a reorganization that respects its constitutive principle of operational closure. While both follow the same basic rule – let movement create space – each does so in a manner entirely particular to it. This is equally to say that both retain the crucial investment in indirection. . . . Just as the sounds themselves do not directly cause changes in bodily movement, but influence the internal processing that yields such changes, visitor movement has an impact on the composition of the sound, and not simply on the sound as already existent, which is to say, on the event of frequency interference itself. In this way, the ‘autonomy’ of the digital sound-generating (compositional) system combines with the (distinct) autonomy of embodied enaction to support the complex interactivity produced by this work’ (Hansen, 2005: 161–2).

## Media Critique

Spuybroek and van der Heide offer Son-O-House as a critical intervention into our contemporary, globalized media system. Designed as a space of retreat from the dominant rhythms of the Eindhoven corridor, the hub of the Netherlands’ information technology industry, Son-O-House exploits the quasi-autonomy and material creativity of paper as an ‘analog computer and of the digital computer itself as a transformation of analog processes. (In so doing, incidentally, it lends support to Brian Massumi’s important claim for the ‘superiority of the analog’: by showing how the modes of co-operation of the digital and the analog – ‘transformative integration, translation and delay’ – are themselves analog operations, Massumi offers a different, but corroborating, account of the certain privilege embodiment enjoys over technics [Massumi, 2002: 143].) Taking advantage of the excess of the analog, of the excessive materiality of embodiment, Son-O-House introduces deferral and delay into the smooth flow of the industrialized paradigm of contemporary real-time media networks. It thereby exposes the complex and highly artifactual pre-programming underlying the model of real-time interaction that, as Bernard Stiegler has shown, is intended to produce docile viewers by, literally, highjacking and standardizing the time of their consciousness. What, in my opinion, makes Son-O-House so effective and so interesting as a critical intervention in the contemporary media system is its return to the domain of embodiment, and specifically, its explicit effort to exploit the superiority of the analog, together with the certain privilege of the human that it conveys: because it treats the indirection that is the hallmark of embodied enaction as the very source for deferral and delay, Son-O-House facilitates a reprogramming of interactivity that exploits the material creativity of human embodiment and that yields radically emergent human sensations and (following from the coupling at issue in the transductive dialectic) radically emergent machinic processes.

More important even for our purposes here, Son-O-House comprises a more general example of a (potential) politics of mediation, what I call (in a forthcoming book of the same title) the politics of presencing. At the heart of such a politics is an effort to exploit the possibilities offered by digital technology, and specifically new technical capacities for analysis and synthesis of images and sounds that afford access to and control over the contemporary mediation (or media artifactualization) of the flux of consciousness (which is to say, over the flux of life itself). This politics of presencing finds a point of origin in Stiegler’s analysis of contemporary real-time global media (with ‘cinema’ in the age of the internet being its prime exemplar); according to Stiegler cinema comprises the paradigmatic ‘temporal object’ in relation to which consciousness is able to take a distance from itself and reflect on its own temporal flow, the inner self-affection by time that, for western philosophy from Kant onward, constitutes the very content of ‘inner sense’ or ‘internal time consciousness’.

By updating Husserl’s account of time-consciousness – and specifically his identification of musical melody as an exemplary temporal object – Stiegler is able to demonstrate how the contemporary culture industries operate by controlling and directly capitalizing the time of consciousness itself. What emerges from Stiegler’s updating is the fact that today’s temporal object, while retaining its function as surrogate for the self-reflection that constitutes timeconsciousness, is incontestably a media artifact in the sense in which we have been using the term here. Unlike Husserl’s melody, cinema in the expanded scope intended by Stiegler is in every respect the object of a media system that aims precisely and in the most calculated manner imaginable to subordinate the subjective flux of thinking to pre-programmed and thoroughly standardized temporal patterns of media artifacts. In this sense – and here is where politics enters the scene – the contemporary temporal object/media artifact constitutes the very site for a struggle over who controls the flux of consciousness, or more precisely for a struggle over secondary retention and its selective (and thus determining) impact on primary retention or the production of new presencings. As Stiegler has shown, the contemporary culture industries strive to exercise and maintain a stranglehold on cultural memory (secondary memory) by offering pre-programmed, media artifactual memory objects (tertiary memories) that, because of their seduction and their ubiquity, work to erode the role of personal consciousness and to displace lived experience as the basis for secondary memory. This is precisely how (say) television functions today as a temporal object and as a cultural industry, and it is more and more how – so Stiegler argues – tradition is handed down to new consciousness, which is to say, as something that has not been lived by personal consciousness but is available for adoption – and increasingly required to be adopted – by that consciousness.

The possibility for a critical interruption of the media system thus concerns the question whether there is any way to resist this industrialization of consciousness. For if the culture industries offer media artifacts that succeed in displacing the role of personal memory on the production of new experiences, on new presencings, then they will have succeeded in controlling the future itself, to the extent at least that the future arises out of anticipations or expectations – protentions – which are themselves projections of secondary retention. Now it is easy to see how digital technologies – and precisely the capacities for analysis and syntheses of image and sound fluxes – might offer some hope here. For by facilitating personal control over the flux of time – whether this be the flux of the television in one’s living room (think of the potential of TIVO and other digital storage systems) or the flux of global broadband networks and informational databases – digital technologies empower personal secondary memory to reassert some control over the production of new presencings, and thus, over the projection of the future. More simply still: because they allow personal lived consciousness control over the flux of the media artifact that is its surrogate temporal object, they allow consciousness to live time (at least to some extent) according to its own rhythms. In sum, digital technologies restore some of the agency that personal lived consciousness has (apparently) lost over the past two centuries of rapidly accelerated technical evolution; by exemplifying the way that technologies function as correlates of embodied life (as our above account of the concept of mediation argued), digital technologies help personal consciousness intervene creatively and substantively in the production of presencing that constitutes – and constitutes as an essentially technical process – lived reality itself, including the lived reality of (constituting) consciousness.

This political deployment of digital media technologies raises two related historical differentiations that directly concern the topic and the future prospects of the culture industry. First, there is the question of the newness of new media, which is equally to say, its differentiation from some other form of media, be it ‘old’ media or simply media per se, media as an unmarked term. One thing our discussion thus far has demonstrated is that new media is not (and cannot be) new simply because of its technical specificity. If, as we have argued, technics is always correlated with the living, and the digital with an analog excess, analyses of new media like Lev Manovich’s that focus on the formalist or technicist dimensions of programmability and computation (and here one could equally include analyses of Kittler and his fellow German media scientists) remain positivist and extremely partial. Another way of making this point is to say, as we have said above, that the singular plural term new media cannot simply designate a new kind (or some new kinds) of media artifact(s), but rather must designate a new phase of human technogenesis, one that is perhaps catalyzed first and foremost by new technical capacities (precisely those just analyzed) and one that will become old or unmarked in its turn. The use of the term ‘new’ here is, of course, a way of marking the historicity specific to modernity, but at the same time, it is a way of marking the technical specificity of this modernist dialectic: as a techno-historical phenomenon and lineage, media simply is the perpetual, that is, repeated invention of the new.

A second historical differentiation – of new media from mass media – brings the openendedness, and thus the political potential, of this understanding of media as the perpetual invention of the new to bear on the fraught topic of the consciousness industry. Many recent critics have welcomed new media as a new infrastructure – and indeed a new media system – that would succeed mass media. Thus Félix Guattari (1995) speaks of a post-mass media culture that would tap the singularizing potential of digital media, and specifically, its actualization of living affects; similarly, Pierre Lévy (1998) develops an entire aesthetics out of the various concrete capacities digital technologies afford to intervene in and reappropriate mass cultural artifacts (the technique of sampling being a key example). While these accounts are important and do contribute to a critical media politics, they remain partial in the sense that they fail to grapple with the continuing force, indeed hegemony, exercised by the mass media today. In this respect, one of the merits of Stiegler’s analysis (and Stiegler, let us reiterate, also appreciates the critical potential of digital technologies) is its resistance to any utopian hope (or delusion) that new media would somehow displace and succeed mass media, that mass media would simply wither away.

What is perhaps most striking about Stiegler’s analysis is its success in diagnosing what he calls the ‘symbolic misery’ of contemporary cultural existence (or ‘subsistence’) without losing hope for the future. In this respect, I would suggest, Stiegler’s departure from the thoroughgoing pessimism of Adorno and Horkheimer’s famous critique of the culture industry is inspiring: for by treating the contemporary culture industries – or more precisely, the technologies that form their material infrastructure – as (potential) sources for the reassertion of personal control over secondary retention and the temporal flux, Stiegler does more than simply ‘postmodernize’ the grim picture painted by the German philosophers. Indeed, he bears witness to the deepest insight of the concept of human technogenesis, to the most profound dimension of the transductive coupling of the living and technics, at least as it concerns us today, in our current phase of dizzying technical development: namely, the risk that accompanies, and has always accompanied, human life as essentially-technical, as epiphylogenesis. In a way that goes far toward redeeming Walter Benjamin’s (1969) peculiar appreciation for mass culture and his insight into the tenuous balance between aesthetics and politics, Stiegler’s work shows – and is indeed premised on the very notion – that this risk is a risk that is simply not worth taking, but a risk that simply must be taken. The very hope for a viable future, the hope of keeping open the future, requires a struggle with today’s culture industries and with the media artifacts that they produce; and this struggle is a struggle for control over the source that is living singularity, which is to say, the source of the very transductive dialectic – between the living and technics – that constitutes the being of the human. That is why finding new ways to tap the creativity of human embodiment – to rediscover the singularity of embodied temporal fluxes – comprises the most pressing challenge, and the most inspiring task, for media theorists today.

## References

Adorno, Theodor (2001) Culture Industry, ed. J.M. Bernstein. New York and London: Routledge.

Adorno, Theodor and Max Horkheimer (1972) ‘The Culture Industry’, in Dialectic of Enlightenment. New York: Continuum.

Benjamin, Walter (1969) ‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction’, in Illuminations, trans. H. Zohn. New York: Schocken.

Guattari, Félix (1995) Chaosmosis: An Ethicoaesthetic Paradigm, trans. P. Bains and J. Pfannis. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.

Hansen, Mark B.N. (2004a) ‘The Time of Affect, or Bearing Witness to Life’, Critical Inquiry 30 (Spring): 584–626.

Hansen, Mark B.N. (2004b) New Philosophy for New Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Hansen, Mark B.N. (2005) ‘Embodiment: The Machinic and the Human’, pp. 150–65 in aRt&D: Research and Development in Art, ed. J. Brouwer et al. Rotterdam: V2\_Publishing/ NAi Publishers.

Hayles, N. Katherine (1999) How We Became Posthuman. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Heidegger, Martin (1982) ‘The Question Concerning Technology’, in The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays, trans. W. Lovitt. New York: Harper Perennial.

Kittler, Friedrich (1999) Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, trans. G. Winthrop-Young and M. Wutz. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Lévy, Pierre (1998) Becoming Virtual: Reality in the Digital Age, trans. R. Bononno. New York: Plenum Publishing.

McLuhan, Marshall (1964) Understanding Media. New York: New American Library, Times Mirror.

Manovich, Lev (1999) The Language of New Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Massumi, Brian (2002) ‘On the Superiority of the Analog’, in Parables for the Virtual. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Simondon, Gilbert (1989) Du Mode des objets techniques. Paris: Aubier.

Stiegler, Bernard (1996a) Technics and Time, Vol. 1: The Fault of Epimetheus, trans. R. Beardsworth and G. Collins. Stanford, CT: Stanford University Press.

Stiegler, Bernard (1996b) La Technique et le temps, 2: La Désorientation. Paris: Galilée.

Stiegler, Bernard (2001) La Technique et le temps, 3: Le Temps du cinéma et le problème du mal-être. Paris: Galilée.

Stiegler, Bernard (2004) La Misère symbolique, 1. Paris: Galilée.

Mark Hansen is Professor of English and Cinema/Media Studies at the University of Chicago.   
He is author of Embodying Technesis, New Philosophy for New Media, and Bodies in Code.