## ‘Life is not alive’

Adorno’s citation of Kürnberger’s pithy phrase is meant to capture the subjection of the living (here given an oddly humanist bent) to the inhuman practices of modern organized capital. Life then becomes a naturalized category for proposing points of resistance and disruption. Yet, as Antonio Negri, reworking Spinoza, argues, life can only perform this work if it is given determination in an ontological unit which undercuts any simple humanist subject. Much of the debate around Negri’s work has then turned on the extent to which his proposed unit – multitude – can mediate between the local production of subjects and the transhuman forces which it articulates. The plausibility of this proposition turns on a preparedness to accept the analogy of life as fundamental ontology with ‘lived experience’.

## Life is either origin or destination

The term ‘transhuman’ presents some interesting challenges. It may be taken as marking an appeal to monadism couched in vitalist terms – as expressed in the line of thought that links Spinoza, Nietzsche and Deleuze. In which case, ‘life’ is the ceaseless movement of becoming that finds a provisional form or arrangement of forces in ‘the human’ (an arrangement that finds its harshest critic in Antonin Artaud). Or, ‘life’ marks a progression which has its ultimate cosmic destiny in some form which is produced by the human in order to preserve its particular determination of ‘living’. The transhumanist movement expressed this eschatological notion with some force, albeit with little credulity.

## Life confers authority on she or he who speaks in its name

Science studies has analysed at length the means by which the contemporary life sciences claim privileged access to ‘life’ through technique and method (see esp. Clarke and Fujimura, 1992). Of particular importance is the array of technologies which make it possible to render visible ‘life’ in its most inchoate states (e.g. coloured 3-D foetal imaging techniques). The strangely beautiful images which result have been at the centre of public debate around abortion rights. What remains often mysterious is the rhetorical gesture whereby ‘life’ is not only claimed to be accurately represented but also thereby exhausted in the images which are only brought ‘to life’ by she or he who thereby claims authority to speak on their behalf.

## Life is precisely the condition of the determinable, and as such is not determinable in itself

Henri Bergson infamously proclaimed that a theory of knowledge would have to be erected upon a theory of life itself. This suggests that vitalism becomes the programme which distributes the basic categories of knowing. But, for Bergson, such a scheme would imply that life is, in itself, already given in its determinations. It is precisely because life is not and cannot be given in this way that it ought to be accorded centrality. As movement, as change, life eludes and serves as provocation to any given determination. It is the mobile horizon that presents itself to the ‘logic of solids’ that characterizes the intellect. To imagine that the movement which characterizes life can be stilled in such as a way as to be fully clothed in the latest epistemic garb is to share in the illusion of the child who believes they can catch smoke in their hands. Clap-trap.

## Reference

Clarke, A.E. and J.H. Fujimura (eds) (1992) The Right Tools for the Job: At Work in the Twentieth-century Life Sciences. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Steven D. Brown is Senior Lecturer in Psychology at Loughborough University and visiting professor in critical theory and psychology at Universiteit voor Humanistiek, NL. His work centres on social theory, organization and social psychology. Recent publications include The Social Psychology of Experience: Studies in Remembering and Forgetting (with David Middleton, Sage, 2005) and Psychology without Foundations (with Paul Stenner, Sage, forthcoming).

# Biopolitics

John Marks

Keywords bioethics, biology, biopolitics,

biotechnology, eugenics, life, molecular biology

oucault introduces the notion of biopolitics in The History of Sexuality (1978). Here, it is essentially a complement to his earlier formulation of discipline, whereby sovereign rule – the ultimate right to take life – is increasingly overlaid by a new focus on the life processes of the population. From the 18th century onwards, biological existence is no longer a neutral, unchanging substrate upon which political existence is superimposed. Consequently, a new politics emerges which relates to what it means to be a living species in a living world: biology is drawn into the domain of power and knowledge. The establishment of norms, hierarchies and statistical analyses gain in importance in relation to the creation of legal frameworks. Rather than exercising its sovereign right to curtail life in periodic, spectacular manner, politics focuses increasingly on the fostering and direction – the government – of life.

Biopolitical processes as defined by Foucault have become part of the fabric of everyday reality in advanced capitalist economies, and the industrial era was in some senses characterized by the growth of a biopolitical consensus, whereby the norms of welfare – health, education and various forms of insurance – were articulated with the demands of mass, organized industrial and commercial activity. Today, the globalization of capital means that previous biopolitical norms, such as the rights attached to labour, including the duration of working life and pension rights, are being reassessed. It is in this context that Hardt and Negri (2000) have recently proposed an analysis of the ways in which power in contemporary post-disciplinary ‘control’ societies has become entirely biopolitical. In their reading, power is expressed as a form of control that pervades the entire social field. However, at the same time, they argue that this very pervasiveness means that resistance is no longer marginal, but rather multiple and active. For Hardt and Negri, the positive focus of potential for resistance to biopolitical control resides in the multitude: a widespread attitude of dissent and refusal in reaction to biopower’s grip on all aspects of life.

The development of the industrial biopolitical dispositif which articulated labour, welfare and capital was also, of course, punctuated by significant periods of international armed conflict. These periods of conflict, and most particularly the Firstand Second World Wars, highlighted the genocidal counter-tendencies of biopolitics. Materially and ideologically these wars were fought not only by armies, but by populations. In this sense, the Second World War in particular was characterized by two highly significant aspects of biopower, which remain as spectres haunting the construction of viable future global biopolitical structures: the drift to ‘total war’ pitting population against population, and the elevation of eugenics to a brutally racist state policy.

Leaving aside the complex issue of war, which would necessitate a lengthy discussion in its own right, we will concentrate here on the issue of eugenics in an era of biotechnology: an issue which is implicit but not developed in Foucault’s work. In the postwar era, developments in medicine and molecular biology have led to fears that eugenics might make a return in new forms. In reaction to this, the conceptual resources of thinking on biopolitics have been seen by many as a useful analytical tool for looking in particular at the ways in which the postwar development of molecular biology has provided new pathways for politics to penetrate the material components of ‘life’. From the discovery of the double-helix structure of DNA in 1953 onwards, molecular biology has claimed to render not only visible, but also accessible, the code of life itself: a new dimension of matter that appears to be increasingly available for observation and manipulation. In this sense, biotechnological issues such as gene therapy, preimplantation and pre-natal genetic screening, stem-cell research and therapeutic cloning, the widespread corporate patenting of genes, the Human Genome Project, and the general economic issue of data control and access in the light of genomics and bioinformatics, all raise significant biopolitical issues.

In the light of these technologies, there is an increasing sense that we are entering an era of biopolitical problematization. This era is characterized not only by an uncertainty over the way in which these new technologies reconfigure the natural world epistemologically and even ontologically, but also by what Paul Rabinow (1999) identifies as a ‘purgatorial’ dimension. By this, he means the fact that most of these technologies promise much more in terms of material interventions that they can currently deliver. The possibilities for genetic therapy are currently extremely limited, and it is still the case that pre-natal and pre-implantation genetic testing can only screen for a very small number of genetic ‘abnormalities’. In this sense, as Rabinow indicates, the biopolitical stakes are uncertain: there is a widespread sense that we may be on the verge of significant shifts in our ability to manipulate and transform life, combined with the knowledge that we do not yet know the limits of these new capacities.

Following the French political and social theorist Pierre-André Taguieff (2001), three areas of what we might call biopolitical anxiety are raised by these areas of activity, all of which develop out of the molecular biology revolution. First, there is the widespread fear of the gradual reappearance of eugenic practices and eugenic approaches to social ‘deviancy’. As far as human reproduction is concerned, it is claimed that the gradual increase in genetic testing may be leading to a new, ‘liberal’ eugenics led by consumer choice. This new eugenics may not correspond to the state-controlled racist eugenics of National Socialism, but it nonetheless threatens to create a radical new set of social divisions. According to such scenarios, social groupings that distinguish between genetically enhanced and non-enhanced individuals will revive the racist rationale of previous eugenic projects.

Second, related to anxieties over eugenics, there is a widespread concern to defend the integrity of the ‘human’ in the face of biotechnological advances: in other words, the attempt to prevent a key component of life – namely DNA – from being subject to modification and manipulation. From a religious standpoint, this determination to maintain what we might consider as the ‘genetic contingency’ – or, as popular parlance would have it, the ‘genetic lottery’ – of human reproduction is conventionally expressed as a defence of the sacred nature of human life and procreation. From a secular perspective, as in the recent work of Jürgen Habermas, this suspicion of genetic testing and the biotechnological spectre of so-called ‘designer babies’ is expressed as a defence of human dignity. Drawing on Arendt, Habermas presents the contingent nature of human birth, undetermined by genetic manipulation driven by parental choice or societal/familial expediency, as the metonymic basis for the fundamental existential human freedom to act. The prospect of a ‘posthuman’ future is also seen as a threat by those conservatives, such as Fukuyama (2003), who are attached to what they see as an essential and relatively unchanging ‘human nature’.

Finally, there is the apocalyptic fear that the collective human genetic inheritance – the germ line – might be irreparably damaged by genetic modification or manipulation. As far as the natural world is concerned, this anxiety finds expression in the fear that the combined effect of genetic patenting and genetically modified crops might be, at the very least, a significant reduction in levels of biodiversity. The American political and scientific commentator Jeremy Rifkin (1999) has talked of a process of ‘genetic enclosure’ that is analogous to the land enclosures of the 17th century. It should be pointed out that the alarm and anxiety occasioned by the possibilities for molecular intervention and biopolitical control in contemporary societies is not universally shared. Following sociobiology in the 1970s, subsequent ‘post-humanist’ inheritors of this strand of thinking such as Lee M. Silver (1997) have posited a more genetically ‘efficient’ bio-engineered human future. Silver seizes upon the opportunities offered by biotechnology to achieve control of human evolution, and predicts a future version of American society in which 10 percent of the population – the ‘GenRich’ group – will be bioengineered individuals, constructed from entirely synthetic genes. This genetic elite will control all aspects of society, while the remaining 90 percent of ‘naturals’ will have a subservient social role.

As Eugene Thacker (2004) points out, much current bioethical deliberation on the biopolitical issues raised by biotechnological advances is concerned with the legal and ‘philosophical’ definition of categories such as ‘potential life’, as well as the sociological and anthropological analysis of issues such as risk assessment in the handling of genetic information. However, he also points to a form of bioethics that is orientated more towards critique and problematization, and which is, consequently, more genuinely philosophical in approach. Thacker argues that this ‘cultural bioethics’, as he calls it, is concerned with fundamental epistemological and ontological questions. It asks, for example, whether the body as a subject can be made commensurable with the body as an object of experiment, diagnosis or commodification. It considers the ontological status of the cyborg and the relation of life and the body to information. Thacker goes on to suggest that the conventional use of a version of Kant’s categorical imperative as a basis for bioethics leads to the construction of somewhat rigid ethical protocols. In contrast to this, he draws attention to what he calls ‘bioethics’ – and what others have labelled a ‘transhuman’ approach to bioethics – that takes Spinoza’s treatise The Ethics as its starting point, rather than Kant’s Metaphysics of Morals. Taking its cue from Deleuze’s reading of Spinoza, bioethics asks a threefold question in relation to the ‘body’: what is a body?; what can a body do?; what can you do to a body? Whereas bioethics strives to define a morality that can be applied to the body as a discrete, quantifiable entity with relatively well-defined boundaries, bio-ethics conceives of bodies as much less stable and quantifiable entities and attempts to assess ethically the affective relations between bodies.

## References

Foucault, M. (1978) The History of Sexuality: The Birth of the Prison. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

Fukuyama, F. (2003) Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology Revolution. London: Phoenix.

Habermas, J. (2003) The Future of Human Nature. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Hardt, M. and A. Negri (2000) Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Rabinow, P. (1999) French DNA: Trouble in Purgatory. London: University of Chicago Press.

Rifkin, J. (1999) The Biotech Century: How Genetic Commerce Will Change the World. London: Phoenix.

Silver, L.M. (1997) Remaking Eden: Cloning and Beyond in a Brave New World. New York: Avon Books.

Taguieff, P.-A. (2001) Du progès: biographie d’une utopie moderne. Paris: EJL.

Thacker, E. (2004) Biomedia. London: University of Minnesota Press.

John Marks is Reader in Critical Theory at Nottingham Trent University. He has written on Deleuze and Foucault, and he is currently working on projects dealing with the philosophical and cultural mediation of molecular biology.

# Experience

Scott Lash

Abstract For Kant, experience is epistemological, whereas ontological experience (Gadamer) is in the first instance poetic and Romantic (Schiller, Goethe). In contradistinction to Kantian Erfahrung, it is most often called Erlebniß. We note further that Erfahrung is cognitive experience while Erlebnis is also aesthetic experience. Dilthey and Husserl understand experience pertaining to knowledge through Erlebnis. In epistemological or classificatory knowledge the parts add up to the whole. Ontological knowledge instead is holistic in which the whole is present in each of the parts. In ontological knowledge we can know things themselves. Ontological experience is particularly important for global knowledge. This is because knowing another culture is not reducible to a culture’s qualities or predicates. Culture as a way or form of life is a thingitself. A third type of experience is informational experience. This collapses the epistemological into the ontological and is also increasingly present today. This sort of experience of non-linear information theory can account for the experience of societies, of individual humans, of digital media, of neuronal networks, of phenotypes, urban forms, of cellular organisms, or of inorganic matter.

Keywords aesthetics, classification, creation, destruction, epistemology, Erfahrung, Erlebnis, information, knowledge, ontology, predicates

## Experience

Most commonly encountered in everyday life, experience is spoken of in terms of travel, tourism, adventure. Though also of course we say that a doctor is well qualified and point to his or her many years of ‘experience’. We want prime ministers who already have had some ministerial experience. The first type of experience is a question of undergoing one-off encounters of intense stimulation. In Germany indeed it has been argued that with the decline of tradition and the influence of narratives passing from one generation to another that we live indeed in an Erlebnisgesellschaft, the ‘experience society’, in which the whole of social life has become increasingly a question of searching for one exhilarating experience after the next. But when we speak of a player who has had long experience in international football we refer to a more empirical experience, one in which the person has encountered a number, a series of cases of a relatively similar type. This second type of experience has more to do with learning; with tradition; with practical knowledge. These are the everyday usages of these terms. But these throw some light on the more theoretical considerations that follow.

The idea of experience as most commonly encountered in the social and human sciences is through, for example, ‘gendered experience’ or ‘ethnic experience’. This will often come in terms of a general criticism of objectivity in the social sciences. This would be typically twoedged. It would presume that perhaps it is not objective facts that we study, but experience. It would presume that we should study the experience of people whose situation differs from the middle-class, white male norm. Hence to study working-class experience is different from collecting a random sample of facts from a population. To focus on experience seems to point to a certain method: perhaps to qualitative, ethnographic or phenomenological method, rather than to positivism. Here we want to get a grasp of actual experience that we cannot seem to tap with statistical data from surveys. Second, this experience has to do with not just the object of study but with the human scientific observer. It points to the relevance of the more or less concrete experience of the observer. Thus there is a literature on ‘standpoint epistemology’. This is largely from the late 1980s and early 1990s. At stake mainly is feminist epistemology. This could be compared with earlier epistemologies based in social class from Marxism. This is a criticism of the objective observer, and goes part way towards embedding this observer in a set of social relations. But it only goes part way. That is because there are only a few standpoints that are discussed: class, for example, or ethnicity, or gender. Further, the observer is only very slightly embedded in social relations. It is as if instead of one sort of objectivist positivism, we now have, say, three somewhat less objectivist positivisms: working class, feminist and ethnic positivisms. Surely it makes more sense much more fully to embed our observer in forms of social and cultural and, today, media and informational life. The human sciences could learn from models from the natural sciences starting with Einstein in which the observer is already situated in a system.

In philosophy, discussions of the idea of experience often start with Kant, and in particular Kant’s departure from empiricism. We will address Kant in some detail, because it is at the root of knowledge through classification (Durkheim) as well as knowledge through ideal types (Weber). Kant’s notion of experience comes from The Critique of Pure Reason. Kant began his academic career in mathematics and physics and at stake is primarily experience in physics. Kant was first and foremost influenced by Newton as he entered his Critical period. This was his major break with metaphysics. It is a major move away from Leibniz’s metaphysics and towards Newton’s physics. Kant’s knowledge in the First Critique is physical knowledge. Kantian experience is only of phenomena or appearances. More ontological experience must also be of noumena or things themselves. Kant’s phenomenal experience and knowledge presumes a priori categories. It presumes also the importance of empirical data. We recall that this is somehow a middle ground between Cartesian rationalism and Lockean empiricism. Kant’s ‘categories’ are categories of logic, taken from Aristotelian logic. They presume a unified subject of experience. This is not an empirical subject. It is an a priori condition, not an empirical psychological subject. This a priori condition is Kant’s ‘transcendental unity of apperception’. Nothing could be less embedded than this notion of experience.

Kant asks the question in his first Critique: How is experience possible? Wie ist die Erfahrung möglich? By this he means how is empirical knowledge possible. ‘Empiricism’ in German is translated as Erfahrungswissenschaft. The idea of ‘experience’ here comes from Hume. Kant wants radically to revise Hume’s notion. For Hume our knowledge is far from certain. Kant assumes that we have knowledge. He asks what are its conditions of possibility.

For Hume experience is largely sensory. We have sense impressions. They are feelings. Ideas are just pale impressions of feelings (Hume). For Kant it is more a question of the senses and the intellect. Knowledge in Humean Erfahrungswissenschaft is inductive knowledge, a posteriori knowledge. And Erfahrungsbeweiß is a posteriori proof. Erfahrung is empirical knowledge in philosophy. Erfahrungsgemäß means empirically in philosophy, or more practically from previous experience. Kant wants knowledge that is not just a posteriori but a priori. Empiricism’s judgements are a posteriori. Kant gives us a priori judgements as in rationalism. Yet whereas rationalism’s judgements are ‘analytic’, Kant’s also deal with the empirical material and are hence ‘synthetic’. At stake for Kant in experience and knowledge is the intelligibility of objects. For Kant, Humean sense impressions are not sufficient for such intelligibility. For such intelligibility Kant needs to introduce the intellect, and more specifically the faculty of the understanding. This faculty, which engages in the acts of judgement that comprise knowledge (and experience), is the (most important) a priori for the intelligibility of objects. The other main a priori conditions were the representations of time and space. Note, these are time and space as representations or appearances rather than time and space in themselves. It is only later with the radical break with Kant of phenomenology and vitalism – in Nietzsche, Husserl, Bergson and Heidegger – that time and space in themselves come to replace their representations or forms.

There have been many categorical theories of knowledge. In each case the categories deal with predicates of things that such theories presume are fundamental to our thought about objects. These predicates correspond to Kant’s categories, and which he calls the forms or functions of judgement. They abstract from the content of a given object and through this abstraction make the object intelligible. Yet the various representations of the categories must come under another function be given unity in a judgement. This synthetic unity comes from the transcendental unity of apperception. Hume spoke of his sense impressions in terms of content. Kant’s categories function in the abstraction of form from such content. In this sense, for Hume there is no important distinction between appearances and content: between appearances and things-themselves. It is only when experience (and knowledge) starts to presume such representations are necessary for object-intelligibility that we get this dichotomy. We note also that not just the categories, but time and space too are such predicates. Thus objects have time and space as attributes or qualities, rather than material or social objects having their own intrinsic temporality and spatiality. What are for Kant – as well as for the classificatory knowledge of Durkheim and Weber – epistemological predicates become for phenomenology and hermeneutics ontological structures: that is, intrinsic to the (social) things themselves.

In terms of the discussions of the problem of knowledge in this volume, we note that although the Kantian categories are not themselves classifications, they presume that we know through classifying. This is why in metaphysical knowledge of Leibniz, the subject includes its predicates; that is, the substance or thing includes its qualities. So Leibniz is saying we can have knowledge of things. Kant turns against such metaphysics in his categories. The categories correspond to the thing’s predicates. The thing no longer includes its predicates, but categorical thought abstracts the predicates from the thing. We know through such abstraction. The predicates of the thing are its appearances. For Kant this is what knowledge and experience are. Experience is only intelligible under these conditions. We know through acts of judgement. In each of these acts a number of categories as forms or functions are in play. These are unified by another function that Kant calls the transcendental unity of apperception. It is the category that coordinates and looks after the other categories.

Classificatory knowledge consists of bringing particulars under universals. Indeed Durkheim and Mauss, in their Primitive Classifications, sketch an evolution starting from the most embedded of primitive, totemic categories of classification, that become increasingly abstract, eventually leading to the Kantian categories. Classificatory knowledge is also knowledge through the predicates of the objects. We abstract these predicates from these (this time, social) objects. Not just Durkheim’s classifications but Weber’s ideal types work through such abstraction.

What Gadamer calls epistemology works through such abstraction. Kant’s experience is thus epistemological experience. Ontological experience (Gadamer) is in the first instance poetic and from Romanticism (Schiller, Goethe). It is most often called Erlebniß and in contradistinction to Kantian Erfahrung. We note further that Erfahrung is cognitive experience while Erlebnis is also aesthetic experience. The poet Friedrich Schiller (1759–1805) may have been the first to contrast Erfahrung and Erlebnis. This is a departure from the Kantian Enlightenment, musing that modern man is no longer capable of Erlebniß. Erlebniß here is metaphysical experience, standing in contrast to Erfahrung’s physicality. Wilhelm Dilthey puts a more systematic idea of Erlebniß forth in the context of Lebensgefühl. We note here too that whereas Erfahrung presumes that subjectivity is distanced from the object, Erlebnis has also to do with feeling. Even the verb erfahren means to learn as if to accumulate knowledge, to come to know, etc. But not erleben. Erfahren has fahren in it like ‘Mit dem Zug zu fahren’. To travel, to drive, to go a distance. Erlebnis has life in it. Erlebnis resembles Joycean epiphany. At stake is always the transcendental in the transitory. Erlebnis has something of the event (Ereignis) to it. ‘Event’ happens with Elebnis. It is like having an aesthetic experience. Or having indeed a religious experience. Normally there is no event with Erfahrung: only an act of abstraction, an act of judgement.

Dilthey and Husserl also understand experience pertaining to knowledge through Erlebnis. Their – and Heidegger’s and Gadamer’s – ontological knowledge is one of the main forms of knowledge at stake in this volume of the New Encyclopaedia Project. In epistemological or classificatory knowledge the parts add up to the whole. Ontological knowledge instead is holistic – and the antonym of holism is atomism – in which the whole is present in each of the parts. In ontological knowledge we can know things themselves. Ontological experience is particularly important for global knowledge. This is because knowing another culture is not reducible to a culture’s qualities or predicates. Culture as a way or form of life is a thing-itself. We lose through abstraction. A third type of experience and knowledge, which we will address briefly below, is informational experience. This collapses the epistemological into the ontological and is also increasingly present today. The point is, though, that classificatory knowledge is not ‘over’ in any sense. It has been with us for millennia. And it will continue along with the other two types of experience and global knowledge that we address in this entry and this volume.

For cultural theory today it is perhaps Walter Benjamin who has most influentially focused on experience. Benjamin has not one but two theories of experience. Both are aesthetic and a question of Erlebniß. Benjamin’s earlier, ‘metaphysical’ theory of experience is very much influenced by Goethe but also by the cabbalistic German language philosopher Hamann. Its keywords are creativity and creation. His second, ‘materialist’ theory of experience is influenced by Baudelaire, Marx and surrealism. It is based not on creativity but destruction and not on Erlebnis but Shockerlebnis. Both are very anti-Kantian. Benjamin’s first notion of experience owes something to Goethe’s colour doctrine. Goethe’s doctrine was critical of Newton on colour. For Newton there is the generation of colour in a spectrum through the refraction of a ray of light through a small pinhole. Goethe instead generated a spectrum through a prism, the point of whose triangle he held up to a horizontal light-dark boundary. Whereas Newton’s spectrum was linear, Goethe’s was circular, the two ends joined by a new colour. Goethe also focused on feelings, on our emotional relation with colour. For him we experience, for example, red as the darkening of light and blue as the lightening of dark. We should note that Chinese film directors such as Tian Zhuangzhuang have underscored the more abstract significance on the level of feeling in regard to colour in China in comparison with the Western rationalism of colour as quality. The early Benjamin was influenced by the notion of creation as generative of singularities that was indebted to a more general Goethean poetic. This was central to Benjamin’s youthful notion of experience. Here he looks at creation in Genesis in the Old Testament. He points to a paradisiacal language of the name, of the proper name. In this God created man as the naming animal. Man names through proper nouns: all things that he names are thus singularities. This was man’s task as God assigned it: it was also the ‘task of the translator’. This also is indeed poetic language. With the Fall, man’s language becomes dominated by the common noun, i.e. experience after the fall comes through classification by such common nouns and judgement. Not only had man fallen into a language of common nouns and judgement but also into a Babel of chatter, of meaninglessness, of tabloid journalism. This was previously remarked upon by Kierkegaard and later by Heidegger. Any hope of redemption is Messianic, but is at the same time through poetic language, a poetic language of singularities. This is classical Erlebnis. It is quintessentially hermeneutic. It connects not only to Goethe’s poetics, but to Dilthey’s idea of Erlebnis. Gadamer calls this sort of ontological experience that is also aesthetic, paradoxically, not Erlebnis but Erfahrung. He seems to do so because of his own focus on slower historical processes and tarrying. This is also very much Heidegger’s idea of aesthetic experience in ‘The Origins of the Work of Art’. Even when disentangled from the religious, it is ‘authentic’ and somehow also ‘natural’, hence the strong notions of the unfolding of nature and our subjective experience thereof in Goethe and the centrality of not just ‘world’, but ‘earth’ in Heidegger on art.

The later Benjamin radically breaks with this. This is particularly well defined in his seminal essay ‘Karl Kraus’. Now we move from aesthetics of creation to an aesthetics of destruction. Goethe and the Genesis are displaced by Baudelaire, Aragon and Bataille. The singularity and naming language of the Genesis and Romantic poetry is rediscovered in the poètes maudits and the unconscious of the surrealist dream. German authenticity – Benjamin despised Wagner and Heidegger – was displaced by French irony. The metaphysical Benjamin was becoming materialist. He contrasts thus Kraus’s ‘materialist humanism’ with classical humanism. Materialist humanism promotes less nature than the technological destruction of nature. This is no longer an aesthetics of nature, but now an aesthetics of technology. Benjamin says we are now no longer on the side of the natural iron ore but on the side of the foundry that destroys the iron ore and yet makes something else. Hence art, and the work of art, also becomes ‘proletarian’. This is the work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction: it is also Baudelaire’s flaneur. It is indeed shock experience, whether experienced by the disorienting shocks of the assembly line or the close-ups and jarring images of the cinema. Chatter (Geschwatz), which was once reviled as part of the Fall from Paradise, now becomes the object of the poet’s and theorist’s gaze. The advertisement, previously reviled, becomes more important than the treatise or the classical critic as a prism onto the social world. Benjamin and Baudelaire and surrealism thus work through the cast-offs and disused material that was previously relegated to chatter. This is not an aesthetics of pure destruction because a kind of redemption will come through this otherwise discarded matter. This of course is Benjamin’s dialectical materialism. Through the everyday of discarded matter, he will open out onto a transcendental (and dialectical materialism was of course always about the generation of the transcendental from the material). Now, however, the transcendental is not so much heavenly or supernal as it is infernal à la Sade and Baudelaire. Indeed it is animal as much as human: in his performances Karl Kraus’s voice, Benjamin observes, descended into an animal humming: Paul Klee’s Angelus Novus was also as much animal as man. It is this notion of ‘shock experience’ that speaks most directly to contemporaries.

A third, informational and post-human idea of experience can be found in the work of and Francisco Varela – and the non-linear systems sociology of Niklas Luhmann. For all of the thinkers addressed in this entry experience is a mode of sense-making. Experience is surely a mode of sense-making for Varela. But such sense-making is informational. What we see in Luhmann and Varela is a sort of neo-phenomenology or post-phenomenology. It is a phenomenology of non-linear systems. For Husserl the phenomenological ‘act’ is an intentional Erlebniss. Intentionality means consciousness is of an object. This breaks radically with Kantian experience. Husserlian experience is intentional; Kantian experience is as it were unintentional. For Kantian experience the object is intelligible only with respect to the object’s predicates or qualities. These are only appearances, and the object appears as intelligible not in terms of its content but in terms of these forms. Husserl forgets the a priori categories, the forms and the predicates. We will not understand experience, he says, if we look at these.