Experience becomes intentional for us precisely in our latching onto the content of the thing itself. This is not necessarily the thing’s deep ontology but its content, i.e. the substance or subject that has the predicates. Through bracketing the a prioris, through bracketing the predicates, we perform the phenomenological reduction and are able to describe the structure of experience. Now the reality of the object is not a mere appearance, but it unfolds itself in the phenomenon. Further, Husserl speaks of an ‘inner temporality of Erlebnisse’. This converges with Bergsonian time, as Alfred Schutz noted. This inner temporality may have the overlay of past, present and future and may be a stream or a flow of consciousness. But what concerns us here is how this inner temporality of what Husserl calls ‘internal time consciousness’ comprises Erlebnisse. Or of experiences that consciousness has. In inner time consciousness experiences follow one another. No distinction can be made between these successive experiences unless they are different than one another. So no Erlebnis without difference. This makes intuitive sense too. That is, even if it is the ‘same’ object, each Erlebniss must have change in its Bewußtseinzusammenhang, i.e. its consciousness-relation.

Now Luhmann and Varela will read Husserl’s intentionality as a sort of ‘structural coupling’ of subject and thing. They will replace this with the structural coupling of system and environment. With Varela and Luhmann, Husserl’s consciousness is replaced by system and the object by its environment, perhaps another system with which it structurally couples. It is now information that is taken in. This is an informationalization of experience and a moving away of it from the human subject towards post-human experience. Every structural coupling is like a Husserlian Erlebnis. Indeed systems must ‘bracket’ dealing with one another via their predicates in order structurally to couple. A system couples with its environment in such acts of bracketing that involve ‘operational closure’. A system only notices and takes in information that is different. Hence again we see the principle of difference. For Varela, there are neuronal patterns, that is patterns of action, of networks, of brain cells. This is a brain no longer composed in a rigid part/whole relation, but a bit of a brain without organs, a molecular brain. No longer is it the hippocampus, the thalamus, etc. that counts but more firing-patterns, networks of plastic, networks of brain cells. This is a sort of a cellular neuro-psychology replacing the more organic one of the 1960s and before. It’s all about neurons. Yet our experience is something we can describe. And in Varela’s ‘neurophenomenology’ experience is on not the neural but the phenomenological level. How do these firing-patterns of neuronal networks map onto specific experiences that the subject can describe? Varela studied selection and structural coupling in computer designed single cell automata. These systems are operationally closed and comprise histories of structural coupling. These histories determine how these automata select from the environment. Yet Varela does not hold that such automata, that are so much simpler than living cells, have experience. In many ways Varela’s and Luhmann’s operational closure applies to humans, non-humans and machines.

This is often a question of the co-evolution of systems. Here each system processes the information – as differences; it, as it were, absorbs from the other system. Each of the systems is ‘open’ insofar as it is self-organizing and coupling with other systems. Yet such coupling takes place through operational closure. Each system also couples with the other on a deep structural level, that is, on the level of information generation, whether this generation is algorithmic or involves another form of coding. This sort of experience of non-linear information theory can account for the experience of societies, of individual humans, of digital media, of neuronal networks, of phenotypes, of urban forms, of cellular organisms, or of inorganic matter. Such a notion of experience is central to complexity theory and will be increasingly pervasive in the global information society.

## References

Benjamin, W. (1979) ‘Karl Kraus’, pp. 258–92 in W. Benjamin, One Way Street. London: Verso.

Benjamin, W. (1979) ‘On Language as Such and the Language of Man’, pp. 107–23 in W. Benjamin, One Way Street. London: Verso.

Durkheim, E. and M. Mauss (1963) Primitive Classifications. London: Routledge.

Gadamer, H.-G. (1976) ‘The Phenomenological Movement’, pp. 130–81 in H.-G. Gadamer, Philosophical Hermeneutics. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Heidegger, M. (1971) ‘The Origin of the Work of Art’, pp. 15–88 in M. Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought. New York: Harper and Row.

Husserl, E. (1991) On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Scott Lash is Professor of Sociology and Director for the Centre for Cultural Studies at Goldsmiths College, University of London. His most recent books are Critique of Information (Sage, 2002) and Another Modernity, A Different Rationality (Blackwell, 1999).

# Lifeworld

Austin Harrington

Keywords globalization, humanism, life, lifeworld, post-humanism, social theory

‘L<sup>ifeworld’</sup> <sup>entered</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>vocabulary</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>20th-</sup>century philosophy and social theory with century philosophy and social theory with the publication of Edmund Husserl’s The Crisis of the European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology in 1936, although Alfred Schütz earlier adopted the term following correspondence with Husserl in the early 1930s in his Der sinnhafte Aufbau der sozialen Welt of 1932 (translated in English in 1967 as The Phenomenology of the Social World) (see Srubar, 1988). By the ‘lifeworld’, Husserl meant the tissue of intersubjective background understandings that first makes scientific objectifying knowledge meaningful. In Husserl’s thesis, the lifeworld had become occluded under the impact of the norms of naturalistic positive science set down by Galileo and Descartes in the 17th century and enshrined in Leibniz’s project of mathesis universalis. This threatened to fuel the general disaffection from all rational critical inquiry unleashed by fascism in Europe in the 1930s.

For Schütz the lifeworld was the takenfor-granted ‘common-sense reality’ of the social world as it is lived by ordinary individuals. In the daily course of their lives individuals produce typifying constructs of their fellows’ actions which, though frequently faulty or short-sighted, are the only legitimate basis on which social scientists can advance toward what Max Weber called genuinely ‘meaningfully adequate’ explanatory accounts of social action and belief.

The concept of the lifeworld returned in later 20th-century social theory in Jürgen Habermas’s uneasy fusion of phenomenological philosophy and

Parsonian functionalist theory in The Theory of Communicative Action of 1981. The lifeworld then became the world of everyday communicative interaction which gradually differentiates over the course of processes of social evolution into distinct rationally articulated spheres of ‘cultural validity’. When the spheres of moralpractical and aesthetic-expressive communication start to become narrowed down by the sphere of science and technology under conditions of advanced capitalist administration, the lifeworld is threatened with ‘colonization by the system’. Instrumental, purpose-rational imperatives and expedients operative in the institutions of the market, the state, the juridical system and other expert apparatuses invade and disfigure that space of social antagonism whose only sources of legitimate resolution lie in inclusive uncoerced dialogue in the public sphere.

Today we are invited to raise numerous questions about the currency of this conception of the lifeworld. In what sense is the concept a ‘transcendental’ one, as Husserl held, or a ‘quasi-transcendental’ one, as Habermas sometimes writes? Does ‘transcendental’ imply ‘universal’, i.e. invariance across cultures? How is the life of the lifeworld to be rethought after the biotechnological revolutions of our present age? How is the world of the lifeworld to be rethought after globalization? Can phenomenological philosophy address a virtualized world of near-ubiquitous digitalized information systems? Is the notion now a redundant ‘old European’ naivety – after post-structuralism, postmodernism, post-colonialism, post-humanism? Or could the notion in fact gesture in some way toward the ultimate question to which all these issues seem to return: the possibility of life and the possibility of world?

European vitalist philosophers of the turn of the 19th century thought of life as the a priori horizon of all conscious experience. Not Kant’s ‘concepts and categories of the Understanding’ but life made all experience of the world and all worldhood possible. For Nietzsche, Dilthey, Simmel and Bergson, the world was given to the ego only in the flow of life and its temporal historical continuum. But today we must ask: whose world, and whose ego? What happens when the cognizer moves from one (‘transcendental’) lifeworld to many (‘quasi-’ or ‘semi-transcendental’) lifeworlds – from ‘our lifeworld to ‘their’ lifeworld, and back? How can a lifeworld be both empirical object and transcendental precondition of our ability to cognize it? And how is the lifeworld given in a world mediated by writing, television, the Internet and a dozen other means of electronic simulation? What might be the lifeworld, say, of the Amazonian tribesperson who lives from the fruits of the forest, uses a mobile phone and accesses the Internet? Derrida’s worries about Lévi-Strauss’s worries about lost originarity in the Tristes Tropiques here seem more pertinent than ever (see Derrida, 1967).

German anthropological philosophers of the mid-20th century saw the essence of human existence as revolving around what they called ‘worldopenness’. For Helmut Plessner (1950) the rational human animal was an ‘ex-centric’ animal, one capable of standing outside of its centred embodied being and comprehending other worlds from which it was physically absent. Logos implied consciousness, memory, imagination, creativity, linguistic inventiveness, freedom from simple stimulus-and-response – all of what Wilhelm von Humboldt called energeia or what Chomsky used to call ‘generative grammar’: the child’s ability to understand and to produce syntactic strings never previously registered or uttered. Contemporary thinking encourages us to be sceptical of such essentialism after the revolutions in neuroscience and information technology and the practical penetration of a great many people’s everyday lifeworlds by artificial intelligence, intelligent medical prostheses and the possibility of genetic cloning. The interventions of philosophical anti-humanists from Foucault and Deleuze to Luhmann, Haraway and Latour are now familiar articles of this onslaught on what Charles Taylor (1989) called the ‘expressivist model of the subject’.

But still the issue nags, on a number of fronts, political as well as epistemological. According to Giorgio Agamben (1995), the Jews at Auschwitz died before they reached the gas chambers because what the camp stripped away from them before they entered the chambers was the possibility of having and being in a world. With the removal of worldhood went the removal of life. Or more precisely, with the removal of worldhood went the collapse of life qua bios – life lived in and with the world – into ‘bare life’ qua zoë. Though Agamben grossly distorts the historical specificity of the Holocaust by extending it metonymically to all modernity tout court – as do some other Holocaust books such as Zygmunt Bauman’s – still the question left unanswered in much of the antihumanist ridiculing of old European technophobia is the one first raised by Husserl and Heidegger: how is it that we can find the fact of our existence and our being-in-the-world a question for ourselves – rather than spin around on a groove like automatons or like bare life awaiting extinction? If globalization is about anything, it is about the possibility of world, of having and being in a world which is open to us and to which we can be open. Entweltlichung, or ‘world-privation’, was the term Hannah Arendt (1958) took from Heidegger to describe the closure or flattening out of the apparently open vista of infinite possibilities that was modern technical civilization. Today with Jean-Luc Nancy (2002) we can ask a similar question: is mondialization the extension of monde or the diminution of monde? For all the difficulties of regarding globalization as homogenizing and destructive of texture and diversity, one possibility cannot be brushed aside: perhaps the more we extend the world beyond itself, the more we collapse it within itself, and the more we raise the power of life, the more we raise the life of power.

## References

Agamben, G. (1995) Homo Sacer. Turin: Einaudi.

Arendt, H. (1958) The Human Condition. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.

Derrida, J. (1967) De la Grammatologie. Paris: Éditions de Minuit.

Habermas, J. (1981) Die Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns: Band 2, Zur Kritik der funktionalistischen Vernunft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.

Husserl, E. (1991[1936]) Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Nancy, J.-L. (2002) La création du monde, ou, La mondialisation. Paris: Galilée.

Plessner, H. (1950) Lachen und Weinen: eine Untersuchung nach den Grenzen menschlichen Verhaltens. Munich: Lehnen.

Schütz, A. (1932) Der sinnhafte Aufbau der sozialen Welt: eine Einleitung in die verstehende Soziologie. Vienna: Springer.

Srubar, I. (1988) Kosmion: die Genese der pragmatischen Lebenswelttheorie von Alfred Schütz und ihr anthropologischer Hintergrund. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.

Taylor, C. (1989) Sources of the Self. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Austin Harrington is Research Fellow at the Max Weber Centre for Advanced Study at the University of Erfurt, Germany, and Reader in Sociology at the University of Leeds, UK. His recent publications include Art and Social Theory: Sociological Arguments in Aesthetics (Polity Press,

2004), Modern Social Theory: An Introduction (Oxford University Press, 2005; editor) and Concepts of Europe in Classical Sociology: German Social Thinkers and the Fate of the West, 1914–1945 (forthcoming).

# Leben

Josef Bleicher

Keywords Bergson, Dilthey, form, Geist, life, metaphysics, Nietzsche, Simmel

L<sup>eben</sup> <sup>(Life),</sup> <sup>together</sup> <sup>with</sup> <sup>Geist</sup> <sup>(Spirit),</sup>represent the core defining concepts in represent the core defining concepts in German philosophy in the 200 years of its most flourishing period, marked at either end by the names of Kant and Heidegger. These concepts together define a shared ground that also helps to characterize German philosophy: concern with activity, development, history, tension and resolution, and a transcendental mode of inquiry. One of the difficulties of tackling Leben is that Life runs counter to form, yet somehow has to be captured or described through form, which means there will necessarily be a lack of clarity and precision. Georg Simmel (1858–1918), one of the foremost exponents of the Philosophie des Lebens, saw it as the third stage of western philosophy. In the first place there was Greek philosophy, resting on the concept of Substance: a persisting substratum as the core of all being and cognition. Secondly, there was modern philosophy with its stress on movement and mechanical form, which aimed to uncover the laws that render it calculable and thus comprehensible. More recently, the third stage suggests a redirection in the form of a Verlebendigung, an enlivening of the conception of the world and our knowledge of it. Leben is the metaphysical principle that issues forth subject and object, and provides their ontological and epistemological common ground (Simmel, 1912).

At its core, Leben serves as the antithesis to static conceptions and a one-sided focus on consciousness or reflexivity. Formal constructs themselves issue from Leben, and are its expressions. Leben ‘throws up’ intellectual activity, and no amount of internal, self-oriented ruminations will gain any insight into the true grounding of this enterprise. The contrast between the calculative reductionism found in the mechanistic universe of Newton and Kant is developed by Simmel in his essay on Kant and Goethe. The pantheistic reverence of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832) for the ceaseless creativity of nature provides the grounds for his refusal to write a conventionally ‘philosophical’ account of Leben. But during his life-time, the Verlebendigung of philosophy started to take root. Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860), an ardent admirer of Goethe, is considered by Simmel the first Philosopher of Leben. He reflected on ‘Leben as such’, rather than enquiring about the meaning or value of an aspect of Life. Leben as such is characterized by a ‘will to Life’ which engenders all manifestations of the human and natural world. Yet, in its urge to come into realization, it causes pain and suffering, false hopes and disillusionment as it stimulates desire and striving. The higher developed the species, and within humanity as the apex of creation the individual, the more sensitized, hence exposed to suffering, they will be. While art, as self-sufficient insight into Life, and in particular music, can provide genuine but brief respite, the only lasting solution lies in renunciation and the denial of the will – and thus of Life. Schopenhauer is indebted to Indian philosophy in his account of Leben as futile illusion and as suffering, until the taming of the will through selfdiscipline, withdrawal from the world, and its meditative contemplation become effective.

Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900) responds to the problematic of Leben in a diametrically opposite way. Rather than renouncing Life’s quests, our task is to give full expression to them. As the stream of Life propels us forward, its energy should be drawn on also to move upwards, to transcend transgressively all conventionalized normalcy with its Life-inhibiting norms and precepts. This is the progression which Nietzsche famously encapsulated in the notion of the Übermensch. For Nietzsche, all intellectual and aesthetic content and values are merely realizations of the process of Leben, with the ‘will to power’ having Leben itself as its real essence. While Nietzsche’s philosophy of Leben is focused on human existence and the specific values and merits engendered by the former, Henri Bergson’s (1859–1944) ambitions are more wide-ranging. In one respect, he retains a link with earlier Romanticist critiques of the newly emerging scientific ethos (echoing Goethe’s reservations against the reformulation of reality in terms of mathematical science); on the other, he articulates a vitalistic conception of Life that reverberates in present neo-vitalist discourses. All that exists, whatever its form or content, represents a specific emanation of the elan vital.

Bergson counterpoises mechanistic conceptions that privilege fixed spatial relationships and, through acts of cognition, dissect the stream of consciousness into isolated segments, to his holistic and vitalistic insights. Here ‘intuition’ can access Life as livingness (être vivant) by immersing itself into the flow of life, or life as flow (durée), a dynamic, ‘organic’, inter-connectedness of whole and part and as the absolute continuity of psychological reality. Bergson’s lebensphilosophic outlook stresses the primacy and centrality of Life, as the unity within continuous change. As such, it situates itself in relation to the Ur-dichotomy, forever associated with the names of Parmenides and Heraclit, of assigning primacy to either the substantively fixed and durable or the eternally flowing. Pointing beyond Bergson, Simmel (1914) suggests that perhaps philosophy will take its next step and place itself beyond this opposition to see these as two modes of revelation of the unity of metaphysical Leben.

Wilhelm Dilthey (1831–1911), too, insists on the crucial insight that Leben can be made intelligible only from within Leben. Bergson pointed to Intuition as the mode of understanding that can immerse itself into the flow of Life. Dilthey draws on the verstehen, everyday understanding, which he re-defines and develops into the mode of cognition characteristic of the Geisteswissenschaften (human sciences/humanities), in contra-distinction to the descriptive and analytical methods of the natural sciences. As a mode of participating in Leben, verstehen leads us ‘inside’ the objectivations of Leben which, as such, are in themselves meaningful forms. This privilege, that is the direct internal access to the meaning of the object (another human being, history, art, etc.), on the basis of shared Leben, involves Dilthey in the problematic of objectivity. Wedded to the Kantian project of establishing the scientificity of the human sciences, in the shape of a ‘Critique of Historical Reason’, Dilthey remains tied to methodological presuppositions of the natural sciences, and in particular the Cartesian separation of subject and object. Reluctant to take the full step into Leben and thereby move beyond the abstractions and methodological artifice of the empirical-analytical sciences, as Bergson had demonstrated, Dilthey remains caught within the antinomies that a courageously consequential Lebensphilosophie should have undercut. His later work does, however, see a shift from a psychological conception of verstehen as introspection and empathy towards a hermeneutic one. The subjectmatter of history and other objectivations arising out of the flow of Leben are here related to their structuring context that imparts them with their meaning. This way, verstehen is an act of interpretation, of relating a part to its overarching whole, thereby elucidating the meaning of both reciprocally. Leben constitutes the ultimate meaningcontext and horizon, as well as the preceding fundament on the basis of which subject and object (as co-subject) can enter into the communicative process that is verstehen.

It was his younger colleague and earlier protégé, Simmel, who undertook the step towards an ontology of Leben. His final work, Lebensanschauung, contains as the first chapter ‘The transcendence of Leben’, in which he moves towards the concept of ‘absolute Leben’ as the grounding of Life’s flow, its trials and tribulations, creations and boundaries. A core feature here is the opposition of Leben and Form that he had analysed in ‘Der Konflikt der Kultur’ (1918) as one between the unceasing flow of Life and the Forms it needs to assume, which then come to oppose this very flow as hardened objectivations (Simmel, 1997). Now this opposition is dissolved in the sense that both appear as moments in the totality of absolute Leben. The latter provides the ‘absolute unity between the continuity that is Leben and the individuality that is predicated on Form. But under the sign of the ‘absolute Leben’, all such dichotomies melt back into it. The central schema of the opposition of subject and object that announced the core question of modern philosophy itself appears as a retroactive construct, a crystallization of thought emerging from the flow of Life that misunderstands itself as an original epistemological problematic. Leben is self-transcending; it is ahead of itself, reaching beyond itself. Simmel offers the complementary definitions of Leben as Mehr-Leben and Mehr-als-Leben to elucidate this central point.

As ‘More-Life’, (absolute) Leben incorporates within itself all relativities; it encompasses any oppositions the intellect may establish as it freezes elements of dynamic Life into detached Forms. Past and future melt into the present moment as Life refuses to be dissected abstractedly and asserts its enveloping dynamic. Even ‘human immortality’,