suggests Simmel, could be just the accumulated sense, directed into an immense symbol, of the transcession of Leben beyond itself (Simmel, 1997 [1918]: 15). It is ‘more-Life’ since, at every moment, it draws something into itself in order to transform it into Leben. Life requires Forms, yet it needs more than Forms. As ‘More-than-Life’, Leben encompasses both physiological Life and the Life of the mind, as it expresses itself in the meaningful forms of its creations. The latter possess independence from the stream that generated them, and autonomy as to their content. They stand outside Life, as it were. Yet this paradox disappears with the realization that in the field of the intellect, as in all products of human creativity, Leben has elevated itself beyond itself, and thereby remained with itself. The intentions and meanings contained in autonomous objectivations of mental Life it comes to recognize as its very own.

Simmel’s contribution to the analysis of Leben reaches beyond the confines of philosophy proper, and into the fields of biography, aesthetics and sociological diagnosis of his times. Here, Goethe serves as an exemplar of a successful life, an organic unity of life and work, which Simmel considered the hallmark of true Leben. In his major monograph of Goethe (2003, orig. 1913), and numerous essays written on this subject afterwards, Simmel uses Goethe in contrast to ‘modern man’, the Sachmensch and the exigencies of ‘professionality’. The purposive habitus of the Sachmensch (the expert functionary) has come about through the focus on goal orientation, rather than growing from the roots (Simmel, 2003: 151).

But what is the place of Leben in a civilization that, with increasing success, is learning to manipulate the very essence of human existence while endangering this, and other forms of life, through the heedless degradation of the living environment? From Goethe through Bergson to Simmel, the critique of ‘mechanistic’ Science and its effects on social and intellectual life provided the agenda for the philosophy of Leben and Lebensphilosophie. Now the ‘life sciences’ themselves have taken over as the lead sciences. They are reshaping the parameters and preconditions of human existence, and their transformative drive has been announcing itself in the growth of biomorphic conceptualizations and jargon that have entered the social and natural sciences as well as everyday talk (Fraser et al., 2005). In an already largely objectified social world they are about to complete the scientistic project and are assuming to play God.

## References

Bergson, H. (1911) Creative Evolution. London: Macmillan.

Dilthey, W. (1962) Pattern and Meaning in History. New York: Harper. [From: Gesammelte Schriften pp. 339–416 in Vol. V.]

Dilthey, Wilhelm (1976) Selected Writings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Fraser, Miriam, S. Kember and C. Lury (eds) (2005) ‘Inventive Life: Approaches to the New Vitalism’. Special Issue: Theory, Culture & Society, 22(1).

Simmel, G. (1912) ‘Ueber einige gegenwaertige Problemeder Philosophie’, Vossische Zeitung, 17 Nov.

Simmel, G. (1914) ‘Henri Bergson’, Die Gueldenkammer 4(9): 511–25.

Simmel, G. (1997) ‘The Conflict of Modern Culture’, in D. Frisby and M. Featherstone (eds) Simmel on Culture. London: Sage.

Simmel, G. (2003) Goethe. Gesamtausgabe vol. 15, edited by Ottheim Rammstedt. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.

Josef Bleicher is a member of the Theory, Culture & Society editorial board. His books include: The Hermeneutic Imagination (1982) and Contemporary Hermeneutics (1990). His translation of Georg Simmel’s ‘Kant and Goethe’ will appear in Theory, Culture & Society in 2006. He is an independent scholar, and teaches Goethean science. His current research is on ‘Nature as text: Goethean science as a hermeneutic of nature’.

# Animation/Re-animation

Ryan Bishop

Keywords animation, art, media, science, technology

s science became more enamored with not only finding the secrets of nature but of mastering them and turning the natural world to the will of human society, the concept of animation, converting dead tissue into a living being again, captured the imagination of artists and scientists in Europe in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. This fascination, of wresting the power of life from death by means other than the divine or the metaphysical, was perhaps most memorably evoked by Mary Shelley’s gothic novel Frankenstein, and is contextualized within a larger desecularization of European society, and thus constitutes the human as having power over life and death, over nature, and thus becoming God himself. The 1931 James Whale film version of Frankenstein, which provided the monster with his iconic bolts in the neck, explored many of the issues about animation and re-animation found in Shelley’s novel but the medium, cinema, and the immediate cultural-historical context of the film, the 1930s and Europe creeping toward war again, provides a repetition of and concerns about the powers unleashed by technology, especially those that can animate or provide the illusion of reanimation. Cinema, as with Frankenstein’s monster, is composed of an array of lifeless pieces (film stock for the former and body parts from corpses for the latter) that are sewn together (editing, suturing) and infused with the simulation of life through electricity (the projector in the theater, the lab equipment in the laboratory). The unconscious anxiety addressed in the film is that the life it has created might be monstrous, and that the very technologies that deliver humans this divine-like power might not always deliver what they promise.

The film further thematized the capacity found in various recording and projecting technologies from the 19th century onward, the capacity to provide the presence of that which is absent (often through death or time-space distance). Representation, itself, provides such a technology: the presence of that being represented through the act or trick of the representation. Early visual culture, such as magic lanterns, zoetropes and photodromes, often depicted ghosts or spirits, as if in acknowledgement of the power of technology to animate and overcome time and space. Similarly, the effects of early audio technology can be seen in the icon known the world over of ‘Nipper’, the corporate logo of HMV music and video shop. The image comes from a late 19th-century painting that became popularly but incorrectly known as ‘His Master’s Voice’. The painting depicted the dog, as in the current logo, cocking its head in recognition of his master’s voice coming out of the horn (speaker) of a gramophone. But the dog is sitting on a coffin, clearly indicating that the master is dead yet, through the capabilities of aural technologies, his voice remains present. Though inanimate himself, the voice is reanimated by the gramophone.

From the Second World War to the present, technologies of animation and re-animation repeat and intensify the simulation of re-animation, as well as its attendant ambivalence of empowerment and dread, in computer-based virtual realms, IT and tele-technologies. Many of these were developed through and for military use, intensifying the connections between animation and reanimation – the living and the dead – and which have now become an increasing part of global consumer culture.

Ryan Bishop teaches at the National University of Singapore in the Department of English and has published on urbanism, military technology, critical theory, avant-garde aesthetics and international sex tourism.

# Nature

# Phil Macnaghten

Keywords embodiment, the environment, global nature, technology, temporality

t is commonly asserted that the boundaries between culture and nature are in the process of dissolving. The idea of an autonomous nature, separated and divorced from culture, is no longer tenable. Or at least, this is how the argument runs. A number of variants are available.

One variant can be seen in the kind of millennial arguments proposed by Bill McKibben (1988) and his claim that we have now reached ‘the end of nature’. McKibben claims that human activity, driven by the technological-industrial complex, has now altered whatever we once thought nature was. Wilderness no longer exists in a pristine state, anywhere; forests and farmland have become thoroughly domesticated; even the climate appears to be altered, possibly irrevocably, as we face the threats of climate change. Global nature is here confronted by an array of human-imposed threats, from acid rain to global warming, from the extinction of species to the destruction of the rainforest. A new variant emerges with the advent of new genetic and nano-technologies, with the ability to alter and re-work DNA into new forms of life, evoking images of the ‘post-natural’ and, indeed, the ‘post-human’ (Hayles, 1999). Denuded of any external referent, nature becomes merely a sign, commodified and preserved by consumer culture, often Disneyfied, devoid of any legitimacy (Wilson, 1992). This kind of argument appeals to a discourse of nature as both global and original, and of human activity as intrinsically separate from, and antithetical to, a state of nature. Most commonly this discourse is to be found in the writings of environmentalists and conservationists, as well as in environmental studies, environmental ethics and environmental philosophy. And, according to this discourse, ‘nature should be conserved in a pristine state, unaffected, as far as possible, by human activity (Milton, 1999: 438).

On the other hand, and currently in vogue in some popular science writing, is the proposition that nature refers to a chain of being to which human beings and everything else belongs. Current changes to the environment represent simply a new advance of an ongoing process that has been unfolding since the beginning of life some 4 billion or so years ago. Humans are here seen as animals, as part of nature, and while they may possess unique qualities of language, written culture and opposable thumbs, all animal species are unique in their own way. As Matt Ridley (2001: 76) recently wrote, ‘there is nothing unique about being unique’. This critique of ‘human exceptionalism’ is supported by strands of intellectual thought informed by evolutionary theory, not least in sociobiology.

A third variant, common among many social scientists and historians, is that ideas of nature are, and always have been, informed, shaped and even constituted by culture and history. Raymond Williams (1980), in a seminal essay on the subject, undertook a socio-historical analysis of some of the key transformations of people’s understandings of and relationships with nature in the West. Numerous other writers have written about changing attitudes towards and relationships with nature from the time of the Greeks to the present, but it is Williams who most provocatively examines the proposition that ideas of nature contain ‘an enormous amount of human history’. Informed by such an approach are various social constructivist studies on environmental issues and controversies, aimed at identifying the ways in which what is taken as ‘natural’ is in fact shaped by social forces.

A variation of the above is the argument that the dominant enlightenment ‘culture of nature’ appears to have stopped working so well. Premised on a misguided metaphysics in which the world of facts (i.e. the domain of science) could be separated from the world of values (i.e. the domain of values and politics), nature has been dislocated from due political process with all sorts of unforeseen political consequences ranging from the unseen and unknown effects of ‘mad cow’ disease and genetically modified foods, to the ethical and societal dilemmas posed by gene therapy and the cultivation of human embryos (Latour, 2004). Arguing that political ecology has to let go of nature, Latour develops the proposition of rekindling a new politics of nature, involving a constitutional agreement in which all kinds of actors are involved, both human and non-human.

Such arguments all tend to support the proposition that the idea of nature as a unit of analysis – and indeed, of politics – is diminishing in potency. Yet, if this is indeed the case, how can such analytical frameworks help explain the continuing and, arguably, increasing appeal of ‘nature’ and ‘the natural’ in everyday life? It is instructive to ask how the popular appeal of ‘nature’ and ‘the natural’ is configured within each of the broad discourses highlighted above. In the first and second variants it would appear that people have been duped, in that either nothing is natural or everything is natural. In both cases people are clearly deluded; in both cases the perceptual category of ‘the natural’ is of little utility, at least in terms of how it is used in public discourse. In more socially constructive accounts it would appear also that people are being tricked in that they are mistaking nature for what is in reality shaped by culture. Indeed, this is the putative power of the natural, to naturalize, and hence to hide from view, its effects in terms of reproducing, legitimating, classifying, excluding and validating certain dominant ideas in society (Franklin et al., 2000).

How might one develop alternative, and possibly more culturally resonant, frameworks to help account for the potency and enduring qualities of the idea of nature in everyday life? Following Goodin (1992) and his ‘green theory of value’, we can concur that people want to see some sense and pattern to their lives, that this requires their lives to be set in a wider context, and that nature on many occasions provides that context. This theory can be used to explain the appeal of nature when it becomes embodied in particular localized practices, whether this is walking, gardening, fishing, even hunting. In all such activities we – in the West, at least – appear to be striving towards a relationship in which we can interact with nature in a way in which we are only a part of nature, and where nature goes on, more or less, regardless of our own actions.

The depiction of nature as ‘the environment’, as a set of issues, global in scope and physical in substance, is a configuration that remains universal and abstracted from life. Ingold (1993) usefully critiques the conception of ‘the global environment’ as one that separates the human from their environment, positioning the subject as if he/she was looking at the globe, detached and outside. By contrast, the nature of the ‘lived-in’ world is active and changing, and experienced through practices that actively connect to ‘life’. Perhaps this is one explanation.

The temporal aspects are further highlighted by Barbara Adam who distinguishes between nature as a thing (natura naturans) and as a process (natura naturata). Adam (1998: 33) argues that: ‘we need to reconnect the externalised phenomena to their generative processes, the countryside to its re/production, the forests to their formation. We need to bring into conceptual unity natura naturata and natura naturans . . . We need to see the “product” produced, nature natured, life lived.’ Take the tree as an example. Trees live a long time, ranging from hundreds, even thousands of years. The life of a tree commonly exceeds that of humans. Trees change both seasonally and annually, at a pace that unfolds often in symmetry with the unfolding relationships of people, families and communities. Trees are regularly a central feature in people’s sense of place; they are alive yet also fixed in the landscape. Trees mark history in ‘lived’ terms. As Ingold (2000: 204) points out, ‘people . . . are as much bound up in the life of the tree as is the tree in the life of the person’. Trees thus exhibit a rhythmic pattern of persistence and change, from the swaying, bending and twisting of branches, to the growth of leaves and ripening of fruit, to eventual death and decay. Like humans, each tree is unique, exhibiting an underlying form or character that transcends the vagaries of illness, the weather and the seasons. In this sense the popular appeal of trees, and the common symbolism of trees as nature, can be seen as a prime site where people can connect with nature as a living process.

This type of analysis of emerging nature–culture relations is at odds with many of the arguments outlined earlier. Goodin’s theory does not require any fundamental divide (or convergence) between a state of nature and one of humanity; nor does it seek to focus on how we commonly confuse nature for what is shaped by culture. However, perhaps there is a wider societal context in which to situate the current appeal to nature. Environmentalism emerged in the 1970s and 1980s as part of a cultural response to unease with technological modernity. The urgency of the appeal to nature today is largely a reflection of, and reaction to, new forms of technological advance. For example, the promise of new genetic and nano-technologies lies in the introduction of new crops, new landscapes, new habitats, new animals, even new humans. In this sense we could say that Goodwin’s theory of green value is conditional, the key condition being a profound and enduring sense of unease that technological modernity is contributing towards ‘the death of what [people] are part of, a natural rhythm that operates beyond human control’ (Milton, 1999: 444). In such conditions the wildness of ‘nature’, as non-human nature, becomes the needed ‘other’. In less pressing times, and in more benign contexts, the ‘other’ of nature may be less wild and more harmonious, with promises of practices that restore constitutive harmony. We navigate, one might say, between the metaphor of the garden and the wilderness. And when the garden becomes transgenic we flee for the wild woods.