context. In the case of Bildung, it originally denoted a ‘natural formation’, as in well-formed limbs or other successful forms created by nature. Transposed first by Herder into a humanistic ideal, it reached its apex in the Weimar Klassik of Goethe and Schiller. The semi-religious undertones of the fulfilment of human potential as the most noble project are themselves remaining traces of the elaborations it experienced within the mystical tradition. It thus maintains its link with the idea of a Bild (image) of the Higher Powers contained within us, and serving as a Vorbild (model) that entails the exhortation to engage in its Nachbildung (modelling upon). Celebrated in Klopstock’s Messiah, this notion of Bildung had a signal effect on Goethe. The aspect of a spiritually guided formation as ‘modelling upon’, together with the organicist origins of the concept, provided an instance of the union of God and Nature that Goethe considered the sign of deep meaningfulness. It chimed in perfectly with his own work on the metamorphosis of plants, where, as an early theory of evolution, he traced the workings of a nisus formativus, translated as Bildungstrieb, that is, a formative self-organizing drive. We here approach the ultimate and highest understanding: ‘This immensity personified approaches us as a God, as Creator and maintainer whom we are called upon to worship and revere in all ways possible.’ Selbstbildung of the individual accords with the self-organization already apparent in matter, and more so in organic growth, which all provide symbolic references to it. Exemplified in the new genre of the Bildungsroman (the novel), tracing the course of an individual’s self-formation, such as Wilhelm Meisters Wanderjahre [1829] with its maxim: ‘through the useful towards the True and the Beautiful’, it directs our attention to the most noble and pressing task of bringing all the potentials contained within us to full expression.

Gestalt (integrated form) and Gesetz (rule), the defining terms of Classicism, are indispensable for Bildung. Goethe thus also highlights the further dimension of self and society, individual and world, required for self-development. Only in service to the community, in self-restraint and submission to ethical demands, can Bildung shape the individual.

God, Nature, community: these thus are the points of reference for Bildung. Transcending mere acquisition of knowledge, Bildung points to a way of integrating knowledge and expertise with moral and aesthetic concerns. On the basis of a successful integration of thinking, willing and feeling, it enables sound judgement, indicated by a developed awareness of what is appropriate, and is expressed in tact, good taste, and a sense of community. It entails openness to difference and a willingness to self-correct. Bildung, in the classic sense, thus also contains a projective anticipation of the ‘good life’, of human freedom enacted with responsibility for self and others in the open-ended project of self-creation.

## Reference

Gadamer, Hans-Georg (1975) Wahrheit und Methode, 4th edn. Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr (Trans. Truth and Method. New York: Seabury Press, 1975).

Josef Bleicher is an independent scholar and a member of the Theory, Culture & Society editorial board. He teaches Goethean science. His books include The Hermeneutic Imagination (1982) and Contemporary Hermeneutics (1990). His translation of Georg Simmel’s ‘Kant and Goethe’ will appear in Theory, Culture & Society in 2006. His current research is ‘Nature as text: Goethean science as a hermeneutic of nature’.

# Bunka

David Buist

Keywords bunka, culture, East Asia, Japan, translation

文化

[Chinese (Putonghua): wénhuà; Japanese: bunka; Korean: munhua]

he notion of global knowledge necessarily implies an appreciation of regional and local differences. The global diffusion of the social and cultural sciences provides a framework facilitating worldwide communication among intellectuals through a degree of sharing of common concepts. However, the variation in local historical, cultural and social circumstances can produce subtle variations in the context and application of concepts that might otherwise be regarded as ‘universal’. As concepts diffuse outwards from their original context of application, redefinitions inevitably multiply. The linguistic mechanisms of conceptual appropriation are varied, ranging from wholesale verbal transplantation to the coining of new words from existing lexical resources. In neither case is a simple ‘copy’ of the original reproducible. Some process of ‘translation’ or linguistic ‘transformation’ is inevitably involved. ‘Equivalence’ of meaning is a product of translation, not its prerequisite, and what constitutes ‘equivalence’ has to be negotiated in the process. Here, I examine the reappropriation of the word as a ‘translation’ of the ‘culture’ concept. As the main entry on culture amply demonstrates, this is itself far from being an internally homogeneous concept. This entry seeks to probe the further complexities raised by ‘translation’.

Although most of what I say here refers specifically to Japan, the concept of can in some sense be regarded as an ‘East Asian’ concept. This is partly why I have chosen to retain the original characters (which are recognized and used in China and Korea as well as Japan) rather than resorting to a Romanized phonetic transcription (which would inevitably reflect the local variations in pronunciation of the characters). As with many of the concepts appropriated from European thought in the latter half of the 19th century, the initial process of translation occurred in Japan, and the resulting terms were subsequently adopted also in China and Korea. Throughout East Asia, until comparatively recently, the dominant medium of literary and intellectual discourse was Classical Chinese. The characters and compounds derived from this tradition have continued to provide the building blocks for much verbal innovation and translation.

Etymologically, denotes the process of acquiring (or causing another to acquire) literacy and learning, and by extension, of ‘cultivation’ in the sense of the adoption of manners and dispositions of thought characteristic of the dominant social class. On its own, the character refers primarily to the written language. As well as denoting the medium of characters, sentences and texts, its meaning can also embrace in some contexts the ‘content’ or ‘message’ expressed through that medium (‘knowledge’) and the process of its transmission (‘education’). The character or concept typically opposed to is (usually pronounced ‘bu’ in Japanese). refers to military force. Prior to the Meiji Era (1868–1912), especially during the Edo Period (1600–1867), Japanese rulers would sometimes appeal to as an alternative instrument of rule to (bu, military force). This involved the promotion of the ‘peaceful’ arts of literacy and learning instead of the honing of military skills. With the end of the violent upheavals of the ‘Warring States (Sengoku) Period, and the establishment of a stable regime under the Tokugawa Shoguns, rulers sought to bolster the legitimacy of their rule by supervising the development of what we might now call ‘culture’ ( ). To some extent, this also implied the spread of literacy and knowledge among the general populace as a part of what could be called a strategy of ideological control as opposed to simply relying on the threat or use of force. Contrary to later depictions of the Edo Era as a ‘dark age’ prior to the ‘enlightenment’ of the Meiji Era of modernization, Japan had undergone processes of social change that were analogous to certain aspects of ‘modernization’ even before the adoption of European knowledge and social models in the late 19th century. Emiko Ikegam (2005) describes this as ‘proto-modernity’. One aspect of this was the relatively high level of education and literacy among the population, and the existence of a significant publishing industry based on wood block printing. Popular manuals of instruction in etiquette and refined manners, artistic and literary appreciation, and basic historical and geographical knowledge were widely produced and consumed.

Thus, prior to its use as a ‘translation’ for the newly introduced concept of ‘culture’, is perhaps best described as having been part of the terminology of governance. Before the 20th century it was not a very widely used term, but it had already acquired certain associations which had consequences for its subsequent usage and meaning. Like ‘culture’, it originally referred to a form of ‘high culture’ – literate, refined, prestigious and close to the sources of political power. However, it also had a processual dimension (denoted by the second character , meaning ‘change’ or ‘transformation’) which was generally conceived in transitive terms as the action of an agent (the ruling elite) educating and ideologically incorporating the masses.

During the Meiji Era, greater attention was given to the ‘Western’ concept of ‘civilization rather than to ‘culture’. ‘Civilization’ was usually rendered as (bunmei) in Japanese. To the extent it was used at all, tended to be treated as a synonym of . meant, above all, ‘Western civilization’ with particular emphasis on the industrial, military and institutional technologies of the dominant European and North American states. By emulating these, the Meiji rulers sought to transform Japan into a modern nation-state on equal terms with the encircling Western powers which were then colonizing much of the rest of Asia.

According to Nishikawa Nagao (1993), the first use of in a manner close to its dominant contemporary meaning was in a newspaper commentary written in 1889 by Riku Katsunan, who was an advocate of ‘cultural nationalism’ as opposed to the then dominant ‘state nationalism’. The gist of this article was to call for the formation of a unified ‘national culture’ expressing the distinctive character of the Japanese people as a whole. This embraced not only ‘high’ literary culture, but also everyday customs ( fuzoku). As Nishikawa also points out, the ‘culture’ concept was appropriated at a moment when ‘civilization and ‘culture’ were emerging in Europe as opposing elements of a dichotomy. This was especially so in Germany, where Kultur came to be valued as the more ‘authentic’ and ‘indigenous’ alternative to the Zivilisation associated largely with external, especially French and Napoleonic, models. In many respects, the intellectual and political trajectory in Japan followed that of Germany. German Bismarckian models of modernity were increasingly adopted in preference to the British, French and American models popular in the early Meiji Era. This was accompanied by an increasing interest in German thought and philosophy, which included absorption of German notions of ‘civilization’ as being ‘external’ and ‘material’, and ‘culture’ as being ‘interior’ and ‘spiritual’. and came to represent respectively the two poles of this conceptual dichotomy. became the ‘object of desire’ in an introverted search for authenticity and cultural cohesion, which was explicitly conceived as a remedy for the social upheavals caused by Meiji ‘civilization’.

During the Taisho Era (1912–1926) use of the word greatly increased. It ceased to be a peripheral concept and took on crucial significance in intellectual and wider social discourse. The diversity of its meanings and uses likewise multiplied. It became a subject widely discussed by major philosophers of the period (including Nishida Kitaro, Kuki Shuzo and Miki Kiyoshi) and the founders of Japanese folklore studies (notably Yanagida Kunio and Orikuchi Shinobu). The notion of ‘popular culture’ ( taishu¯bunka) also emerged, along with the development of consumer lifestyles. became a commercially exploitable concept, as is reflected in such phrases as (bunkabo¯cho¯ ‘cultural chef ’s knife’) and (bunkaju¯taku ‘cultural residence’). This attachment of to the names of artifacts of the new consumer lifestyle was one way of emphasizing the desirable qualities of the products concerned. At the same time, there was also a significant stream of socialist thinking that sought to develop ‘proletarian culture’ as an anticapitalist alternative.

Despite the ‘democratizing’ tendencies of the Taisho Era, the potential of as an instrument of governance had not been entirely exhausted. Indeed, as some commentators have pointed out, the development of essentialist notions of the ‘distinctive character’ of Japanese culture during the Taisho Era provided the groundwork for the subsequent development of an imperialistic state ideology in the period immediately before and during the Second World War (Pincus, 1996; Harootunian, 2000). The attempt to construct an all-embracing state-dominated social system for wartime mobilization in the 1930s encouraged the development of the idea of ‘cultural policy ( bunka seisaku). The clear definition and demarcation of a specific sphere of life as ‘culture facilitated its integration into a unitary and efficient system geared to military success. Such explicit definitions of tended to be extremely broad, embracing everything from education, the arts, religion, and social welfare, to information and propaganda (Miyahara, 1943). could thus fulfil the function of a totalizing concept abetting the complete integration of society under government control for a single objective.

The use of the concept of in Japan since the end of the Second World War can roughly be characterized by three aspects. First, it has continued to be linked to the concept of ‘culture as used in the social and cultural sciences, and its meaning has developed along with the continuous introduction of new theoretical approaches from Europe and North America. In the post-war period, the field of cultural anthropology ( ) was established in Japan, and later in the 1990s, the fields of cultural sociology and cultural studies ( ) were introduced.

However, there are other uses of the term that can only be understood in the context of that word’s specific history in Japan. The post-war Japanese state has deliberately used as a means of bolstering its claim to be a ‘peace state ( ) forever renouncing warfare. In contrast to its wartime use, is now once again employed as a counter to the image of military force, especially in diplomatic relations, where ‘cultural exchanges’ are a frequent feature of official contacts with other countries. Even in internal affairs, the idea of ‘cultural promotion ( ) has sometimes been invoked as a desirable complement to the dominant goal of economic growth. As well as seeking to present Japan as a ‘peace state’, official policy has promoted the related or synonymous goal of constructing a ‘cultural state’ ( ). At the end of the 1970s, under Prime Minister Ohira, a grand vision proclaiming the ‘Age of Culture’ ( ) was formulated as a guideline for official policy-making in the aftermath of Japan’s extremely successful high growth policy in the 1960s and 1970s.

A third aspect of the use of in the postwar period is the discourse known as (Nihonbunkaron). This developed into a major genre in the commercial publishing market especially in the 1970s and the 1980s. The central theme of this discourse is the characterization of the supposedly distinctive features of Japanese as compared to the culture of other (usually American or European) countries. One could argue that this was an appropriation or internalization of the essentialist characterizations of the ‘enemy culture’ conducted by American anthropologists during the Pacific War. Although the content of the characterizations of Japanese culture varied little, the evaluation of these essentialized characteristics changed from negative to positive as Japan developed into a major economic power (Aoki, 1990). Cultural factors came to be cited as the principal reasons for Japan’s high level of economic growth. Indeed, economic success has acted as a general stimulus to cultural confidence and has encouraged government investment in cultural diplomacy (as noted above) and the founding of institutes for research on ‘Japanese culture’ (such as the or International Institute for Japanese Studies based in the city of Kyoto and founded in the mid-1980s under Prime Minister Nakasone).

In conclusion, one can say that is still very much alive as a central concept in academic, political and popular discourse. Its meanings have ramified, absorbing most of the principal senses of ‘culture’ in addition to the associations of the term prior to the 20th century. Representations of ‘Japanese culture’ as a uniquely distinctive totality are no longer as dominant as they were in the 1980s. Discourse on has since become more diverse and less prone to essentialism. There nevertheless remains a significant latent potential for totalization and government or commercial manipulation of the ‘culture’ concept, no less so in Japan than elsewhere.

## References

Aoki, T. (1990) Nihonbunkaron no Henyo¯. Tokyo: Chu¯o¯ Ko¯ron Sha.

Harootunian, H. (2000) Overcome by Modernity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Ikegami, E. (2005) ‘The Emergence of Aesthetic Japan’, in J.A. Fogel (ed.) The Teleology of the Modern Nation-State. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Miyahara, S. (1943) Bunka Seisaku Ronko¯. Tokyo: Shin Keizai Sha.

Nishikawa, N. (1993) ‘Kokka Ideorogii to shite no Bunmei to Bunka’, Shiso¯ 827: 4–33.

Pincus, L. (1996) Authenticating Culture. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

David Buist is a faculty member of the Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies at the University of Tokyo. He was educated at University College London, Lancaster University, Duke University and the University of Tokyo.