# Postcolonial Cultures

Rajeev S. Patke

Keywords contemporary cultures, hybridity, multiculturalism, postcolonialism, postmodernity

W <sup>ords</sup> <sup>that</sup> <sup>bear</sup> <sup>a</sup> <sup>‘post-’</sup> <sup>as</sup> <sup>prefix</sup> <sup>defer</sup>to, but differ from, the terms they to, but differ from, the terms they qualify. ‘Postcolonial’ derives its meaning from a complex relation to ‘colonial’, which in turn derives its significance from the sense of ‘colony’ as a territory annexed or controlled for settlement or profit. Motives that mixed curiosity, profit and adventure propelled Europeans after 1492 into a series of interactions with peoples previously unfamiliar to and separated from them by large expanses of ocean and land. European expansion took two forms: settlers looked for land and religious freedom, adventurers and traders looked for commercial gain. In time these interactions shaped and were shaped by differences between the belief-systems, technologies, economics, religions and cultures of Europeans and the peoples they encountered. The quest for land or profit followed a pattern in which Europe exploited relations of difference to its advantage, while the European nations competed with one another in the race for territory and dominance. Settlement and trade grew into empires. Success was the result of various combinations of aggressive enterprise, technological capability and the will to power. Modern imperialism was paralleled by three developments that reinforced the asymmetry between Europe and its colonies: the Industrial Revolution, the rise of modern capitalism, and the rationalization of the instruments of institutional management and governance. An additional factor that entered this equation in stages during the 20th century was the steady rise to power of the USA, especially after the collapse of the former Soviet Union. The conditions of inequality that subsidized empires persisted past the end of imperialism, and were often aggravated – as in the case of many African and some Asian nations – by incompetent or corrupt regimes, and dissension among constituent elements of the new nation. That is where ‘postcolonial’ comes in. When post-independence leadership reneged on the hopes that had subsidized anti-colonial struggles, ‘postcolonial’ became the sign of recognition for the inequalities that beset new nationhood after the end of colonialism

in an era of uneven industrialization and globalization. On the other hand, once nationhood had accomplished its often anti-climactic political goals, anti-colonial resistance and nationalist fervour found themselves dissipated in a celebration of diaspora, multiculturalism and hybridity, and ‘postcolonial’ has had to struggle to keep clear of degenerating into ethnic chic or the blandishments of ‘cosmopolitan’.

Many of the preoccupations that characterize the contemporary study of ‘postcolonial cultures’ were anticipated at about the time that the consequences of European imperialism were diagnosed from the colonies by intellectuals such as Aimé Césaire (Discourse on Colonialism, 1950), Frantz Fanon (Black Skin, White Masks, 1952), Octave Mannoni (Prospero and Caliban, 1956), Albert Memmi (The Colonizer and the Colonized, 1957), George Lamming (The Pleasures of Exile, 1961), C.L.R. James (The Black Jacobins, 1962), Amilcar Cabral (The Weapon of Theory, 1966), Roberto Fernández Retamar (‘Caliban’, 1971), and others, who have since been canonized as formative influences on ‘postcolonial studies’ (Brydon, 2000). Poets from the colonies had been active on this front even earlier. The Négritude movement made an impact in Africa and the Caribbean, and acquired a wider European resonance when Jean-Paul Sartre, in the 1940s, highlighted formulations on race and writing first articulated by Césaire, Léopold Senghor and Leon Damas in the 1930s. These were meant to redress the ethnic disparagement that accompanied colonialism by reviving racial pride among the colonized. The strategy had precursors in black writing of the Harlem Renaissance, and in W.E.B. Du Bois’ The Souls of Black Folk (1903). Later writers from Africa questioned the adequacy of Négritude on the grounds that it invoked an untenable form of ethnic essentialism, fell back on romantic simplifications of precolonial cultures, and merely inverted the binaries fostered by colonizers on the colonized. Nevertheless, the movement was the precursor for various forms of cultural nationalism that took part in the political struggle for freedom from colonial rule.

The academic invention of ‘postcolonial’ took place in the 1980s, as the impact of Edward Said’s Orientalism (1978) was assimilated by intellectuals. Fanon addressed issues of race, colonial cultures and nationalism well before ‘postcolonial acquired currency. He wrote as an activist formulating strategies from the perspective of the imperatives of decolonization in Algeria and Africa. In contrast, Said wrote as a committed intellectual using academic scholarship to scrutinize the motives, mechanisms and effects of colonial scholarship in the complicity between knowledge and empire. Said’s influence gave ‘postcolonial’ studies a global orientation and a base in the US academy, which rapidly overtook and assimilated the more modest growth of ‘Commonwealth’ studies. ‘Postcolonial’ studies reinforced and was reinforced by new interest in minority discourses (e.g. JanMohamed and Lloyd, 1990), and by the global development of academic curricula devoted to gender, feminism and diaspora. Cinema and music are the latest additions to this franchise, although it is too early to say who stands to profit from such liaisons. After 11 September 2001, and the death of Said, the American Right has shown signs of re-examining its academic investment in ‘postcolonial studies’. Meanwhile, writers have consistently resisted the association of their work with ‘postcolonial’, with the argument that such terms tend to homogenize difference, simplify complexity, misdirect reading and perpetrate a new form of conceptual colonization that pushes writers into a cultural ghetto at the behest of academics struggling to place themselves closer to the centre by promoting the margins of post-imperial cultures.

In a more constructive sense, ‘postcoloniality functions as a period concept which marks the gap separating the formation of nation from the maturation of new social formations relatively free of cultural cringe. As a name for a predicament, it represents the phase of writing in which cultural identity foregrounds itself as a historical problem. ‘Postcoloniality’ as a state of mind occurs and recurs in individuals and communities whenever the ambivalent energies of their colonial legacy are shaped by, or give shape to, their writing. In a third sense, ‘postcoloniality’ provides a contingent name for the internalization of asymmetries, an ongoing process in which native inhabitants and non-European migrants struggle to find voice and representation within the cultural dynamics of a settler country. This sense addresses the issue of how cultural productions react to the marginalization imposed by dominant groups on other members or groups within their society on the basis of racial prejudice, as in the case of the Native Americans, Australian aborigines, New Zealand Ma¯ori, and Africans under apartheid. The suffixes ‘-ism’ and ‘-ity’ entail different connotations. Graham Huggan distinguishes between ‘postcolonialism’ as a form of ‘anti-colonial intellectualism’, and ‘postcoloniality’ as a mechanism within ‘the global late-capitalist system of commodity exchange’ (2001: 6). Robert Young promotes ‘postcolonialism’ in respect to ‘the political ideals of community, equality, self-determination and dignity’ (2002: ix). When used in this way, the term links decolonization with bipolar struggles against oppression, injustice, discrimination or prejudice, but it also risks diluting a pathology of the cultural cringe with a secular ethics that is at once both politically correct and aesthetically bland. Aijaz Ahmad (1992), among others, has objected to ‘postcolonial’ for foregrounding colonial history and neglecting class and the economics of capitalism, observing that a large body of writing and cultural production during colonial and post-independence histories focuses on issues of specific and local concern, with little or no reference to the motifs prioritized by ‘postcolonial studies’. But feminism has found its strategic suspicion of dominative modes useful in refining perceptions that gender as a social construct is a varied phenomenon, not to be homogenized under a western rubric (e.g. Mohanty et al., 1991; Trinh, 1989).

The narrow sense of ‘postcolonial’ confines it to a period concept, which refers to developments that followed European colonialism. This is now a very small part of the story. The dissolution of empire was a gradual process. Dates commemorating political independence only indicate key moments in the more gradual change from dependency to autonomy, or from national hubris to post-imperial detumescence. Moreover, new political realities did not necessarily coincide with changes in culture and society, nor ensure a steady progress towards modernity, peace or prosperity. Therefore ‘postcolonial’ has acquired a wider connotation. Whether we describe culture as a form of ‘having’ or a form of ‘doing’, or some kind of dynamic relation between the two notions, a culture may be described as postcolonial wherever, and for as long as, a nation or a people or a set of individuals suffers its colonial past as a legacy that mixes partial empowerment with partial disablement in respect to the habits of thought and feeling that determine cultural practices and produce cultural artifacts. The broader sense of ‘postcolonial’ implies awareness of the ways in which modes of thought and belief learned through colonial history continue to affect cultures after the formal collapse of empires. It turns to cultural productions and practices for an imprint of, and a reaction to, the residual force of colonialism on societies whose contemporary history is shaped by asymmetrical patterns of modernization, industrialization and globalization.

The colonizer–colonized polarity implicit in ‘postcolonial’ is met with a caveat. In 1992, Anne McClintock worried that the term ‘reduces the cultures of peoples beyond colonialism to prepositional time’, that it ‘signals a reluctance to surrender the privilege of seeing the world in terms of a singular and ahistorical abstraction’, and that ‘Political differences between cultures are thereby subordinated to the temporal distance from European colonialism’ (1992: 86–7). The degree to which nations are overshadowed by their colonial pasts, their incipient nationhood is indeed prepositional. Her second and third worries reinforce the need for those who use the term to avoid homogenizing diversity and difference along a single axis related to Europe, and the need to recognize the ways in which lateral relations between the various ex-colonies are as important in cultural terms as vertical relations between former colonizers and the ex-colonized. Another worry about the broader connotation of the term is that it can claim to cover a disparate variety of situations: ‘Does the post indicate the perspective and location of the ex-colonized (Algerian), the ex-colonizer (French), the ex-colonial settler (Pied Noir), or the displaced hybrid in First World metropolitans (Algerians in France)?’, asked Ella Shohat (1992: 104). Her anxiety can be allayed only when those who use the term in its broad sense distinguish carefully between the contingent logic for each specific application.

Despite such misgivings, and in the short period of two decades, the idea of ‘postcolonial cultures’ has become extended – some say, distended – in scope. It currently includes reference to any ex-colonial society which gives evidence of asymmetry in respect to power (over the canons and organs of knowledge, belief and practice), access (to outlets and audiences for the production of cultural artifacts), or recognition (from peers, consumers and empowering institutions such as the state, media and educational apparatuses). The idea is applied to multicultural as well as monocultural societies, and to the features that complicate such distinctions (e.g. English/French Canadian cultures). It is used to refer to the cultural changes in former colonizers (e.g. sonnets and serials on the British Raj), in the formerly colonized (e.g. cricket in the Caribbean), to the relation between them (e.g. Dub poetry in Black Britain), to the infiltration of one by the other (e.g. Parisian Beur culture, the culture of censorship in relation to the music of Mzwakhe Mbuli), or to internalizations of the colonial relation (e.g. natives in the Americas, aborigines in Australia, Ma¯ori in New Zealand, coloured and black people under apartheid). In general, ‘postcolonial studies’ proposes diagnoses that might redress ‘transculturation’, the process whereby marginal or subordinate groups can only ‘select and invent from materials transmitted to them by a dominant culture’ (Pratt, 1992: 6).

The study of ‘postcolonial cultures’ gives particular emphasis to the ethico-political dimension that links the ideas of ‘postcolonial’ and ‘postmodern’ societies: hybridization. Homi Bhabha expands the connotations:

Hybridization is not some happy, consensual mix of diverse cultures; it is the strategic, translational transfer of tone, value, signification, and position – a transfer of power – from an authoritative system of cultural hegemony to an emergent process of cultural relocation and reiteration that changes the very terms of interpretation and institutionalization, opening up contesting, opposing, innovative, ‘other grounds of subject and object formation. It is this double consciousness that produces what I call the vernacular cosmopolitanism of the postcolonial or minoritarian subject. It is a mode of living, and a habit of mind, that seeks cultural translation, not to recover the norms of universality, autonomy, and sovereignty, but to assert that there is a positive, agential value in the whole process of surviving domination that can add an edge, a cutting edge, to the critiques – contra neoliberalism or retro-Marxist – that come from those who have been displaced or marginalized on the grounds of their cultural, civilizational, or, as it is often described, moral and spiritual backwardness. (2000: 370)

In all its forms the idea of ‘postcolonial cultures refracts cultural change through the lens of displacement. Translation between languages becomes a metaphor for the translation of beliefs, values and practices between cultures. Linguistic displacement becomes an allegory for exile and diaspora. At its widest, the oppressive and exploitative dimension of colonialism provides ‘postcolonial’ with an application that takes in every form of victimization perpetrated by custom, prejudice or ideology on grounds of belief, gender, sexual preference, religious persuasion, or linguistic and ethnic affiliation.

However, there is a sense in which the currency of the term needs to meet with a natural datedness. The first British colony to break free from its colonial status was the USA. The formation of nation managed to avoid or evade the appellation of ‘postcolonial’ in a manner that has implications for other former colonies. There must come a time when ‘postcolonial’ ceases to be a term always open-ended about the receding future it recognizes as the plight of those it describes. For that future to stop receding there would have to come a time when a society could look on its colonial and postcolonial pasts as the assumed ground on which to live and continue changing

## 372 Theory, Culture & Society 23(2–3)

without being overshadowed or constrained by that history. In the United States, Noah Webster proposed an ‘American standard’ for language as early as 1789, and the American Spelling Book (1783) was selling a million copies a year by the 1850s (in a US population of about 23 million), before Walt Whitman’s Leaves of Grass was published in 1855, 80 years after the American declaration of independence (and in the same year as Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s far more traditional Hiawatha). The example suggests that the ‘postcoloniality’ of any culture may be identified as a moment of gradual and complex ‘cross over’. However suspended or drawn out this moment may be, it is possible for peoples, nations and cultures to conceive of a time when the crossing is finally over. In that sense, the idea of ‘postcolonial’ cultures is contingent and provisional, like a ladder that has to be drawn up when the climbing is done, or a name that is meant to become a misnomer.

## References

Ahmad, A. (1992) In Theory: Classes, Nations, Literatures. London: Verso.

Brydon, D. (ed.) (2000) Postcolonialism: Critical Concepts in Literary and Cultural Studies, 5 vols. London and New York: Routledge.

Bhabha, H.K. (2000) ‘Surviving Theory: A Conversation with Homi K. Bhabha’, pp. 369–79 in F. Afzal-Khan and K. Seshadri-Crooks (eds) The Pre-occupation of

# Cultural Diversity

Yudhishthir Raj Isar

Keywords collective identity, cosmopolitanism, cultural goods and services, cultural policy, international relations, multiculturalism, politics of recognition

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>contemporary</sup> <sup>wave</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>culturalism</sup> <sup>has</sup>transformed the notion of cultural diversity transformed the notion of cultural diversity from a given of the human condition – and the stuff of anthropology – into a normative metanarrative, whether culture is seen as ‘the ground of perpetual, irreducible (and, in most cases, desirable and worth conscious preservation) diversity of human kind’ (Bauman, 1992) or in terms of ‘the conscious mobilization of cultural differences in

Postcolonial Studies. Durham, NC and London: Duke University Press.

Huggan, G. (2001) The Postcolonial Exotic: Marketing the Margins. London and New York: Routledge.

JanMohamed, A.R. and D. Lloyd (eds) (1990) The Nature and Context of Minority Discourse. New York: Oxford University Press.

McClintock, A. (1992) ‘The Angel of Progress: Pitfalls of the Term “Post-Colonialism”’, Social Text 31/32: 84–98.

Mohanty, C. et al. (eds) (1991) Third World Women and the Politics of Feminism. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Pratt, M.L. (1992) Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation. London: Routledge.

Said, E.W. (1978) Orientalism. London: Routledge.

Shohat, E. (1992) ‘Notes on the “Post-Colonial”’, Social Text 31/32: 99–113.

Trinh, T.M. (1989) Woman, Native, Other: Writing Postcoloniality and Feminism. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Young, R.C. (2002) Postcolonialism: An Historical Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell.

Rajeev Patke teaches at the National University of Singapore. Forthcoming publications include Postcolonial Poetry in English (Oxford University Press, 2006) and the co-edited Historical Companion to Postcolonial Literatures: Continental Europe and its Empires (Edinburgh University Press, 2007).

the service of a larger national or transnational politics’ (Appadurai, 1996: 15). While the culturalism is patently global, the discourses of cultural diversity as a policy ideal have been generated principally in Europe and North America and appear to have their strongest purchase there.

Everywhere, though, understandings of cultural diversity as a strategic notion tend to favour ‘billiard ball’ representations of cultures as neatly bounded wholes whose contents are given and static – hence mainly to be ‘protected’ or ‘preserved’. These understandings downplay ‘the ways in which the meanings and symbols of culture are produced through complex processes of translation, negotiation and enunciation’ (Stevenson, 2003: 62), as well as by contestation and conflict.

The notion has also been rather specifically connoted: in the United States, for example, it was a code word throughout the 1960s and 1970s for the recognition of the civil rights of Afro-Americans; as Appiah (1987) has suggested, the call of collective identities expressed in American ‘multiculturalism’ is much less a reflection of ‘culture’ than an expression of the individual’s concern for dignity and respect. It is only recently that the term has become the handmaiden of a ‘multiculturalism’ that seeks to celebrate the full variegation of American society. And the 21st century has introduced yet another special coding: ‘cultural diversity’ in international cultural politics is the standard-bearer of a campaign to exclude cultural goods and services from global free trade rules.

Once a technical term deployed by the social sciences, the term ‘culture’ itself has escaped all academic control and has undergone a marked inflation of usages. ‘Culture’ is now proclaimed as an inalienable ‘right’, conceived of as a value in itself, and justified as an inherited ‘tradition’. It has entered the repertoires of discourses and strategies deployed by ‘imagined communities’ at different levels – from the activism of minorities, religious sodalities and local groups to the ‘cultural policies of nation-states. Perceived as threatened by a dominant source of ‘civilization’, the values of different ways of life have risen to consciousness and have become the rallying cry of diverse claims to a space in the planetary culture. ‘Before, culture was just lived. Now it has become a self-conscious collective project. Every struggle for life becomes the struggle of a way of life’ (Sahlins, 1994: 11).

It was in this spirit that the notion of cultural diversity was given international political legitimacy by the World Commission on Culture and Development, of whose report, entitled Our Creative Diversity (UNESCO, 1996), it was the leitmotif. The notion also dominates the cultural policy lexicon in Europe; the Council of Europe has issued a Declaration on it and it is foregrounded in the cultural rhetoric of the European Union. As a counterpart to the idea of a European cultural identity, built on the assumption of a shared history and common ‘roots’, the diversity of its cultures is proclaimed as one of the defining, if not unique, merits of European civilization (the idea was actually first mooted by the great French historian François Guizot a century and a half ago). The European Union has even adopted ‘the unity of diversities’ as its slogan. The principle of subsidiarity protecting this diversity gives the Union only complementary or residual competence for cultural policy, leaving the main responsibility at the level of national governments (EFAH, 2004). Yet over five decades ago, ‘unity and diversity’ was already the motto of the newly-formed Republic of India. But in this usage, the term merely recognized the empirical plurality of the sub-continental nation’s constituent parts rather than being an overt celebration of its cultural variety; this factual usage is replicated frequently elsewhere in the non-Western world.

While the conscious mobilization of collective cultural differences and concomitant claims to the recognition of cultural rights are worldwide phenomena, the elevation of cultural diversity to the status of a value in itself and its use as a ‘buzzword’ in the popular lexicon have been largely Western. Within nations, the accent has begun to shift from policies with a nationalist and homogenizing cast to the acceptance and even active promotion of cultural differences, as postcolonial developments force societies to address the challenge of articulating and mediating a sense of separate as well as shared space for diverse cultural communities (Bennett, 2001). Thus, the term is now commonly deployed with a view to supporting the ‘right to be different’ of many different categories of individuals/groups placed in some way outside dominant social and cultural norms, hence including disabled people, gays and lesbians, women, as well as the poor and the elderly. And yet, the predominant emphasis – particularly outside the West – is on ethnic differences and the affirmations of ethnic minorities in the face of dominant majorities and/or the homogenizing tendencies of ‘national’ cultures. But even these affirmations are diverse, as Bennett has pointed out. They include, first, sub- or multi national communities (the Basques or the Sri Lanka Tamils, for example) that dispute the homogenizing tendencies of national cultures, but do so on the basis of essentially similar strategies by articulating a set of associations between a territory, its people and their culture which competes with that of the dominant national culture. Second, autochthonous communities, ethnically marked, that are the result of earlier movements of peoples or boundaries. Third, diasporic cultures, produced in association with the histories of displaced peoples, involving mobile international cultural networks operating across, and offering an alternative to, the territorial logic of national cultures. Finally, indigenous cultures developed in the context of resistance to colonial occupation that typically contest national mappings of the relations between people, culture, history and territory by mobilizing deeper and longer histories.

In Europe, the topical challenge is posed by the claims to difference associated with the international movement of – mainly non-European – peoples. This has brought articulations of ethnic difference into the public sphere, rather than relegating them to the private sphere alone, an issue that has become a key stake in the re-composition of the notion of ‘national’ culture and identity. How is difference heard in the public sphere and what are the strategies, social objectives and recognition goals sought by its actors (Wieviorka and Ohana, 2001)? We are in the midst of a polarized policy debate. On the one hand, the classic liberal position, which posits the primacy of the individual and her/his identity over collective belonging and restricts the affirmation of the latter to the private sphere. On the other, the communitarian approach which sees individual identity as the product of community. As an increasing number of individuals opt for the right to choose the markers and roles they use to construct their identities, how are the claims of equality and citizenship to be reconciled with the claims of difference? The challenge of including diversity within the national public sphere can also help question the ‘national’ culture itself and develop new understandings about its increasingly interethnic and inter-racial composition.

There is an increasingly visible discourse of according respect and value to different cultures that now coexist within national civic communities. Such liberal forms of ‘multiculturalism’, however, may well aestheticize difference through the cosmetic celebration of cultural diversity; they may reify difference at the expense of the new patterns of interaction which might arise from their mixing and intermingling (Bennett, 2004). How to nurture relationships of difference that avoid such pitfalls? What are the forms of intercultural competence – both mutual translation and dialogic interchange – that this would require? Enabling all the groups that henceforth constitute the national community to assume ownership of its composite cultural identity remains a major challenge for policy-makers. This is not simply a matter of combating intolerance and exclusion, but also of giving dignity, voice and recognition in the public sphere to different cultural groups while constructing – negotiating – a sense of national community. How can we forge societies that are truly pluralistic yet possess a shared sense of belonging? What can states do to help different cultural communities live together as one national community? Are current policies and practices effective in promoting attitudes and values that encourage mutual respect? How should policies and institutions evolve so as to better respond to the needs of diverse societies? Can national identity be defined so that all communities may identify with the country and its self-definition?

This entry would be incomplete without a reference to the latest avatar of the notion, its current transubstantive reduction, through a subtle process of semantic sleight of hand, to the issue of cultural goods and services. In this guise, the term emerged at the turn of the present century, as an alternative to the limited and somewhat negative connotations of the ‘exception culturelle’ that France, Canada and other nations had been negotiating since the end of the Uruguay Round discussions in the mid-1990s. When the United States attempted to make free trade principles apply to all ‘cultural goods’, principally their own audiovisual exports, in the context of a debate over the European Union’s broadcasting directive Television Without Frontiers, France countered with the argument that a ‘cultural exception’ was necessary because culture was not just another type of merchandise. The shift from exception to diversity as the master concept allowed French international diplomacy to tap into a much broader range of cultural commitments and anxieties in international relations. Thus, UNESCO’s Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity, adopted in 2001, was the successful outcome of a vigorous Franco-Canadian strategy. Article 8, which is entitled ‘Cultural goods and services: commodities of a unique kind’, states:

In the face of present-day economic and technological change, opening up vast prospects for creation and innovation, particular attention must be paid to the diversity of the supply of creative work, to due recognition of the rights of authors and artists and to the specificity of cultural goods and services which, as vectors of identity, values and meaning, must not be treated as mere commodities or consumer goods.

Although the Declaration contains 11 other articles that address the policy challenges of cultural diversity in a much more comprehensive way (including many of the issues discussed above), its main strategic purpose, clearly, was to legitimize policy measures taken by national governments to protect nationally produced cultural goods and services. This is also the main purpose of the ‘Convention on the Protection of the Diversity of Cultural Contents and Artistic Expressions’ that was adopted in October 2005 by UNESCO; it is the sense in which many individuals, non-governmental organizations, cultural activists and government officials strategically use the term today.

The principle is laudable. The goal is to foster the dynamism of contemporary cultural production rather than play a preservationist role. Yet this new international trope is also built upon unquestioned, undeconstructed discourses of nationhood. Precisely because its object is cultural diversity among nations rather than within them, it brings us little closer to a truly cosmopolitan agenda.