## References

Appadurai, A. (1996) Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Appiah, K.A. (1997) ‘The Multiculturalist Misunderstanding’, New York Review of Books 44(9 October): 15.

Bauman, Z. (1992) Intimations of Postmodernity. London: Routledge.

Bennett, T. (2001) Differing Diversities: Cultural Policy and Cultural Diversity. Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing.

Bennett, T. (2004) ‘Culture and Difference: The Challenges of Multiculturalism’, paper presented at the symposium, ‘When Culture Makes the Difference: The Heritage, Arts and Media in Multicultural Society’, organized by the Associazione per l’Economia della Cultura and the Faculty of Foreign Languages and Literatures at the University of Genoa, in collaboration with DAMS – Faculty of Humanities and Philosophy, Genoa, 19–21 November.

EFAH (European Forum for the Arts and Heritage) (2004) Inventory, http://www. efah.org/en/resources\_for\_culture/inventory/ cultdiv.htm

Sahlins, M. (1994) ‘A Brief Cultural History of Culture’. Unpublished paper prepared for the World Commission on Culture and Development (UNESCO).

Stevenson, N. (2003) Cultural Citizenship: Cosmopolitan Questions. Maidenhead: The Open University Press.

UNESCO (1996) Our Creative Diversity (Report of the World Commission on Culture and Development). Paris: UNESCO Publishing.

UNESCO (2001) Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity. Paris: UNESCO.

Wieviorka, M. and J. Ohana (eds) (2001) La différence culturelle: Une reformulation des débats. Paris: Balland.

Y. Raj Isar is an independent cultural adviser, Jean Monnet Professor at The American University of Paris and President of the European Forum for the Arts and Heritage (EFAH).

# Violence

Ryan Bishop and John Phillips

Abstract Violence is spoken of in several senses but its most basic definition, as a force exerted by one thing on another, harbors serious problems, especially when it comes to a consideration of its source or cause. We begin this article by identifying some of the aporias of violence with reference to philosophical and religious discourses and then we go on to analyze how violence problematizes concepts of law and justice in world historical contexts. We examine several traditions including Indo-European mythology, as well as Hindu, Taoist, and ancient Greek philosophy, before addressing the concept of violence in modern thought, as a revision of Christianity. We conclude with some discussion of epistemological violence and its critics.

Keywords epistemological violence, force, human, justice, knowledge, law, religion, sacrifice

## Introduction

We speak of violence in several senses: physical, psychological, emotional and conceptual. Most immediately, though (and in that sense most violently), it is said to erupt among people in motivated personal or political struggles, sometimes irrationally, criminally, unexpectedly; in any event, violence leaves its victims in shock or lying wounded or dead. Ubiquitous 24-hour news services report an almost continuous narrative of the multiple events of violence that at any one time are occurring globally. Violence, in this immediate sense, can be the result of natural catastrophes, terrorism, demonstration, rioting or revolt, state policing, military conflict, various kinds of warfare, major offensives, strategic assaults or domestic abuse. This immediate sense of the notion of violence is itself violent. Considered as a category of global knowledge, violence can erupt as the spectacular instance of underlying conditions, complex and often unobserved political negotiations and uncontrolled, incalculable effects. Identifying the causes of violence in certain ways – determining an instance of violence as the consequence of this or that motive or ideology – can itself be regarded as a kind of violence, which would be manifested when a determination is acted upon (e.g. in the form of a retaliation or deterrence), leading to conceptions of justified violence, necessary violence, sufficient force, etc. Violence, in this immediate sense, escalates. There is no doubt that the last 150 years have seen an escalation of violence in terms at least of the sheer numbers of a global, increasingly urban, population who have been or who are currently (at any time) the victims of the several causes of violence. Simply identifying the empirical escalation of violence does nothing to solve the problem of violence, which is as old, it seems, as the race itself.

So violence would seem to be an empirical phenomenon yet questions arise as to its origin, its source. The empirical (materialist or formalist) concepts of violence have proven to be wholly inadequate to any attempt to think through violence as an epistemological category. Traditionally the problem falls into the disjuncture between empirical and transcendental determinations, as if perhaps there was a transcendental (traditionally a divine and thus unconditioned) force before and beyond experience. In his book, Religion and Violence: Philosophical Perspectives from Kant to Derrida, Hent de Vries (2002: 1) offers a basic and inclusive definition of violence as entailing ‘any cause, any justified or illegitimate force, that is exerted – physically or otherwise – by one thing (event or instance, group or person, and, perhaps, word and object) on another’. As inclusive as it is, the definition harbors a serious problem, which becomes one of the main strands of the book. The definition of violence as ‘force’, or at least the concept of force as violence, presupposes a relation between more than one, and thus a potential play, or worse, opposition, of forces. Violence as a condition of possibility is thus presupposed by any act of force. Any real violence (physical, psychological, social, etc.) might seem to presuppose an ideal (a priori or transcendental) violence – or even a radical non-violence. Yet the reverse is true as well: the thought of violence seems necessarily constrained by circumstances, contained by history.

Attempts to engage with the aporias of violence through the (evidently considerable) remaining resources of religion and philosophy address an important aspect of global knowledge. The problem, conceived in this way, is widespread and fundamental. It concerns not only questions of personal and social justice, government, international relations and international law, but also – more fundamentally perhaps – the very constitution of knowledge itself in its concepts and modes of classification. In what follows we make some observations about violence and global knowledge and then go on to analyze how violence problematizes concepts of law and justice in several world historical contexts. We then return to the question of epistemological violence as a contemporary concern of global knowledge.

The problem of knowledge is inextricable from the problem of violence. To speak of epistemological violence in the 21st century might feel almost tautological. When the dominant strands of scientific, but especially technological, knowledge have not only served but also – perhaps more significantly – driven the development of military epistemologies and technologies, then one cannot talk of knowledge without evoking violence. Even beyond the evident military sphere, mainstream scientific and technical knowledge can be analyzed as a kind of legitimating force, which not only produces the legitimate bounds of a particular branch of knowledge, but also classifies knowledge generally, relegating, domesticating or even subjugating alternative kinds of knowledge. In this way, for instance, the traditional discourses of Orientalism (in policy, commerce and scholarship) can be said to characterize, through several kinds of representation often in the guise of scientific objectivity, an Orient that replaces – literally stands in stead of – anything that might have been produced as Oriental knowledge as such. These representations are all the more powerful for their combining of scorn and hypostatization, which produces the hallucination of a fully formed relationship. Orientalism, in this sense (and to the extent that this argument is valid), would only become a knowledge in the deepest sense of the term with the acknowledgement of the violence of these projections. It seems, then, that knowledge, according to traditional, even ancient, principles, ought to be opposed to violence. Nevertheless the problem of violence is considerably more complex than such ideals allow.

## Theories of Violence

The word violence is associated with two kinds of terminology; it participates in at least two registers. If it belongs with the lexical series – force, power, polemos, eris, etc. – then it does so where this register is no longer distinguishable from an ethical or political register: polites, praxis, law, right, rules, respect, duty and justice. Violence is the term, it seems, that causes the most confusion between these registers. For instance, Dike, justice, for the Greeks, whether conceived as right, trial, penalty or vengeance, is identified with a kind of Eris, discord or conflict, and thus with adikia, injustice. Justice thus presupposes a certain notion of violence, both in the condition that calls for justice and the just response to that call.

A generally applicable pattern can be traced across situations otherwise constrained by their historical conditions. What this pattern manifests each time it emerges is an aporia that resides at the heart of conceptions about violence. Violence is perceived, always, as excessive to some stable principle, condition, or state of affairs (e.g. the Law). But this excess also makes justice possible as a necessary action over and above whatever conditions prevail. Such a situation then gives rise to a concept of present justice that remains beyond, or exceeds, the Law. All attempts to establish justice, therefore, aim either to revise existing laws or to establish laws not yet in existence. No such attempt would escape violence.

For this reason violence is singled out as a problem or question during times of perceived crisis. For instance, European models of parliamentary democracy, which are regularly confronted by crisis, also regularly fail to overcome the aporia that functions as their ground. Crises and their responses emerge in the forms, variously, of revolutions, world wars, both liberal and fascist discourses, pre- and post-war failures of pacifism, anti-militarism, as well as intellectual or scholarly attempts to form judgments about, critiques of, violence, including state political violence. The problem of non-violence is that its ends are the foundation of new laws or re-interpretation of existing ones on principles that do not yet exist (for it will be the task of the new laws to justify the principles of their founding). Walter Benjamin’s (1996) example of the general strike in ‘Critique of Violence [Gewalt – also legitimate force]’ finds a logic there similar to that which grounds the idea of the proletariat revolution. Laws are founded in violence (always and everywhere) just as all attempts to contest, rewrite, re-found – whether in the name of justice in general or on behalf of some identifiable party or parties – are also made in the moment of violence.

Violence also defines the human subject as a possible subject of violence, injustice, or even lack of respect. But this is the result of a peculiar metaphysical and anthropocentric axiomatic that presupposes a hierarchy even within the category man – as, for instance, male, European, citizen, capable of sacrifice and omnivorous. Again, this conception is both historically specific and also, in critical terms, a resource for considerations of performative justice in the light of the aporia that it exemplifies.

Attempts to distinguish justice from violence tend to reproduce the distinction between foundation(s) and end(s). The Greek notion of the founding violence of law can be uneasily compared with Jewish notions of divine, destructive, annihilating violence; there are equivalent notions of founding violence in the Indo-European tradition, and in Islam. In each case these notions of founding violence are coupled with catastrophic ends: the last judgment, divine positioning, telos and eschatos (the end of hope in death and the final destiny of the race). In concrete political terms the metaphysics of origin and end becomes the pragmatic distinction of means and ends, where one can be justified only in reference to the other (the ends justify the means or the means justify the ends). Aristotle’s distinction between legitimate force and criminal violence presupposes a law governed constitution (politeia) that has been founded. The good of that (arbitrary) foundation must, however, be distinguished from the arbitrary and impetuous acts that characterize crimes. The power of a King must therefore remain outside the Kingdom, so that it is best that the sovereign acts as warrior as opposed to governor, for here the distinction resolves into that between justice and tyranny.

Examples from many times and geographical spaces reveal the emergence of horizons like these and their deconstruction: the enlightenment idea (whether in repetition of or distinguished from the Platonic one); various forms of Messianism (Jewish, Christian, Islamic); eschatology and teleology. As Jacques Derrida (2002) suggests in ‘The Force of Law: The Mystical Foundations of Authority’, the aporia of justice lies in the fact that the requirement to be just falls between a violent founding and the horizon of a present justice, always to come (in the French, ‘avenir’ – or future). The requirements of both justice and law are excessive but each exceeds itself to the extent that it appeals to the other: law exceeds itself in an appeal to justice; justice exceeds itself in its appeal to law. If the Law is founded in violence, then justice, insofar as it is distinguished from the law, would always be called on to reinterpret or adjust the law as it currently stands, or to found a new one entirely, whose justification is written mysteriously in the future anterior of its moment of violence. So what the law most fears in its other is what resides in itself.