## The Traditions

The nexus of might and right (force and law) cannot be easily disentangled. In a famous work on Indo-European mythology, George Dumézil (n.d.) traces the complementary and complicated relationship between violence and law as essential dimensions for the justification of sovereignty. Using a comparative, synchronic, structuralist model of cultural-historical analysis that has come under severe critique, Dumézil nevertheless provides us with examples of a need to reconcile the relationship between force and justice operative in a diverse range of chronological, cultural moments. Taking the Vedic texts as one site of inquiry, Dumézil argues that ancient states did not rely on war to justify and maintain sovereignty per se, that is state sponsored violence against other states to perpetuate internal legitimacy, but rather used internal policing through the law as well as magic for its claims to rule. Violence in state form, according to Dumézil, was almost exclusively an internal matter. As Deleuze and Guattari (1987: 352) argue, the channeling of the force that is violence through an apparatus such as the military is almost always external to the state and is not reducible to the state. The Vedic texts delineate a complex relationship of gods through which Indra, the warrior god, stands in opposition to both the State-as-Law and State-as-Spirit. He is responsible for keeping the earth and heavens apart. As such, Indra embodies violent forces that are both destructive and beneficent while also demarcating the divide between sacred and secular realms. Similarly, the Dhanur Veda, which provides martial instruction, contains both sacred knowledge and profane knowledge. Violence, in the Vedic texts, is external and internal to the state, harnessed in the form of a military for conflict with other states and in the form of the police (within the polis) when exerting internal control. As such, it is both related to justice in metaphysical (religious, sacred) and physical (secular, legalistic) rationales.

The Bhagavad Gı¯ta¯ is perhaps most famous as a parable of violence in defense of a philosophy of non-violence. One of the books of the great Mahabharata and a corner stone of Hindu philosophy, the Gı¯ta¯ begins with a moment just before a scene of battle, where Arjuna, the Kshatria warrior prince, is filled with doubt when he realizes that his enemies on the battlefield are to be family, friends, and beloved teachers. On seeking advice from Lord Krishna, Arjuna learns through dialogue the main tenets of the Yoga School. The yoga of knowledge (jna¯na) and the yoga of good works (karma) are to be integrated under the yoga of devotion (bhakti), with the aim of cultivating an ethical state of selfless duty, in which actions have no reference to personal loss or gain. In the Gı¯ta¯ Krishna’s teaching begins with the analogy (based upon the widespread belief in the transmigration of souls) that, ‘just as a man casting off wornout clothes takes up others that are new, so the embodied self, casting off its worn-out bodies, goes to other, new ones’ (Bhagavad Gı¯ta¯ 2.22). The notion of the absolute immutability of the a¯tman, the essential self, justifies Arjuna’s leadership in a battle that will destroy thousands of his loved ones on the grounds that only the bodies of his enemies will suffer and die. Their essential selves will not be harmed. The body, as the parable suggests, is anyway the site of inevitable suffering, ultimate decay and death. Krishna’s teaching defines the eternal state in terms of devotion or duty: Arjuna’s involvement in a just war is confirmed as a devotional act, to the extent that his actions will be violently opposed to his inclinations, motivated not by passion but by duty alone. The metaphysical scheme is unmistakable and, as such, reveals the philosophy behind it to be an affirmation of a non-violence in the radical sense as devotion to principles whose source lies beyond the physical world. Mahatma Gandhi’s famous reading of the Gı¯ta¯ draws on its spiritual implications in order to support his philosophy of struggle through non-violence. Gandhi argued that the war of the Mahabharata was allegory for the general experience of conflict and could thus be applied to the specific struggle against British colonial rule. And so by means of non-violent civil disobedience, Gandhi sought to bring about India’s independence from British rule, and in doing so, contributed hugely to the British Empire’s collapse.

It may be that violence in its logical form serves as a hinge both joining and distinguishing heterogeneous entities, ensembles, registers or concepts. But this hinge would always be an eruption. Violence breaks out or erupts, revealing retrospective violence at the heart of the law while simultaneously establishing a new just law to come for which it lays the violent grounds. Some of the most violent actions – as well as actions that have the most violent effects – are in principle non-violent, but in these cases it is the principle of non-violence that decides against the performative excess of justice in its possibility.

Two extremes emerge, between which all combinations are possible and many common. On one side, violence is never just and the law should never be violent. Violence, at this extreme, always comes into a world that is already governed by laws, for against mythology neither the force that precedes law, nor that which the law must harness for the administration of its justice, would generally have been considered violent. Violenta is marked not only by its vehemence and impetuosity, but also by its lawlessness. Physical force would be recognized as violence according to both the rapidity of its eruptions and the damage it inflicts on persons or properties and, in not necessarily physical ways, on other lawfully governed or protected entities (language, grammar, mores, sensibilities, morals, etc.). Justice is always called upon by a world that is already (and thus perhaps imperfectly) governed by laws. Both violence and justice come into the world as if from the outside. In this account there can be no just violence.

Related to this conception would be the Taoist principle according to which human life is a partial and very minor manifestation of the larger process of nature. The only justifiable human actions are those which are in accord with the patterns and flows of Nature – the Tao or the Way. Taoism rejects any principle that would lead to excessively assertive modes of behavior or commitment to the achievement of worldly goals. Assertiveness against nature (or unnatural assertiveness) is the root cause of violence and aggression. If Confucius offered moral reasons to counsel against violence and to urge rulers to govern by virtue rather than by force, then Taoism takes the Confucian principle further and denounces violence as reflecting the ultimate ignorance of the Way of Nature. The distinction between the excesses of human action and the mysterious foundation of natural law is not uncommon. At the other extreme, violence can be justified as natural at the origin. A basic violence outside the world of laws (Mythology, Darwin, Natural Law) precedes the establishment of governed communities. Law is an appropriation of violence and can be opposed by violence. In this case it is argued that there can be just violence.

In the Greek tradition, which is itself formed in complex transactions between Middle Eastern and south Asian traditions, Violence is personified as part of a family group along with several other ethical/political terms. Nike (victory) is, according to Hesiod, the sister of three powerful siblings: Zelos (Rivalry), Kratos (Strength) and Bia (Violence and Force). In the Promethean myth it was Bia who, together with Cratos and Hephaestus, chained Prometheus to the rock. Bia and Dike, in the early archaic periods, are cast as enemies of one another. But as the fragment from Pindar makes clear, later periods found them co-existing under the sovereignty of nomos (the rule, law) with each justifying and supporting the other. The same principle is found in Heraclitus (n.d.). Hesiod, however, sought to separate them from one another and, in fact, used this separation as a means for separating humans from animals. Animals could deploy Bia because they did not possess Dike, but Zeus bestowed Dike upon humans so they could forget Bia. Thus Agamben observes that, ‘the sovereign nomos is the principle that, joining law and violence, threatens them with indistinction’ (Agamben, 1998: 31).

A famous saying of the pre-Socratic philosopher Heraclitus (500 BC) establishes a complex reference for considerations of violence: ‘War is the father of all, king of all: some it shows as gods, some as men; some it makes slaves’. Taking Heraclitus as an early proponent of war, in the face of common-sensical empirical experience of it, Porphyry attributes to him the notion that humans provide the judgment of the enactment of force, which in the eyes of the gods (or God) merely is, neither good nor bad. Violence then is amoral, insofar as it is merely a type of energy, or a force, of the universe that is part of what is necessary for being. But for Heraclitus, this energy, which is best embodied as fire, is ‘intelligent’ and capable of judgment itself. He writes that fire ‘will come and judge and convict all things’ (1987: 104). The universe – itself finite and infinite, divisible and indivisible – is ‘generated from fire and it is consumed in fire again, alternating in fixed periods throughout the whole of time’ (1987: 107). Anticipating in some specific ways the Materialist thought of Hobbes, Heraclitus asserts that ‘We must know that war is common to all and strife is justice, and that all things come into being and pass away through strife.’ The force of the universe, in this early philosophy, is simultaneously creative and destructive. But contra Porphyry’s reading of Heraclitus, force embodies and enacts justice. So the force of the universe that manifests itself as violence or fire is part of the infinite in the universe necessary for the existence of all things and beings but which wreaks strife and despair in the finite world of humans, from which and for which we seek explanation and judgment. According to Heraclitus, though, judgment resides in the force that results in and is violence. And in this manner, Heraclitus anticipates Nietzsche’s discussion of the force of being as ‘the will to power’, which is also a will to interpretation and evaluation (or judgment). Violence has long held the aura and enigmatic power of both divine and secular law.

After Plato, philosophical treatises on justice and violence eschew the suggestive force (and potential violence) of myth. In Book V of The Nichomachean Ethics, Aristotle addresses much of what is at stake in considerations of violence and justice, by claiming the right to use force as a legislative principle of constitutional government (politeia). Following and developing motifs of the Ethics, a key text in discussions of political justice, The Politics distinguishes from an at once ideal and historical necessity in sovereignty, a progressive and developmental necessity for replacing sovereignty with constitutional (and contingent) politics. It is here where Aristotle definitively rejects democracy as a tyrannous form of constitutional government, which allows the violent principle of sovereignty back into the civilized state. The concept of violence once again distinguishes the citizens of a constitution, who are never women, children, slaves, animals or plants.

Immanuel Kant (1991, 1996), in the name of Enlightenment, outlines the passage from the state of nature to constitutional government as both the distinction between, and the continuity of, founding force against the state of nature and rational law against criminal violence. States in an international arena thus repeat the natural situation of individual men in a natural arena. Just community is always to come – it is one of reason’s ideas. Kant’s idea for a universal history has its ethical correlative in the categorical imperative, according to which I must act as if the maxim for my action could, by my will alone, become a universal law in analogy with natural laws. Several scholars have identified points of comparison between Kant’s metaphysics of morals and the Bhagavad Gı¯ta¯, which is suggestive, so long is we acknowledge that for Kant the analogy is a regulative ideal, and thus a hypothetical horizon of present justice to come.

## Violence and Sacrifice

The texts of widely varying traditions reveal a strong link between violence and the sacred (and, by extension, secular law and metaphysical justice). The most apparent form of this link, perhaps, can be found in the sacrifice. Rene Girard (1979: 14–19) argues that sacrifice serves as a means of staving off violence by redirecting it toward a victim incapable of seeking vengeance, an initial act of violence that seeks to prevent an escalation of it. Religious sacrifice as a means for containing human violence yielded to the secular Law in later societies, and the judicial system (always somewhat derivative for its authority on Divine Law) takes over the mantle of ritualized violence within the State apparatus. Girard argues further an exteriority of violence in relation to humans, much as Heraclitus asserted it as a force operative in the universe. Because violence is exterior to humans, Girard (1979: 31) writes, it is a ‘part of all the other outside forces that threaten mankind. Violence is the heart and the secret soul of the sacred. We have yet to learn how man succeeds in positing his own violence as an independent being’. Violence’s exteriority, then, connects it to the sacred and through the containment of it in the form of sacrifice, humans perform a sacred ritual.

The three great monotheistic religions each include the willingness of Abraham to sacrifice his son, only to have God intervene and stay his hand. The early tribes of Israel would seem to have positioned their belief in relation to sacrifice, much as each of the monotheistic traditions has had to address the relationship between sacrifice and murder. The crucifixion of Jesus has been read by many as a sacrifice to end all sacrifices; the son of God is also the Lamb of God, or the sacrificial lamb. Nevertheless, the question of sacrifice is amongst the deepest questions of ontology.

The problem, in the peculiar (and fecund) form it takes in the western critical tradition, culminates in Hegel’s philosophy (1948, 1977). Hegel’s early theological works (written between 1795 and 1800) manifest the mature systematic philosophy in rudimentary form. There, the concept of sacrifice plays the role of removing a prior violence: the violence of irreconcilable division. In Hegel’s account, Abraham founds the history of the Jewish people and thus inaugurates a dialectical process. In emancipating his people from slavery Abraham institutes a singular relation to his (the Hebrew) God and at the same time establishes a fundamental and hostile division between the Jewish nation and the rest of the world. Abraham encounters foreign people as he encounters nature: as a wandering stranger, destined to remain in absolute opposition: ‘he was a stranger on earth, a stranger to the soil and to men alike (Hegel, 1948: 186). This foreignness particularly characterizes his God, who remains absolutely alien to the world. For readers of the Phenomenology Abraham’s foreignness with regard to the world anticipates how consciousness in its early manifestation seizes on mastery as the only possible relationship to a world infinitely opposed to it (the canonical form, for us, of the subject–object relationship). Abraham’s willingness to sacrifice his son can thus be grasped as the mythical version of a necessary phase in the process by which consciousness becomes aware of itself beyond its naïve opposition to its others – essentially yet only ultimately, of course, between selfish interests and the ethical interests of the total community.

The point is that a remainder – construed as absolute division or absolute difference – will throughout history have determined particular kinds of response. Regarded as violence, this division, this utter difference, will provoke counter measures of all kinds. Sacrifice is often presented as the lesser violence. For Hegel, Christianity marks a further step forward. The sacrifice of Jesus, the Lamb of God, functions as a kind of refined repetition of the previous situation (perhaps, in Samuel Beckett’s sense, a better failure): Jesus supposedly dies for everybody’s sins, thus revealing the Christian God as somewhat less exclusive than its Hebrew predecessor. Moreover, Jesus is supposed to, though he does not quite, resolve the absolute division between the mundane and the divine. Jesus’ ascension, which attempts to resolve the division between the Jews and the rest of the world, leaves, if anything, a greater calamity in the wake of his absolute disappearance into the divine. And, Hegel argues, as long as Christianity remains a ‘positive’ religion (excluding heathens), the unity of life is divided by the principle of bondage to the Christian lord. Thus Hegel begins his philosophy (properly speaking) with (what remains as) a short fragment on ‘Love’, which he saw (still as early as 1798) as the only possible solution to the several kinds of violence produced by discord: not the restricted love that binds all Christians but what he thought of as a ‘living’ bond capable of uniting radical opposites. The ways in which Hegel’s dialectic both fails (catastrophically) and succeeds (beyond expectation) in establishing the bond of love as the basis for ethical life remains one of the key problems of modern critical thought in the European tradition.

## Epistemological Violence

Many critical approaches to global epistemological violence generally identify a reductionist model of knowledge based on modern science and determined by the capitalist hold over organizations of government. Vandana Shiva (1990), for instance, argues as follows:

The linkage between modern science and a profit-based economic system can be discerned in major and varied scourges such as desertification, diarrhoea, and deforestation. Since the alternative modes of knowledge which can provide solutions to these problems are oriented to social benefit rather than to personal or corporate profits, reductionist science scoffs at them as hocus-pocus. The fact, however, is that reductionist science itself often resorts to misinformation and falsehood in order to establish its monopoly on knowledge.