## References

Bowker, G.C. and L. Star (2000) Sorting Things Out: Classification and its Consequences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Cohen, L. (2005) ‘Operability, Bioavailability, and Exception’, in S.J. Collier and A. Ong (eds) Global Assemblages: Technology, Politics and Ethics as Anthropological Problems. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Collier, S.J. and A. Ong (2005) ‘Global Assemblages, Anthropological Problems’, in S.J. Collier and A. Ong (eds) Global Assemblages: Technology, Politics, and Ethics as Anthropological Problems. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Dunn, E. (2005) ‘Standards and Person-Making in East-Central Europe’, in S.J. Collier and A. Ong (eds) Global Assemblages: Technology, Politics and Ethics as Anthropological Problems. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Giddens, A. (1994) ‘Living in a Post-Traditional Society’, in Reflexive Modernization: Politics, Tradition and Aesthetics in the Modern Social

Order. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Lakoff, A. (2005) Pharmaceutical Reason: Technology and the Human at the Modern Periphery. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Latour, B. (1987) Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Scheper-Hughes, N. (2005) ‘The Last Commodity’, in S.J. Collier and A. Ong (eds) Global Assemblages: Technology, Politics and Ethics as Anthropological Problems. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Weber, M. (2002) The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism and Other Writings. New York: Penguin.

Stephen Collier is an assistant professor in the Graduate Program in International Studies at the New School in New York. His research examines post-Soviet transformation, welfare, neoliberalism, globalization, and security.

# Mundialization/Globalization

Renato Ortiz

Keywords culture, globalization, mundialization, pattern, world modernity

Hglobalization from a cultural perspective? globalization from a cultural perspective? One possible answer would be to go back to the world system paradigm, for its critique of the nation-state as a unit of analysis opens a way to envision the world dynamics in other bases. This perspective, however, opens up other problems that, if ignored, will lead us into a dead end. There is, first, a strong economic inclination of the analyses, for the world system’s history is conceived as the evolution of capitalism (Wallerstein, 1991). As the economic basis is the privileged unit of analysis, political and cultural manifestations appear as its immediate reflections. In fact, this way of understanding social phenomena transposes to a wider territoriality a wellknown reasoning: society is formed by an economic infrastructure and an ideological superstructure. The material ‘floor’ would comprehend and determine the upper part of such architecture.

Another dimension posited by the analysis is its systemic character. A world system is an articulated set within which all elements are functionally integrated into the whole. An example is to be found in Luhmann’s work, that, conceiving society as a system, can extend the concept to reach a planetary scope; in this sense, the world would be a sole communicative system, where the parts, in their differences, would be linked to the same set. There would even be a hierarchy among social systems, from simple to complex, i.e., from less to more differentiated. The difference, however, has a simply functional role, the part functions for the integrity and coherence of the whole.

This theoretical conception allows us to answer an array of questions related to the role of economic and political forces in the ‘world system’. It includes, however, a series of contradictions that unveil its weaknesses. There is, first, a lack of social actors; a system-society does not need individuals and political actors: it consummates itself independently of their existence. The systemic approach encompasses the limitations of the sociological objectivism characteristic of Durkheimian or structuralist theories. By understanding society as a ‘thing’ or ‘structure’, one transcends the existence of ‘the men who make history’, i.e. the individuals and institutions that act and interact with each other. It would be difficult to conceive of social action within this theoretical framework, for the social actor would have a passive role in the social interaction process (at best, he or she would perform a function). In a word, the fate of all would be determined (not only comprehended) in the planetary structure that encompasses us. Another aspect has to do with the degree of interaction required by analytical thinking. In order to function, a system requires an articulation such that the movement of each one of its parts would be solely coordinated by the whole. Internal cohesion has to be high, and without this systemic unity would be compromised. Within this perspective, as Wallerstein (1991) emphasizes, culture is ‘a structure through which the world system operates’. In fact, it would simply have the function of a ‘geo-culture’, guaranteeing the maintenance of an order imposed by itself, independent of the culture.

The above criticisms allow us to take up the cultural question at another level. There is, in the idea of globalization, the suggestion of a certain unity. When we speak about a global economy, we have in mind one single structure, underlying economic exchange in any place on the planet. Economists can even measure the dynamics of this globalized order through various indicators: exchanges and international investments. The same can be said of the technological sphere: it is marked by the unity of techniques – computer, satellites, electric or nuclear energy. But, would it make sense understanding the cultural theme in the same way? Could we speak of ‘one’ global culture or ‘one’ global identity in the same manner we consider the economic and technological levels? Surely not, and language offers a good example. For historical reasons – British colonialism, North American imperialism, capitalist economic expansion, the development of science in the USA after the Second World War, and the like – English became the language of world modernity; it would not make sense, however, to imagine the disappearance of other languages in the face of its dominance. The existence of a hypothetical ‘universal’ language, shared by all the planet’s individuals, would require that all human experiences converged towards one and the same source of meaning. But such a linguistic speculation is not reasonable. The emergence of English as a world language gives a new definition to the world market of linguistic goods at a planetary scale, shows an unmistakable power situation but does not imply a single way of speaking. And that is the reason why it is useful to establish a difference between the terms globalization and mundialization. The first may well be applied to the economic and technological spheres; the second adapts itself better to the cultural universe. The ‘mundi’ (world) category is then articulated to both dimensions. It is bound first to the movement of globalization of societies, to the economic and technological transformations that involve them. Without this material dimension we could hardly discuss the existence of a process of mundialization of the cultural sphere. But it also corresponds to a ‘world (mundi) vision’, a specific symbolic universe of today’s civilization, that coexists with other world visions, establishing hierarchies, conflicts and accommodations with them. Its transversality reveals modern life’s globalization, its mundiality expresses the cultural diversity that is inherent to the process.

Using an idea by Marcel Mauss (Mauss, 1974), I would say, mundialization is a total social phenomenon, which pervades all cultural manifestations. The whole goes to the core of its parts, redefining them in their specificities. In this sense it would not be proper to speak of a world-culture whose hierarchical level would be situated outside and above local, regional or national cultural practices. Thinking in this manner would amount to establishing dichotomous relations between various platforms (local vs. national; national vs. global; local vs. global), promoting the dualist reason in a planetary scale. In order to exist, a culture has to have roots, to be situated in men’s everyday practices, without which it would be an abstract expression of social relations. With the emergence of globalization/mundialization, the cultural whole recasts the ‘situation’ where multiple particularities are located, without the need to think in systemic terms. Thinking mundialization as a totality allows us to approximate it to the notion of civilization, an extra-national set of specific social phenomena, common to many societies. But it is necessary to emphasize a particularity of our times. Historically, a civilization extended beyond a people’s frontiers, but limited itself to a determined geographical area. A mundialized culture corresponds to a civilization whose territoriality is globalized. This is not, however, synonymous with uniformity. I emphasize this aspect for the cultural debate sometimes identifies both dimensions, and this is inadequate. For a long time, the discussion of culture, especially when it refers to the so-called mass culture, has debated the dilemma of consciousness homogeneity. In fact, the conception of mass itself is associated with the idea of crowd (a popular notion in the 19th century), where the individuals tended to dissolve into the whole. The theme is posed anew in the context of the planetary diffusion of technologies. For a good many authors, the global village would consecrate the homogeneity of habits and thinking. Communication technologies, getting people closer to each other, would make the world smaller and identical. An example: Theodore Levitt’s (1983) diagnosis of markets’ globalization. We would be living a reality that had suffered a standardization of products consumed at a global scale, leveling cultural practices to a sole common denominator. It would be naïve to non-critically oppose this globalizing perspective. Science, technology, consumption, all are important vectors of the globalization process. There is in fact a patterning of modern life’s different domains. This is due to some extent to industrialism that invades the cultural sphere itself. The industrial making of movies, television series, books, video games, clothes, is doubtless bound to product patterning.

It is, however, important to distinguish pattern and standards. Anthropologists teach us that there is no society without a determined cultural pattern. And for this they understand the models, the norms that structure social relations. Individual behavior is bound to this ‘ground’ shared by all. A society is a set of subgroups whose particular ways are distinguished within a common framework. But no one ever refers to culture ‘standardization’ when dealing with indigenous societies (as it would make no sense to describe Trobriand aborigines’ life in terms of ‘patterning’). It is only in the discussion of industrial societies that pattern and standard are identified to the idea of homogeneity. Such an association became ‘natural’ due to the high degree of rationalization of modern life and to the extension of industrial procedures to the cultural domain. The modern world’s rationality distinguishes different areas of society, in one of which, consumption, the patterning process is deeply established. The serial production of cultural artifacts even allows for an analogy with industrial rationality. This fundamental trait of contemporaneous societies, however, should not lead us to be confused. When Weber writes on the rationalization about Western music, he has in mind the casting of a cultural pattern in the sense anthropologists give to the notion. We could hardly assimilate such a pattern to the idea of standardization. In other words, the pattern is not to be confused with the standard. The point is to understand how the patterning process takes on hegemonic character, although not univocal, in the globalized context. Taking on again the concept of civilization restores the discussion to another level. There is no conceptual opposition between the common and the diverse; a mundialized culture promotes a cultural pattern without imposing the uniformity of all; it disseminates a pattern bound to the development of world modernity itself. Its width certainly involves other cultural manifestations, but it is important to emphasize that it is specific, founding a new way of ‘being-in-the-world’ and establishing new values and legitimizations. And that is the reason why there is not and there will be not a single global culture, identical in all places. A globalized world implies a plurality of world-views. What we do have is the consolidation of a civilization matrix, world modernity, that is actualized and diversified in every country, region, place, as a function of its particular history. And this means that globalization/mundialization is one and diverse at the same time. We should not conceive of such a diversity as equivalent to the idea of pluralism. In the global situation, parts are different and unequal, fill hierarchically diverse positions, and are permeated by the power relations and force lines that constitute the reality of the game of the world’s interests.

## References

Levitt, Theodore (1983) ‘The Globalization of Markets’, Harvard Business Review May–June: 92–102.

Luhmann, Niklas (1982) ‘The World Society as a Social System’, International Journal of General Systems 8: 131–8.

Mauss, Marcel (1974) ‘Théorie des civilisations’, in Œuvres, vol. 2. Paris: Minuit.

Wallerstein, Immanuel (1991) Geopolitics and Geocultures: Essays on the Changing World-System. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Renato Ortiz is Professor of Sociology at the State University of Campinas (Unicamp), Brazil. He was an undergraduate at l’Université de Paris VIII (Vincennes), and gained his PhD at l’École Pratique des Hautes Études (Paris, 1975). His publications include Mundialización y Cultura (Buenos Aires, 1997), and Otro Territorio: ensayos sobre el mundo contemporaneo (Bogotá, 1998).

# Culture and Global Systems

Jonathan Friedman

Keywords cosmopolitan, culture, global systems, hybridity, intentionality

ulture is often treated as a code, a paradigm and more recently as a substance that can spread throughout the world. The position I suggest here is much simpler. Culture in the most general sense, as generic culture, is simply that which is specific to human societies based on the notion of alternative ways of doing similar things. The capacity for culture is the capacity within the same species to constitute different ways of getting organized. It has usually been contrasted with the rest of the biological world, of which we are, of course, a part, by the fact that other species have far less leeway in the organization of their lives, their production of ways of going about the world. This relative fixity has been called instinct in the past, although the behavior of non-humans is today understood as more complex, even displaying cultural learning. This notion of culture as that which makes us human is not the usual usage of the term of course, except for those who deal with the relations between species. Rather, human culture is a differential concept, based on the notion of difference itself, different ways to skin a cat, different ways to relate to the world, different ways of organizing social reproduction, etc.

That culture can be understood in terms of specific structures, even codes, is based on a false dichotomy between culture as specific social practice and culture as the organizing principle of such practice. Culture is difference, of course, but the difference does not precede the practice. Culture is a set of properties of practice, that which is the specificity of the latter. It is not a scheme for the organization of social life that has a prior existence to that life. Nor does the fact of cultural difference convey anything concerning the origins of such difference. The embeddedness of culture within the social is the starting point for examining the way it is constituted as a social-historical phenomenon. In sum, to say that social life is culturally constituted is to say that social life is constituted of culture but not by culture. It is of course true that there are aspects of culture that are not embedded in actual social relations but exist as relatively autonomous symbolic schemes to be used to socialize members of a particular social world and/or to interpret the nature of social existence (as in myth). The internal order of the cultural is related to the construction of worlds of intentionality that constitute the immediate, i.e., non-reflexive meaning of action. Understanding such worlds should not be conflated with the external observation of meaning as a set of texts, objects or substance, as is the case in most globalization approaches to culture. The attempt to understand what people are doing in their lives can never be replaced by an external interpretation of the products of their activities. The examples of this confusion are often quite shocking, as when it is assumed that culture A is a melange of cultures B and C, without any analysis of the way the so-called possessors of such culture create their worlds. Thus, spaghetti becomes part-Chinese, and New Guinea masks depicting advertising for South Pacific Beer are assumed to be hybrid works. Hybrid-for-us perhaps, and it is often stated that such hybridity is an objective phenomenon even if local subjects are unaware of it. But hybridity-for-us is not objective since it is only ‘for us’, in fact, our own subjective interpretation of our objectification of other people’s lives. I have suggested that discourses of hybridity are identity discourses rather than attempts to understand what the people we are supposed to be studying are up to. This perspective is symptomatic of global elites, of transnationally identified artists, intellectuals, media people, and global politicians. In cultural terms, it is generated by a gathering of cosmopolitans in the West. This elite congregation is the source of much of the discourse of globalization as well.

The issue of globalization as related to culture is a product of the kind of conflation referred to above. The objectification of culture is one of its instrumental aspects, the reduction of the practice of difference, of meaning, to a product, a text, a substance which liquified can thence flow across all conceivable borders. This process is associated with visions of a new world that we are entering, a millennium of globalization that for some is the announcement of a world of diasporic hybridity, and for others, a world of increasing disorder and inequality.

## Global Process and Culture

The global field is one within which globalization, in the sense of movement, can either occur or not occur. Globalization itself does not define the global. The Fordist period of nation-states was just as global as the contemporary world of supposedly disintegrating national sovereignty, even if states are as strong as ever. A systemic approach allows us to ask the very question: why suddenly did culture become a central figure of discourse and why has ‘cultural globalization’ followed suit (Friedman, 2004b)?

The emergence of culturalist discourse occurred in tandem with the rise of cultural politics, with the decline of modernist structures of identity and the fragmentation of the modernist world into cultural specificities, the search for roots, the demands for culturally based rights as opposed to class rights. This was a major historical transformation in the West and its dependencies, stimulating a series of cultural re-identifications: indigenous, regional ethnicity, immigrant ethnicity and the transformation of national identity from the issue of citizenship to one of cultural belonging. This is what I have referred to as horizontal fragmentation of the national order.

At the same time there has been a rapid vertical polarization separating upwardly mobile sectors of national populations and downwardly mobile sectors, the increase in the rate of stratification in which the lower half indigenizes while the upper sector cosmopolitanizes. While the bottom becomes increasingly xenophobic and indigenizing in its search for a secure identity, the top identifies as the wards of the multicultural world that has been produced by globalization. Here we find the tendency to self-identification as hybrids, as in ‘my life space is an assemblage of objects from world cultures’, or ‘I am a citizen of the world’. At the bottom, those identified and sometimes self-identified as the global rednecks become increasingly angry opponents of what they identify as global elites: Washington, Rome, the Jews and all other representatives of the cosmopolitical agenda. It is interesting that here as well there are alliances across ethnic lines, the ‘black Washitaw Indians who are allied with the Republic of Texas, the KKK in St Petersburg that trains with local black power groups. Sometimes this is made explicit, as when it is stated that all the trash, white, black, red and brown, should have it out and then get the real culprits – the gold cardcarrying academics (Goad, 1997) who have always succeeded in separating themselves from the multicultural bottom that they so celebrate.

The above polarities are not alone, of course. There is an interesting tendency for the emergence of geo-political polarizations that have been suggested by authors such as Huntington (1996). Others (Buruma and Margalit, 2004) have suggested that a more general hatred of Western modernity is a deeper structure of Western civilization, from the Romantics to more recent culturally left anti-Westerners. This discourse has been exported, they claim, to Japan in World War II, to Russia beginning in the 19th century, as well as to contemporary Muslim ‘fundamentalism’. While it is true that such discourses have been used by anti-Western and anti-modernist movements in order to purify their geographical regions from the disease of modernity, there is plenty of local discourse that can be summoned for the same geopolitical goals. Fractures at lower geographical levels in the global arena are thus supplemented by these larger world regional configurations (Friedman, 2004c).

While fragmentation is occurring in the Western-dominated sector of the world, in East Asia, primarily China, but also in parts of Southeast Asia, the cosmopolitan is in a weak position with respect to nationalist and regionalist discourses, the establishment of larger geographical units, an intensive focus on development and a new Asian modernism, the extinction or integration, by assimilation, segmentation, rather than autonomization of indigenous minorities.

The combination of horizontal and vertical polarization establishes the field of forces that in their specificity are, by definition, cultural (Friedman, 2004a). If particular signifying constructions are produced in such processes – discourses of hybridity and multiculturalism, discourses of indigenization, nationalism, traditionalism and Kastom – these are the cultural content or properties of the changing configuration of the global arena itself. Is there global diffusion in all of this? Of course, commodities, brands, technologies, the media, etc. have established themselves across much of the globe and there has even been a certain superficial identification with these sets of objects among rising elites and, to some extent, middle classes. One might wish to call this homogenization, although it is countered by the fragmented production of new identities and cultural forms. From the outside there might indeed be examples of what one could call hybridity, but these are usually observer-dependent phenomena. Hybridity only exists, and it does, of course, where those who are so defined identify as such.

All of this of course has occurred in the past, not least in the form of religious expansion related most often to economic and political colonization: the Hinduization and then Islamization of Southeast Asia (and East Africa), the spread of technologies, products, texts, all common phenomena in world history. We note, however, that diffusion is not a process in itself but a result. How things move and the way they are integrated into people’s lives must be approached in great detail and with emphasis on the actors involved. For the spread of religion, at least, the conflicts between local elites