in vying for control over trade and other forms of external wealth have been a crucial aspect of such ‘diffusion’ in Asia, Africa, the Pacific and even in the early history of Europe. The articulation between different logics and strategies originating in different parts of the world forms the site of a true understanding of such phenomena.

## References

Buruma, Ian and Avishai Margalit (2004) Occidentalism: The West in the Eyes of its Enemies. New York: Penguin.

Friedman, Jonathan (2004a) ‘The Dialectic of Cosmopolitanization and Indigenization in the Contemporary World System: Contradictory Configurations of Class and Culture’, pp. 179–97 in D. Nugent and J. Vincent (eds) The Blackwell Companion to the Anthropology of Politics. Oxford: Blackwell.

# Global History

Bruce Mazlish

Keywords Eurocentrism, global history, globalization, knowledge, new global history, world history

G<sup>lobal</sup> <sup>history</sup> <sup>compels</sup> <sup>us</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>ask</sup> <sup>what</sup> <sup>it</sup> <sup>is</sup>we know about our world, and how we we know about our world, and how we know it. In its simplest terms, globalization, the subject of study in global history, takes us beyond Eurocentrism, nationalism, and their parochial ways of thinking, into a world of both difference and differences being transcended in the name of a common humanity. In doing so, however, it raises many questions about the disciplines by which we try to discern the shape of what it is we are seeking to understand.

These are lofty-sounding statements. We need to come down to earth as well. Global history is, to begin with, a sub-field of history (Mazlish, 1993; Hughes-Warrington, 2005). It is often used as a synonym for world history. This obfuscates our knowledge in an important way. While world history is also an effort to go beyond Eurocentrism, it does not focus on globalization. The latter is a theme, contained within world history, that can be traced from earliest times – hunter–gatherers spreading across the globe – up to the present. It encompasses interconnection and interdepen-

Friedman, Jonathan (2004b) ‘Culture and its Politics in the Global System’, Protosociology 20: 217–38.

Friedman, Jonathan (2004c) ‘Choc de cultures et logique du déclin hégémonique’, pp. 261–79 in H. Dawod (ed.) Tribus et pouvoirs en terre d’Islam. Paris: Armand Colin.

Goad, Jim (1997) The Redneck Manifesto. New York: Simon & Schuster.

Huntington, Samuel P. (1996) The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order. New York: Simon & Schuster.

Jonathan Friedman is Directeur d’Etudes at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales and Professor of Social Anthropology at Lund University, Sweden. He has written extensively on issues of world systems, globalization, and sociocultural transformation.

dence of people, trends that appear to be increasing over time. Yet, teleology and determinism must be rejected as we seek to understand globalization’s development. The story of the latter is made up of unintended consequences and human agency, with the result being powerful currents that move in a global direction.

We ‘know’ this since some time after the end of the Second World War, when the factors making globalization achieved a level of expansion and synchronicity and synergy that, like water boiling, has brought us to a new state. The very term ‘globalization’ only appeared around the 1960s. To reflect our new awareness we would do well to adopt a new periodization: the global epoch. Previously, we spoke of ancient, medieval and modern periods or epochs. Now we must transcend the latter term in this sequence, modern (and its offspring postmodern), for it has lost its potency in orienting us in a ‘world’ (a word derived from Middle English meaning ‘earth’) that has become a globe (a word derived from Latin for spheroid, and pointing us outward) (Mazlish, 1998). Our consciousness of space and time has changed to match our changed life experiences. This is knowledge, a knowledge that requires us to re-examine all our social sciences disciplines, which were derived from an earlier transformation, that of the Industrial and French Revolutions.

Many, if not most, scholars will refuse to take this jump. Their disciplinary traditions, their fights over turf, do not allow them to embrace the interdisciplinary approach and the global history perspective that is required. This is even more true in regard to what is emerging as New Global History, an initiative that focuses on present-day globalization, seen as coming into being after 1945 (for further details, see the website, www.new globalhistory.org). Knowledge moves by fits and starts – one thinks of Galileo’s opponents who refused to look through his telescope or, if they did, declared the stars seen through it to be mere dust on the glass. Such an intelligent man, but stuck in his own limited perspective, as Immanuel Wallerstein declares ‘socalled “globalization”’ to be a fad (Wallerstein, 2000, xviii–xix). Many follow him in this view.

Often they are blinded by their political desires. Particular ethnic, religious, and national groupings prize particularism rather than universalism, which they link to globalization and see as threatening their ways and local power. Thus, universalizing sciences, such as mathematics and physics, are viewed as mere social constructs, with no need to accept them as true knowledge. This in spite of the fact that they are the same for Asians and Americans and produce similar results everywhere. The same can be said for parts of technology: computers work the same everywhere. How they are used, of course, is a different matter.

Needless to say, outside the natural sciences, the situation is more complicated. Do we know about human rights in the same way we know about gravity? The answer is obviously no. Yet, emerging out of human historical experience as a moral imperative with universalistic claims, human rights, or so its proponents claim, override local, particularistic behaviors in the name of the greater community of humanity. Foreshadowed in the idea of cosmopolitanism (see the entry in this encyclopedia by Pheng Cheah), which is being rethought in the light of globalizing experiences, human rights are based on the reality of developments in the information revolution and the interconnections made possible by that revolution. In the shape of non-governmental organizations (NGOs), operating in connection with the UN and nationstates, the rights of each individual and of oppressed minorities are vindicated.

The perspective of (new) global history requires us to see the world anew in these terms. NGOs and multinational corporations (MNCs) are the new actors, alongside the state, in our emerging global society. Our growing knowledge of this fact – for example, of the 100 largest economies, 29 of these are MNCs; as a result, the value added by, say, Exxon Mobil, is larger than the GDP of countries such as Pakistan, New Zealand,

Hungary, and Vietnam – needs to be matched by our visualization of this world (Chandler and Mazlish, 2005). If we open an atlas, we do not see this fact. To remedy this distortion, an historical atlas of the MNCs, Global Inc., has been published (New Press, 2003). A project is now under way to match it with a similar atlas depicting the extent and power of the NGOs.

This is knowledge for the eye as well as in the mind. Global history requires us to rethink and review all our other pieces of knowledge. Thus, the notions of sovereignty, internationalism, migrations, and so forth call out for re-conceptualization in the context of globalization, viewed from an historical perspective (in which history, of course, is interdisciplinary). In spite of certain fantasists of globalization, nation-states will not disappear in the world shaping itself around us. Yet national histories will certainly have to be written anew from the global history perspective. One can see this beginning to happen even in such extremely nationalistic and parochial settings as the teaching of American history.

In short, global history puts all our preconceptions and presumed knowledge at risk. As we have been told since antiquity, with this truism recently emphasized by many postmodernists, knowledge is power. It can be power over nature, or power over humans. And power produces knowledge, whether aiding in domination or undermining existing dominations. The question at issue is whether knowledge is merely local power or can transcend its origin and become part of the heritage of humanity. The answer is, of course, contested, but now must be contested in the terms presented to us by globalization.

At a minimum, global history requires us to take up the epistemological and dialectical dimensions of old questions about knowledge in a new light. Without doubt, it forces us to transcend the received Eurocentric perspective and to engage in the preliminary step of going beyond Orientalism to a close examination of Occidentalism (Coronil, 1996). The next step is to explore the geography of globalism per se, an adventure on which we are only now beginning to embark in a serious way. This is a piece of knowledge that is no longer refutable.

## References

Chandler, A. and B. Mazlish (2005) Leviathans: Multinational Corporations and New Global History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Coronil, F. (1996) ‘Beyond Occidentalism: Toward Nonimperial Geohistorical Categories’, Cultural Anthropology 11(1): 51–87.

Hughes-Warrington, M. (ed.) (2005) Palgrave Advances in World Histories. London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Mazlish, B. (1993) ‘An Introduction to Global History’, in B. Mazlish and R. Buultjens (eds) Conceptualizing Global History. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Mazlish, B. (1998) ‘Comparing Global History to World History’, Journal of Interdisciplinary History, xxviii(3): 385–95.

Wallerstein, I. (2000) The Essential Wallerstein. New York: New Press.

Bruce Mazlish is Professor of History Emeritus at MIT. Among his most recent publications are The Global History Reader, ed. Bruce Mazlish and Akira Iriye (Routledge, 2005) and Civilization and Its Contents (Stanford University Press, 2004). He has also published numerous articles on globalization in various periodicals.

# East and West in Global History

John Hobson

Keywords capitalism, civilizations, East/West, Eastern agency, Eurocentrism/Orientalism, imperialism, Oriental globalization

f the title of this entry appears to be unproblematic, if not anodyne, it turns out to be contradictory and loaded with Eurocentric bias. It is contradictory because within conventional historiography there is no East and West in ‘global history’. ‘Global history’ is neither global, because it is a provincial story of Western universalism, nor historical, because it is ‘ahistorical-Eurocentrism’ written backwards. For in conventional historiography, the East is prejudicially relegated to a residual category that has no autonomous place in global history – it is merely a stagnant backwater in the mainstream Western story. In short, conventional global history turns out to be an ahistorical-Eurocentric ‘Western provincialism writ large’.

David Landes dismisses this view as but politically correct ‘good think’ which avoids the ‘twin facts’ that the West has consistently led the East and pioneered modern global capitalism (Landes, 1998). Similarly, John Roberts argues for the veracity of Eurocentrism on the grounds that:

[it] means ‘putting Europe at the centre of things’, and its usual implication is that to do so is wrong. But, of course, if we are merely talking about facts, about what happened, and not about the value that we place on them, then it is quite correct to put Europe at the centre of the story in modern times. (1985: 201)

But it is precisely the naïvety or impossibility of the fact-value distinction wherein the source of the problem lies. For what eludes Roberts and Landes is that Europe only appears to occupy centre-stage of progressive global history because Eurocentric values have led them to select Europe as, or place it at, the centre of the story in the first place. And the East only appears to be absent because it has been selected out, having being consigned to the dark ghetto of the marginalized periphery.

The idea of Western history as universal (global) history emerged in the 19th century when racist-Eurocentrism or Orientalism had been constructed by the Europeans (Said, 1978). This discourse suddenly pronounced the superiority of Europe over the ‘inferior Eastern other’. It entailed two critical assumptions: first, that what had previously been thought of as interlinked, if not symbiotic, regions were suddenly relocated along either side of a constructed ‘civilizational line of apartheid’. And, second, Europe was constructed as qualitatively superior to the East because it supposedly had exceptional, progressive characteristics or virtues. By contrast, the East was inscribed with only regressive properties. Having constructed Europe as superior and exceptional, Eurocentric thinkers then extrapolated this conception back in time to Ancient Greece, thereby painting an ahistorical picture of Europe as permanently superior (Amin, 1989; Bernal, 1991). Simultaneously Europe was inscribed with a unique ‘logic of immanence’ wherein the seeds of progress were contained within its socio-political structure. Accordingly, from Ancient Greece on, European development and global history are (re)presented as a purely endogenous Western story that unfolds in a linear sequence. In the process, the Western people were elevated to the permanent ‘subject’ of global history standing at the centre of all things progressive. Conversely, the Eastern peoples were relegated to the peripheral status of global history’s passive ‘object’, languishing on the Other side of an imaginary civilizational frontier, stripped of history and dignity.

Crucially this Orientalist discourse was endogenized within the major theories of the rise of capitalist global modernity – especially liberalism, Marxism and Weberianism (Blaut, 1993; Turner, 1993; Frank, 1998: Chapter 1; Hobson, 2004: Chapter 1). Accordingly they explain Europe’s rise by excavating causal variables that allegedly exist only within Europe. Moreover, fabricating the story of the rise of the West entailed retrospectively tracing Europe’s superiority back to Ancient Greece and then forwards through an immanent journey of the Western (Oriental) Express. On the way the Western train passes through an imaginary linear series of purely European way-stations. These comprise feudalism, the Italian commercialfinancial revolution and the Renaissance, commercial capitalism and the Iberian Voyages of Discovery, and then on through British industrialization before arriving (for liberalism) at the terminus of history – the Pax Americana. Marx, of course, shared in this view though he saw capitalism as the penultimate way-station before socialism, which stood at the gateway of the communist terminus of history. Conversely, such a progressive linearity was absent on the Other side of the ‘civilizational frontier’, where Oriental despotic/patrimonial states and collectivist mentalities and production systems choked civil society, thereby resulting in permanent stagnation. Accordingly, the Easterners could only passively await the arrival of the Oriental (imperial) Express which, fuelled by Occidental Messianism, steamed across to pick them up in order to graciously deliver them to the emancipatory terminus of history.

But the problem with this Eurocentric story is that it obscures the considerable role that Eastern agents have played both in progressive global history and in the rise of Europe, which in turn implies a promiscuous and globally interdependent relationship between East and West. Recently, a number of scholars have undertaken their own ‘voyages of rediscovery’ resulting in various non-Eurocentric explorations of the global-historical rise of the West (Abu-Lughod, 1989; Blaut, 1993; Frank, 1998; Goldstone, 2000; Pomeranz, 2000; Hobson, 2004). Despite all manner of differences, one of the common themes of the alternative post-1997 departure is the inversion of the standard Eurocentric temporal-narrative. Now the mainstream of global history up to the 19th century appears as Eastern – especially East Asian – and, after a short Western interlude, seems to be returning back to China. Moreover, without the considerable help provided by the East, there might never have been a Western interlude (Hobson, 2004). The assumption that global history began with the Europeans after 1492 obscures the point that the West emerged within a pre-existing Eastern-led global economy that was forged in the post-500 era. And between then and about 1800 Europe resided on the backward periphery of the global economy, constituting a promontory of Afro-Asia or the ‘Cape of Asia (Valéry, cited in Nederveen Pieterse, 1990: 105).

Important to the emergence of the global economy after 500 was the rise of various interlinked regions. These extended across from T’ang China to the Islamic Ummayad/Abbasid empire in West Asia and the Fatimids in North Africa via the kingdom of S<sup>´</sup>rı¯vijaya in Sumatra, ultimately linking to Europe via Ummayad Spain and Italy. They promoted an extensively pacified space that enabled both considerable trade and the transmission of advanced Eastern ‘resource portfolios (ideas, institutions and technologies) to Europe. In turn, the Afro-Eurasian economy was woven together by three major trade routes (Abu-Lughod, 1989), which were initially promoted by Islamic capitalists after about 650, though Jews, Africans, Javanese, Indians and Chinese were also important.

Islam led the way in terms of two major indicators – extensive and intensive global power. Extensive power refers to the ability of a state or region to spread its economic tentacles outwards, whereas intensive power refers to a leading economy that provides high supply and demand for global trade. Islamic West Asia led the way in both after about 650. Around 1100 the baton of global intensive power was passed not to Italy but to China (during the Sung industrial miracle), where it remained down to the early 19th century. And around 1450 the leading edge of global extensive power passed not to the Iberians but to the Chinese. Nevertheless the distribution of global economic power was polycentric for Islamic West Asia and North Africa as well as India and later Japan maintained high levels of intensive and extensive global power.

Paradoxically, the official 1434 Chinese ban on foreign trade came just before Chinese external trade escalated (Hobson, 2004: Chapter 3). China’s voracious demand for silver, owing to her hugely productive economy and large trade surplus with the rest of the world, ultimately sucked Europe directly into the Afro-Asian-led global economy. China’s demand for silver provided the main outlet for the plundered Spanish-American bullion, thereby enabling the Europeans to finance both their trade deficit with China (and other Asian