# Globalization with a European Face

Hermann Schwengel

Keywords emerging powers, Europe, European globalization, Westphalian order of societies, world systems

## Mediating Emerging Powers

Should globalization have a face as civilizations and cultures, states and societies, economic and social orders historically had or have? We may think of friendly or ugly faces of power – our cultural memory includes colonial and racist faces of power. One generation in 1968 had the dream of socialism with a human face, and another of capitalism with a human face in the good times of the new economy at the end of the last century. The cultural memory of historical representations of power matters when new emerging powers are beginning to shape the global order. The European cultural memory may enable Europeans to mediate emerging powers beyond the world of traditional empires and their global economies, beyond the worlds of nation-states and their international economies, and beyond the world of liberal empires and their global economy, since they know something about the reflexivity of power. The double character of power, being at once asymmetrical, as Max Weber characterized it, as well as creative, i.e. the ability to do something with somebody else, as Hannah Arendt stressed, has to be turned into a tool for mediation. The emerging powers are structurally diverse: there are nation-states and societies as extended as continents and civilizations like India and China, associations of regional states as in Europe, South-east Asia, and South America, and all the varieties of reflexive territorialism between them. There are networks of global firms and technology hubs, the nodes of capital markets and knowledge systems, and the new economic archaeology of power. There are these widespread media-, techno-, ideo-, religious, and cultural scapes that Arjun Appadurai talks about, and the old and new ecumenical spheres, diasporic locations and islands of meaning with their flows of images, text, sound, and artefact. Last but not least, there are global cities no longer defined only by financial headquarters, historical functions and home for the creative classes, but by their position in the permanent struggle for centrality in the global urban landscape of power, as Saskia Sassen (1995) has taught us.

Their emerging powers work from above and from below, within global societies and within their interdependency: people see, hear, taste, feel, and smell this emergence. Discourses on globalization are an essential part of globalization everywhere and are mirrored and reflected by multiple audiences. One may argue that these emerging powers do not allow, do not need or should not ask for mediation, because the flows and stocks of the global complexities, as John Urry (2003) has characterized them, will find their own way. But the realities of globalization demand a rethink of the old European ideas of mediation and Aufhebung. At the same time it is true that European thought is not just the naturally born candidate for the position of mediating emerging powers. European reflexive modernity is less universal and more particular than Europeans often like to believe. It is true that it would be better to speak of 5000 years of globalization rather than of 500 years, as André Gunder Frank (1998) has suggested; that the project of globality is different from the project of modernity, and the global universe after modernism will not be defined by the postmodernism we know. Modern individualism and individual choice in all spheres of life, the interaction of markets as a social research process and the driving force for mobilization and differentiation, popular democracy and individual conflict management, the dominance of rational cultures forcing secularists as well as believers to come up with their reasons and intensities, all these modern achievements are confronted with emerging powers and the empty place of globality. Before suggesting a European reflexive empire, as Ulrich Beck does (Beck and Grande, 2004), Europeans have to break with their idiosyncratic identification of globalization and modernization, reflect on their position in the rise of the modern world system and reshape their illusions after recovering from their own two world wars.

## World Systems

The real challenge of Immanuel Wallerstein’s world system theory is to speak of a singular world system. Archaeologists as well as historians would prefer to speak about world systems. They suggest, as Gil Stein (1999) does, alternative frameworks such as trade-diaspora and distance-parity models of interaction, they have empires and their world economies, as Fernand Braudel has documented, and last but not least the world of nation-states and their global economy. The singular modern world system marks the special place in-between historical-archaeological empires and exchange systems, on the one hand, and modern capitalism, democratic republic and open culture, on the other. In this modern world system, however, some basic questions remain: whether the dynamic towards universal nations or the balance of strategically acting powers, and the commercial and credit institutions of economic power or the professional and industrial commodification of labour are shaping economic life, and whether the institutionalized coexistence of beliefs, traditions, and cultures, or the mediation of different human experiences in a single universe of science, ethics, and aesthetics makes the world go round. It is that singularity that now is reappearing on the globa political, cultural, and economic stage, but this time in terms of a true global world system. Europeans do not own the reflection on the singular world system at all; they have to accept their histories of rising, rivalling and declining power in a collective psychoanalysis in order to contribute to and mediate the antagonisms of a true global world system. After their centuries of religious civil war and reason, revolution and development, life and difference – Helmuth Plessner has suggested the sequence of reason, development and life for the European centuries – American modernization emerged in the first half of the 20th century as the only mediator between universalism and the balance of powers, industry and commerce, pluralism and belief. As the challenge of socialism disappeared in the second half of that century, and the aspirations of the Third World remained limited because the constitution of many independent states was not embedded in an institutionalized global economic order, for a moment it seemed that the American unification of modernity and globality would be the end of history and that globalization would get an American face. But after only a few years the basic questions of the one-world system are back and more open than ever before. If Europeans are entering the contemporary struggle and competition for the mediation of the emerging powers of globalization, they not only have to understand the shift of economic, political, and cultural power to the American project of global modernization during the last century, but maybe even more the global limits of their own post-war European project which proves to be much more inwardlooking, historicist and passive than most of them believe.

## European Illusions

After the post-war-recovery, with the crisis of the 1970s, Europeans became conscious of their reflexive capacities and developed sublime feelings of superiority regarding the liberal project of modernization. At the end of the century most of these feelings proved to be illusions, software without hardware. Nevertheless, this amalgam of reflexive social capacities and sublime illusions is an obstacle to any global mediating role giving globalization a European face. Europe seemed to have some civilizational advantages resulting from a longer and more intensive period of industrialization creating the appropriate institutions and the appropriate behaviour of mass society, sophisticated organization and democracy. More than this, European urban experience seemed to preserve an idea of public life, depth of collective experience and vital senses for the division of meaning between urban and rural landscapes. Some people even thought that the European experience of family, marriage and intensive bonds between individuals had the better historical chances to be cultivated and extended. When, three decades ago, the first waves of our contemporary globalization arrived, many Europeans, due to their mature historical institutions, the complexities of their urban life and their differentiated family life believed themselves to be better adjusted to the uncertainties of modernity. Indeed, the American way of life having been Europeanized by war, welfare-statism and communication had moved into the global crisis of the 1970s, seemingly unable to work with this decline. By turning this decline upside down hegemonic American liberals – and their British followers – first of all learned from their Japanese and German competitors and then used the new opportunities of globalization, information industry and global mediascapes to make their project of modernization reflexive, raising productivity, including vital parts of European and Asian societies. The seemingly civilizing European advantages were doubted. The long and extensive experience of industrialization could also be a disadvantage in flexible high-tech production or high quality service structured by global expansion of the tertiary sector. The European urban experience with its historical-cultural core might not be open enough for the productive effects of migration, transnational media experience and anthropological reflexivity. Even the often quoted stability of personal bonds, reciprocity and public life expressed in public places, theatres and museums could be doubted as too slow, too homogeneous and too inflexible for a vital post-colonia world of intensive differences. The European face seemed to be looking old, not only against the new

America but against the new Second World of emerging powers from India and China to South African and South American states and societies. But neither the old nor the new Europe, neither the old nor the new America, neither the old Third World nor the new Second World, match the questions of our time. In 1973 economic globalization began to recover from the deglobalization of the world wars; in 1989, after the collapse of the Berlin Wall, the question of political globalization returned, and after 2005, with the end of the post-war constitution for Europe, the German question is over, but the European question of that time is now embedded in the real interaction of global emerging powers.

## Global Expectations

At the beginning of the 21st century expectations for Europe come more from the periphery than from the centre. The East and South European societies of the EU are re-inventing themselves to get into the markets, networks, and institutions, although these efforts are embedded in the nervous intertwining of local and global desire. Emerging powers like China and India as well as associations of growing economies are interested in a better balance of power and are looking for attractive, cooperation cultures in a competitive world. Beyond nation-building, beyond the historical interaction of civilizations and beyond the Westphalian Order of states, global complexities are framed in a different manner. But instead of developing global governance software without the hardware of global government, a new Westphalian order of societies may be the future. The treaty for this contract is not yet signed, but overlapping societies, migration from above and from below, permanent comparison and exchange of ideas and values are demanding new arenas for conflict and consensus in and between societies linking the power structure of one society much closer to the power structure of the others. As high-technology enterprises, media and cultural industries are providing the interaction of markets, opportunities, desires, and life chances, Europeans could offer a model for an order of open societies attractive for a globalized world. However, the European economic unity in diversity is not established, the difference between a Scandinavian and British welfare regime is unbalanced, and the creative cores of development are partly chic nodes in the global enterprise network. From the glorious times of European modernity there might remain a distinguished sense of global complexities, the fluidity of objects and subjects between words, histories, and experiences, as well as some sense of the dignity of places, persons, and artefacts, but as in history Europeans have to re-invent themselves to mediate the emerging powers. The long shadows of the European 19th century, nation and class, have to be reflected when Europeans are mediating work and service within and between societies, and have to mediate taxation and representation within and between societies while leaving the shadows behind in contributing to a truly globalized world. European intellectual traditions are characterized by the same ambivalence. The intellectual history of critical social theory, structuralism and cultural theory, modernization and systems theory is somehow exhausted from the great post-war recovery, the post-colonial fragmentation and the post-totalitarian difference, but at the same time offering tools of reflexivity for the management of emerging powers. As often in history Europeans prove to be the most universal and the most particular human beings at the same time. They are born to invent the idea of Weltpragmatismus, but could get lost between their history and the compression of time and space.

## References

Beck, U. and E. Grande (2004) Das kosmopolitische Europa. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.

Frank, A.G. (1998) ReOrient: Global Economy in the Asian Age. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Sassen, S. (1995) ‘On Concentration and Centrality in the Global City’, pp. 63–78 in P.L. Knox and P.J. Taylor (eds) World Cities in a World System. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Stein, G.J. (1999) Rethinking World-Systems: Diasporas, Colonies, and Interaction in Uruk Mesopotamia. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press.

Urry, J. (2003) Global Complexity. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Hermann Schwengel is Head of the Department for Sociology at the Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg and Dean of the Faculty for Philosophy. He works in the field of interdisciplinary cultural studies and historical and political sociology, including his Globalisierung mit europäischem Gesicht: Der Kampf um die politische Form der Zukunft (Berlin, 1999).

# America

Djelal Kadir

Keywords exceptionalism, godliness, hegemony, hypertrophy, immunity, impunity, providentialism, supplement, terrorism

T<sup>o</sup> <sup>take</sup> <sup>America</sup> <sup>as</sup> <sup>an</sup> <sup>encyclopedic</sup> <sup>object,</sup>and as a ‘supplement’, at that, is to court damnable incoherence, if not outright actionable impertinence where America’s global order of the day at the beginning of the 21st century is concerned. Hegemonic world order is prone to guard its privileged epistemic and onto-theological status with fanatical zeal. America as self-reifying centrality has militated for its indisputable ontological status since its inception as Puritan theocracy. Harold Bloom, not without typical American selfconviction, has diagnosed America as endemically self-sanctifying and providentially elect, closer to God than any other chosen people has dared deem itself so chosen. Bloom’s The American Religion: The Emergence of the Post-Christian Nation, published in the not insignificant year of 1992, is as acute as Bloom could ever be. It is also symptomatic of America’s perennial self-perception as history’s exception. A ‘Post-Christian Nation’, as Bloom’s subtitle avers, is a post-historical nation, inasmuch as history where America is concerned has always been teleological and messianic, which is to say apocalyptic. Its ‘post-Christiannesss’ would clearly make it as post-apocalyptic and extra-historical. Symptomatically, Bloom’s diagnosis coincides with Francis Fukuyama’s The End of History and the Last Man (1993), yet another instance of American triumphalist exceptionalism that deems itself beyond human history. And while Bloom saw America as ‘post-Christian’ in 1992, by the beginning of the 21st century the ‘postness’ he and Fukuyama diagnosed would prove encyclically circular.

In a vehement return of the repressed, in Freud’s terms, that would betray a pre-Christian zeal verging on self-idolatry and divinely conferred self-justification, by 2005 commentarists such as Canada’s (formerly of the USA) Henry A. Giroux refer to the reigning paradigm of America’s public sphere as ‘Rapture Politics’, and to the pithy characterization of America by its former Attorney General John Ashcroft as

Unique among nations, America recognized the source of our character as being godly and eternal, not being civic and temporal. And because we have understood that our source is eternal, America has been different. We have no king but Jesus. (Giroux, 2005)

At the beginning of the 21st century, then, as we cycle back into encyclopedic knowledge management, America stands apart as uncontested and incontestable hegemon in a cyclical return to a ‘heroic’ age, where ‘heroic’ can only be understood in Hobbsian and apocalyptic terms, rather than in terms of the recursive spirals of Giambattista Vico. Such recursivity is not only a reaction formation responding to the baleful contingencies of realpoli tik and its terrors, itself a complex set of reactions, in turn. Rather, America’s self-perceived godliness and infallibility are yet another occasion of a compensatory gesture seen as perennially indispensable because, in good measure, of America’s genesis as nominal and philological gambit on the part of pundits such as Thomas More, himself no less theologically convinced, a strength of conviction that would end with his decapitation in the court of his sovereign, and on the part of ironic wits such as Martin Waldseemüller. In his Cosmographia Introductio (Introduction to Cosmography) (1507), Waldseemüller would forge the baptismal nomination of ‘America’ as lexical play on the name of Amerigo Vespucci. By taking the Greek stem meros (‘place’) and prefixing the privative ‘a’ to it, and by locating this ‘no-place’ on earth (ge), with Amerige Waldseemüller left the trope of ‘utopia’ as legacy for the ill-starred Thomas More (Kadir, 1992). This is the nominal ontology for which America has been compensating ever since with desperate and sanctimonious righteousness. It has not sufficed to displace nominalism as foundation by substituting realism’s or religion’s bedrock ontology. America has perennially labored to convert that compensatory realism into an onto-teleology, an overcompensation that would have America be ‘real’ not only of/in this world, but also of/in the next. Thus, the providentialist exceptionalism has echoed unremittingly since Columbus equated the newly encountered oceanic land mass with the eschatological New World, since the Puritans founded their theocracy in New England as New Canaan, since continental conquest and colonization found its divine sanction in Manifest Destiny, and since God himself certified the enterprise of global hegemony through His latest providential agent,