the current president of the USA, George W. Bush, who is convinced of his divine appointment and godly agency. (Mr Bush would confess on a 16 July 2004 visit to an Amish community in Smoketown, PA, ‘God speaks through me.’ See http://www.irregulartimes.com/godspeaksthrough me.html.) How, then, to consign such providentially sanctioned centrality to epistemic supplement in an encyclopedic archive, when the destiny of America is already writ large in God’s own book for the ages? Perennial attempts to reframe America as hemispheric synecdoche, as ‘the other America’, or as ‘our America’, have proved no more than disingenuous reaffirmations of America as Whitmanesque grandeur and bipolar multiplicity, or as involuntary and inexorable self-subalternizations on the part of Latinate voices in the rest of the American Hemisphere. Symptomatic, in this regard, is Boaventura de Sousa Santos’s ‘Nuestra America: Reinventing a Subaltern Paradigm of Recognition and Redistribution (2001), where a ‘reinvention’ ends by being a reinscription and replication of what it would interrogate.

If, then, as the subtitle of this encyclopedic project avers, the global goal is to render ‘global knowledge’ problematic, we are faced with no larger problem than the supplementarity this project would impute to the status of what deems itself not only global in this planet Earth, but central in the cosmic order of extra-planetary space (now duly militarized) and transcendental metaphysics (now evangelized with the zeal of born-again self-conviction). This, of course, is not only a transcendence into metatheoretical space and post-apocalyptic time, it is a bulking metastasis, a hypertrophy that distends the global and overflows any site of knowledge production – no matter whether encyclopedic, archival, digitalized, or hypertexted. No cognitive mapping can contain America, as supplement or as metanarrative, and no network – the World Wide Web or any other cosmic formation of knowledge management – proves equal to the task of epistemic or discursive containment. America has proved from its inception what this author has termed elsewhere ‘an incontinent continent’ (Kadir, 1986). At the beginning of this new millennium, America labors to sustain this indomitable impetus with greater vigor than ever. This is no mere deluge or fluidity that overflows the sites and epistemic rules of knowledge production. America has always viewed itself as post-diluvian and post-apocalyptic, where, as the already cited Bloom demonstrates, by example as much as by assertion, ‘post-’ and ‘pre-’ converge in a cycle of ‘preposterous’ selfconviction. As such, if indeed it is to be consigned taxonomically to the status of supplement,

America’s supplementarity must be cosmic and extend well beyond the circumscriptions of the circular paideia we commonly call an ‘encyclo-pedia’. As global hegemon, America situates itself beyond any globalizing process. No archive, squared or in the round, can subsume, much less subject to its disciplinarity the America that militantly deems itself exempt from and exceptional to any consignments of knowledge or constellations of realpolitik. An orthogenesis of its own exertions, America does not brook definition as instance of any discursive formation or as epistemic object of any dialogical assemblage. In its self-perceived and oft-declared exceptionalism, it would persist as incomparable monad that does not allow for diagnostic scrutiny or prognostic speculation outside its own self-engendered criteria. It aggressively projects its own unilateral and monologic soliloquy in which it deems itself incomprehensible by/in any logic or epistemic archive. Any definition imputed to this phenomenon, as supplement or otherwise, will be deemed a less than adequate projection of the archivist, or considered a wishful transference of the encyclopedist. To venture any diagnosis or characterization of America other than the self-sanctioned at this historical juncture runs the risk of being indicted for terroristic intentions and condemned for seditious heterodoxy. By questioning what now reigns with bellicose immunity, then, one risks the consequences of its absolute impunity. This risk itself and the all too evident global repercussions of its belligerence may be America’s self-defining and most compelling descriptor. No encyclopedic endeavor can feel immune from the prospect of its own encirclement – epistemic, ideological, carcelary – within the hegemonizing circumscriptions of its object of knowledge, if that object should be America at the beginning of this new millennium.

## References

Bloom, Harold (1992) The American Religion: The Emergence of the Post-Christian Nation. New York: Simon & Schuster.

de Sousa Santos, Boaventura (2001) ‘Nuestra America: Reinventing a Subaltern Paradigm of Recognition and Redistribution’, Theory, Culture & Society 18(2–3): 185–217.

Fukuyama, Francis (1993) The End of History and the Last Man. New York: Avon Books.

Giroux, Henry A. (2005) ‘Rapture Politics’, The Toronto Star 24 July, http://www.thestar.com

Kadir, Djelal (1986) Questing Fictions: Latin America’s Family Romance. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Kadir, Djelal (1992) Columbus and the Ends of the Earth: Europe’s Prophetic Rhetoric as

Conquering Ideology. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Djelal Kadir is the Edwin Erle Sparks Professor of Comparative Literature at the Pennsylvania State University and the Founding President of the International American Studies Association. He is the author or editor of more than ten books, the latest being How Far Is America from Here? Selected Proceedings of the First World Congress of the International American Studies Association 22–24 May 2003 (Editions Rodopi, 2005) and the Literary Cultures of Latin America, 3 vols (Oxford University Press, 2004).

# Civilization

Roland Robertson

Abstract It is necessary to distinguish between civilization as a sociocultural complex on the one hand, and civilization as a process, on the other. This is illustrated by invoking the work of Norbert Elias. For Elias, the civilizing process consisted in the way in which what were, historically, constraints on human behaviour became internalized, and is a process that takes different forms in different cultures. On the other hand, at the centre of civilization as sociocultural complex was the question concerning the attributes of a human being, crystallizing as clear-cut criteria for adjudging the degree to which the people occupying a particular territory were or were not civilized. The conception of civilization as a complex has become contemporary via Huntington’s ‘clash of civilizations’ thesis, and is indicative of the way in which the very word ‘civilization’ now carries with it a considerable ideological baggage. This article argues that the ideological use of civilization and the wider discourse of the war against terror involves the fusion, or conflation, of civilization as process and civilization as complex.

Keywords complex, culture, Elias, Huntington, Islam, modernity, process

## Process vs Complex

The concept and idea of civilization is replete with problems of meaning and interpretation. In the first place, it is necessary to distinguish between civilization as a sociocultural complex – more loosely, a bounded way of life – on the one hand, and civilization as a process, on the other. As will be seen, this distinction is, in itself, by no means clearcut. This can be immediately illustrated by invoking the work of Norbert Elias (1978, 1982). While Elias concentrated very explicitly on the processual meaning of the term, his work has some overlap with the notion of civilization as a complex. As will be seen in due course, the overriding difficulty with Elias’s work inheres in his apparent failure to recognize that what came by the end of the 19th century to be called the standard of civilization was a relatively autonomous, transnational norm (Gong, 1984; Robertson, 1992: 114–28). In other words, over and beyond Elias’s analytic conception of the civilizing process there had developed a consciously known and recognized, prescriptive denotation of civilization.

For Elias, the civilizing process consisted in the way in which what had been, historically, constraints on human behaviour became internalized. This process makes the conduct of social affairs less a matter of external control and more a matter of individual conduct. Essentially this means that over the long haul there is, in Elias’s perspective, a trend toward what we would in everyday terms call civilized behaviour, notwithstanding periodic deviations from this trend. There has been considerable debate as to the degree to which this process has taken different forms in different sociocultural contexts (Mennell, 1992: 227–50). Of particular relevance here is the principle of civility (Cuddihy, 1987; Robertson, 1992: 115–28).

Elias’s work was undoubtedly influenced by Sigmund Freud, who had talked in roughly the same terms, but much less elaborately. Freud’s ideas in this regard were expressed succinctly in his lateish book, Civilization and its Discontents (1930).

In contrast to the processual conception of civilization, the focus upon civilization as a