life’, albeit one that continually ‘opens little parentheses’ (Lyotard, 1997: 118) in the ‘first life’ of conscious speaking and doing that marks the mature subject. This secrecy of the second life is treated with suspicion. It does not support public exchanges, easy translation, or comfortable communication as is demanded of all politically rational humans; and it is neither good nor beautiful. The second life instead generates the incommensurate, the experimental, and the difficult, even the sublime, and it is here that it too approaches the monstrous and the dreadful.

This inhuman second life is of a part with that which resists and that which remains. At the end of history we are supposedly without remainder, or rather the remainder is simply the invalid and the illegitimate. Understood as evil, the inhuman remains the cloak beneath which the supposedly ‘legitimate’ system continues to expand, but conceived as dissonance, dissensus and heterogeneity, the inhuman places demands upon our thinking and interrogates our knowledge in a manner that may yet offer us a way to refigure our relations with difference and with others, beyond the system and without prejudice, maybe, even, beyond terror.

## References

Lyotard, Jean-François (1988) Peregrinations: Law, Form Event. New York: Columbia University Press.

Lyotard, Jean-François (1991) The Inhuman. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Lyotard, Jean-François (1992) The Postmodern Explained to Children. London: Turnaround.

Lyotard, Jean-François (1997) Postmodern Fables. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Neal Curtis is Senior Lecturer in the School of Arts, Communication and Culture at Nottingham Trent University. He is the author of War and Social Theory: World, Value and Identity (2005, Palgrave).

# Religion

Bryan S. Turner

Abstract The emergence of a science of religion and religions in which the sacred became a topic of disinterested, objective inquiry was itself an important statement about the general character of social change and can be taken as an index of secularization. It implies a level of critical self-reflexive scrutiny in society. In the West, the study of ‘religion’ as a topic of independent inquiry was initially undertaken by theologians who wanted to understand how Christianity could be differentiated from other religions. The problem of religious diversity had arisen as an inevitable consequence of colonial contact with other religious traditions and with phenomena that shared a family resemblance with religion, such as fetishism, animism and magic. The science of religion implies a capacity for self-reflection and criticism, and it is often claimed that other religions do not possess such a science of religion. While different cultures give religion a different content, Christianity was defined as a world religion. In Hegel’s dialectical scheme, the increasing self-awareness of the Spirit was a consequence of the historical development of Christianity. The contemporary scientific study of religion and religions is confronted by significant epistemological problems that are associated with globalization, and the traditional question about the nature of religion has acquired a new intensity.

Keywords Enlightenment, reason, religion, sacred, secularization, violence

## Etymological Roots

Jacques Derrida in ‘Faith and Knowledge’ (1998: 34) notes, following Emile Benveniste in Indo-European Language and Society (1973), that the word ‘religion’ (religio) has two distinctive roots. First, relegere from legere means to bring together, to harvest or to gather (in). Second, religare from ligare means to tie or to bind together. The first meaning indicates the religious foundations of any social group that is gathered together, while the second points to the disciplines or morality that are necessary for controlling human beings and creating a regulated mentality. The first meaning indicates the role of the cult in forming human membership, while the second meaning points to the regulatory practices of religion in the discipline of passions. This distinction formed the basis of Kant’s philosophical analysis of religion and morality. In Religion within the Limits of Pure Reason (1960), Kant distinguished between religion as cult (des blossen Cultus), which seeks favours from God through prayer and offerings to bring healing and wealth to its followers, and religion as moral action (die Religion des guten Lebenswandels), which commands human beings to change their behaviour in order to lead a better life. Kant further elaborated this point by an examination of ‘reflecting faith’ that compels humans to strive for salvation through faith rather than the possession of religious knowledge. The implication of Kant’s distinction was that (Protestant) Christianity was the only true ‘reflecting faith’, and in a sense therefore the model of all authentic religious intentions. Kant’s distinction was fundamentally about those religious injunctions that call human beings to (moral) action and hence demand that humans assert their autonomy and responsibility. In order to have autonomy, human beings need to act independently of God.

In a paradoxical fashion, Christianity implies the ‘death of God’ because it calls people to freedom and hence the Christian faith is ultimately self-defeating.

These Kantian principles were eventually translated into the sociology of Max Weber (1864–1920). In the Sociology of Religion (1966), Weber distinguished between the religion of the masses and the religion of the virtuosi. While the masses seek comforts from religion, especially healing, the virtuosi fulfil the ethical demands of religion in search of spiritual salvation or enlightenment. The religion of the masses requires saints and holy men to satisfy their needs, and hence charisma is corrupted by the demand for miracles and spectacles. More importantly, Weber distinguished between those religions that reject the world by challenging its traditions (such as inner-worldly asceticism) and religions that seek to escape from the world through mystical flight (such as other-worldly mysticism). The former religions (primarily the Calvinistic radical sects) have had revolutionary consequences for human society in the formation of rational capitalism. The implication of this tradition is paradoxical. First, Christianity (or at least Puritanism) is the only true religion (as a reflecting faith) and, second, Christianity gives rise to a process of secularization that spells out its own self-overcoming (Aufhebung).

## The History of the Sciences of Religion and Religions

There is an important tension between religion and philosophy in terms of their claims to truth. This tension is between revelation and reason as different modes of understanding. The Enlightenment was significant in the development of classifications of religion, since the Enlightenment philosophers treated religion as a form of false knowledge. The Enlightenment philosophers emphasized the importance of rational self-inspection as a source of dependable understanding against revelatory experiences. For Hume, Voltaire, Rousseau and Diderot, Christianity was a form of irrational or mistaken knowledge of the world, and hence the Enlightenment sharpened the distinction between revelation and reason as modes of apprehension of reality. The sciences of religion are a product of the Enlightenment in which knowledge of religion was important in the liberation of human beings from the false consciousness of revealed religion. Diderot was specifically critical of Christian institutions, and Hume, who was critical of the claims made by revealed religion for miracles, wrote somewhat ironically of the differences between monotheistic and polytheistic religions. The former religions are more likely to support authoritarian states, while the polytheistic traditions are more conducive to pluralism. The Enlightenment associated political intolerance with monotheism in general and Catholicism in particular, and advocated the separation of church and state as a necessary condition of individual liberties.

While Enlightenment philosophy was overtly hostile to religious institutions, the Enlightenment itself had an important impact on religious thought. The Jewish Enlightenment or Haskalah emphasized the rational individual, natural law, natural rights and religious tolerance. The Jewish Enlightenment attempted to make Jews equal citizens with their Christian and secular counterparts in European societies. Moses Mendelssohn played an important part in presenting Judaism as a rational religion and these European developments partly paved the way towards Zionism. The problem of religion as a form of rational knowledge also preoccupied the young Marx who, in ‘the Jewish Question’ (1844), argued that the ‘solution’ to the Jewish problem was their movement into the urban proletariat and adoption of secular socialism, but the final emancipation of the Jewish worker could not be achieved by political emancipation alone without a total transformation of capitalism. The point of Marx’s argument was that the final demise of religion as a form of consciousness could only be achieved through a transformation of the actual structure of society.

In other societies similar developments took place. In Russia Peter the Great was responsible for imposing many of the ideas of the Enlightenment on a society that was historically backward. The building of St Petersburg was intended to demonstrate architecturally the importance of western reform and Enlightenment values. Russian Orthodoxy was held to be a particularly barbaric form of Christian religion. Peter’s contact with German Enlightenment was in fact a combination of German Pietism and the rationalism of Leibniz. In this form of benevolent despotism, modernization and Enlightenment ensured that opposition to these foreign cultural standards involved a combination of Russian nationalism and Russian Orthodoxy.

The connections between the Enlightenment and religion were a good deal more complex than this introductory note might suggest. One can claim more accurately that the Enlightenment philosophers were hostile to institutionalized Christianity, specifically the Roman Catholic Church, rather than to religion per se. If we set the Enlightenment within a broader historical framework, it is clear that the 18th-century philosophers were drawing inspiration from the Reformation of the 16th century and the Renaissance humanism of the 15th century. The Renaissance (1400–1600) involved a rediscovery of the humanistic literature of Greek and Roman antiquity. The Renaissance placed Man at the centre of learning and knowledge, emphasizing human perfection through education rather than human sinfulness and depravity. Humanistic philosophy was spread by the invention of printing in the mid-15th century, and printing in turn facilitated the growth of the Reformation in the 16th century. Both Christianity and humanism were influenced by the European discovery of the Americas in 1492 and by new routes to China and Japan. Colonialism and the discovery of aboriginal cultures presented a significant challenge to the biblical notion of the unity of humankind. The Enlightenment philosophers had much in common with the Cambridge Platonists and the latitudinarian movement of the 17th century, which sought to reject what it saw as the fanaticism of the Civil War and attempted to present Christian practice and belief as reasonable. The English notion of reasonableness was not quite what Marx and Hegel had in mind by the historical march of rational knowledge and the spirit, but it was a long way from the experiential intensity of the conversionist sects. This broader historical picture indicates a greater philosophical (indeed theological) continuity between the Christian humanism of Erasmus, the rationalism of Diderot and the dialectical idealism of Hegel; it also explains why their contemporaries suspected a political plot between freemasonry and the Enlightenment to attack the authoritarianism of the Catholic Church and the monarchy.

## Secularization

In the 1970s and 1980s, religion ceased to be a topic of central importance to sociology, and the sociology of religion was confined to the study of sects. With the dominance of modernization theory, it was assumed that religion would not play a large part in social organization. At best it would be confined to the private sphere. In short, secularization, which was assumed to be a necessary component of modernization, proved to be enormously difficult to define. Secularization involves the following:

(1) There is the social differentiation of society into specialized spheres in which religion becomes simply one institution to provide various services to its followers or to the community; secularization is the decline of the scope of authority structures. Fundamentalism is the attempt to halt this differentiation;

(2) Rationalization involves the corrosion of the power of religious beliefs and the authority of religious specialists (such as priests). This argument is associated with Weber’s notion of ‘disenchantment’. While this argument acknowledges the impact of science on public explanations of phenomena and the conduct of public life, social survey research shows that belief in magic and superstition remains very high in advanced societies. Eschatology can also have a potent role in secular society. In the United States, the Christian fictional series Left Behind, depicting the return of Christ, has sold over 70 million copies. These stories are loosely based on the book of Revelation and this literary genre gives expression to what evangelicals call ‘the Rapture’, which is the contemporary account of the disappearance of Christians from the earth and their entry into heaven, leaving behind sinners and unbelievers. The series combines a traditional apocalyptic religion with conservative political attitudes. For example, in the struggle with evil forces, the UN appears as the anti-Christ on earth. Around 8 million American Christians believe that the Rapture is coming soon, and this transformation of the world is indicated by, for example, the crisis in the Middle East.

(3) Modernization (often a combination of differentiation and rationalization) is a cluster of processes emphasizing individualism, democratic politics, liberal values, and norms of efficiency and economic growth. Because modernization undermines tradition, it cuts off the communal and social foundations that supported religion as a traditional institution. However, religion continues to play a role in supporting national, regional or class identities in industrial capitalism, for example in Northern Ireland, Catholic France, the Solidarity movement in Poland or the Orthodox revival in Russia;

(4) Secularization may simply be the transformation (metamorphosis) of religion as it adjusts to new conditions. There are many versions of this argument. Sociologists have argued that the social is essentially religious, and what counts as ‘religion’ does not decline; it just keeps transforming. Thomas Luckmann (1967) has argued that modern societies have an ‘invisible religion’ that characterizes the transcendence of the everyday world. There is an ‘implicit religion’ of beliefs about spiritual phenomena that are not necessarily Christian or components of formal religion. In modern societies there is ‘believing without belonging’, because religious membership and attendance decline, but belief in the Christian faith is still prevalent (Beckford, 2003).

Over the last two centuries, secularization in the narrow meaning (decline in church membership and attendance, marginalization of the Church from public life, the dominance of scientific explanations of the world) has been characteristic of Europe (especially northern, Protestant Europe) and its former colonies (Australia, New Zealand, Canada), but not of the United States, where religion remains powerful, or in many Catholic societies, especially in Latin America and Africa. In these societies, Pentecostalism and charismatic movements have been growing. In Islam, Christianity and Judaism there have been powerful movements of fundamentalist revival. In many societies, in youth cultures and popular culture generally, there have been important hybrid forms of religiosity, often employing the Internet to disseminate their services and beliefs. In post-communist societies, there is clear evidence of a revival of Orthodoxy (in Russia and eastern Europe) and Islam (in China), and Buddhist movements and ‘schools’ have millions of followers in Japan. Shamanism thrives in Okinawa. In some respects, this conclusion is compatible with Weber’s sociology of virtuoso-mass religion in that rational and individualistic Protestantism (Kant’s moralizing faith) appears to be selfdestructive and there is also an ongoing demand for mass religious services (Kant’s cultic form of religion) in most human societies. There is one difference here. In the past, the educated and disciplined virtuosi determined the official form of religion. Periodically religion gets ‘cleaned up’ as the virtuosi expel the magical, popular, cultic accretions – the Buddhist monks, often with the help of a righteous monarch, reject the magic of their followers; Christian reformers – from the desert fathers to John Wesley – condemned the corrupt practices of the laity; in Islam, according to Ibn Khaldun, prophets enter the city to reform the House of Faith. In the modern world, the laity have some degree of literacy and they can access radio, the Internet, TV, travel and mass consumerism. The globalization of popular religion makes it increasingly difficult for the virtuosi to regulate the mass. In Thailand, popular Buddhist charismatics sell magical charms and amulets over the Internet; on Muslim websites, popular American mullahs offer fatwas on every aspect of daily life. The growth of global spiritual marketplaces means that ‘religion’ constantly transforms itself, becoming increasingly hybrid and reflexive. Fundamentalism is in this sense an attempt to control the consumerist spiritual market place, but this growing hybridity may only be a problem from the perspective of those religious traditions that represent the Kantian moralizing faith. Syncretism has been historically the norm.