## Religion and Political Violence

By the end of the 20th century, with the collapse of the Soviet Union, the rise of fundamentalism, and the retreat of assertive humanism, sociologists abandoned the secularization thesis; religion, far from declining, is central to modern political life. Sociologists and philosophers have become more interested in the relationship between religion and violence (de Vries, 2002). Given the contemporary relationship between terrorism and political Islam, it is difficult to avoid the popular question: is there any relationship between Islam as a religious system, violence and authoritarian rule? The traditional answer of mainstream political science has been to argue that, because Islamic culture does not differentiate between religion and politics, it assumes an undemocratic and, typically, an authoritarian complexion. This conventional answer follows Weber’s thesis of caesaropapism – namely the integration of state and Church power, or the combination of Caesar and the Pope – and liberal political philosophy.

A more promising argument might be that no religious system has a deep relationship to democracy. Charisma is hierarchical and religious communities (churches, temples and monasteries) do not democratically elect their leaders. Prophets receive revelations that are not tested by popular assent. In this respect, the principle of authority in Islam might be an exception. Whereas Shi’ite Islam saw authority in terms of descent from the Prophet, Sunni Islam accepted the idea of communal consensus for the first four Rightly Guided Caliphs. In Christianity, there is the argument that the Protestant sects embraced the idea of ‘priesthood of all believers’, a politics of ‘No King, No Bishops’, popular assembly, presbyterianism and the rule of local chapels, and female ministries, but the openness to debate also led to antinomianism and the quest for ‘godly rule’. There is also the view that Confucianism is essentially a philosophy of good governance and good order rather than a religion as such. In Buddhism, there is a tradition of powerful and just (but undemocratic) monarchs who periodically clean out the monastery (Sangha) and the kingdom to establish a just society and personal merit – a tradition that has its origin in King Asoka’s rule over the Magadha Empire (270–232 BC). Any religion whose system of authority claims to be the result of revelation (hence of prophecy, ecstatic visions, charisma) does not support the idea of truth as the outcome of communal consensus. Holy war, crusades and just war have been used to illustrate the relationship between violence, monotheism and hostility to the outside world. In these political struggles, jihad has become a popular description of violent confrontation. Sympathetic interpretations of Islam normally argue that jihad means ‘spiritual struggle’ but has been corrupted to mean ‘armed struggle’. Watt’s account of the origins of jihad in the inter-tribal raids (razzia) that were common in Arabia is important for understanding the greater jihad (war against external enemies) and the lesser jihad against polytheism. In Islamic Political Thought (1999), he argues that jihad (‘striving’ or ‘expenditure of effort’) had entirely secular economic origins, namely camel raids. In the great expansion of Islam in its first century, there was little intention of spreading the religion of Islam ‘apart from other considerations that would have meant sharing their privileges of booty and stipends with many neo-Muslims’ (Watt, 1999: 18). In subsequent generations, it ‘has roused ordinary men to military activity’, while later mystics have described it as ‘self-discipline’ (1999: 19).

In sociological terms, 20th-century political Islam is a product of the social frustrations of those social strata (unpaid civil servants, overworked teachers, underemployed engineers and marginalized college teachers) whose interests have not been well served by either the secular nationalism of Nasser, Muhammad Reza Shah, Suharto or Saddam Hussein, or the neo-liberal ‘open-door’ policies of Anwar Saddat or Chadli Benjedid in Algeria. The social dislocations created by the global economy produced ideal conditions for external western support of those secular elites in the Arab world who benefit significantly from oil revenues; bureaucratic authoritarianism has been the political result. In summary, Islamism is a product of a religious crisis of authority, the failures of authoritarian nationalist governments, and the socio-economic divisions that have been exacerbated by neo-liberal globalization.

Roy (1994) and Kepel (2002, 2004) have developed an influential interpretation of the failure of political Islam. Their account of the radicalization of Islam starts with the Algerian crisis, the October riots of 1988, the coup of 1992, and the increasing violence between the state, the GIA (Groupe Islamique Armé) and FIS (Fronte Islamique du Salut). The failure of radical Islam to establish itself in confrontation with the Algerian state resulted in the export of political Islam to Central Asia, Afghanistan and Pakistan, but these revolutionary Islamic movements have failed to establish fundamentalist Islamic states. Political Islam is the consequence of social frustrations, articulated around the social divisions of class and generation, following from the economic crises of the global neo-liberal experiments of the 1970s and 1980s. The demographic revolution produced large cohorts of young Muslims, who, while often well educated to college level, could not find opportunities to satisfy the aspirations that had been inflamed by nationalist governments. Kepel’s thesis is simply that the last 25 years have witnessed the spectacular rise of Islamism and its failure. In the 1970s, when sociologists assumed that modernization meant secularization, the sudden irruption of political Islam, especially the importance of Shi’ite theology in popular protests in Iran, appeared to challenge dominant paradigms of modernity. These religious movements – especially when they forced women to wear the chador and excluded them from public space – were originally defined by leftist intellectuals as a form of religious fascism. Over time, however, Marxists came to recognize that Islamism had a popular base and was a powerful force against colonialism. Western governments were initially willing to support both Sunni and Shi’a resistance groups against the Russian involvement in Afghanistan after 1979, despite their connections with radical groups in Pakistan and Iran.

These religious movements largely cancelled out the legacy of Arab nationalism that had dominated anti-western politics since the Suez Crisis of 1956. The ideological basis of Islamism was devised in the late 1960s by three men: Maududi in Pakistan, Qutb in Egypt and Khomeini in Iran. For Kepel, Islamism is the product of both generational pressures and class structure. First, it has been embraced by the youthful generations of the cities that were created by the post-war demographic explosion of the Third World and the resulting mass exodus from the countryside. This generation was poverty-stricken, despite its relatively high literacy and access to secondary education. Second, Islamism recruited among the middle classes – the descendants of the merchant families from the bazaars and souks who had been pushed aside by decolonization, and from the doctors, engineers and businessmen, who, while enjoying the salaries made possible by booming oil prices, were excluded from political power. The ideological carriers of Islamism at the local level were the ‘young intellectuals, freshly graduated from technical and science departments, who had themselves been inspired by the ideologues of the 1960s’ (Kepel, 2002: 6). Islamic themes of justice and equality were mobilized against those regimes that were corrupt, bankrupt and authoritarian, and often supported by the West in the Cold War confrontation with the Soviet empire.

## Conclusion: Enlightenment, Violence and Revelation

In the last decade, Huntington’s analysis of ‘the clash of civilizations’ (1993) has orchestrated much of the academic discussion about inter-cultural understanding. While Edward Said’s criticisms of Orientalism offered some hope that intellectuals could cross cultural boundaries and establish a road towards mutual respect and understanding, in the post 9/11 environment, Huntington’s pessimistic vision of the development of micro fault-line conflicts and macro core state conflicts has more precisely captured the mood of western foreign policy in the era of global terrorism. Huntington, of course, believes that the major cultural division is between the Christian West and the Muslim world. Given Huntington’s description of ‘the age of Muslim Wars’, any attempt to engage with Islamic civilization is now seen as a ‘war for Muslim minds’ (Kepel, 2004).

Although the Enlightenment has been much criticized by postmodern philosophy, this criticism is somewhat misleading when applied to Leibniz (1646–1716), the German founder of the predominantly French Enlightenment. He is best known as a mathematician, but Franklin Perkins (2004) shows a rather different, but equally important, side of Leibniz’s philosophy, which appears extraordinarily pertinent to modern times. Leibniz lived in a period of intense trade and commerce with the outside world and, alongside this emerging capitalist enterprise, Leibniz advocated a ‘commerce of light’ or mutual enlightenment. Contrary to Spinoza’s view that there is only one substance, Leibniz argued that the world is characterized by an infinite diversity, richness and completeness. This world is a teeming world of entities that exist in a state of harmony, and in the Discourse on Metaphysics he claimed that God has created the best of all possible worlds (a theodicy), which is ‘the simplest in hypotheses and the richest in phenomena’.

Recognition of the diversity of cultures and civilizations leads us to recognize the inherent value of difference. Leibniz advocated a tolerance of diverse views, but went beyond the philosophers of his day to establish a moral imperative to learn from cultural diversity. He applied this ethic to himself, committing much of his life to studying China from the reports of missionaries and merchants. Differences between entities or monads require exchange, but this also establishes a commonality of culture. Leibniz was not, in modern terms, a cultural relativist – if all cultures are equal (in value), why bother to learn from any one of them? While all knowledge of the outside world is relativistic, Leibniz argued that, because we are embodied, there are enough innate ideas to make an exchange of enlightenment possible. According to Perkins, from the doctrine of blind monads, Leibniz developed a hermeneutics of generosity that regarded inter-cultural understanding as not merely a useful anthropological field method, but as an ethical imperative. Leibniz developed a notion of cosmopolitan virtue in his attempt to establish an exchange with China that offers us a guideline for understanding our own times, especially a cosmopolitan exchange with Islam. Leibniz is a sort of rational and moral antidote to Huntington.

How might we best illustrate cosmopolitan or Leibnizian historiography? One starting point is the work of Marshall G.S. Hodgson in his monumental The Venture of Islam (1974). Hodgson, formerly a professor of history at the University of Chicago, set himself the task of Rethinking World History (1993). His thesis was that Islam was an integral part of Mediterranean civilization, which can in turn only be understood from the standpoint of world history. He shifted the central point of European historical geographical imagination eastwards and southwards, giving Cairo, Damascus and Baghdad greater prominence in European civilization. His work embraced a cosmopolitan virtue in that he was a Quaker, attempting to understand Islam hermeneutically. From a sympathetic, pacifist stance, he criticized the militaristic evolution of imperial Islam as a social system. These imperial systems were alien to the inner religious tradition of Islam. Hodgson showed hermeneutic generosity to both faiths, demonstrating for example how a sense of justice was crucial to Islamic theology. Hodgson’s world history was an attack on western provincialism, but it also contained a critical assessment of the relationship between faith and political empire. From Hodgson we might conclude that the recognition of cultural difference does not mean uncritically accepting those differences. On the contrary, we need a critical recognition theory in which there is a place for dialogical critical understanding. I call this perspective a ‘critical recognition ethics’ that is at the heart of cosmopolitan virtue in which caring for the differences of the other does not rule out critical judgement of other cultures.

## References

Beckford, J. (2003) Social Theory and Religion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Benveniste, E. (1973) Indo-European Language and Society. London: Faber and Faber.

Derrida, J. (1998) ‘Faith and Knowledge’, in J. Derrida and G. Vattimo (eds) Religion. Cambridge: Polity.

Hodgson, M.G.S. (1974) The Venture of Islam: Conscience and History in World Civilization, 3 vols. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hodgson, M.G.S. (1993) Rethinking World History: Essays on Europe, Islam, and World History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Huntington, S.P. (1993) ‘The Clash of Civilizations’, Foreign Affairs 72(3): 22–48.

Kant, I. (1960) Religion within the Limits of Pure Reason. New York: Harper and Row.

Kepel, G. (2002) Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam. London: I.B. Tauris.

Kepel, G. (2004) The Battle for Muslim Minds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, Belknap.

Luckmann, T. (1967) The Invisible Religion: The Problem of Religion in Modern Society. New York: Macmillan.

Marx, K. (1844) ‘The Jewish Question’, in Deutsch Franzosische Jahrbucher. Paris.

Roy, O. (1994) The Failure of Political Islam. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Said, E.W. (1978) Orientalism. New York: Vintage.

Perkins, F. (2004) Leibniz and China: A Commerce of Light. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Vries, H. de (2002) Religion and Violence: Philosophical Perspectives from Kant to Derrida. Baltimore,

MD and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Watt, W.M. (1999) Islamic Political Thought. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

Weber, M. (1966) Sociology of Religion. London: Methuen.

Bryan S. Turner is Professor of Sociology in the Asia Research Institute at the National University of Singapore and the author of Religion and Social Theory (1991).

# The Gift and the Given

John Milbank

Keywords donation, ethics, exchange, God, Mauss, ontology

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>gift,</sup> <sup>according</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>ancient</sup> <sup>Seneca</sup> <sup>(1989)</sup>and modern Mauss (1990), is supposed to form the primary social bond. Here, especially for Mauss, generosity precedes contract. The latter may be necessary in order to protect, but it is not fundamental. Gift, rather, is what connects and unites.

And yet it has come to be that which we most disagree about, beginning with the question of 1: gift and contract itself.

Is gift always gift-exchange? In order to give, must one already be in a relationship, and if gift is socially fundamental, does that mean that gifts have always already been exchanged? But if gift in this way begins as a return gift and itself expects in return a counter-gift, then is not gift itself an exotic mode of contract? But can that be a true gift? Already Seneca (1989) asked whether there can be an aristocratic, pure, disinterested gift, giving for the sake of giving. In that case gift has more to do with absolute duty than with social bonds, with absolute ethical respect for the other, rather than with practices sustaining a specific community.

And so one gets the contrast between the pure, disinterested, unilateral gift on the one hand and the idea that any gift is always involved in the complex reciprocity of gift-exchange on the other. But then it has come to be asked 2: Is the gift purely a social matter, or is it also ontological?

In the case of the imperative to give freely and disinterestedly, this has been grounded ever since Kant in an absolute divine imperative, a command to be good more fundamental than the divine bringing about of being and the human modification of the same. Equally, the perennial adepts of gift-exchange – most of humanity hitherto – have understood this exchange not to be merely social or cultural at all, but to be an aspect of a cosmic ecology: a vast circulation encompassing natural beings, the gods and the ancestors.

This is a circumstance still perhaps reflected in our language, in which we speak of ‘the given’ to refer to the inertly factual, and yet with a language that paradoxically conveys the notion of a personal transfer. When theorists, in turn, have reflected in the 20th century on this circumstance, one gets 3: The debate about the given and the gift.

All of modern philosophy, analytic and continental, sought to evade metaphysics by confining itself to the given, beginning with the given and remaining with the given, whether as the logical and grammatical parameters of possible sense, or as the noetic processes within which we receive and actively constitute a meaningful world.

But nothing, it turned out, was given in this inert fashion. There was no inviolable empirical data uncontaminated by synthesis or interpretation or evaluation. To find anything uncontestably given one had rather to turn to our entire existential circumstance. Here, ‘it is given’ that we are beings able to reflect on the fact that there is being at all. Here, our specific existence in time and space is also ‘given’ to us. Finally, things are only ‘there’ for us because they are able to appear to us in diverse and never exhaustive aspects, both across space and through time. Things arrive to us via spatial journeyings and temporal advents. This may be the crucial reason why we can speak of the factual as the ‘given’ – in excess of ancestral habit. What is there arrives and is in this sense ‘donated – we naturally greet the budding tree and the new dawn with grateful welcome.

But what can this mean? Here, 4: the analytic and the phenomenological approaches part company.

For analysis, once the given has become a ‘myth’ and this is fully admitted, only the inanity of practice in order to be practical remains (‘pragmatism’). For phenomenology, on the other hand, it may be that we can salvage the anti-metaphysics of remaining with the given by re-interpreting the given literally as gift (Levinas, 1991; Derrida, 1992; Blanchot, 1993; Marion, 1991). But does that mean that one turns at first to the rising dawn? No, because the pheneomenological presumption of confinement to the given is that one remains with what appears within the realm of the thinking subject. If what is given within this appearance is fundamentally a gift, then this cannot be guaranteed by the of-limits ‘transcendence’ of thought-independent being, but only in terms of this subjective space itself.

Therefore, it must be this space, as such, and not what appears to it, that is a gift. The gift of the thinking subject to itself? But how could such self-reference be a gift, or indeed fully proven as given even to itself? Instead, the subject must be given to itself before itself by an other in a ‘history always older than itself (Levinas, 1991). No representation of an ineluctable given is required here, since the other is registered by my inescapable ethical response to her needy demand – a response which first of all ensures that I am ‘there’ at all.

But how can we know such an imperative without characterizing the suffering other? And how else, if this subject does not, as an ethical subject, ‘appear’ to me (as Levinas insists) except by projecting my own experience of what it is to exist, to feel and to know onto the other? Is not the ‘given’ Cartesian subject still secretly prior in this schema after all? But this sort of givenness is supposed to have lapsed, along with all the other mythically ‘givens’.

Therefore, the priority of the ethical does not clearly work, and one is left with the question 5: Is the gift/given first enacted ethically, or first known about theoretically?

Instead of trying to save givenness as gift, could one not instead admit (now that the antimetaphysical 20th century is over) that one has always already speculatively (‘metaphysically’) transgressed the boundary between the immanently appearing and the excess of non-appearing in the real? If, as Marion (2002) says, the typical phenomenon is ‘saturated’ in terms of an appearing that exceeds our full conceptual grasp, then does not this mean (beyond Marion, 2003) that we receive such an appearing also with the supplement of our poetic, constructive speculation concerning the hidden – else the non-appearing excess will be merely a sublime hyper-presence without character, neatly segmented from that which does definably appear? And an uncharacterizable hyper-presence might be menace as much as it is gift.

This consideration, of course, tends to return us to the issue of language and interpretation. But it also brings us back to the arriving dawn and the budding tree. For now it is possible that things as well as persons can be initially conceived as gifts. Already, Heidegger (1972) suggested that es gibt was the deeper name for being. So, 6: Can one substitute the gift for the given in ontological terms, instead of reading the given as the gift in phenomenological terms?

Yet to read being as time necessarily but tragically interrupted by presence (Heidegger, 1972) is to ensure that the gift is still an impersonal given and, moreover, that it is perpetual mutual sacrifice (of Being to beings and vice-versa) rather than giftexchange. In addition, to claim that this is a true phenomenological reduction is still, after all, to locate the gift in the supposedly given.

Is another ontological strategy possible? Supposing that I am myself, really, ontologically a gift? Then one does not immediately need to invoke the other in order to grant oneself this status. If mind or spirit is more than an illusory epiphenomenon, then it does not derive from matter, and must be in consequence a mysterious and fundamental gift from the unknown (Bruaire, 1983). If I am myself a gift, then what lurks in me from before myself is more than the human, horizontal other. It is rather the trace of a vertical donor. And it seems appropriate that this donor, ‘God’, who gives gifts to nothing, and so gives gifts to themselves in order to establish gifts, should create first of all a creature able reflexively to exist by giving this gift to herself in turn. Is this not what it means to think (Bruaire, 1983)? Then gratitude for the gift of self spills later over into generosity towards the neighbour in imitation of that generosity that has first constituted us in being at all.

But if spirit is appropriately the first given, is it absolutely the first given? Is this not rather being in general, and does not this then allow that ‘I’ am first co-given along with others? And what of the role of merely material things? Are they not also first given? And do they not ensure that there can be between people a concrete shared community, rather than mere mutual sympathy and respect at a safe distance?

This raises 7: The question of whether our approach to the gift should be primarily philosophical or else primarily ethnographical. Or, in other terms, can we define the gift most securely as an eidetic possibility (within phenomenology) or as an ontological pre-condition of finite existence (Bruaire’s metaphysics), or must we rather discover it from the complex actuality of historical practice? A phenomenology combined with an ontology of the gift (Merleau-Ponty, 1968) might perhaps conclude that gift is interpersonal, that to give one must already be responding and must already be in a relation of exchange to the proposed recipient. Moreover, it might also conclude that a gift, if it is to be accounted a gift, must be an appropriate gift – therefore the complex business of combining thing with person (‘finding the right gift’) is essential and not dispensable. Such a perspective suggests that gift is always a moment within gift-exchange.

But can there be an exchange that is not pure formal contract? That deconstructs our modern divisions between private freedom (of donation) and public duty (of binding prior word)? This would have to be in terms of timings and spacings judged equivalent, even though not measurable as such. Non-identical repetition. Asymmetrical reciprocity. Plus the appropriateness of the gift combined with a surprisingness that exceeds the ‘just what I have always wanted’ which can derisorily suggest that the recipient was about to obtain the article for himself in any case. The difficult question then of the appropriate surprise – which judged wrong could even be a violent intrusion. And since the horizon invoked here depends upon the reality of objective value, the possibility arises that a real but difficult gift might be wrongly received as a curse.

One can see, then, in abstract formal terms, the possibility of an exchange that still sustains gift. It would be less a circle than an ongoing never foreclosed spiral (Godbout and Caillé, 1998). But to know if this apparent possibility can really be instantiated, one has to regard and judge historical actions – both on a micro and a macro scale. At this stage historical ethnography becomes essential. But within ethnography, as much as within philosophy, the question has been asked 8: Is the gift unilateral or is it reciprocal?

Many anthropologists have seen in gift only disguised contract, and have assumed in effect the modern division between reciprocal contract and unilateral gift. Especially they have suggested that a gift is only a kind of loan secured by capitalized, ungivable items (Godelier, 1999; Weiner, 1992). But could it be that the ungivable and that which must be given are two halves of the same unmodern picture? Namely, that, in ancient times, objects were not yet commodities, and so were seen as specific things with specific characteristics liable to achieve specific but not quite predictable effects. Able, in fact, to move the human plot almost as much as persons do. Then the ungivable belongs to the person it defines, while its surrogates must return or return in some equivalent mode, because they must always remain him in some sense. Gift-exchange is possible in part because of a certain belief in the animation of objects (Godbout and Caillé, 1998). This is the question 9: of the spirit of the gift.

But beyond this discussion one can ask 10: Is the unilateral/reciprocal contrast absolute?

Perhaps both paradigms assume that a situation of equality between social parties is the norm. But is there not rather usually hierarchy? Or always at least temporary hierarchy in that one person talks – gives orders, reports etc. – and is thus superior for the moment, or else one person listens – and judges – and is so likewise thereby superior? The person who talks both gives in a one-way sense and creates the theme and space of a subsequent conversation. In a sense he (somewhat) unilaterally gives the space of future reciprocity. Thus unilaterality and reciprocity can operate simultaneously, yet at different levels of causality. Supremely, one could note, God unilaterally gives a creature whose whole existence must be response to him. It is, indeed, this interaction of two causal levels that helps to sustain the neverforeclosed spiral of gift-exchange.

But to speak of spoken sign as gift – what does this mean? If a gift is a signifying convention then is it at bottom a fiction? Is the impossibility of the pure gift according to Derrida (because we award ourselves economically even in telling ourselves that we have been generous) coterminous with the endless deferral of meaning by the sign, such that to speak is to endlessly project the arrival of meaning, while to act ethically is endlessly to strive towards a generosity that cannot be enacted? This implies, however, as Derrida was aware, that postponement of meaning nonetheless remains ‘truer than a foreclosed presence of truth, while equally the impossible gift remains ‘the good’ in a way that economic and contractual self-assurance cannot be. So 11: What is the co-implication between gift and fiction?

Is meaning just postponed? Or can it be in some measure anticipated? And if not, then is the gift basically a sign, a promise of special attention that can never be realized? But perhaps, to the contrary, a sign has always a material vehicle, like the person speaking, the medium in which it is inscribed, the actions, place and time that