# Lifeworld

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Lifeworld

Austin Harrington

Keywords globalization, humanism, life, lifeworld, post-humanism, social theory

‘L<sup>ifeworld’</sup> <sup>entered</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>vocabulary</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>20th-</sup>century philosophy and social theory with century philosophy and social theory with the publication of Edmund Husserl’s The Crisis of the European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology in 1936, although Alfred Schütz earlier adopted the term following correspondence with Husserl in the early 1930s in his Der sinnhafte Aufbau der sozialen Welt of 1932 (translated in English in 1967 as The Phenomenology of the Social World) (see Srubar, 1988). By the ‘lifeworld’, Husserl meant the tissue of intersubjective background understandings that first makes scientific objectifying knowledge meaningful. In Husserl’s thesis, the lifeworld had become occluded under the impact of the norms of naturalistic positive science set down by Galileo and Descartes in the 17th century and enshrined in Leibniz’s project of mathesis universalis. This threatened to fuel the general disaffection from all rational critical inquiry unleashed by fascism in Europe in the 1930s.

For Schütz the lifeworld was the takenfor-granted ‘common-sense reality’ of the social world as it is lived by ordinary individuals. In the daily course of their lives individuals produce typifying constructs of their fellows’ actions which, though frequently faulty or short-sighted, are the only legitimate basis on which social scientists can advance toward what Max Weber called genuinely ‘meaningfully adequate’ explanatory accounts of social action and belief.

The concept of the lifeworld returned in later 20th-century social theory in Jürgen Habermas’s uneasy fusion of phenomenological philosophy and

Parsonian functionalist theory in The Theory of Communicative Action of 1981. The lifeworld then became the world of everyday communicative interaction which gradually differentiates over the course of processes of social evolution into distinct rationally articulated spheres of ‘cultural validity’. When the spheres of moralpractical and aesthetic-expressive communication start to become narrowed down by the sphere of science and technology under conditions of advanced capitalist administration, the lifeworld is threatened with ‘colonization by the system’. Instrumental, purpose-rational imperatives and expedients operative in the institutions of the market, the state, the juridical system and other expert apparatuses invade and disfigure that space of social antagonism whose only sources of legitimate resolution lie in inclusive uncoerced dialogue in the public sphere.

Today we are invited to raise numerous questions about the currency of this conception of the lifeworld. In what sense is the concept a ‘transcendental’ one, as Husserl held, or a ‘quasi-transcendental’ one, as Habermas sometimes writes? Does ‘transcendental’ imply ‘universal’, i.e. invariance across cultures? How is the life of the lifeworld to be rethought after the biotechnological revolutions of our present age? How is the world of the lifeworld to be rethought after globalization? Can phenomenological philosophy address a virtualized world of near-ubiquitous digitalized information systems? Is the notion now a redundant ‘old European’ naivety – after post-structuralism, postmodernism, post-colonialism, post-humanism? Or could the notion in fact gesture in some way toward the ultimate question to which all these issues seem to return: the possibility of life and the possibility of world?

European vitalist philosophers of the turn of the 19th century thought of life as the a priori horizon of all conscious experience. Not Kant’s ‘concepts and categories of the Understanding’ but life made all experience of the world and all worldhood possible. For Nietzsche, Dilthey, Simmel and Bergson, the world was given to the ego only in the flow of life and its temporal historical continuum. But today we must ask: whose world, and whose ego? What happens when the cognizer moves from one (‘transcendental’) lifeworld to many (‘quasi-’ or ‘semi-transcendental’) lifeworlds – from ‘our lifeworld to ‘their’ lifeworld, and back? How can a lifeworld be both empirical object and transcendental precondition of our ability to cognize it? And how is the lifeworld given in a world mediated by writing, television, the Internet and a dozen other means of electronic simulation? What might be the lifeworld, say, of the Amazonian tribesperson who lives from the fruits of the forest, uses a mobile phone and accesses the Internet? Derrida’s worries about Lévi-Strauss’s worries about lost originarity in the Tristes Tropiques here seem more pertinent than ever (see Derrida, 1967).

German anthropological philosophers of the mid-20th century saw the essence of human existence as revolving around what they called ‘worldopenness’. For Helmut Plessner (1950) the rational human animal was an ‘ex-centric’ animal, one capable of standing outside of its centred embodied being and comprehending other worlds from which it was physically absent. Logos implied consciousness, memory, imagination, creativity, linguistic inventiveness, freedom from simple stimulus-and-response – all of what Wilhelm von Humboldt called energeia or what Chomsky used to call ‘generative grammar’: the child’s ability to understand and to produce syntactic strings never previously registered or uttered. Contemporary thinking encourages us to be sceptical of such essentialism after the revolutions in neuroscience and information technology and the practical penetration of a great many people’s everyday lifeworlds by artificial intelligence, intelligent medical prostheses and the possibility of genetic cloning. The interventions of philosophical anti-humanists from Foucault and Deleuze to Luhmann, Haraway and Latour are now familiar articles of this onslaught on what Charles Taylor (1989) called the ‘expressivist model of the subject’.

But still the issue nags, on a number of fronts, political as well as epistemological. According to Giorgio Agamben (1995), the Jews at Auschwitz died before they reached the gas chambers because what the camp stripped away from them before they entered the chambers was the possibility of having and being in a world. With the removal of worldhood went the removal of life. Or more precisely, with the removal of worldhood went the collapse of life qua bios – life lived in and with the world – into ‘bare life’ qua zoë. Though Agamben grossly distorts the historical specificity of the Holocaust by extending it metonymically to all modernity tout court – as do some other Holocaust books such as Zygmunt Bauman’s – still the question left unanswered in much of the antihumanist ridiculing of old European technophobia is the one first raised by Husserl and Heidegger: how is it that we can find the fact of our existence and our being-in-the-world a question for ourselves – rather than spin around on a groove like automatons or like bare life awaiting extinction? If globalization is about anything, it is about the possibility of world, of having and being in a world which is open to us and to which we can be open. Entweltlichung, or ‘world-privation’, was the term Hannah Arendt (1958) took from Heidegger to describe the closure or flattening out of the apparently open vista of infinite possibilities that was modern technical civilization. Today with Jean-Luc Nancy (2002) we can ask a similar question: is mondialization the extension of monde or the diminution of monde? For all the difficulties of regarding globalization as homogenizing and destructive of texture and diversity, one possibility cannot be brushed aside: perhaps the more we extend the world beyond itself, the more we collapse it within itself, and the more we raise the power of life, the more we raise the life of power.

