# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

## Introduction

We speak of violence in several senses: physical, psychological, emotional and conceptual. Most immediately, though (and in that sense most violently), it is said to erupt among people in motivated personal or political struggles, sometimes irrationally, criminally, unexpectedly; in any event, violence leaves its victims in shock or lying wounded or dead. Ubiquitous 24-hour news services report an almost continuous narrative of the multiple events of violence that at any one time are occurring globally. Violence, in this immediate sense, can be the result of natural catastrophes, terrorism, demonstration, rioting or revolt, state policing, military conflict, various kinds of warfare, major offensives, strategic assaults or domestic abuse. This immediate sense of the notion of violence is itself violent. Considered as a category of global knowledge, violence can erupt as the spectacular instance of underlying conditions, complex and often unobserved political negotiations and uncontrolled, incalculable effects. Identifying the causes of violence in certain ways – determining an instance of violence as the consequence of this or that motive or ideology – can itself be regarded as a kind of violence, which would be manifested when a determination is acted upon (e.g. in the form of a retaliation or deterrence), leading to conceptions of justified violence, necessary violence, sufficient force, etc. Violence, in this immediate sense, escalates. There is no doubt that the last 150 years have seen an escalation of violence in terms at least of the sheer numbers of a global, increasingly urban, population who have been or who are currently (at any time) the victims of the several causes of violence. Simply identifying the empirical escalation of violence does nothing to solve the problem of violence, which is as old, it seems, as the race itself.

So violence would seem to be an empirical phenomenon yet questions arise as to its origin, its source. The empirical (materialist or formalist) concepts of violence have proven to be wholly inadequate to any attempt to think through violence as an epistemological category. Traditionally the problem falls into the disjuncture between empirical and transcendental determinations, as if perhaps there was a transcendental (traditionally a divine and thus unconditioned) force before and beyond experience. In his book, Religion and Violence: Philosophical Perspectives from Kant to Derrida, Hent de Vries (2002: 1) offers a basic and inclusive definition of violence as entailing ‘any cause, any justified or illegitimate force, that is exerted – physically or otherwise – by one thing (event or instance, group or person, and, perhaps, word and object) on another’. As inclusive as it is, the definition harbors a serious problem, which becomes one of the main strands of the book. The definition of violence as ‘force’, or at least the concept of force as violence, presupposes a relation between more than one, and thus a potential play, or worse, opposition, of forces. Violence as a condition of possibility is thus presupposed by any act of force. Any real violence (physical, psychological, social, etc.) might seem to presuppose an ideal (a priori or transcendental) violence – or even a radical non-violence. Yet the reverse is true as well: the thought of violence seems necessarily constrained by circumstances, contained by history.

Attempts to engage with the aporias of violence through the (evidently considerable) remaining resources of religion and philosophy address an important aspect of global knowledge. The problem, conceived in this way, is widespread and fundamental. It concerns not only questions of personal and social justice, government, international relations and international law, but also – more fundamentally perhaps – the very constitution of knowledge itself in its concepts and modes of classification. In what follows we make some observations about violence and global knowledge and then go on to analyze how violence problematizes concepts of law and justice in several world historical contexts. We then return to the question of epistemological violence as a contemporary concern of global knowledge.

The problem of knowledge is inextricable from the problem of violence. To speak of epistemological violence in the 21st century might feel almost tautological. When the dominant strands of scientific, but especially technological, knowledge have not only served but also – perhaps more significantly – driven the development of military epistemologies and technologies, then one cannot talk of knowledge without evoking violence. Even beyond the evident military sphere, mainstream scientific and technical knowledge can be analyzed as a kind of legitimating force, which not only produces the legitimate bounds of a particular branch of knowledge, but also classifies knowledge generally, relegating, domesticating or even subjugating alternative kinds of knowledge. In this way, for instance, the traditional discourses of Orientalism (in policy, commerce and scholarship) can be said to characterize, through several kinds of representation often in the guise of scientific objectivity, an Orient that replaces – literally stands in stead of – anything that might have been produced as Oriental knowledge as such. These representations are all the more powerful for their combining of scorn and hypostatization, which produces the hallucination of a fully formed relationship. Orientalism, in this sense (and to the extent that this argument is valid), would only become a knowledge in the deepest sense of the term with the acknowledgement of the violence of these projections. It seems, then, that knowledge, according to traditional, even ancient, principles, ought to be opposed to violence. Nevertheless the problem of violence is considerably more complex than such ideals allow.

