# America

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# America

Djelal Kadir

Keywords exceptionalism, godliness, hegemony, hypertrophy, immunity, impunity, providentialism, supplement, terrorism

T<sup>o</sup> <sup>take</sup> <sup>America</sup> <sup>as</sup> <sup>an</sup> <sup>encyclopedic</sup> <sup>object,</sup>and as a ‘supplement’, at that, is to court damnable incoherence, if not outright actionable impertinence where America’s global order of the day at the beginning of the 21st century is concerned. Hegemonic world order is prone to guard its privileged epistemic and onto-theological status with fanatical zeal. America as self-reifying centrality has militated for its indisputable ontological status since its inception as Puritan theocracy. Harold Bloom, not without typical American selfconviction, has diagnosed America as endemically self-sanctifying and providentially elect, closer to God than any other chosen people has dared deem itself so chosen. Bloom’s The American Religion: The Emergence of the Post-Christian Nation, published in the not insignificant year of 1992, is as acute as Bloom could ever be. It is also symptomatic of America’s perennial self-perception as history’s exception. A ‘Post-Christian Nation’, as Bloom’s subtitle avers, is a post-historical nation, inasmuch as history where America is concerned has always been teleological and messianic, which is to say apocalyptic. Its ‘post-Christiannesss’ would clearly make it as post-apocalyptic and extra-historical. Symptomatically, Bloom’s diagnosis coincides with Francis Fukuyama’s The End of History and the Last Man (1993), yet another instance of American triumphalist exceptionalism that deems itself beyond human history. And while Bloom saw America as ‘post-Christian’ in 1992, by the beginning of the 21st century the ‘postness’ he and Fukuyama diagnosed would prove encyclically circular.

In a vehement return of the repressed, in Freud’s terms, that would betray a pre-Christian zeal verging on self-idolatry and divinely conferred self-justification, by 2005 commentarists such as Canada’s (formerly of the USA) Henry A. Giroux refer to the reigning paradigm of America’s public sphere as ‘Rapture Politics’, and to the pithy characterization of America by its former Attorney General John Ashcroft as

Unique among nations, America recognized the source of our character as being godly and eternal, not being civic and temporal. And because we have understood that our source is eternal, America has been different. We have no king but Jesus. (Giroux, 2005)

At the beginning of the 21st century, then, as we cycle back into encyclopedic knowledge management, America stands apart as uncontested and incontestable hegemon in a cyclical return to a ‘heroic’ age, where ‘heroic’ can only be understood in Hobbsian and apocalyptic terms, rather than in terms of the recursive spirals of Giambattista Vico. Such recursivity is not only a reaction formation responding to the baleful contingencies of realpoli tik and its terrors, itself a complex set of reactions, in turn. Rather, America’s self-perceived godliness and infallibility are yet another occasion of a compensatory gesture seen as perennially indispensable because, in good measure, of America’s genesis as nominal and philological gambit on the part of pundits such as Thomas More, himself no less theologically convinced, a strength of conviction that would end with his decapitation in the court of his sovereign, and on the part of ironic wits such as Martin Waldseemüller. In his Cosmographia Introductio (Introduction to Cosmography) (1507), Waldseemüller would forge the baptismal nomination of ‘America’ as lexical play on the name of Amerigo Vespucci. By taking the Greek stem meros (‘place’) and prefixing the privative ‘a’ to it, and by locating this ‘no-place’ on earth (ge), with Amerige Waldseemüller left the trope of ‘utopia’ as legacy for the ill-starred Thomas More (Kadir, 1992). This is the nominal ontology for which America has been compensating ever since with desperate and sanctimonious righteousness. It has not sufficed to displace nominalism as foundation by substituting realism’s or religion’s bedrock ontology. America has perennially labored to convert that compensatory realism into an onto-teleology, an overcompensation that would have America be ‘real’ not only of/in this world, but also of/in the next. Thus, the providentialist exceptionalism has echoed unremittingly since Columbus equated the newly encountered oceanic land mass with the eschatological New World, since the Puritans founded their theocracy in New England as New Canaan, since continental conquest and colonization found its divine sanction in Manifest Destiny, and since God himself certified the enterprise of global hegemony through His latest providential agent, the current president of the USA, George W. Bush, who is convinced of his divine appointment and godly agency. (Mr Bush would confess on a 16 July 2004 visit to an Amish community in Smoketown, PA, ‘God speaks through me.’ See http://www.irregulartimes.com/godspeaksthrough me.html.) How, then, to consign such providentially sanctioned centrality to epistemic supplement in an encyclopedic archive, when the destiny of America is already writ large in God’s own book for the ages? Perennial attempts to reframe America as hemispheric synecdoche, as ‘the other America’, or as ‘our America’, have proved no more than disingenuous reaffirmations of America as Whitmanesque grandeur and bipolar multiplicity, or as involuntary and inexorable self-subalternizations on the part of Latinate voices in the rest of the American Hemisphere. Symptomatic, in this regard, is Boaventura de Sousa Santos’s ‘Nuestra America: Reinventing a Subaltern Paradigm of Recognition and Redistribution (2001), where a ‘reinvention’ ends by being a reinscription and replication of what it would interrogate.

If, then, as the subtitle of this encyclopedic project avers, the global goal is to render ‘global knowledge’ problematic, we are faced with no larger problem than the supplementarity this project would impute to the status of what deems itself not only global in this planet Earth, but central in the cosmic order of extra-planetary space (now duly militarized) and transcendental metaphysics (now evangelized with the zeal of born-again self-conviction). This, of course, is not only a transcendence into metatheoretical space and post-apocalyptic time, it is a bulking metastasis, a hypertrophy that distends the global and overflows any site of knowledge production – no matter whether encyclopedic, archival, digitalized, or hypertexted. No cognitive mapping can contain America, as supplement or as metanarrative, and no network – the World Wide Web or any other cosmic formation of knowledge management – proves equal to the task of epistemic or discursive containment. America has proved from its inception what this author has termed elsewhere ‘an incontinent continent’ (Kadir, 1986). At the beginning of this new millennium, America labors to sustain this indomitable impetus with greater vigor than ever. This is no mere deluge or fluidity that overflows the sites and epistemic rules of knowledge production. America has always viewed itself as post-diluvian and post-apocalyptic, where, as the already cited Bloom demonstrates, by example as much as by assertion, ‘post-’ and ‘pre-’ converge in a cycle of ‘preposterous’ selfconviction. As such, if indeed it is to be consigned taxonomically to the status of supplement,

America’s supplementarity must be cosmic and extend well beyond the circumscriptions of the circular paideia we commonly call an ‘encyclo-pedia’. As global hegemon, America situates itself beyond any globalizing process. No archive, squared or in the round, can subsume, much less subject to its disciplinarity the America that militantly deems itself exempt from and exceptional to any consignments of knowledge or constellations of realpolitik. An orthogenesis of its own exertions, America does not brook definition as instance of any discursive formation or as epistemic object of any dialogical assemblage. In its self-perceived and oft-declared exceptionalism, it would persist as incomparable monad that does not allow for diagnostic scrutiny or prognostic speculation outside its own self-engendered criteria. It aggressively projects its own unilateral and monologic soliloquy in which it deems itself incomprehensible by/in any logic or epistemic archive. Any definition imputed to this phenomenon, as supplement or otherwise, will be deemed a less than adequate projection of the archivist, or considered a wishful transference of the encyclopedist. To venture any diagnosis or characterization of America other than the self-sanctioned at this historical juncture runs the risk of being indicted for terroristic intentions and condemned for seditious heterodoxy. By questioning what now reigns with bellicose immunity, then, one risks the consequences of its absolute impunity. This risk itself and the all too evident global repercussions of its belligerence may be America’s self-defining and most compelling descriptor. No encyclopedic endeavor can feel immune from the prospect of its own encirclement – epistemic, ideological, carcelary – within the hegemonizing circumscriptions of its object of knowledge, if that object should be America at the beginning of this new millennium.

