# Reflexivity, Modernity and Specific Gender Practices / Deconstructing Sex, Gender and Embodiment / New Epistemological Directions

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

## Reflexivity, Modernity and Specific Gender Practices

Gender was always framed within a collectivist set of epistemological paradigms along with class, race, ethnicity and nationality. However, as Beck and Beck-Gernsheim (1995: 5–6) observe, ‘as people are released from roles, especially gender roles, that modern capitalist society prescribed, they are encouraged more and more to build up a life of their own’. Within what Beck defines as a ‘new modernity’ is a fragmentation and differentiation of life patterns and an erosion of conventionalized life careers and relationships.

The conceptualization of this ‘new modernity’ in socio-cultural and gender terms as understood by Beck and others is a highly Westernized notion of modernity. Beck (2000) distinguishes between a ‘first modernity’, signalled by collective full employment and the existence of both nationstates and welfare states, and a ‘second modernity’, in which increased individualization, gender revolution and globalization come about.

In this Western conceptualization of the ‘new modernity’ traditionally conceived notions of gender, of feminine and masculine, are breaking down, which poses additional challenges to relationships of intimacy. There are now multiple masculinities (Connell, 1996) and femininities and new epistemological frameworks to accompany them. Plummer (2003) formulates a sociology of intimacy based on an understanding of choices about gender and a reconceptualization of traditional gender categories such as masculinity and femininity. Far from a positive representation of relationships of intimacy as suggested by Beck and Giddens, Plummer shows how gender relationships have very negative connotations including:

‘gender wars’ as men and women seem increasingly incapable of living with each other . . . side by side with this, newer concerns over bisexuality and polyamory [described by Plummer as relationships where there is multiple love], gender benders and gender blenders, queers, lesbian daddies, dykes . . . and transgender warriors. (Plummer, 2003: 6)

Conceptualizing modernity in non-Western contexts produces a very different understanding of reflexivity and gender identity. As I have noted elsewhere (Brooks, 2003), in Southeast Asia, the intersection of gender, family values and multiculturalism is a pervasive phenomenon impacting on reflexivity and identity. Religion and ethnicity give a further inflection to the debate. The underlying issues around religion, ethnicity and class intersect with gender and impact on the debate around both ‘Asian’ family values and gender identity. The rhetoric emerging from many of the governments in Southeast Asia has deliberately tied issues of gender identity to debates around ‘Asian family values’, nation building and questions of national identity. Whether the particular inflection is Confucian or Islamist, modernity, reflexivity and gender identity has a different frame of reference.

Thus modernity within non-Western contexts lends itself to a very different conceptualization of gender and a very different framing of gender identity. Within non-Western contexts a more appropriate model to understand gender may be that of ‘divergent modernities’ or ‘multiple modernities’. Within an Asian context, Asian women are creating non-Western conceptualizations of modernity. As Roces and Edwards (2000: 4–5) note, in doing so ‘it reaffirms the distinctiveness of a particular national subjectivity from a putative hegemonic Westernising identity’. An expression of this can be seen in Malaysia where the use of the veil has been seen as an attempt to embrace modernity in non-Western terms (Stivens, 1998).

Problematizing the relationship between modernity, reflexivity and gender, Gole (2002: 174) considers: ‘The public visibility of Islam and the specific gender, corporeal and spatial practices underpinning it’, through the practice of veiling. In writing about the contemporary veiling practices of Muslim women, Gole highlights the significance of gender in the public visibility of Islam and shows how women become important religious and political agents through the emergence of the veil as the symbol of politicized Islam. Gole (2002: 181) shows that:

The Islamic headscarf is deliberately appropriated not passively carried and handed down from generation to generation. It is claimed by a new generation of women who have had access to higher education . . . Instead of assimilating to the secular regime of women’s emancipation, they press for their embodied difference (e.g. Islamic dress) and their public visibility.

As Gole points out, Muslim women find themselves a visible representation of ‘difference’ from both a sometimes hostile West and a confused and divided Islam. Gole (2002: 183) maintains that the practice of veiling does not reflect a subjugation of Muslim women to traditional religious practices: ‘On the contrary, it bears a new form, the outcome of a selective and reflexive attitude that amplifies and dramatizes the performative signs of “difference” . . . the new covering suggests a more rather than less potent Islam.’ Traditionally denied any visible presence in the public sphere, Muslim women’s representation of contemporary Islam has redefined both gender roles and representations of women. The relationship between gender, Islamization and religious practice has had a strong impact on reflexivity and gender identity. In countries in Southeast Asia and elsewhere, modernist versus traditional Islamist positions can be seen to be played out around issues of marriage, polygamy and embodiment. As Stivens (1998: 113) notes, ‘the subtext of these contests is that women have been deployed as bearers of correct religious dress and behaviour and as keepers of a revivified private sphere, “the family”’. Such reconceptualizations of gender and identity have posed serious challenges to conventional epistemological frameworks and to contemporary theorizing around reflexivity and identity.

## Deconstructing Sex, Gender and Embodiment

Reconceptualizing sex and gender has been a relatively recent development among gender and feminist theorists and activists, characterized by significant epistemological shifts. These reconceptualizations of the relationship between sex, gender and embodiment have problematized conventional understanding of such relationships. In fact it was not until gender had become more established as a category that sexuality became more amenable to investigation. In addition, sexuality itself came to be seen as another axis of inequality. The relationship between sex and gender became increasingly seen as a sphere of epistemological conflict, particularly within feminist and gender theorizing. Debates raged initially over sex and sexuality (see below); however, the emphasis shifted to the interrogation of both sex and gender. Some argued that questioning sex as well as gender facilitates a more complete social understanding of the distinction between women and men. Other theorists maintain that the sex/gender distinction is no longer useful and that if both sex and gender are social constructions, we should return to using the term ‘sex’ (Grosz, 1995).

In Volatile Bodies (1994), Grosz argued for a re-examining of notions of female corporeality and for interrogating the body within sexuality and ethics. Grosz (1994: 58, 187) holds a view of the materially sexed body, maintaining that ‘the body is constrained by its biological limits’, and also notes that ‘the kind of body inscribed’ makes a difference to the meaning and functioning of gender that emerges. However, she also observes that social norms structure our perception and understanding of male and female identities. As Shilling (2005: 68) notes: ‘We are left with a body that is positioned by, and unalterably tied to, the sexual norms of society.’ Shilling correctly acknowledges that Grosz does not overstate the significance of the ‘body’s “malleability” (as with Giddens’s focus on individual reflexivity) or its determination (as with Bourdieu’s notion of the habitus)’ (Shilling, 2005: 67). However the problematic inherent in Grosz’s model is her failure to establish criteria on which to judge between the two positions. Regardless of Grosz’s emphasis on an autonomous ‘sexed corporeality’, Shilling observes that she shares with Bourdieu a perspective on the body’s positioning in society which ties into the dominant structures of social class or sexuality, and hence to a substantially modernist view of gender identity. Elsewhere, Grosz (1995) argues for an explicit ‘sexualization of knowledges in order to explicate the impact that ‘sexed corporeality’ may have on how we understand knowledge, as well as how governing knowledges are codified and understood. Thus, for Grosz, sex, as well as gender, is an important dimension in the problematics of epistemological frameworks.

The construction of gender identity, gendered subjectivity and the gendered body is a major area of interest for gender knowledge. Judith Butler’s (1990) deconstruction of sex and gender is the most influential epistemological contribution to the debates. Butler shows that once sex and gender are treated as separate categories there is no reason to argue for a gender binary. Butler maintains that bodies become gendered through the continual performance of gender; in other words gender is ‘performative’. However, the concept of the ‘performative’ as understood by Butler does not imply a performance. Performativity as developed by Butler has a different etymology. Butler draws on a notion of ‘performativity’ deriving from linguistics which draws on a process of ‘citations or repetitive practices based on normative structures. As used by Butler, linguistic performatives are forms of speech, which by their utterances bring what they name into being. In other words, sex is materialized, according to Butler, through a complex of citational practices. Butler’s work among others has made a significant contribution to the development of new epistemological frameworks which explore the intersection of gender and sexuality and which attract gender, feminist and queer theorists challenging binary models of gender and sexuality.

Gender and feminist theorists have also problematized forms of global knowledge which legitimate dominant forms of sexuality, including heterosexuality and ‘hegemonic masculinity (Connell, 1996). In Connell’s critique of hegemonic masculinity, he shows how there is no single clearly articulated masculinity or femininity in Western societies – just culturally prescribed forms which may take a different form at different points in time. In addition, the dominant hegemonic form is embedded in institutional ideology, e.g. religious doctrines, mass media, education, wage structures, welfare policy, etc. Connell shows that hegemonic masculinity is constructed in relation to women and to subordinate masculinities. It is pivotal to the dominance of heterosexual hegemony and marriage. Not only is hegemonic masculinity important ideologically, it also has significant epistemological implications for gender.

Dominant models of sexuality and masculinity clearly have implications for what kind of knowledge is constituted, reproduced, circulated and legitimated. Gender and feminist theorists have sought to problematize the epistemological frameworks within which such dominant paradigms exist. This does not, however, assume consensus around what counts as knowledge within gender and feminist theory, and ‘paradigm wars’ have constantly surfaced around gender epistemologies. As Oakley (2004: 192) notes, ‘[p]aradigm wars – in which one can unfortunately find oneself caught . . . are one example of the gendered social tensions produced within a patriarchal social structure’.

Epistemological schisms have characterized the gender/sex relationship, particularly around sexual practices, pornography and reproductive technologies. Internal schisms characterized the relationships between feminist theorists and activists, including lesbian feminists, sex radicals and queer theorists. ‘Sex wars’ developed between feminists themselves and between lesbian and gay theorists and activists. Schisms have also characterized lesbian and gay movements, particularly around ‘normal’ and queer theory. As Plummer (2003: 44) comments: ‘Linked to these epistemological conflicts is the argument over “queer family values”. Such decision about rights and choices is as fundamental to the gay community as it is to the heterosexual community.’

## New Epistemological Directions

Plummer, in Intimate Citizenship, observes that ‘we are probably living simultaneously in traditional, modern and postmodern worlds (2003: 8). The ‘paradigm wars’ around gender epistemology are certainly still operating on all three levels. Feminist theorists still debate the relevance of feminist knowledge production within dominant hegemonic structures such as global knowledges. However, in the postmodern world the questions posed are which groups are these models relevant to: which women? or which genders? For many gender groups, as Plummer (2003: 54) notes, gender is not a fixed identity and thus cannot have any citizenship rights. This highlights the fundamental epistemological dilemma in relation to gender (or any other category): the classic problem of universals and differences. As Plummer (2003: 59) observes in framing his new conception of multiple citizenships, ‘the women’s movement, the lesbian and gay movement, the ethnic and post-colonial movements have raised a host of potential new identities that demand recognition and lay claim to rights and obligations’.

