# Mobility and the City / The City as Centering / Counter-Topographies / Costs?

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Mobility and the City

Brenda S.A. Yeoh

Keywords gender, globalization, migration,

place, space, transnationalism

## The City as Centering

The city is often thought of as a material (lived) and imagined (ideological) space that came into being as a result of a consolidation of power (social, cultural economic, political). It is hence often represented as an economic node or hub, a centrifugal point for the collection of resources, a crucible of ideas and innovation, the locus of imagined communities, and a source of identity and security. Cities are privileged sites of consolidation, power and dwelling. John R. Short (2003: 18–23) describes three urban discourses – the authoritarian city (cities as ‘sites of social aggregation that involve compulsion, order, and discipline as well as freedom, anarchy, and self-realization’); the cosmic city (cities as religious artifacts reflecting and embodying cosmologies); and the collective city (cities which are ‘sites of collective provision, collective consumption, and the workings of civil society’).

With the emergence in recent years of the discourse on global/globalizing cities, the centering role of cities is further emphasized. For example, the term global cities has now gained common currency to represent the ‘mega-cephalic’ corporate and financial centers for capital accumulation within a hierarchical articulation of global space. Apparently, during the Apollo space flights, it was reported that one of the astronauts, looking back to Earth, expressed amazement that he could see no boundaries. This new view of our world as the ‘blue planet’, famously captured in NASA photo 22727, presented a view of the Earth with no territorial markings but made up most visibly by lights delimiting a global pattern of cities, consisting of a broad swath girdling the mid-lattitudes plus many pinpricks of light elsewhere (Beaverstock et al., 2000: 123). In this formulation, cities are the only visible nodes in the global imaginary; other spaces are invisible.

## Counter-Topographies

Yet, these electric nodes of light on space photos are actually connected by massive electronic flows of information as well as material flows that cut across territorial boundaries. Historically, cities have always existed within interconnectivities comprising all manner of linkages and networks. These very systems of flows sustain and generate urban space in the first place.

Increasingly, translocal (often transnational) mobilities disrupt this sense of the city as centrality, as stasis, as a gathering together, as a permanence. The experience of city life as centering is being shot through by the multiple possibilities of combining ‘here’ and ‘there’, absence and presence, ascription and disavowal, in everyday life – astride boundaries and across ever-widening distances and spaces. Mobility, traveling, migration and unmoorings (often circular, multi-directional, ridden with detours) are the quintessential experience of these times and often one arrives in the city only to leave again. Cities are hence as much spaces of flows as they are spaces of place.

This is not to say that cities are ‘places which are leaking away into a space of flows’ (Thrift, 1997: 140). With information and communication technologies speeding up interconnectivities between places and enhancing the simultaneity of absence/presence, being in the city is a multidirectional rather than a centering experience. In as much as the city as a locality is constantly reconfigured by ‘hybrids of the “newly arrived” and the “previously there”’ (Short et al., 2000), human experiences in terms of mobility have also grown so much larger than can be encompassed by the spatial fixity of the city. This is accompanied by both pains and gains for the individual as may be illustrated by examples from either end of the migration spectrum.

The embodied urban experiences of unmoored transnational lowly paid migrant workers whose navigation of transnational routes to and from ‘home’ and ‘host’ (the city) are not inevitable but perpetuated by the city’s disciplinary policies of ‘use and discard’. For example, policies ensuring the transience of female foreign domestic worker bodies in cities such as Singapore, in turn, reinforce the permanence of transnational mobilities among unskilled labor migrants. With little chance of sustainable employment in her home country where she is a citizen and even less likelihood of becoming an immigrant-turned-citizen in the country where she is employed, the migrant domestic worker is locked into unending circuits of transnational care, affection, money and material goods in order to sustain the family in its transnational form. One needs to ask the question: Do transnational mobilities always work to the benefit of individual transmigrants attracted to the city? Or do the resources and cushioning effects provided by transnational connectivities somehow make it even easier for the cities to extract labor power from transmigrants while abdicating responsibility for their social welfare? Such abdication of responsibility – the lack of provision for rights and resources – is often justified by dint of the fact that transmigrants are non-citizens who have roots and networks anchoring them to the sending nations elsewhere (Yeoh et al., 2004).

The experience of upper-end skilled/ professional migrants in the global city (‘foreign talent’ as they are referred to in Singapore) is also not necessarily one of centrality and consolidation as far as the social spheres of life are concerned. Often, in order to circulate from one global city to the next, family forms have to be made flexible. Being in the city often means being away from the family as in the case of Hong Kong ‘astronauts’ and their families (the so-called ‘astronaut wives and parachute kids’ syndrome). Against the centering, inclusive effects of city-living, there is also the need to recognize the simultaneous embeddedness in the ‘city’ and ‘elsewhere’, and the need for constant mobility in linking the two in order to sustain social and cultural institutions such as the transnational family.

The importance of grappling with the way ‘centering’ and ‘mobility’ work with and against each other in specific contexts is implied in Michael Smith’s (2001) Transnational Urbanism where he uses the ‘transnational optic’ as a counter to the globalization perspective, as a bifocal lens which brings into view bodies – disposable labor or embodiments of talent in circulatory flows – and at the same time frames them within contested historical and geographical contexts as socially and spatially situated subjects. As Ryan Bishop communicated to me before, ‘the tension between storage/archive/consolidation on the one hand and circulation/amnesia/dispersal on the other reveals the inherent urbanism operative on both sides of the tension’ (pers. comm.). In the city, sedentarist administrative procedures and disciplining border controls have an in-built tendency to immobilize human bodies; at the same time, other contradictory impulses to move, circulate, defy fixity and transcend boundaries are equally powerful.

## Costs?

As already implied, there is nothing inevitable about the simultaneous impulses of centering and connecting in the shaping of globalizing cities. Feminists, for example, have insisted on giving attention to the politics of transnational urbanism. Not only has mobility across borders intensified in complex ways, there has been a feminization of many of these flows as a result of changing production and reproduction processes worldwide. Globalization processes, in which production activities are relocated from core economies to those of the periphery to take advantage of cheaper input costs, have drawn on the preexisting gender relations and targeted cheap and flexible female workers – many from countries with declining employment opportunities – to enter factory employment in export processing zones and industrial parks in rapidly industrializing countries. The other numerically more important form of female labor migration is linked to reproductive activities, such as domestic service and the sex industry. Major accounts of cultural globalization to which the transnational framework is linked tend to be masculinist, for they ‘make no attempt to identify the processes that increasingly differentiate the power of mobile and non-mobile subjects’ (Ong, 1999: 11). In traversing transnational space, men often feature as entrepreneurs, career-builders, adventurers and breadwinners who navigate transnational circuits with fluidity and ease, while women are alternatively taken to be missing in action from globalized economic webs, stereotyped as exotic, subservient or victimized, or relegated to playing supporting roles, usually in the domestic sphere or as a trailing spouse (Yeoh et al., 2000). As Freeman (2001: 1018) observes, ‘travel, with its embodiments of worldliness, adventure, physical prowess, and cultural mastery, is widely constructed as a male pursuit.’ In short, that ‘women stay home and men go abroad’ is a takenfor-granted expectation (Clifford, 1997: 6).

We also need to be suspicious of the claims that the transnational subject embodies liberatory potential that could challenge ‘oppressive nationalism, repressive state structures, and capitalism’. Aihwa Ong (1999: 15) reminds us of the ‘diverse forms of interdependencies and entanglements between transnational phenomena and the nationstates’ which trouble any easy assumptions equating mobility with emancipatory impulses. Indeed, the hypermobility and the easy transgression of national borders in today’s globalizing world may well be liberating or emancipatory for the individuals involved, but may also reinforce existing social ideologies, including those of the nation-state. It is important in a feminist approach to transnationality not to somehow attribute a sense of inevitability in thinking about transnational processes but to look them squarely in the eye and ask the all-important question as to who reaps the gains and who bears the costs of rapidly developing transnational social practices in global cities. Is it the transnational subject himself or herself, in subjecting his or her body to the constant state of being ‘neither here nor there’? Or are transnational families at risk, and does the cost fall mainly on women who often bear the emotional costs of holding the family stretched across countries together? Or do those outside the transnational project, such as the poor and those with little access to networks, bear the brunt of growing transnationality as a privileged discourse?

