# East and West in Global History

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# East and West in Global History

John Hobson

Keywords capitalism, civilizations, East/West, Eastern agency, Eurocentrism/Orientalism, imperialism, Oriental globalization

f the title of this entry appears to be unproblematic, if not anodyne, it turns out to be contradictory and loaded with Eurocentric bias. It is contradictory because within conventional historiography there is no East and West in ‘global history’. ‘Global history’ is neither global, because it is a provincial story of Western universalism, nor historical, because it is ‘ahistorical-Eurocentrism’ written backwards. For in conventional historiography, the East is prejudicially relegated to a residual category that has no autonomous place in global history – it is merely a stagnant backwater in the mainstream Western story. In short, conventional global history turns out to be an ahistorical-Eurocentric ‘Western provincialism writ large’.

David Landes dismisses this view as but politically correct ‘good think’ which avoids the ‘twin facts’ that the West has consistently led the East and pioneered modern global capitalism (Landes, 1998). Similarly, John Roberts argues for the veracity of Eurocentrism on the grounds that:

[it] means ‘putting Europe at the centre of things’, and its usual implication is that to do so is wrong. But, of course, if we are merely talking about facts, about what happened, and not about the value that we place on them, then it is quite correct to put Europe at the centre of the story in modern times. (1985: 201)

But it is precisely the naïvety or impossibility of the fact-value distinction wherein the source of the problem lies. For what eludes Roberts and Landes is that Europe only appears to occupy centre-stage of progressive global history because Eurocentric values have led them to select Europe as, or place it at, the centre of the story in the first place. And the East only appears to be absent because it has been selected out, having being consigned to the dark ghetto of the marginalized periphery.

The idea of Western history as universal (global) history emerged in the 19th century when racist-Eurocentrism or Orientalism had been constructed by the Europeans (Said, 1978). This discourse suddenly pronounced the superiority of Europe over the ‘inferior Eastern other’. It entailed two critical assumptions: first, that what had previously been thought of as interlinked, if not symbiotic, regions were suddenly relocated along either side of a constructed ‘civilizational line of apartheid’. And, second, Europe was constructed as qualitatively superior to the East because it supposedly had exceptional, progressive characteristics or virtues. By contrast, the East was inscribed with only regressive properties. Having constructed Europe as superior and exceptional, Eurocentric thinkers then extrapolated this conception back in time to Ancient Greece, thereby painting an ahistorical picture of Europe as permanently superior (Amin, 1989; Bernal, 1991). Simultaneously Europe was inscribed with a unique ‘logic of immanence’ wherein the seeds of progress were contained within its socio-political structure. Accordingly, from Ancient Greece on, European development and global history are (re)presented as a purely endogenous Western story that unfolds in a linear sequence. In the process, the Western people were elevated to the permanent ‘subject’ of global history standing at the centre of all things progressive. Conversely, the Eastern peoples were relegated to the peripheral status of global history’s passive ‘object’, languishing on the Other side of an imaginary civilizational frontier, stripped of history and dignity.

Crucially this Orientalist discourse was endogenized within the major theories of the rise of capitalist global modernity – especially liberalism, Marxism and Weberianism (Blaut, 1993; Turner, 1993; Frank, 1998: Chapter 1; Hobson, 2004: Chapter 1). Accordingly they explain Europe’s rise by excavating causal variables that allegedly exist only within Europe. Moreover, fabricating the story of the rise of the West entailed retrospectively tracing Europe’s superiority back to Ancient Greece and then forwards through an immanent journey of the Western (Oriental) Express. On the way the Western train passes through an imaginary linear series of purely European way-stations. These comprise feudalism, the Italian commercialfinancial revolution and the Renaissance, commercial capitalism and the Iberian Voyages of Discovery, and then on through British industrialization before arriving (for liberalism) at the terminus of history – the Pax Americana. Marx, of course, shared in this view though he saw capitalism as the penultimate way-station before socialism, which stood at the gateway of the communist terminus of history. Conversely, such a progressive linearity was absent on the Other side of the ‘civilizational frontier’, where Oriental despotic/patrimonial states and collectivist mentalities and production systems choked civil society, thereby resulting in permanent stagnation. Accordingly, the Easterners could only passively await the arrival of the Oriental (imperial) Express which, fuelled by Occidental Messianism, steamed across to pick them up in order to graciously deliver them to the emancipatory terminus of history.

But the problem with this Eurocentric story is that it obscures the considerable role that Eastern agents have played both in progressive global history and in the rise of Europe, which in turn implies a promiscuous and globally interdependent relationship between East and West. Recently, a number of scholars have undertaken their own ‘voyages of rediscovery’ resulting in various non-Eurocentric explorations of the global-historical rise of the West (Abu-Lughod, 1989; Blaut, 1993; Frank, 1998; Goldstone, 2000; Pomeranz, 2000; Hobson, 2004). Despite all manner of differences, one of the common themes of the alternative post-1997 departure is the inversion of the standard Eurocentric temporal-narrative. Now the mainstream of global history up to the 19th century appears as Eastern – especially East Asian – and, after a short Western interlude, seems to be returning back to China. Moreover, without the considerable help provided by the East, there might never have been a Western interlude (Hobson, 2004). The assumption that global history began with the Europeans after 1492 obscures the point that the West emerged within a pre-existing Eastern-led global economy that was forged in the post-500 era. And between then and about 1800 Europe resided on the backward periphery of the global economy, constituting a promontory of Afro-Asia or the ‘Cape of Asia (Valéry, cited in Nederveen Pieterse, 1990: 105).

Important to the emergence of the global economy after 500 was the rise of various interlinked regions. These extended across from T’ang China to the Islamic Ummayad/Abbasid empire in West Asia and the Fatimids in North Africa via the kingdom of S<sup>´</sup>rı¯vijaya in Sumatra, ultimately linking to Europe via Ummayad Spain and Italy. They promoted an extensively pacified space that enabled both considerable trade and the transmission of advanced Eastern ‘resource portfolios (ideas, institutions and technologies) to Europe. In turn, the Afro-Eurasian economy was woven together by three major trade routes (Abu-Lughod, 1989), which were initially promoted by Islamic capitalists after about 650, though Jews, Africans, Javanese, Indians and Chinese were also important.

Islam led the way in terms of two major indicators – extensive and intensive global power. Extensive power refers to the ability of a state or region to spread its economic tentacles outwards, whereas intensive power refers to a leading economy that provides high supply and demand for global trade. Islamic West Asia led the way in both after about 650. Around 1100 the baton of global intensive power was passed not to Italy but to China (during the Sung industrial miracle), where it remained down to the early 19th century. And around 1450 the leading edge of global extensive power passed not to the Iberians but to the Chinese. Nevertheless the distribution of global economic power was polycentric for Islamic West Asia and North Africa as well as India and later Japan maintained high levels of intensive and extensive global power.

Paradoxically, the official 1434 Chinese ban on foreign trade came just before Chinese external trade escalated (Hobson, 2004: Chapter 3). China’s voracious demand for silver, owing to her hugely productive economy and large trade surplus with the rest of the world, ultimately sucked Europe directly into the Afro-Asian-led global economy. China’s demand for silver provided the main outlet for the plundered Spanish-American bullion, thereby enabling the Europeans to finance both their trade deficit with China (and other Asian countries) as well as their, albeit modest, presence within the Indian Ocean trading system (Hobson, 2004: Chapter 7). And it enabled the Europeans to directly insert themselves into the global gold–silver arbitrage system that was centred upon China (Flynn and Giraldez, 1994; Frank, 1998).

Eurocentrism assumes that the Europeans single-handedly made their own developmental history (and subsequently that of the world’s). But this obscures what I call Oriental globalization wherein advanced Eastern ‘resource portfolios diffused along the sinews of the global economy to be eventually assimilated by the Europeans, thereby fuelling the rise of the West throughout the 500–1800 period. So while the Italians led th way in Europe after about 1000, the financial institutions upon which they relied were borrowed from West Asia. Moreover, without the many Islamic ideas that diffused across there might never have been a ‘European’ Renaissance (Goody, 2004; Hobson, 2004: Chapters 6 and 8). In Eurocentrism the Voyages of Discovery signify the emergence of proto-globalization at the hands of the Europeans. But they might better be labelled the Voyages of Rediscovery, given that the regions the Portuguese ‘discovered’ had long been in contact with each other and indirectly with Europe through Oriental globalization. Moreover, without the diffusion of Eastern resource portfolios, there might never have been any Voyages of Rediscovery. The critical features of the European ships that enabled oceanic sailing – the square hull and stern-post rudder, lateen sail and triple-mast system – were derived from Islamic and Chinese shipping. The critical navigational techniques and technologies – the astrolabe, solar and lunar calendars, astronomy, trigonometry and geometry – were derived mainly from Islamic West Asia. And when we note that the weapons deployed by the Iberians – gunpowder, gun and cannon – had been invented in China in 850, 1275 and 1288 respectively, then there is very little left for the Portuguese or Spanish to have sincerely claimed for their own. Last, but not least, British industrialization was significantly fuelled by the imperial appropriation of Eastern resources – land, labour, bullion, raw materials and markets – and the assimilation of Chinese ideas and technologies (Hobson, 2004: Chapters 9–11).

So what does this tell us about ‘East and West in global history’? It should be clear by now why ‘bringing the East back in’ creates a genuinely global history. But this begs the question: does the deconstruction of the white Eurocentric myth of the West-as-pioneering-subject of global history merely lead to an inverted-Orientalist, or Occidentalist, metanarrative? This retort misses the central point. For deconstructing the civilizational-apartheid perspective of Eurocentrism necessarily reveals the peoples of the world as symbiotic, hybrid partners rather than opposing and separate entities. It points up the modalities of inter-human commonality, communication and connection rather than difference, deafness and disassociation. And in so doing it reveals the affiliations and immanent solidarity of civilizations and of the world’s peoples. Ultimately, in recognizing this we take an initial step, if not one giant leap, towards a global dream that exorcises the global nightmare of cycles of war and civilizing missions imposed upon a manufactured Eastern Other. A dream wherein the peoples of the Earth can finally sit down at the table of global humanity and communicate as equal partners after the dark interlude of Western colonialism and neocolonialism.

