# The Determination of Life / Eight Incommensurable Propositions on the Determination of ‘Life / Life is the object of a superior mechanism / Life is reducible to communication / ‘Life is not alive’ / Life is either origin or destination / Life confers authority on she or he who speaks in its name / Life is precisely the condition of the determinable, and as such is not determinable in itself / Reference / Biopolitics

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

## The Determination of Life

Steven D. Brown

Keywords communication, life, vitalism

## Eight Incommensurable Propositions on the Determination of ‘Life

Life is a term which enables the rupture of existing categories

When Daniel Dennett claims that evolutionary theory is akin to a ‘universal acid’ which is capable of corroding extant systems of thought and epistemic preoccupations, he is merely restating the central thrust of vitalism – that the thinking of ‘life itself ’ necessarily undercuts established dualisms (e.g. nature/culture; mind/body). The cultural premium which is accorded to contemporary Darwinism and to the ‘life sciences’ may be seen as in direct proportion to the extent to which they are able to present themselves as having taken charge of ‘life itself ’ as a problem. Critical interrogators of the life sciences, such as Donna Haraway, therefore confront the problem of analysing a practice which often disappears into its own gestures of boundary-blurring (a problem which she proposes to counter through poetics and reflexivity).

Life is a term which enables the preservation and ‘future proofing’ of existing hierarchies The notion of a ‘tree of life’, typically found in high school biology textbooks, neatly retains the principal features of the medieval ‘great chain of being by substituting the ramified branching of a centrifugal movement of evolution away from the ‘primeval soup’ for the centripetal movement of sentience from the lesser beings towards the Prime Mover. Hierarchy is nevertheless retained, when either scheme is considered from an implicit notion of the ‘perfectibility of life’. This latter notion may be innocuously presented as ‘good environmental fit’. In either case, the logic is one well described in Deleuze and Guattari’s characterization of ‘arboreal thought’.

## Life is the object of a superior mechanism

Although vitalism and mechanism are often considered as separate poles of thought, the forms of mechanism which emerge in the wake of 20thcentury postwar cybernetics authorize themselves in relation to their ability to grasp ‘life’ as merely the most complex of a series of imagined mechanisms. In his popular writing, Norbert Wiener, for instance, displays such confidence that life is capable of being rendered as ‘system’ that he proposes an ethical debate on the powers which are newly accorded to ‘the human’ as a consequence. Of the many paradoxes that this creates, surely none is finer than the attempt to restore dignity to the human subject by atomizing its humanity into the Cantor dust of classical communication theory.

## Life is reducible to communication

The rise of molecular biology is premised, as Jacques Monad and François Jacob beautifully display, on the positing of ‘information’ as the basic biological unit. Which is to say, by holding the term ‘life’ to be only a folk category which denotes the complex ontogeny of coding biological materials within an emerging functional assemblage. However, the recognition that such elementary forms of communication are interdependent with ‘noise’ – or, put slightly differently, that much of the genetic ‘junk’ actually contributes in hitherto unknown ways to embryonic development – problematizes the notion that life could be reproduced on the basis of communicative rationalization.

## ‘Life is not alive’

Adorno’s citation of Kürnberger’s pithy phrase is meant to capture the subjection of the living (here given an oddly humanist bent) to the inhuman practices of modern organized capital. Life then becomes a naturalized category for proposing points of resistance and disruption. Yet, as Antonio Negri, reworking Spinoza, argues, life can only perform this work if it is given determination in an ontological unit which undercuts any simple humanist subject. Much of the debate around Negri’s work has then turned on the extent to which his proposed unit – multitude – can mediate between the local production of subjects and the transhuman forces which it articulates. The plausibility of this proposition turns on a preparedness to accept the analogy of life as fundamental ontology with ‘lived experience’.

## Life is either origin or destination

The term ‘transhuman’ presents some interesting challenges. It may be taken as marking an appeal to monadism couched in vitalist terms – as expressed in the line of thought that links Spinoza, Nietzsche and Deleuze. In which case, ‘life’ is the ceaseless movement of becoming that finds a provisional form or arrangement of forces in ‘the human’ (an arrangement that finds its harshest critic in Antonin Artaud). Or, ‘life’ marks a progression which has its ultimate cosmic destiny in some form which is produced by the human in order to preserve its particular determination of ‘living’. The transhumanist movement expressed this eschatological notion with some force, albeit with little credulity.

## Life confers authority on she or he who speaks in its name

Science studies has analysed at length the means by which the contemporary life sciences claim privileged access to ‘life’ through technique and method (see esp. Clarke and Fujimura, 1992). Of particular importance is the array of technologies which make it possible to render visible ‘life’ in its most inchoate states (e.g. coloured 3-D foetal imaging techniques). The strangely beautiful images which result have been at the centre of public debate around abortion rights. What remains often mysterious is the rhetorical gesture whereby ‘life’ is not only claimed to be accurately represented but also thereby exhausted in the images which are only brought ‘to life’ by she or he who thereby claims authority to speak on their behalf.

## Life is precisely the condition of the determinable, and as such is not determinable in itself

Henri Bergson infamously proclaimed that a theory of knowledge would have to be erected upon a theory of life itself. This suggests that vitalism becomes the programme which distributes the basic categories of knowing. But, for Bergson, such a scheme would imply that life is, in itself, already given in its determinations. It is precisely because life is not and cannot be given in this way that it ought to be accorded centrality. As movement, as change, life eludes and serves as provocation to any given determination. It is the mobile horizon that presents itself to the ‘logic of solids’ that characterizes the intellect. To imagine that the movement which characterizes life can be stilled in such as a way as to be fully clothed in the latest epistemic garb is to share in the illusion of the child who believes they can catch smoke in their hands. Clap-trap.

## Reference

Clarke, A.E. and J.H. Fujimura (eds) (1992) The Right Tools for the Job: At Work in the Twentieth-century Life Sciences. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Steven D. Brown is Senior Lecturer in Psychology at Loughborough University and visiting professor in critical theory and psychology at Universiteit voor Humanistiek, NL. His work centres on social theory, organization and social psychology. Recent publications include The Social Psychology of Experience: Studies in Remembering and Forgetting (with David Middleton, Sage, 2005) and Psychology without Foundations (with Paul Stenner, Sage, forthcoming).

# Biopolitics

John Marks

Keywords bioethics, biology, biopolitics,

biotechnology, eugenics, life, molecular biology

oucault introduces the notion of biopolitics in The History of Sexuality (1978). Here, it is essentially a complement to his earlier formulation of discipline, whereby sovereign rule – the ultimate right to take life – is increasingly overlaid by a new focus on the life processes of the population. From the 18th century onwards, biological existence is no longer a neutral, unchanging substrate upon which political existence is superimposed. Consequently, a new politics emerges which relates to what it means to be a living species in a living world: biology is drawn into the domain of power and knowledge. The establishment of norms, hierarchies and statistical analyses gain in importance in relation to the creation of legal frameworks. Rather than exercising its sovereign right to curtail life in periodic, spectacular manner, politics focuses increasingly on the fostering and direction – the government – of life.

Biopolitical processes as defined by Foucault have become part of the fabric of everyday reality in advanced capitalist economies, and the industrial era was in some senses characterized by the growth of a biopolitical consensus, whereby the norms of welfare – health, education and various forms of insurance – were articulated with the demands of mass, organized industrial and commercial activity. Today, the globalization of capital means that previous biopolitical norms, such as the rights attached to labour, including the duration of working life and pension rights, are being reassessed. It is in this context that Hardt and Negri (2000) have recently proposed an analysis of the ways in which power in contemporary post-disciplinary ‘control’ societies has become entirely biopolitical. In their reading, power is expressed as a form of control that pervades the entire social field. However, at the same time, they argue that this very pervasiveness means that resistance is no longer marginal, but rather multiple and active. For Hardt and Negri, the positive focus of potential for resistance to biopolitical control resides in the multitude: a widespread attitude of dissent and refusal in reaction to biopower’s grip on all aspects of life.

The development of the industrial biopolitical dispositif which articulated labour, welfare and capital was also, of course, punctuated by significant periods of international armed conflict. These periods of conflict, and most particularly the Firstand Second World Wars, highlighted the genocidal counter-tendencies of biopolitics. Materially and ideologically these wars were fought not only by armies, but by populations. In this sense, the Second World War in particular was characterized by two highly significant aspects of biopower, which remain as spectres haunting the construction of viable future global biopolitical structures: the drift to ‘total war’ pitting population against population, and the elevation of eugenics to a brutally racist state policy.

Leaving aside the complex issue of war, which would necessitate a lengthy discussion in its own right, we will concentrate here on the issue of eugenics in an era of biotechnology: an issue which is implicit but not developed in Foucault’s work. In the postwar era, developments in medicine and molecular biology have led to fears that eugenics might make a return in new forms. In reaction to this, the conceptual resources of thinking on biopolitics have been seen by many as a useful analytical tool for looking in particular at the ways in which the postwar development of molecular biology has provided new pathways for politics to penetrate the material components of ‘life’. From the discovery of the double-helix structure of DNA in 1953 onwards, molecular biology has claimed to render not only visible, but also accessible, the code of life itself: a new dimension of matter that appears to be increasingly available for observation and manipulation. In this sense, biotechnological issues such as gene therapy, preimplantation and pre-natal genetic screening, stem-cell research and therapeutic cloning, the widespread corporate patenting of genes, the Human Genome Project, and the general economic issue of data control and access in the light of genomics and bioinformatics, all raise significant biopolitical issues.

In the light of these technologies, there is an increasing sense that we are entering an era of biopolitical problematization. This era is characterized not only by an uncertainty over the way in which these new technologies reconfigure the natural world epistemologically and even ontologically, but also by what Paul Rabinow (1999) identifies as a ‘purgatorial’ dimension. By this, he means the fact that most of these technologies promise much more in terms of material interventions that they can currently deliver. The possibilities for genetic therapy are currently extremely limited, and it is still the case that pre-natal and pre-implantation genetic testing can only screen for a very small number of genetic ‘abnormalities’. In this sense, as Rabinow indicates, the biopolitical stakes are uncertain: there is a widespread sense that we may be on the verge of significant shifts in our ability to manipulate and transform life, combined with the knowledge that we do not yet know the limits of these new capacities.

Following the French political and social theorist Pierre-André Taguieff (2001), three areas of what we might call biopolitical anxiety are raised by these areas of activity, all of which develop out of the molecular biology revolution. First, there is the widespread fear of the gradual reappearance of eugenic practices and eugenic approaches to social ‘deviancy’. As far as human reproduction is concerned, it is claimed that the gradual increase in genetic testing may be leading to a new, ‘liberal’ eugenics led by consumer choice. This new eugenics may not correspond to the state-controlled racist eugenics of National Socialism, but it nonetheless threatens to create a radical new set of social divisions. According to such scenarios, social groupings that distinguish between genetically enhanced and non-enhanced individuals will revive the racist rationale of previous eugenic projects.

Second, related to anxieties over eugenics, there is a widespread concern to defend the integrity of the ‘human’ in the face of biotechnological advances: in other words, the attempt to prevent a key component of life – namely DNA – from being subject to modification and manipulation. From a religious standpoint, this determination to maintain what we might consider as the ‘genetic contingency’ – or, as popular parlance would have it, the ‘genetic lottery’ – of human reproduction is conventionally expressed as a defence of the sacred nature of human life and procreation. From a secular perspective, as in the recent work of Jürgen Habermas, this suspicion of genetic testing and the biotechnological spectre of so-called ‘designer babies’ is expressed as a defence of human dignity. Drawing on Arendt, Habermas presents the contingent nature of human birth, undetermined by genetic manipulation driven by parental choice or societal/familial expediency, as the metonymic basis for the fundamental existential human freedom to act. The prospect of a ‘posthuman’ future is also seen as a threat by those conservatives, such as Fukuyama (2003), who are attached to what they see as an essential and relatively unchanging ‘human nature’.

Finally, there is the apocalyptic fear that the collective human genetic inheritance – the germ line – might be irreparably damaged by genetic modification or manipulation. As far as the natural world is concerned, this anxiety finds expression in the fear that the combined effect of genetic patenting and genetically modified crops might be, at the very least, a significant reduction in levels of biodiversity. The American political and scientific commentator Jeremy Rifkin (1999) has talked of a process of ‘genetic enclosure’ that is analogous to the land enclosures of the 17th century. It should be pointed out that the alarm and anxiety occasioned by the possibilities for molecular intervention and biopolitical control in contemporary societies is not universally shared. Following sociobiology in the 1970s, subsequent ‘post-humanist’ inheritors of this strand of thinking such as Lee M. Silver (1997) have posited a more genetically ‘efficient’ bio-engineered human future. Silver seizes upon the opportunities offered by biotechnology to achieve control of human evolution, and predicts a future version of American society in which 10 percent of the population – the ‘GenRich’ group – will be bioengineered individuals, constructed from entirely synthetic genes. This genetic elite will control all aspects of society, while the remaining 90 percent of ‘naturals’ will have a subservient social role.

As Eugene Thacker (2004) points out, much current bioethical deliberation on the biopolitical issues raised by biotechnological advances is concerned with the legal and ‘philosophical’ definition of categories such as ‘potential life’, as well as the sociological and anthropological analysis of issues such as risk assessment in the handling of genetic information. However, he also points to a form of bioethics that is orientated more towards critique and problematization, and which is, consequently, more genuinely philosophical in approach. Thacker argues that this ‘cultural bioethics’, as he calls it, is concerned with fundamental epistemological and ontological questions. It asks, for example, whether the body as a subject can be made commensurable with the body as an object of experiment, diagnosis or commodification. It considers the ontological status of the cyborg and the relation of life and the body to information. Thacker goes on to suggest that the conventional use of a version of Kant’s categorical imperative as a basis for bioethics leads to the construction of somewhat rigid ethical protocols. In contrast to this, he draws attention to what he calls ‘bioethics’ – and what others have labelled a ‘transhuman’ approach to bioethics – that takes Spinoza’s treatise The Ethics as its starting point, rather than Kant’s Metaphysics of Morals. Taking its cue from Deleuze’s reading of Spinoza, bioethics asks a threefold question in relation to the ‘body’: what is a body?; what can a body do?; what can you do to a body? Whereas bioethics strives to define a morality that can be applied to the body as a discrete, quantifiable entity with relatively well-defined boundaries, bio-ethics conceives of bodies as much less stable and quantifiable entities and attempts to assess ethically the affective relations between bodies.

