# Logic(s) / On the Singularity of Logical Argument / Ancient Greece / The Development of Western Logic / Hegelianism / Logics outside the West / The Problem with Logic / Conclusion: Enter Derrida

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Logic(s)

Bryan S. Turner

Abstract Logic is concerned with the design or structure of arguments. It describes the forms of valid argument and is concerned with the public presentation and reception of arguments. Hence it has a close connection with politics and the public sphere, and with rhetoric as the science of persuasion. Philosophers have analysed the objective conditions of validation, that is, the justifiability of assertions about the world. This quest for objective and scientific validity in argumentation about the nature of reality dominated much of the development of logic in the 20th century. Logical arguments are held to be successful as a result of the ‘force of reason’ rather than because one’s opponents have been bribed or coerced. Logic involves the study of the abstract, deductive moves in argumentation rather than an empirical study of how actual arguments are conducted. However, there is also a tension between rhetoric and philosophy; Plato drew a clear distinction between knowledge and persuasion. Logic is intended to give security to the former. The historical drift of logic is towards abstraction, especially the use of mathematical forms of representation. The study of logic is an important component of any project on encyclopaedic knowledge, that is, with knowledge that circulates in the public sphere, but the globalization of culture has raised an important problem about the universalistic claims of (western) traditions of logic, namely, are there different forms of logical reasoning?

Keywords language, logical atomism, logical positivism, mathematics, rhetoric

## On the Singularity of Logical Argument

The recognition of the public or indeed political character of the validation of argument immediately raises a question about the universality of valid forms of logic. In Max Weber’s sociological studies of the conditions of modernity, a variety of social arrangements (rational law, a money economy, the autonomous city, an ascetic ethic and so forth) were held to differentiate occidental from oriental cultures. Although Weber did not undertake a study of logic, one can easily imagine a sociological account of the history of logic that showed how the science of the forms of valid argument contributed to the historical rationalization of western civilization. This reference to Weber’s notion of rationality raises the problem of whether one requires a history of logic or logics. In classical Greece, early philosophical discussions of logic recognized logics as a plurality. There were different ways of reasoning, particularly between formal and substantive analysis. The western development of reasoning has been to reduce its inherent richness, that is, to reduce it to a singularity as in our use of the term ‘logic’. This shift in meaning is one further reason for connecting this discussion with the historical sociology of Weber, because we can treat the history of logics as an example of the routinization of knowledge.

Historical accounts of western civilization typically start with an inquiry into its Greek origins. Logic, for Aristotle, was an aspect of this inquiry into logos (word, account or reason) whereby thought could arrive at the truth of being. Logos (plural logoi) or word, speech and reason had multiple meanings in Aristotle’s philosophy; it signified rule or law, account or explanation, reasoning and abstract theory, or measure as in musical scales. The cosmos could be known with some degree of certainty since there was an essential connection between mind and reality. This correspondence was first thought of in terms of making the individual mind into a mirror of the world-mind, whose thought processes amounted to, or emanated as, the structure of the cosmos. The logos was substantive, that is the logic of external reality, to which we could have access via a certain kind of introspection. Aristotle’s logic shifted the ground by focusing on the formal categories and procedures of thought necessary for arriving at truth. His successors divided between those for whom Aristotle’s philosophy was a distinctive part of philosophy, and those for whom it was merely an instrument (organon) of philosophy as a whole. The latter notion of logic as the handmaiden of philosophy prevailed in the Middle Ages. Francis Bacon (1561–1626) in his New Organon of 1620 (the expanded Latin version of The Advancement of Learning) followed this tradition, developing especially inductive reasoning, which had been present but underdeveloped in Aristotle’s logic.

Logic as a substantive understanding of reality was revived in the Enlightenment, and received a powerful and influential statement in the philosophy of Hegel. In contemporary thought, the substantive dimension of logic has often been associated with historical-logical schemes of world history, often associated with Marxism, for example. In the modern period, however, logic as formal or instrumental reason has been the principal line of development, in which logic has been slowly submerged into or transformed by mathematics.

## Ancient Greece

Martin Heidegger claimed that philosophy itself is an essentially Greek activity, the meaning of which cannot be detached from the language of ancient Greece. In What is Philosophy? Heidegger says that ‘philosophy is Greek in its nature; Greek, in this instance, means that in origin the nature of philosophy is of such a kind that it first appropriated the Greek world, and only it, in order to unfold’ (1989: 31). Heidegger’s view was that pre-Socratic philosophy revealed the nature of Being, while modern language only represents and classifies it. Historical accounts of logic also typically start with Greek philosophy. The historical roots of logic are to be found in the formulation of the structures of argument by Aristotle and the Stoics. Aristotelian logic sought to replace the meaning of sentences as the guarantee of the validity of arguments with their underlying structures. The argument that ‘All men are bipeds; Socrates is a biped; therefore Socrates is a man’ has the logical form ‘All As are members of category B; B belongs to C; therefore A belongs to all Cs.’ Aristotelian logicians attempted to substitute the terms of an argument (‘Socrates is a man’) with letters or symbols in order to understand the validity of arguments independently from the terms that appear in the argument. Hence it is referred to as ‘term logic’. The study of these syllogisms constituted the core of Prior Analytics. The logic of the Stoics is abstracted from sentences rather than terms, and it is consequently called a sentential logic.

Aristotle (384–322 BC) was a member of Plato’s Academy for 20 years and later founded his own school at the Lyceum where his dialogues became famous as models of philosophical inquiry. Aristotle’s corpus (1462 pages of Greek text) constitutes the remaining fragments of these Lyceum debates. Interest in Aristotle was renewed in the first century BC by Andronicus of Rhodes and subsequently many commentaries were written on Aristotle, the modern edition of which runs to 15,000 pages. These commentaries are the product of the Peripatetic school and the Neoplatonists between AD 200 and 600. The survival of Aristotelian logic and philosophy is attributed to Islamic philosophers who began translating Aristotle in the 9th century.

In the Islamic world, logic was also regarded as an organon or instrument to acquire knowledge. Islamic philosophers were particularly interested in the relationships between language and logic, given the dominance of the Arabic language in Islamic theological orthodoxy. They generally accepted the view that the syllogism was the foundation of logical validity. Western interpretations of Islamic philosophy and science tend, therefore, to regard Islamic thought as merely a conduit between ancient Greece and the Renaissance – a view expressed, for example, in O’Leary’s How Greek Science Passed to the Arabs (1949). Islamic philosophers such as Al-Biruni, Farabi and Al-Khwarizmi made important contributions to mathematics and algebra, but the consensus among western historians such as the authors of The Legacy of Islam has been that ‘The Arabs are before all else the pupils of the Greeks’ (de Vaux, 1931: 376).

## The Development of Western Logic

From the 12th century onwards, Aristotelian logic was an essential component of university training, because it was an important tool in the public disputations through which knowledge was transmitted. We cannot understand medieval logic separately from grammar and rhetoric. While Plato distinguished between rhetoric as an art of persuasion and philosophy as a quest for knowledge, the arts of public persuasion and the logical force of an argument are not easily separated. Medieval instruction depended crucially on the use of logic for rhetorical ends. Medieval instruction devised intellectual puzzles or sophismata that were designed to explore the weakness and limitations of formal logic. The language of instruction was Latin, which in medieval philosophy was treated as a purely technical language. It was through the grammatical properties of Latin that logicians explored syncategoremata, namely the effect on sense and reference resulting from the placement of such terms as ‘all’, ‘some’ or ‘of ’.

Renaissance logic departed from the medieval tradition in developing a greater appreciation of the role of language in argument, namely a greater appreciation of rhetoric. Humanistic logic was less formal, being concerned to explore the role of logic in literature, history and biblical studies, but the study of logic remained central to the curriculum.

Modern logic has become closely associated with mathematics and as a result has become divorced from rhetoric and language philosophy. Modern logic has its origins in 17th- and 18thcentury empirical science. Philosophers like Bacon and Descartes wanted to reform medieval logic by examining the connections between empirical research and logical arguments. From Locke onwards, philosophers attempted to explore the relationship between human cognitive faculties and empirical reality. Algebra and logical calculi were developed as means of examining logical structures. Newtonian mechanics had created a picture of the world as determined by a limited number of exact laws, such as the law of gravity. Newtonian physics gave a great impetus to the development of mathematics and logic as methods for describing the natural world, the aim being to formulate simple but precise logical laws similar to Newtonian mathematics.

Logic in the 19th and 20th centuries has drawn ever closer to mathematics and further away from rhetoric and ordinary language. This transition involved the demonstration that the justification of mathematical truths is accomplished without reference to perceptual information or intuition. In short, mathematical truths are logical, and logic does not require any knowledge of the world. Mathematical truths are deduced from logical first principles with the aid of logical inference. George Boole (1815–64) developed a formal language to express logical relations through a set of basic rules. His system was closely modelled on numerical algebra, and the development of his approach placed logical theory at the centre of computer design. Gottlob Frege (1848–1925) followed the Boolean tradition in separating logic from an empiricist tradition, and attempted to demonstrate that all mathematical operations are inferences from logic. Michel Dummett (1981) has argued that Frege is important because he transformed logic into a branch of mathematics, by making its procedures reliable and reproducible. He made it possible to approach logic without recourse to any prior philosophical substructure. These developments gave rise, for example, to ‘logical atomism’ in which philosophers like Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) attempted to explore the properties of a perfectly logical language made up of fundamental sentences (logical atoms) and their combinations. Logical positivism, which flourished in Vienna and Berlin, attempted to purge philosophical analysis of metaphysics by the application of the verifiability principle. Observation or experiment cannot verify theological and metaphysical claims, for example that God created the world, and hence all such claims are neither true nor false but simply meaningless. Metaphysical propositions, like ethical or aesthetic statements, are primarily emotional rather than statements of fact.

## Hegelianism

Logic from Aristotle to the 17th century was concerned with the public nature of argument, and hence it had close connections with rhetoric, politics and the public sphere. Logic from the 19th century was separated from the arts of public conduct and conjoined with science and mathematics. The aim was to purify logic of its dependence on social content, that is, of ordinary language. Logicians sought to develop artificial languages such as symbolic logic, truthtables, set theory or propositional calculus.

One major alternative to this development was Hegelianism. G.W.F. Hegel (1770–1831) developed German idealism through the Science of Logic (Wissenschaft der Logick), which was published between 1812 and 1816 in his Nuremberg period and is also known as ‘the Greater Logic’. In Hegel’s system the unfolding of self-consciousness is the principle of historical development, and the historical development of reality is the unfolding of dialectic, the basic elements of which are contradiction, negation and overcoming. History is the overcoming (Aufhebung) of the present. Through this dialectical process, self-consciousness is realized through history and its culmination. Hegel’s dialectic was critical in the formulation of Marx’s dialectical materialism, in which social history is punctured by the revolutionary transformation of modes of production that are characterized by their internal contradictions. The revolutionary overthrow of capitalism was, for Marx, the realization of freedom through the contradictions of the economic and social processes of the capitalism mode of production. Following Hegel, the Asiatic mode of production described the static and non-contradictory character of Oriental despotism, whose overcoming required an external force, namely the ironic impact of western capitalism. Although Hegelian philosophy became unpopular as a consequence of the crisis of western Marxism, interest in Hegel has been revived through the phenomenological interpretation of Alexandre Kojève (1969) and the critical philosophy of Charles Taylor (1975). Hegelianism as a form of German idealism constitutes a major alternative to analytical philosophy as an approach to logic, and Hegelianism provides logic with a critical linkage to politics.

## Logics outside the West

We have seen that Islamic philosophy is interpreted as merely a development of Aristotle. In a similar fashion, historians have claimed that logic in Japanese philosophy emerged only in the 20th century and was directed towards a dialectical logic in a Hegelian sense rather than to a symbolic system. The Japanese term for logic in this Hegelian sense is ronri, which refers to the principles of argument, and ronrigaku is a more common term for formal logic. Nishida Kitaro (1870–1945) and Tanabe Hajime (1885–1962) developed a dialectical logic that incorporated assumptions from traditional Japanese culture, but expressed them in a western paradigm of philosophical analysis. However, contemporary commentaries on the interaction between Japanese and European thought have demonstrated important connections between the Kyoto School and the south-western universities of Germany. The Japanese scholars who worked in Germany included Seiichi Hatano (1877–1950), Tanabe Hajime, Tetsuro Watsuji (1889–1960) and Shuzo Kuki (1888–1941). Although the late development of logic in Japan is indicative of Japanese dependence on the West, Heidegger disguised his appropriation of Buddhist ideas to express notions relating to death, nothingness and being in the development of Being and Time (1962). Heidegger, who wanted to claim that the German language was the true heir of Greek civilization, had to suppress any apparent reliance on or continuity with Japanese Buddhism (May, 1996; Parkes, 1987).

Similar issues have surrounded western interpretations of Chinese philosophy. It is claimed that they had a semantic theory but no logic. Western historians have confused logic with the theory of language, and inappropriately referred to the Chinese ‘name school’ as a school of logicians. A concept picks out some aspect of reality and develops general names to designate classes of things. From these general terms, people develop agreements about ‘This is an X’ and ‘This is not an X’. From these oppositions, language develops modes of distinction and opposition. The word bian refers to ‘distinction/opposition’ and came eventually to refer to philosophical dispute.

A major school of Chinese philosophy (‘Mohism’) is associated with the philosopher Mo Tzu (479–438 BC) who challenged Confucianism. The later Mohist Canons from as late as the 3rd century BC developed analytical thought. The Canons were structured around four fields: discourse (or knowledge of the relationship between words and things); ethics (or knowledge of correct guides to action); science (or the knowledge of objects); and argumentation (or knowledge of the organization of names).

Confucianism recognized the political conflicts that might arise from disagreements about the conventions that determine how language should be properly used. Confucian philosophers like Xunzi and Han Feizi came to the conclusion that the state should suppress disagreements over language. Confusion over language resulted in political instability and immoral actions, and hence the ruler should control the use of language. The Emperor Qin, who was influenced by Han Feizi, carried out a radical policy to suppress disagreements, and as a result analytical philosophy was replaced by religion and scholasticism.

## The Problem with Logic

From this brief sketch of the history of logic, we can isolate a series of questions that require further reflection. First, can logical arguments be wholly separated from meaning? Can form be wholly separated from contents? The empirical thrust of anthropological fieldwork and sociological inquiry has been to emphasize the context-dependent nature of thought, and in general to promote cultural relativism. Contemporary anthropology has rejected the notion that the thought of ‘primitive’ people, especially so-called magical beliefs, is irrational or that the ‘primitive mind’ was incapable of logical reasoning. The fieldwork of anthropologists recognized a practical distinction between magical, religious and technical beliefs and practices. The idea of a neutral or scientific language of pure symbolic formalism runs against the empirical findings of ethnography. From an anthropological perspective, the triumph of symbolic logic can only be achieved in the form of tautology. This tension between the natural languages of the social world and the artificial language of symbolic logic is well illustrated by the differences in the work of the early and late Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951). In the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) he adhered to logical atomism, and argued that philosophy can resolve the problems of our everyday understanding by breaking meaning down into logical atoms. Logicians in this mode tend to regard the beliefs and actions of the everyday world as confused and mistaken. In his later work, Wittgenstein abandoned logical atomism and developed a theory of meaning in the Philosophical Investigations (1953) that is remarkably close to the sociology of language in which the meaning of sentences is dependent on social practices. Meanings cannot be detached from how language is used in particular situations. Wittgenstein’s rejection of the idea of a ‘private language’ is important for the sociological understanding of the practical functions of language in everyday life. Wittgenstein noted that formal logic (employing the calculus of truth-functions to propositions) had been primarily concerned with the analysis of indicative rather than imperative sentences. While the former (‘This grass lawn belongs to the university’) may be true or false, imperatives (‘Get off the grass!’) are appropriate or inappropriate, effective or ineffective, rather than true or false. To understand the functions of language, one needs to attend to the structure of social groups rather than the logical properties of sentences.

For example, there is a logical argument that if one is prepared to accept a contradiction, one might accept a nonsensical conclusion. If you accept ‘p and not p’, then you might as well accept ‘the cow jumped over the moon’. In logic, one should not be willing to believe that ‘it is snowing and it is not snowing’. However, we might as anthropologists discover an Eskimo community in which there are many terms for ‘snow’ that distinguish subtle variations in the quality of snow (in terms of its hardness, coldness and composition). Perhaps an Eskimo could without contradiction believe that ‘it is snowing (of type x)’ and ‘it is not snowing (of type y)’. The logical character of ‘p and not p’ will depend on its ethnographic context and its meaningful contents. This issue was brought out famously in Wittgenstein’s observations in the Philosophical Investigations on the different types of handles that one might find in a locomotive cabin, all of which looked like handles but had very different functions and uses.

Second, from a sociological perspective we might ask whether other human societies are logical. Many of the historical accounts of logic treat logical thought as a peculiarity of the West. In this respect, histories of logic often show some parallels with the Orientalism of Weberian sociology in promoting the uniqueness of Greek origins, the general dominance of the legacy of Aristotle, the failure of Oriental societies to develop a science of logic, and the suppression of analytical thought in the development of ‘Oriental Despotism’. We might also approach this historical problem from the perspective of debates in anthropology about the relationship between magic, science and religion in other cultures. Are other systems or mentalities genuinely irrational or simply non-rational? The research of Bronislaw Malinowski in Magic, Science and Religion (1948) showed that the Trobriand Islanders made a clear distinction between the practical knowledge required to build canoes and the magical practices that were employed in situations of risk and uncertainty. Magical beliefs were not philosophical mistakes; they were practical responses to uncertainty.

In contemporary anthropology and sociology, there has been a general reluctance to accept the ethnocentric bias of earlier explanations from 19th-century ethnography. It is often held that, when understood in their context, apparently absurd or inconsistent views are intelligible. The famous illustration is from Edward Evans-Pritchard, who argued that the proposition ‘cockatoos are twins’ makes sense when we interpret it as an effort to legitimate the traditional practice of killing twins. Evans-Pritchard (1965: 111) came to argue that concentrating on the origins or nature of (magical) beliefs was somewhat pointless. The issue was to understand beliefs in relation to other institutions and beliefs. Some anthropologists, however, have argued that this form of contextualism is too charitable, because it means that nobody can ever be irrational. Ernest Gellner (1970) argued that functionalism (‘all beliefs make sense in their context’) prevents anthropology from developing a critical reflection on contradictions in society. One might conclude from this debate that (a) all societies must be able to share common logical assumptions, for example that contradictions undermine the validity of arguments, but (b) different societies have different formulations of logic that are related to the grammatical structures of their language. This debate may therefore require some solution to the issues raised by Noam Chomsky with respect to the existence of a universal grammar. However, Chomsky’s language theory rests on the notion of a genetically determined language facility that is shared by all humans, but sociologists and anthropologists want to argue that language is a shared institution that works because there are commonly held norms that arise from socialization.

Finally, can logic be divorced from rhetoric? Because logic has become a feature of mathematics and computer science, its public role in dispute and persuasion has been abandoned, or at least obscured. Rhetoric, in the classical Aristotelian sense, is rarely taught in universities, and where it survives rhetoric is typically an aspect of the study of literature rather than politics. The connection between logic, rhetoric and the public sphere has been broken. The arts of persuasion in a postmodern, information society are associated with research on focus groups and the impact of the mass media on political opinion. The discipline of rhetoric in Athenian democracy has been replaced in modern society with the theory of public relations.

## Conclusion: Enter Derrida

The analysis of logic and our historical understanding of it depend, therefore, on our understanding of the nature of language and its relationship to public persuasion. These issues have been central to the philosophy of Jacques Derrida, whose philosophical work is an attack on ‘logocentrism’. The Greek notion of logos was both an account of the principles of validation and an analysis of the structure of reality by grasping its origin. Aristotle’s Nichomachean Ethics distinguished between the rational logos of the soul and the irrational desires of nature. Derrida has criticized the western philosophical tradition for making logos or speech the origin of truth, thereby privileging the phonetic over the graphic side of communication. Speech is the rational expression of a subject who is self-sufficiently rational and conscious, and hence logocentrism assumes that speech is a perfectly adequate vehicle for the expression of pre-existing truths whereas writing is merely an addition or supplement to speech. For example, the linguistic theory of Ferdinand de Saussure (and subsequent structuralist philosophy) assumed a perfect relationship or correspondence between a sound (signifier) and an idea (signified). Derrida’s philosophy came to be known as ‘post-structuralism’ and his method of deconstruction was employed to show that meaning is never transparent or ‘self-present’, but is always delayed or deferred. Meaning always requires further supplementation through an endless chain of deferred signifiers. Derrida’s deconstructive strategies are designed to expose these supplements. Meaning can never be complete because it is, as it were, waiting for the next supplement.

Derrida (1978) has also developed the idea of ‘phonocentrism’ to describe an aspect of ethnocentrism in which western phonetic alphabets are given cultural and political privileges over against other systems, which has the consequence of making western logos triumphant over other systems of meaning. The growth of western science can be interpreted as a movement to suppress the reflexivity and creativity of language in order to understand nature without the confusion of the playfulness of language. Hence Francis Bacon, in developing an inductive empirical science, argued that scientific progress required ‘plain and simple words if the idols of the mind were to be banished. This quest for a simple transparent language has dominated much of western philosophy, culminating in the 20th century in the logical positivism of the Vienna Circle. Philosophers like A.J. Ayer (1936) held that the problems of philosophy were basically problems of language, and logic, as developed by Frege, was the method by which these problems could be solved. Truth has its origin in simple statements (or Bacon’s plain and simple words) that can be traced back to empirical facts. Derrida’s deconstruction of western logos attempts to show that logic cannot perform this task, because meaning, rather like letters in a postal system, is deferred in a chain of delivery.

