# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

## Introduction

What does it mean to live with science? What sensibilities or practices are conducive to living with science? The metaconcept, science, is hardly a coherent formation, whether viewed from within, without or somewhere on the margins. And as anthropologist Paul Rabinow (1999: 181) writes, ‘the present is a good time to desist from employing totalizing categories like epoch, civilization, culture and society’, and it could be added, science. The ways in which sciences are lived and affect lives, human and non-human, are difficult to marshal in any single direction. For the social sciences and humanities, divergent paths head toward and away from the sciences, and these are travelled in very different ways. Sometimes, head-on confrontations occur, as happened in the ‘Science Wars’ of the mid-1990s, when some scientists (Sokal and Bricmont, 1998) argued that much social and cultural theory is mired in poorly understood science. The Science Wars, it might be said, followed in the aftermath of a long series of attempts by philosophy and social thought to unmask science. Today, in the aftermath of the Science Wars (Ross, 1996), and the avalanche of social constructionist explorations of different sciences as themselves local, contingent organization of knowledge, it is important to ask how other knowledges, which themselves do not count as science, stand in relation to science. What kinds of movements between science and other knowledges are possible or desirable?

