# The Body and Modernity in China

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# The Body and Modernity in China

Li Shiqiao

Keywords China, modernity, the combatant body

M<sup>odernity</sup> <sup>in</sup> <sup>China</sup> <sup>seems</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>invoke</sup> <sup>an</sup>endless set of questions about both endless set of questions about both modernity as a meaningful cognitive framework and the ways in which modernity manifested in the Chinese cultural and political context. This, on the other hand, probably contributed to the fact that studies on modern China have become one of the fastest growing areas of scholarship in the past two decades. The account of modernization in China, until recently, had been relatively straightforward; encounters with the modern West beginning with the mid-19th century led to institutional tensions between new ideas and traditions, leading to a series of peaceful and violent revolutions marking the conflicts – the Opium War (1839–42), the Boxer Rebellion (1900), the May Fourth Movement (1919), etc. This account of the ‘key moments of rapture’ of modernization in China substantiated both the revolutionary hegemonic views of ‘stages’ of revolution and the metanarratives of freedom and progress mapped in a linear and universal pattern. As China’s archives opened up for research, and as intellectual inquiries shift from the Weberian interpretation of institutional changes, more nuanced studies are now possible from a multitude of spaces and views, generating new research questions and reframing old ones. As both a critique of modernity and a reconstitution of the Chinese modern, the new research traces shifting formations, always already hybridized and eclectic, of fractured and contested grounds between heterogeneous traditions and practices.

One useful point of entry into an understanding of modernization in China is through the reconstitutions of the body in the Chinese cultural and political context. When, in 1793 during his famous mission to China, Lord Macartney resisted the bodily movement of kowtow to the dismay of his Chinese hosts, he brought the cultural worlds constructed around the body into sharp relief. At the start of the first major violent encounter between China and the West during the Opium War, the Qing (1644–1911) court considered the body of the imprisoned site of opium-induced pleasures as undermining its normative functions as a site of moral rectitude in the Confucian tradition, in which to establish your body (lishen) commanded a central importance. On the other hand, China’s defeat in this war and a series of other encounters with Western powers set forth a rethinking of the body beyond the conventional understanding of the body framed through the duality of pleasure and moral conduct. Both pleasure and morality were reconstituted to include the ‘combatant body’ – the strong and dexterous body sustained through sports and competitions in the Hellenistic formulation, and codified in the representations of the body since the Renaissance in the West. In China, the combatant body had been understood traditionally as something to be gradually overcome through the civilizing power of ritualized moral conduct or spiritual enlightenment. Vestiges of the combatant body remain through the metaphor of battle frequently used in Chinese erotic literature. Major reform thinkers and revolutionaries in China in the early 20th century paid extraordinary attention to the remaking of the body in a multiplicity of discursive formations. The Renaissance ideal of bringing together active life (vita activa) and contemplative life (vita contemplativa) became a new paradigm to be injected into the traditional role of intellectuals focused on literary and artistic activities. Education reforms in the early 20th century emphasized physical exercises, as shown by Wen-hsin Yeh in Alienated Academy (1990). Liang Qichao (1873–1929) stressed the central importance of the new Chinese person (the new citizen or xinmin) to the renewal of Chinese culture and society in the modern world. This understanding influenced a generation of Chinese reformers and revolutionaries: Mao Zedong, for instance, named his student organization the New Citizens’ Society (Xinmin xueshe), and he engineered a high visibility for his rigorous exercise regimes – a central theme of revolutionary propaganda in post-1949 China. China’s first participation in the modern Olympics in 1984 and its hosting of the 2008 event can be seen as symbolic manifestations of the reconstituted body advocated by successive political regimes in the 20th century, displayed in the international arena. Despite all these changes, the traditional body, seen in its speech (and the absence of it), memory, movement essential to the ever-present power hierarchy, has never ceased to be a significant layer in the process of its hybridization with the new combatant body.

‘The debating mind’ as the counterpart of the combatant body demanded remaking of knowledge underlined with principles of precision and conciseness; this formed the main modern reform agenda for leading intellectuals such as Yan Fu and Liang Qichao as they introduced Western scholarship into China. The embodied knowledge of the traditional hegemonic power hierarchy of Confucianism was contested by the new hegemony of logo-centric knowledge. The new mind must now be sufficiently nimble to employ notions of global space and time (geography and history in the Hegelian sense), and to renew and recreate Chinese scholarship in this new framework. Developing this agenda, scholars such as Hu Shi (1891–1962) and Lu Xun (1881–1936) experimented with a new way of writing Chinese (baihua) which moved away, in form and content, from Chinese tradition symbolized by the dense scholarly language fostered by the traditional examination system. This distance between the new language and the traditional language became an important measure through which renewal and recreation of the Chinese culture in the modern context could be considered possible.

The prosthetic extension of the combatant body through technology was particularly receptive in the Chinese context. This may be attributed to the ease with which the notion of technology could be rephrased in the existing vocabulary in the Chinese scholarly tradition, albeit with technology now playing a reversed role. The conceptual framework for technology was traditionally framed as one side of the binary opposition of the dao and the qi. The dao (the contemplation of universal principles) and the qi (the making of things) were understood as separate endeavours, and the pursuit of the dao was seen to be a superior form of intellectual life. This concept can be found in early classics such as Zhouyi (The Book of Changes), compiled in the late Zhou dynasty (770–256 BCE). As China encountered the Baconian notion of use/power of technology, it sought to rethink its tradition of science and invention which, as Joseph Needham demonstrated in his monumental Science and Civilization in China, had always been a key component in traditional Chinese society. From the 1840s onwards, a number of capable Qing officials such as Zeng Guofan (1811–1872), Zuo Zongtang (1812–1885), and Li Hongzhang (1823–1901), who rose to prominence as commanders of armies suppressing various rebellions (Taiping, Nian, and Muslim) which plagued the Qing Empire in the late 19th century, built shipyards, arsenals, and railways. They revived a historical phrase of self-strengthening (ziqiang) to underscore the Chineseness of their endeavor. They wanted to overcome the ‘shame of labor’ of the Chinese literati, an effort which paralleled the medieval exultation of manual labor in the Benedictine monasteries described by Lewis Mumford in The City in History (1961). While the technological modernization of the Qing court in the late 19th century was undermined by incessant foreign hostility and conservative courtiers, Deng Xiaoping’s pragmatic modernization program from the 1980s has been much more effective in restoring a modernizing agenda sidelined by political and ideological demands in the early 20th century.

The female body in the Chinese cultural and political context presents a uniquely complex question in China’s modernization. The abolition of the female bound feet, a central fetish at the heart of the patriarchal pleasure/morality, became the first indication of a process of reconstitution of the female body. The May Fourth Movement championed the ideal of the Chinese woman through equality and freedom, an ideal that continued to gain currency in post-1949 China. Mao’s impassioned writings in 1919 on the tragedy of Miss Zhao, a young woman who committed suicide as she refused an arranged marriage, reflected this ideal. The Norwegian dramatist Henrik Ibsen’s A Doll’s House, in which the heroine Nora left her husband as she revolted against bourgeois hypocrisy and oppression, was translated and printed in the journal of the new culture, New Youth, in 1918; it was received with great enthusiasm by China’s youth. As much as the cultural iconoclasm in the 1910s demanded the liberation of the female body, nationalism in the 1920s and 1930s exerted a counter-claim on it in the form of a return of the patriarchal authority, as Prasenjit Duara demonstrates in Rescuing History from the Nation (1995) and in ‘Of Authenticity and Woman’ (2000). The earlier representation of anti-Confucian and anti-familial women became a liability for nationalism, and was replaced by one of traditional virtues bound by the domestic space off limits to Western influences, playing a central part in the construction of the nationalist ideology. Within the 20th century, the female body in the Chinese cultural and political context was, and continues to be, the site of violence, oppression, and liberation in the multifarious formations of patriarchal authority, cultural iconoclasm, revolutionary hegemony, and nationalism with heightened intensity.

