# Classification and Human Language

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Classification and Human Language

Mark Donohue

Keywords form, function, gender, grammar, language

lassification has a prehistory. Long before people were writing about classification, or listing classes, they were doing it, whenever they spoke.

The human propensity to classify the world is reflected universally in language, at many levels and in many ways. At its most fundamental, all languages minimally distinguish the pronouns I and you; many (if not most) languages accord special grammatical privileges to I and you, opposed to the rest of the world, and yet others put the dividing line somewhere else, maybe including dogs but excluding insects in a privileged ‘human and most animate’ category. Regardless of where the line between ‘privileged’ and ‘less privileged’ lies, the tendency towards classification is rife and only just begins with the special status of you and me.

The parts of the body, as a group or in parts, can reflect classificatory principles: when fingers and toes are ‘blossoms of hands’ and ‘blossoms of feet’ respectively, as they are in many languages of central Indonesia such as Tukang Besi (Donohue, 1999), we can see the classification of the body into equal upper and lower parts. Foley (1997) describes this upper and lower division for Watam, showing that all parts of the upper limbs have a classification that is perfectly parallel with the lower limbs. The classification of the extremities of humans (fingers and toes) and the extremities of plants and animals (wing-tips and blossoms) into the same units also reflects a pan-species set of classificatory principles. The use of the same lexical item to specify ‘grass’, ‘leaf ’ and ‘hair’, or the use of the same lexical item to express both the start and the end of a process (such as a single item covering ‘tree/wood/fire’, or a single word for ‘stomach/faeces’, as is common in New Guinea) signifies a division of the world into perceived classes, just as much as does its absence in those languages that do not collapse these terms.

Without formal gender we also find formal and functional classification, and the two systems meeting. In the One language of Papua New Guinea the animal world is classified into tolla ‘birds’, mulu ‘meat animals’, and pompone ‘water dwelling creatures’. Another functional classification applies as well as this locational system, and, for instance, a cassowary, which although winged and feathered is flightless, is counted as a pi’i mulu ‘ground animal’, while a saumu ‘tree kangaroo (generic)’ is a tiri mulu ‘upper animal’. Other pi’i mulu are the mammals of the ground: rodents, pigs, wallabies, while other members of the tiri mulu group are all the flying birds. Likewise various oini ‘bandicoot (generic)’ are classified as tiri mulu, pi’i mulu, or fola mulu ‘water animals’ based on their habitat. While they are all mulu, in opposition to pompone and tolla, certain of their members can be functionally grouped with tolla or pompone based on their behaviour, rather than their structure.

The most obvious, and overt, expression of classification in language, and the one that has received the greatest attention from linguists and others, involves gender. Dividing the world into masculine and feminine (and more) parts is overt classification at its most obvious. The basis for the classification can be formal (based on the perceived salient shape: long, thin objects are masculine, short and squat objects are feminine), functional (women’s tools versus men’s tool, for instance), or a mixture of the two. In Skou, a language from New Guinea, the world is classed as feminine or non-feminine, and these two poles contrast in dynamic ways. While non-feminine is the unmarked category, semantically, feminine represents the natural, the biological, the unordered and unpredictable. The land, with all its mysteries, is classed as feminine, while the transparent sea is non-feminine. A canoe is an ordered, societal tool, crewed by men, that is used to travel on the sea; it is classed, however, as feminine, in order to maintain an opposition with the predominantly non-feminine environment. Similarly water in its natural state, a river or a pool in the jungle, is classed as feminine; but when brought (typically by women) into the village, another feminine domain, it is reclassified as non-feminine, to maintain a distinction with ‘wild’ water, and a distinction with its new environment. (Nonfeminine domains include food gardens, nonfeminine by virtue of their being typically tended by men, houses, situated in ‘feminine’ villages but built by men, and islands and mountain tops, nonfeminine on the basis of their shape.)

And the apparently arbitrary can enter the picture: in Burmeso, while third persons can be masculine or feminine, all first persons (I, me) are feminine, and all second persons (you) are masculine. Here the classification has moved from the formal and functional to the purely grammatical. Interestingly, native speakers often create ad hoc explanations for these classification systems, even in the face of counter-examples; I have heard Dutch speakers ‘explain’ the (to them) ‘masculine’ versus ‘feminine’ gender system in terms of shape characteristics of the nominals concerned, even in the face of clear counter examples. This parallels the continued citation of what has become (in some circles) known as ‘The Great Eskimo Snow Hoax’, in which Eskimo languages are asserted to have a vast number of words for snow (or ice), whereas in fact not only do the Inuit (or Eskimo) languages not have any such vast store of lexicon, but English contains at least as many lexical roots for these concepts, at least in the English spoken by avid skiers. As Pullum (1991) points out, people always have enough words to describe the world around them; a typographer recognizes more words for different fonts than does the average academic, but we do not find this exceptional or noteworthy. The use of classification as a tool in categorizing the world around us is so pervasive that we cease to think of it as categorization. Examples, such as the divisions of the natural world in One, which branch and then rejoin in parallel and overlapping systems, suggest that perhaps life in a society without such continual categorization of humans into archetypes such as doctor, professor, brick-layer, politician, etc. allows for a more complex conceptualization of the non-human world as well. But conceptualize it, and classify it, it does.

