# Religion / Etymological Roots / The History of the Sciences of Religion and Religions / Secularization / Religion and Political Violence / Conclusion: Enlightenment, Violence and Revelation

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Religion

Bryan S. Turner

Abstract The emergence of a science of religion and religions in which the sacred became a topic of disinterested, objective inquiry was itself an important statement about the general character of social change and can be taken as an index of secularization. It implies a level of critical self-reflexive scrutiny in society. In the West, the study of ‘religion’ as a topic of independent inquiry was initially undertaken by theologians who wanted to understand how Christianity could be differentiated from other religions. The problem of religious diversity had arisen as an inevitable consequence of colonial contact with other religious traditions and with phenomena that shared a family resemblance with religion, such as fetishism, animism and magic. The science of religion implies a capacity for self-reflection and criticism, and it is often claimed that other religions do not possess such a science of religion. While different cultures give religion a different content, Christianity was defined as a world religion. In Hegel’s dialectical scheme, the increasing self-awareness of the Spirit was a consequence of the historical development of Christianity. The contemporary scientific study of religion and religions is confronted by significant epistemological problems that are associated with globalization, and the traditional question about the nature of religion has acquired a new intensity.

Keywords Enlightenment, reason, religion, sacred, secularization, violence

## Etymological Roots

Jacques Derrida in ‘Faith and Knowledge’ (1998: 34) notes, following Emile Benveniste in Indo-European Language and Society (1973), that the word ‘religion’ (religio) has two distinctive roots. First, relegere from legere means to bring together, to harvest or to gather (in). Second, religare from ligare means to tie or to bind together. The first meaning indicates the religious foundations of any social group that is gathered together, while the second points to the disciplines or morality that are necessary for controlling human beings and creating a regulated mentality. The first meaning indicates the role of the cult in forming human membership, while the second meaning points to the regulatory practices of religion in the discipline of passions. This distinction formed the basis of Kant’s philosophical analysis of religion and morality. In Religion within the Limits of Pure Reason (1960), Kant distinguished between religion as cult (des blossen Cultus), which seeks favours from God through prayer and offerings to bring healing and wealth to its followers, and religion as moral action (die Religion des guten Lebenswandels), which commands human beings to change their behaviour in order to lead a better life. Kant further elaborated this point by an examination of ‘reflecting faith’ that compels humans to strive for salvation through faith rather than the possession of religious knowledge. The implication of Kant’s distinction was that (Protestant) Christianity was the only true ‘reflecting faith’, and in a sense therefore the model of all authentic religious intentions. Kant’s distinction was fundamentally about those religious injunctions that call human beings to (moral) action and hence demand that humans assert their autonomy and responsibility. In order to have autonomy, human beings need to act independently of God.

In a paradoxical fashion, Christianity implies the ‘death of God’ because it calls people to freedom and hence the Christian faith is ultimately self-defeating.

These Kantian principles were eventually translated into the sociology of Max Weber (1864–1920). In the Sociology of Religion (1966), Weber distinguished between the religion of the masses and the religion of the virtuosi. While the masses seek comforts from religion, especially healing, the virtuosi fulfil the ethical demands of religion in search of spiritual salvation or enlightenment. The religion of the masses requires saints and holy men to satisfy their needs, and hence charisma is corrupted by the demand for miracles and spectacles. More importantly, Weber distinguished between those religions that reject the world by challenging its traditions (such as inner-worldly asceticism) and religions that seek to escape from the world through mystical flight (such as other-worldly mysticism). The former religions (primarily the Calvinistic radical sects) have had revolutionary consequences for human society in the formation of rational capitalism. The implication of this tradition is paradoxical. First, Christianity (or at least Puritanism) is the only true religion (as a reflecting faith) and, second, Christianity gives rise to a process of secularization that spells out its own self-overcoming (Aufhebung).

## The History of the Sciences of Religion and Religions

There is an important tension between religion and philosophy in terms of their claims to truth. This tension is between revelation and reason as different modes of understanding. The Enlightenment was significant in the development of classifications of religion, since the Enlightenment philosophers treated religion as a form of false knowledge. The Enlightenment philosophers emphasized the importance of rational self-inspection as a source of dependable understanding against revelatory experiences. For Hume, Voltaire, Rousseau and Diderot, Christianity was a form of irrational or mistaken knowledge of the world, and hence the Enlightenment sharpened the distinction between revelation and reason as modes of apprehension of reality. The sciences of religion are a product of the Enlightenment in which knowledge of religion was important in the liberation of human beings from the false consciousness of revealed religion. Diderot was specifically critical of Christian institutions, and Hume, who was critical of the claims made by revealed religion for miracles, wrote somewhat ironically of the differences between monotheistic and polytheistic religions. The former religions are more likely to support authoritarian states, while the polytheistic traditions are more conducive to pluralism. The Enlightenment associated political intolerance with monotheism in general and Catholicism in particular, and advocated the separation of church and state as a necessary condition of individual liberties.

While Enlightenment philosophy was overtly hostile to religious institutions, the Enlightenment itself had an important impact on religious thought. The Jewish Enlightenment or Haskalah emphasized the rational individual, natural law, natural rights and religious tolerance. The Jewish Enlightenment attempted to make Jews equal citizens with their Christian and secular counterparts in European societies. Moses Mendelssohn played an important part in presenting Judaism as a rational religion and these European developments partly paved the way towards Zionism. The problem of religion as a form of rational knowledge also preoccupied the young Marx who, in ‘the Jewish Question’ (1844), argued that the ‘solution’ to the Jewish problem was their movement into the urban proletariat and adoption of secular socialism, but the final emancipation of the Jewish worker could not be achieved by political emancipation alone without a total transformation of capitalism. The point of Marx’s argument was that the final demise of religion as a form of consciousness could only be achieved through a transformation of the actual structure of society.

In other societies similar developments took place. In Russia Peter the Great was responsible for imposing many of the ideas of the Enlightenment on a society that was historically backward. The building of St Petersburg was intended to demonstrate architecturally the importance of western reform and Enlightenment values. Russian Orthodoxy was held to be a particularly barbaric form of Christian religion. Peter’s contact with German Enlightenment was in fact a combination of German Pietism and the rationalism of Leibniz. In this form of benevolent despotism, modernization and Enlightenment ensured that opposition to these foreign cultural standards involved a combination of Russian nationalism and Russian Orthodoxy.

The connections between the Enlightenment and religion were a good deal more complex than this introductory note might suggest. One can claim more accurately that the Enlightenment philosophers were hostile to institutionalized Christianity, specifically the Roman Catholic Church, rather than to religion per se. If we set the Enlightenment within a broader historical framework, it is clear that the 18th-century philosophers were drawing inspiration from the Reformation of the 16th century and the Renaissance humanism of the 15th century. The Renaissance (1400–1600) involved a rediscovery of the humanistic literature of Greek and Roman antiquity. The Renaissance placed Man at the centre of learning and knowledge, emphasizing human perfection through education rather than human sinfulness and depravity. Humanistic philosophy was spread by the invention of printing in the mid-15th century, and printing in turn facilitated the growth of the Reformation in the 16th century. Both Christianity and humanism were influenced by the European discovery of the Americas in 1492 and by new routes to China and Japan. Colonialism and the discovery of aboriginal cultures presented a significant challenge to the biblical notion of the unity of humankind. The Enlightenment philosophers had much in common with the Cambridge Platonists and the latitudinarian movement of the 17th century, which sought to reject what it saw as the fanaticism of the Civil War and attempted to present Christian practice and belief as reasonable. The English notion of reasonableness was not quite what Marx and Hegel had in mind by the historical march of rational knowledge and the spirit, but it was a long way from the experiential intensity of the conversionist sects. This broader historical picture indicates a greater philosophical (indeed theological) continuity between the Christian humanism of Erasmus, the rationalism of Diderot and the dialectical idealism of Hegel; it also explains why their contemporaries suspected a political plot between freemasonry and the Enlightenment to attack the authoritarianism of the Catholic Church and the monarchy.

## Secularization

In the 1970s and 1980s, religion ceased to be a topic of central importance to sociology, and the sociology of religion was confined to the study of sects. With the dominance of modernization theory, it was assumed that religion would not play a large part in social organization. At best it would be confined to the private sphere. In short, secularization, which was assumed to be a necessary component of modernization, proved to be enormously difficult to define. Secularization involves the following:

(1) There is the social differentiation of society into specialized spheres in which religion becomes simply one institution to provide various services to its followers or to the community; secularization is the decline of the scope of authority structures. Fundamentalism is the attempt to halt this differentiation;

(2) Rationalization involves the corrosion of the power of religious beliefs and the authority of religious specialists (such as priests). This argument is associated with Weber’s notion of ‘disenchantment’. While this argument acknowledges the impact of science on public explanations of phenomena and the conduct of public life, social survey research shows that belief in magic and superstition remains very high in advanced societies. Eschatology can also have a potent role in secular society. In the United States, the Christian fictional series Left Behind, depicting the return of Christ, has sold over 70 million copies. These stories are loosely based on the book of Revelation and this literary genre gives expression to what evangelicals call ‘the Rapture’, which is the contemporary account of the disappearance of Christians from the earth and their entry into heaven, leaving behind sinners and unbelievers. The series combines a traditional apocalyptic religion with conservative political attitudes. For example, in the struggle with evil forces, the UN appears as the anti-Christ on earth. Around 8 million American Christians believe that the Rapture is coming soon, and this transformation of the world is indicated by, for example, the crisis in the Middle East.

(3) Modernization (often a combination of differentiation and rationalization) is a cluster of processes emphasizing individualism, democratic politics, liberal values, and norms of efficiency and economic growth. Because modernization undermines tradition, it cuts off the communal and social foundations that supported religion as a traditional institution. However, religion continues to play a role in supporting national, regional or class identities in industrial capitalism, for example in Northern Ireland, Catholic France, the Solidarity movement in Poland or the Orthodox revival in Russia;

(4) Secularization may simply be the transformation (metamorphosis) of religion as it adjusts to new conditions. There are many versions of this argument. Sociologists have argued that the social is essentially religious, and what counts as ‘religion’ does not decline; it just keeps transforming. Thomas Luckmann (1967) has argued that modern societies have an ‘invisible religion’ that characterizes the transcendence of the everyday world. There is an ‘implicit religion’ of beliefs about spiritual phenomena that are not necessarily Christian or components of formal religion. In modern societies there is ‘believing without belonging’, because religious membership and attendance decline, but belief in the Christian faith is still prevalent (Beckford, 2003).

Over the last two centuries, secularization in the narrow meaning (decline in church membership and attendance, marginalization of the Church from public life, the dominance of scientific explanations of the world) has been characteristic of Europe (especially northern, Protestant Europe) and its former colonies (Australia, New Zealand, Canada), but not of the United States, where religion remains powerful, or in many Catholic societies, especially in Latin America and Africa. In these societies, Pentecostalism and charismatic movements have been growing. In Islam, Christianity and Judaism there have been powerful movements of fundamentalist revival. In many societies, in youth cultures and popular culture generally, there have been important hybrid forms of religiosity, often employing the Internet to disseminate their services and beliefs. In post-communist societies, there is clear evidence of a revival of Orthodoxy (in Russia and eastern Europe) and Islam (in China), and Buddhist movements and ‘schools’ have millions of followers in Japan. Shamanism thrives in Okinawa. In some respects, this conclusion is compatible with Weber’s sociology of virtuoso-mass religion in that rational and individualistic Protestantism (Kant’s moralizing faith) appears to be selfdestructive and there is also an ongoing demand for mass religious services (Kant’s cultic form of religion) in most human societies. There is one difference here. In the past, the educated and disciplined virtuosi determined the official form of religion. Periodically religion gets ‘cleaned up’ as the virtuosi expel the magical, popular, cultic accretions – the Buddhist monks, often with the help of a righteous monarch, reject the magic of their followers; Christian reformers – from the desert fathers to John Wesley – condemned the corrupt practices of the laity; in Islam, according to Ibn Khaldun, prophets enter the city to reform the House of Faith. In the modern world, the laity have some degree of literacy and they can access radio, the Internet, TV, travel and mass consumerism. The globalization of popular religion makes it increasingly difficult for the virtuosi to regulate the mass. In Thailand, popular Buddhist charismatics sell magical charms and amulets over the Internet; on Muslim websites, popular American mullahs offer fatwas on every aspect of daily life. The growth of global spiritual marketplaces means that ‘religion’ constantly transforms itself, becoming increasingly hybrid and reflexive. Fundamentalism is in this sense an attempt to control the consumerist spiritual market place, but this growing hybridity may only be a problem from the perspective of those religious traditions that represent the Kantian moralizing faith. Syncretism has been historically the norm.

## Religion and Political Violence

By the end of the 20th century, with the collapse of the Soviet Union, the rise of fundamentalism, and the retreat of assertive humanism, sociologists abandoned the secularization thesis; religion, far from declining, is central to modern political life. Sociologists and philosophers have become more interested in the relationship between religion and violence (de Vries, 2002). Given the contemporary relationship between terrorism and political Islam, it is difficult to avoid the popular question: is there any relationship between Islam as a religious system, violence and authoritarian rule? The traditional answer of mainstream political science has been to argue that, because Islamic culture does not differentiate between religion and politics, it assumes an undemocratic and, typically, an authoritarian complexion. This conventional answer follows Weber’s thesis of caesaropapism – namely the integration of state and Church power, or the combination of Caesar and the Pope – and liberal political philosophy.

A more promising argument might be that no religious system has a deep relationship to democracy. Charisma is hierarchical and religious communities (churches, temples and monasteries) do not democratically elect their leaders. Prophets receive revelations that are not tested by popular assent. In this respect, the principle of authority in Islam might be an exception. Whereas Shi’ite Islam saw authority in terms of descent from the Prophet, Sunni Islam accepted the idea of communal consensus for the first four Rightly Guided Caliphs. In Christianity, there is the argument that the Protestant sects embraced the idea of ‘priesthood of all believers’, a politics of ‘No King, No Bishops’, popular assembly, presbyterianism and the rule of local chapels, and female ministries, but the openness to debate also led to antinomianism and the quest for ‘godly rule’. There is also the view that Confucianism is essentially a philosophy of good governance and good order rather than a religion as such. In Buddhism, there is a tradition of powerful and just (but undemocratic) monarchs who periodically clean out the monastery (Sangha) and the kingdom to establish a just society and personal merit – a tradition that has its origin in King Asoka’s rule over the Magadha Empire (270–232 BC). Any religion whose system of authority claims to be the result of revelation (hence of prophecy, ecstatic visions, charisma) does not support the idea of truth as the outcome of communal consensus. Holy war, crusades and just war have been used to illustrate the relationship between violence, monotheism and hostility to the outside world. In these political struggles, jihad has become a popular description of violent confrontation. Sympathetic interpretations of Islam normally argue that jihad means ‘spiritual struggle’ but has been corrupted to mean ‘armed struggle’. Watt’s account of the origins of jihad in the inter-tribal raids (razzia) that were common in Arabia is important for understanding the greater jihad (war against external enemies) and the lesser jihad against polytheism. In Islamic Political Thought (1999), he argues that jihad (‘striving’ or ‘expenditure of effort’) had entirely secular economic origins, namely camel raids. In the great expansion of Islam in its first century, there was little intention of spreading the religion of Islam ‘apart from other considerations that would have meant sharing their privileges of booty and stipends with many neo-Muslims’ (Watt, 1999: 18). In subsequent generations, it ‘has roused ordinary men to military activity’, while later mystics have described it as ‘self-discipline’ (1999: 19).

In sociological terms, 20th-century political Islam is a product of the social frustrations of those social strata (unpaid civil servants, overworked teachers, underemployed engineers and marginalized college teachers) whose interests have not been well served by either the secular nationalism of Nasser, Muhammad Reza Shah, Suharto or Saddam Hussein, or the neo-liberal ‘open-door’ policies of Anwar Saddat or Chadli Benjedid in Algeria. The social dislocations created by the global economy produced ideal conditions for external western support of those secular elites in the Arab world who benefit significantly from oil revenues; bureaucratic authoritarianism has been the political result. In summary, Islamism is a product of a religious crisis of authority, the failures of authoritarian nationalist governments, and the socio-economic divisions that have been exacerbated by neo-liberal globalization.

Roy (1994) and Kepel (2002, 2004) have developed an influential interpretation of the failure of political Islam. Their account of the radicalization of Islam starts with the Algerian crisis, the October riots of 1988, the coup of 1992, and the increasing violence between the state, the GIA (Groupe Islamique Armé) and FIS (Fronte Islamique du Salut). The failure of radical Islam to establish itself in confrontation with the Algerian state resulted in the export of political Islam to Central Asia, Afghanistan and Pakistan, but these revolutionary Islamic movements have failed to establish fundamentalist Islamic states. Political Islam is the consequence of social frustrations, articulated around the social divisions of class and generation, following from the economic crises of the global neo-liberal experiments of the 1970s and 1980s. The demographic revolution produced large cohorts of young Muslims, who, while often well educated to college level, could not find opportunities to satisfy the aspirations that had been inflamed by nationalist governments. Kepel’s thesis is simply that the last 25 years have witnessed the spectacular rise of Islamism and its failure. In the 1970s, when sociologists assumed that modernization meant secularization, the sudden irruption of political Islam, especially the importance of Shi’ite theology in popular protests in Iran, appeared to challenge dominant paradigms of modernity. These religious movements – especially when they forced women to wear the chador and excluded them from public space – were originally defined by leftist intellectuals as a form of religious fascism. Over time, however, Marxists came to recognize that Islamism had a popular base and was a powerful force against colonialism. Western governments were initially willing to support both Sunni and Shi’a resistance groups against the Russian involvement in Afghanistan after 1979, despite their connections with radical groups in Pakistan and Iran.

These religious movements largely cancelled out the legacy of Arab nationalism that had dominated anti-western politics since the Suez Crisis of 1956. The ideological basis of Islamism was devised in the late 1960s by three men: Maududi in Pakistan, Qutb in Egypt and Khomeini in Iran. For Kepel, Islamism is the product of both generational pressures and class structure. First, it has been embraced by the youthful generations of the cities that were created by the post-war demographic explosion of the Third World and the resulting mass exodus from the countryside. This generation was poverty-stricken, despite its relatively high literacy and access to secondary education. Second, Islamism recruited among the middle classes – the descendants of the merchant families from the bazaars and souks who had been pushed aside by decolonization, and from the doctors, engineers and businessmen, who, while enjoying the salaries made possible by booming oil prices, were excluded from political power. The ideological carriers of Islamism at the local level were the ‘young intellectuals, freshly graduated from technical and science departments, who had themselves been inspired by the ideologues of the 1960s’ (Kepel, 2002: 6). Islamic themes of justice and equality were mobilized against those regimes that were corrupt, bankrupt and authoritarian, and often supported by the West in the Cold War confrontation with the Soviet empire.

## Conclusion: Enlightenment, Violence and Revelation

In the last decade, Huntington’s analysis of ‘the clash of civilizations’ (1993) has orchestrated much of the academic discussion about inter-cultural understanding. While Edward Said’s criticisms of Orientalism offered some hope that intellectuals could cross cultural boundaries and establish a road towards mutual respect and understanding, in the post 9/11 environment, Huntington’s pessimistic vision of the development of micro fault-line conflicts and macro core state conflicts has more precisely captured the mood of western foreign policy in the era of global terrorism. Huntington, of course, believes that the major cultural division is between the Christian West and the Muslim world. Given Huntington’s description of ‘the age of Muslim Wars’, any attempt to engage with Islamic civilization is now seen as a ‘war for Muslim minds’ (Kepel, 2004).

Although the Enlightenment has been much criticized by postmodern philosophy, this criticism is somewhat misleading when applied to Leibniz (1646–1716), the German founder of the predominantly French Enlightenment. He is best known as a mathematician, but Franklin Perkins (2004) shows a rather different, but equally important, side of Leibniz’s philosophy, which appears extraordinarily pertinent to modern times. Leibniz lived in a period of intense trade and commerce with the outside world and, alongside this emerging capitalist enterprise, Leibniz advocated a ‘commerce of light’ or mutual enlightenment. Contrary to Spinoza’s view that there is only one substance, Leibniz argued that the world is characterized by an infinite diversity, richness and completeness. This world is a teeming world of entities that exist in a state of harmony, and in the Discourse on Metaphysics he claimed that God has created the best of all possible worlds (a theodicy), which is ‘the simplest in hypotheses and the richest in phenomena’.

Recognition of the diversity of cultures and civilizations leads us to recognize the inherent value of difference. Leibniz advocated a tolerance of diverse views, but went beyond the philosophers of his day to establish a moral imperative to learn from cultural diversity. He applied this ethic to himself, committing much of his life to studying China from the reports of missionaries and merchants. Differences between entities or monads require exchange, but this also establishes a commonality of culture. Leibniz was not, in modern terms, a cultural relativist – if all cultures are equal (in value), why bother to learn from any one of them? While all knowledge of the outside world is relativistic, Leibniz argued that, because we are embodied, there are enough innate ideas to make an exchange of enlightenment possible. According to Perkins, from the doctrine of blind monads, Leibniz developed a hermeneutics of generosity that regarded inter-cultural understanding as not merely a useful anthropological field method, but as an ethical imperative. Leibniz developed a notion of cosmopolitan virtue in his attempt to establish an exchange with China that offers us a guideline for understanding our own times, especially a cosmopolitan exchange with Islam. Leibniz is a sort of rational and moral antidote to Huntington.

How might we best illustrate cosmopolitan or Leibnizian historiography? One starting point is the work of Marshall G.S. Hodgson in his monumental The Venture of Islam (1974). Hodgson, formerly a professor of history at the University of Chicago, set himself the task of Rethinking World History (1993). His thesis was that Islam was an integral part of Mediterranean civilization, which can in turn only be understood from the standpoint of world history. He shifted the central point of European historical geographical imagination eastwards and southwards, giving Cairo, Damascus and Baghdad greater prominence in European civilization. His work embraced a cosmopolitan virtue in that he was a Quaker, attempting to understand Islam hermeneutically. From a sympathetic, pacifist stance, he criticized the militaristic evolution of imperial Islam as a social system. These imperial systems were alien to the inner religious tradition of Islam. Hodgson showed hermeneutic generosity to both faiths, demonstrating for example how a sense of justice was crucial to Islamic theology. Hodgson’s world history was an attack on western provincialism, but it also contained a critical assessment of the relationship between faith and political empire. From Hodgson we might conclude that the recognition of cultural difference does not mean uncritically accepting those differences. On the contrary, we need a critical recognition theory in which there is a place for dialogical critical understanding. I call this perspective a ‘critical recognition ethics’ that is at the heart of cosmopolitan virtue in which caring for the differences of the other does not rule out critical judgement of other cultures.

