# Language and Nation / Ethnopoetics Dell Hymes / Introductory editorial note by Ryan Bishop

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Language and Nation

Ismail S. Talib

Keywords dialect, language, literature, nation, spatialization of temporality

lthough the supplementary nature of this entry may be no more than a formal requirement, it leads me to think about something more substantial about the nature of the nation: what is supposed to be the main thing may become a supplement, and then the supplement itself may be erased, which of course is also the story of many so-called nations throughout human history. Indeed, with nations, it is often the supplement which tries to define itself as the main thing – a dialect of a language, for example, spoken by a minority of the population, defines itself as the nation’s language, and then defines or redefines what the nation should be, and finally makes light of or even erases other dialects or languages, which were once spoken by larger sections of the population.

Looking at the trajectories of language and literature in relation to the nation, one can take either a narrow or broad view of what they mean. One narrow conception of language does not attempt to define it structurally or historically. It is more a rigid conception of what one thinks a language should be, crammed with our own prejudices of what it ought to be, like the association of a nation’s language with one of its accents, such as Received Pronunciation in Britain, which even the BBC today is trying to break free from. In such matters, what ought to be – or, more restrictively, what a few people think ought to be – often becomes what is. In spite of the enthronement of a dialect as a language, ultimately there may only actually be dialects available for analysis. What is defined as a language does not really exist in one piece, but can only be understood as the superset that cannot be adequately defined by any of its members (and which itself cannot be adequately defined once and for all), in the same way that a sparrow cannot define what every bird should be, unless, of course – and this is an important qualification – a dialect is politically defined as a language, in the way, for example, a dialect is defined as a national language.

So we have a quite perverse situation here, where the nation defines, delimits or chooses what its language should be, by going for what is the most appropriate dialect of a language. Indeed, a language, in the words of Weinreich (1945), is ‘a dialect with an army and a navy’. What a nation’s language should be, then, through the choice of a dialect, becomes what its language is.

It becomes more perverse if the nation asserts itself as, or tries to equate itself with, the state, because metaphorically we have the army and the navy of the state to back its choice of dialect and its redefinition as a language. Sometimes, even the language itself is renamed. For example, the Malay language has two mutually intelligible dialects chosen as the national languages of Indonesia and Malaysia, which have been renamed as Bahasa Indonesia and Bahasa Malaysia. In Malaysia, Malay is the language of the dominant indigenous population, or, more precisely, the dialect of Malay spoken in what is known as the Johor-Riau region is promoted as the standard and hence what Bahasa Malaysia should be. It is interesting that Johor-Riau is mentioned, and Singapore, which is right at the centre of the Johor-Riau region, and whose dialect of Malay is close to that of Johor and Riau, is never mentioned – again, this appears to be a political decision which later gained academic acceptance. In Indonesia, Malay was a minority language, spoken in Riau, Jakarta, and some coastal areas in Kalimantan, but like Bahasa Malaysia it was later used for the self-definition of the nation state of Indonesia as a whole. In the case of China, a northern language was chosen as the national language and came to be called the Chinese language, a term which is now accepted even by linguists (see DeFrancis, 1990).

Going to literature, if one looks at its narrow conception, one thinks of canonical literature: the kind of literature that is taught in ‘lit.’ departments. Some of us may want to dismiss this linkage with the nation, which has been somehow foregrounded in Anderson’s Imagined Communities (1983). While Anderson’s attempt to relate the novel with the nation may seem elusive, his ideas on print capitalism has an interesting practical link with the dissemination of nationalism, because what print does is the possibility of producing several copies of a text, and hence its wider dissemination.

A broader conception, of course, should also include oral literature. But oral literature may be problematic because time does not sit still, it is relentlessly progressing, and is not an example of the ‘homogeneous empty time’ that is so important for Anderson’s theoretical linkage of the canonical novel to the nation. A broader conception of literature should also include narratives of all kinds, including some in non-traditional media, such as cinema and television serials, as well as lyrical genres such as poetry and songs. The linkage to ‘spontaneous empty time’ may be even further away here, but I think it is Anderson’s approach itself which should be questioned. His conception of ‘spontaneous empty time’ amounts to a spatialization of temporality, and suggests to us that the nation to Anderson is a spatial conception. But the nation is more than just space. Some texts are linked to the nation by way of temporarily realized melodies, like the songs that we associate with a particular nation. Think of the gypsy melodies that tell us something of the gypsy nation, even if this nation is a ‘spectral’ one (Cheah, 2003), and not confined to spatial locations or, indeed, to authentic gypsies. Some of these temporarily realized melodies cannot be conveniently separated from the nation itself in order to perceive them as spatial analogues of the nation, but remain an inseparable part of the life of the nation.

Talking about literature, one must not think of it as pristinely existing within the boundary of the nation, defining it, and giving life to it. Contemporary reality is more complex than this. I am thinking of course of globalization and two linguistic-literary factors that may have an effect on conceptions of the nation: Anglicization and Americanization (see Talib, 2002). Anglicization has to do with the increasing use of the English language, and its cultural manifestation, not only linguistically but also in global literatures written in

## Ethnopoetics Dell Hymes

Keywords Amerindian cultures, ethnography, oral narrative, poetics

## Introductory editorial note by Ryan Bishop

Dell Hymes’ supplement on ethnopoetics results from a moment in the early part of the 20th century in North America during which anthropology and linguistics overlapped with the humanities and psychology. These scholars, led by Franz Boas and later by his star pupil Edward Sapir, considered anthropological linguistics as related to Geisteswisschaften, the sciences of the spirit as

English. Americanization has to do with the increasing exposure to American cultural products, such as Hollywood movies and American rock music. Do these factors have an effect on the nation, or on nations that are not English or American? Or are they themselves nation-defining or nation-creating? The answers to this pair of questions are positive, although I cannot answer them adequately right now: it is a question of extent and whether they will be even more significant in the future.

