# Pleasures of Technology

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Pleasures of Technology

Gunalan Nadarajan

Keywords automation, parergon, pleasure, technology

n Akihabara, Tokyo’s Electric Town, one finds a seemingly odd device – a sushi drive. It is a USB memory device that has a plastic shell that is a replica of a hand-made sushi. These drives, that look as sumptuous as any of the plastic food replicas that one finds in the display windows of Japanese restaurants, come in several flavours and in 32MB and 128MB. While it seems like a somewhat odd conjunction of food and computing, it also does seem logical to associate the bitesized and highly portable sushi with a drive that was created to deliver the same in computing memory. However, it is not enough to tuck this away therefore as a logically coherent object or as a unique and culturally specific articulation of technology. The sushi drive is only a more recent example of the oft-neglected relationship between technology and pleasure.

It is useful first to theoretically articulate the secondary and supplementary place of pleasure in discourses and practices of technology. Towards this end, it is proposed that the notion of parergon as discussed by Derrida provides an interesting reference point. While Derrida’s discussion was developed in response to Immanuel Kant’s notion of ‘aesthetic judgement’ as it bears upon art objects, insofar as judgement of the technological object also enacts limits on what is proper to assessing it, the notion of parergon will be relevant here too.

Immanuel Kant in his Critique of Aesthetic Judgement argues that an aesthetic judgement, just like any logical one, is usually complicated by the presence of what he calls ‘judgements of sense’ where one’s assessment of an object of beauty is affected by questions of whether that thing is agreeable or disagreeable. Kant proposes that a genuine ‘judgement of taste’, however, should not be based on such issues as agreeableness since they are incidental and not fundamental to such assessments. He claims, ‘a judgment of taste . . . is only pure so far as its determining ground (Bestimmungsgrunde) is tainted with no merely empirical delight (Wohlgefallen). But such a taint is always present where charm and emotion have a share in the judgement by which something is to be described as beautiful.’ According to him, qualities such as colour and tonalities are elements that are added (hinzukommen) to the object of beauty but the design and composition of these qualities are what constitute ‘the proper object of the pure judgment of taste’. These qualities are considered to be secondary to what comes to be perceived as beautiful since their contribution is to make the form more ‘intuitable (anschaulich machen) and . . . stimulate the representation by their charm, as they excite and sustain the attention directed to the object itself ’ (Kant, 1911: 65–8).

Derrida, in his deconstructive reading of Kant’s notion of aesthetic judgement, identifies in him one more instance in the long history of attempts to distinguish between what constitutes the proper referent for aesthetic judgement and what does not. Derrida says that this drive to ‘distinguish between the internal or proper sense and the circumstance of the object being talked about – organizes all philosophical discourses on art, the meaning of art and meaning as such, from Plato to Hegel’. He suggests, however, that such attempts presuppose and are sustained by what he calls ‘a discourse on the limit between the inside and outside of the art object’ (Derrida, 1987: 45). This secondary operation that holds a tenuous link with the art object without quite becoming it Derrida refers to as ‘parergon’, as that which works along side the work (ergon) while remaining separate and fundamentally different from it. Derrida argues that for Kant the parergon is ‘that which is not internal or intrinsic, as an integral part (als Bestandstuck), to the total representation of the object but which belongs to it only in an extrinsic way as a surplus, an addition, an adjunct, a supplement’ (Derrida, 1987: 57). Derrida points to the fact that Kant, despite his anxiety to excise the parergonal from that which constitutes the ergon of the work so as to facilitate pure aesthetic judgement, also had a conception of what could be called a good or successful parergon. Derrida notes that for Kant, ‘the parergon can augment the pleasure of taste, contribute to the proper and intrinsically aesthetic representation if it intervenes by its form and only by its form’. However, if ‘it is not beautiful, purely beautiful, i.e. of a formal beauty, it lapses into adornment (Schmuck) and harms the beauty of the work’ (Derrida, 1987: 64). It is important to note though that Derrida identifies in the parergon a capacity for deconstructive operations insofar as it promises to disrupt and frustrate efforts at separation of what constitutes the work from what it is not even as it issues from the anxiety to undertake such demarcations. He characterizes its liminal status thus: ‘a parergon comes against, beside, and in addition to the ergon, the work done (fait), the fact (le fait), the work, but it is does not fall to one side, it touches and cooperates within the operation, from a certain outside. Neither simply outside nor simply inside’ (Derrida, 1987: 54). In the history of attempts to articulate the ‘machine aesthetic’, elements that elicit from and/or address the senses and therefore provide pleasure have been presented as parergonal. Thus, to speak of the place of pleasure in technological development and conceptualization alike requires one to (re)invoke some examples of the complex ways in which pleasure is constitutive of technology.

The earliest automata were embedded into and functioning as part water clocks and astronomical devices and this led to a historiographical tendency to conceive of automata as secondary and parergonal complements to the more technical and functional capacities of this early fine technology. The historian Derek Price argues, however, that a ‘deep complementarity exists between the clepsydra principles used in astronomical models and clocks and the almost identical workings of the Heronic singing brids and other parerga’ (Price, 1964: 15). Price claims that the seemingly marginal automata played a primary role in the development of early pneumatic technology. He argues that the ‘most ingenious mechanical devices of antiquity were not useful machines but trivial toys. Only slowly do the machines of everyday life take up the scientific advances and principles used long before in despicable playthings and overly-ingenious, impracticable scientific models and instruments (Price, 1964: 15). For example, Hero (second century BC) describes a variety of such seemingly trivial automatic operations in his Pneumatica – ‘a bird made to whistle by flowing water’; ‘a trumpet, in the hands of an automaton, sounded by compressed air’; ‘figures made to dance by fire on an altar’; and ‘an automaton, the head of which continues to be attached to the body, after a knife has entered through the neck at one side, passed completely through it and out the other’ (Hero, 1851: 29, 71, 95, 109). The fact that the pneumatic technologies that drive the clock are the very same that animate the automata makes this distinction between the functional and the aesthetic problematic.

David Tiffany cites a curious but little-known fact about these water clocks – that the ones made by Ktesibios, Hero and Philon ‘had no scale of hours, no hands or pointer, nor any kind of legible face’. Drawing on this fact, he goes on to argue that ‘with no constant means of indicating time to an observer, the ancient water clock does not so much tell time as possess it, or embody it in its mechanical movement and technical configuration (Tiffany, 2000: 42). Derek Price also draws a similar conclusion about the operations of such clocks without time-reckoning indicators: ‘It would be a mistake to suppose that water-clocks, or the sun-dials to which they are closely related, had the primary utilitarian purpose of telling time . . . On the whole, their design and intention seems to have been aesthetic or religious satisfaction’ (Price, 1964: 13). With reference to such automata integrated into clocks, it is noteworthy to examine the automata developed by Islamic engineers between the 10th and 13th centuries AD, specifically the works of al-Jazari. In his The Book of Knowledge of Ingenious Mechanical Devices, written between 1202 and 1204 and subsequently published in 1206, al-Jazari proposes a variety of pneumatic and hydrostatic automata including water-clocks, clepsydra-type trick vessels, phlebotomy devices and musical automata as well as some amazing wine arbitrating and serving automata. In al-Jazari’s water-clocks, he incorporates a variety of elaborate automata that are synchronized to become animated at regular intervals of time. These automata, however, were not merely incorporated to accompany and possibly even vivify what must have been an otherwise more abstract reckoning with time as numerical constants. It is also plausible that insofar as they were early attempts at time reckoning, they were still contending with the novelty of the time reckoning experience and the lovely spectacle created by the automata presented more enticing ways of coming to terms with time’s passing than our modern notions of accuracy and predictability. This spectacularization of time constituted automata as the very embodiments of temporal experience where the automotive pleasures elicited by their movements provided one with a sense of the passing of time as such rather than an accurate indicator of the specific time of the day. It is also useful to contextualize these automotive pleasures of reckoning time in relation to the nature of Islamic thought and philosophy during this period best characterized by the poetic algorithms of al-Khwarizmi and the Epicurean poetry of Omar Khayyam.

The history of automation, however, has recorded these many automata developed for pleasure as interesting but useless distractions that merely postponed what was the teleological direction of such automation – to develop an instrument/process for the gradual and effective substitution of human labour. It is crucial to supplement and punctuate this instrumental history of automation with the multiple histories of the many sensory pleasures that the automata and its movements have always provided.

While it is true that the prohibitively high price of sushi drives makes it a relatively precious item compared to the cheaper and standardized memory drives, the pleasures of owning a sushi drive that embodies a distinct aesthetic and quirky appeal to young and old seems to be keeping its prices and value to owners high. The sushi drive is not memory drive first, then replica food secondarily. It is not an instrumental object first and then a pleasurable object also. It is not functional first and formally interesting as a supplementary aspect. Its functional capacity as a portable memory drive issues from and is indistinguishable from the fun that it represents formally. The sushi drive is a gadget – a technological object that is useful because it is fun!

