# Culture

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Culture

John Hutnyk

Abstract Culture is considered as a key term in anthropology, now in critical mode, and to be worked through powerful tropes that lead to issues in politics, interpretation, translation, stereotype and racism. Anthropology is described as a cultural system itself, with a large supporting institutional apparatus, not unlike the culture industry as critiqued by Adorno and the Frankfurt School. The high mass culture/high culture distinction is considered and some distortions explained (away). Street culture and culture as (development) resource are evaluated, leading to an assessment of culture as souvenirs, trinkets and the ephemera of tourism as a modern commodity fetish. How this measures up to political struggles is again considered in the light of work by critics such as Fanon and those engaged with anti-imperialist struggles worldwide.

Keywords Adorno, anti-imperialism, commodity, culture, Malinowski, translation, trinkets

‘You are on earth . . . there’s no cure for that.’ (Beckett, Endgame)

very commentary on culture must begin with a ritual acknowledgement of the local E and the global, and of the twinned inextricably bound antithesis of becoming universal and becoming particular, of identity and difference, and contest over these terms. Of course any easy model of culture is delusional in its simplicity, and the local–global nexus obfuscates and enshrines an untenable and thought-congealing homology that is so fragile it should immediately be toppled (‘what is falling down should be pushed’ – Nietzsche). The task of denoting Culture in encyclopaedic mode is fraught with the impossibility of capturing an always-morphed term – multiple meanings, multiple sites, political struggle. In this sense the categories of Culture are infinitely varied, and so this entry begins with a necessarily incomplete survey, taking account in turn of anthropological notions of culture, mass culture, high culture, cultural translation, culture as a resource, political cultures and cultural movements. Some considerations of the state of culture today are ventured at the end, but with no end in sight, encyclopaedia, for mine would include, or even start with, Bataille’s Encyclopaedia Acephalica (1995), which self-consciously included the most disparate things: from ‘big toe’ to ‘ritual’. No doubt the parameters must be dialectically open ended, both expansive and collapsing categorization in on itself. Borges/Foucault’s list of the Emperor’s animals, some of which from a long way off look like flies, might also suggest a model. The open-ended and incomplete encyclopaedia cannot merely mouth the words of openness in its own destabilization, and it should be more than an application of hyperlinking to old hierarchies. All that said, culture was pretty much presented as a kind of complete compendium in the good old days. Thus we could begin with anthropology (not just because that is my disciplinary training).

The anthropological notion of culture has a certified and defended heritage in anthropology since Sir Edmund Burnet Tylor – culture as that collection of pots and pans, bit and pieces, that we all have: ‘that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, law, morals, custom, and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man as a member of society’ (Tylor,

1871). This notion was not the levelling egalitarianism that some anthropologists perhaps thought it was – despite everyone having ‘a culture’, there were from the beginning tables and grids, and hierarchical schemas aplenty, setting out differences. In the 19th century cultural development ranged from the savage to the civilized in Louis Henry Morgan (1877/1965), or was based on the developmental model of the organism in Herbert Spencer (1901). Culture here was bounded, specific to groups and places, and could be named – though anthropologists like Sir James Frazer were loathe to meet those they wrote about (‘Heaven forbid’ he is supposed to have said when asked if he had ever spoken to any of the heathen). Culture, nonetheless, was global from the start for anthropology, and it was the scholar’s task and duty to set it down and explain it, albeit from afar, with attendant distortions. Later this task and duty enters the Malinowskian project of cultural transcription through ‘fieldwork’ in which the anthropologist spends time (conventionally a year or two) living ‘the life of the natives’ in order to discern, and present, ‘the native’s point of view’ (Malinowski, 1922). With some hesitations along the way, and revisionist anxieties a-plenty, this remains the dominant methodological precept.

Critiques of fieldwork need to be foregrounded, including their historical context. Bronislaw Malinowski arrived in Australia just in time to become an enemy ‘intern’ during the First World War. In a subsequent deal with Governor Hunt, who saw the advantage in having the anthropologist assist with ‘native administration’, Malinowski was permitted to conduct research in Papua New Guinea. He arrived on his first visit to a PNG village accompanied by the local colonial constabulary. It is a matter of record that he established and championed close work with ‘informants’ in order to glean the particulars of a specific cultural group through ‘participant observation’. Though it was many years before he was able to get his Trobriand ethnography into print (after many rejections from publishers he wrote to his wife to say that he would have to enter the margarine industry if Methuen did not take the book), his career was a success. He was responsible for training a generation of scholars (Firth, Evans-Pritchard, Leach – see Stanton, 1997) who in turn carried out various field studies, and, along with Radcliffe-Brown in Sydney and South Africa, and Franz Boas in the USA, he established fieldwork as the modus operandi of anthropology departments throughout the world. It was only with the unravelling of colonialism in the face of anti-colonial movements that fieldwork became more difficult in some places. A re-evaluation rocked the discipline throughout the 1970s and 1980s (see Hymes, 1974; Clifford and Marcus, 1986). Yet the sanctity of fieldwork was sustained despite an excoriating critique, and slowly fieldwork was brought ‘home and applied to minorities at the margins of the metropole, just as it was to the ‘natives’ of colonial times. A subsequent backlash against critical reflexivity was perhaps encouraged by the institutional need to promote a distinctive methodology (contra sociology, cultural studies or geography) and this idea of a distinctive disciplinary mode of inquiry has buttressed postgraduate training programmes (now fee-paying) and kept a significant number of practitioners in gainful employment ever since.

The Malinowskian transcription of bounded culture was supplemented with systemic and comparative analysis such that increasingly notions of change, network, syncretism and flow became commonplace (see, for example, Ghosh, 1992). Eventually even the venerable institution UNESCO felt obliged to start its ‘World Culture Report’ of 1998, by saying: ‘Cultures can no longer be examined as if they were islands in an archipelago’ (UNESCO, 1998: 16). The often-unacknowledged anti-colonial context of such critiques was one where there was a return of the anthropological gaze by those increasingly wary of being so intently stared at. This imposed a rethinking of ethnocentrism and eurocentrism, so as to establish discomfort and doubt, and even a kind of paranoia, as part of a vocation for anthropology. A celebrated story about the pan-Africanist leader and critic of neo-colonialism, Kwame Nkrumah, perhaps best illustrates this.

On the wall behind the desk in Nkrumah’s presidential office after he took power in Ghana in 1957, there was displayed a picture of an African man breaking the chains that had bound him. The heroic figure in the foreground was surrounded, in the four corners of the picture, by fleeing Europeans: these were in turn, a colonial administrator, a missionary with a cross, a trader, and an anthropologist carrying the book African Political Systems.

This image is powerful, but also a stereotype as anthropologists sometimes sided with anticolonial struggles and very often gave material and intellectual support to anti-racist, anticapitalist and popular-democratic nationalist movements. The work of Kathleen Gough would be a case in point, though her career was significantly damaged by rightist criticisms of her partisanship. Eric Wolf was also singled out by Margaret Mead as a ‘communist’ (on the politics of anthropology, see Gledhill, 2000), and even the mildly anti-establishment figures of the ‘writing-culture school’ of the 1980s were subject to denigration by their peers (often fairly so, Nugent, 1991). Today it is a commonplace view that the anthropologist as translator of ‘culture’ is never an uninterested character, and the championing of ‘fieldwork’ now comes with the routine of automatic reflexivity and critical appraisal. Of course it cannot be denied that the work of cultural translation is important, and despite the ‘methodological absolution (Banerjea, 1999: 18) sought in such reflexivity, the argument that translation is necessary seems plausible, if flawed in interesting and interested ways. In a revealing allegory Clifford Geertz tells an Indian story that has the world resting on the back of an elephant, which is itself standing on a turtle, and that the interpretive winks of anthropology are like the turtles that, proverbially, go all the way down (Geertz, 1973). We are told knowledge is perspectival, yet the discipline remains largely based in the enclaves in which it began – in England it is still LSE and Cambridge that receive the larger part of funding for the study of others – the imperial structure of the institutions is not redistributed. And so translation is maimed to the degree to which the distance between the Nkrumah story and the parable of the turtles is calculated ‘reflexively’ and not explicitly in terms of power and privilege.

Thus anthropology might be better described as a cultural system itself. If it claims to be local in focus, its institutional apparatus has a far wider reach. Anthropology (and cultural studies, social theory, geography) might be characterized as a wholly institutionally based global system of knowledge about the peoples of the world. It is organized with researchers and research projects, teaching programmes and degree structures, publishing houses, theoretical schools (more than one, more than a succession of paradigms), methods, debates, tenure, career, course guides, reading lists, footnotes. And this whole agglomeration is more than a project of transcription, translation and comparison for the instruction and edification of those lucky enough to gain places in the teaching factory. As a privileged system then, anthropology reaches well beyond any specifically local instance of the cultural.

Culture of course was never easily presented as a matter of general franchise. The anthropological discussion of culture in ‘all’ its guises should of course be read against an older European notion of culture which was intrinsically hierarchical, if, by the 20th century, somewhat in transition. The critique of privilege took a different form in the context of western industrial societies. Here the mass culture/high culture distinction was central to the cultural dynamic of European thought. Two sides of a broken heritage, the Marxist philosopher Theodor Adorno called it. Often misconstrued as a defender of elite culture, Adorno’s effort was to examine and relate the commodification he saw before him of both Beethoven and mass culture. He did not think that these two ‘torn halves’ could together add up to an authentic whole so long as reification and exchange-value were the driving determinants of cultural experience. At least in his own assessment Adorno did not privilege high culture as many seem to assume – on the leap day of 29 February 1940 he wrote one of his last letters to the critic Walter Benjamin explaining that he was not out to ‘save’ culture (Adorno and Benjamin, 1999: 320). His critique was designed to provoke awareness of the ways industrialization affects both high and mass culture through the routinized processes of the culture industry, and so through the co-option of every last trace of creativity into commerce. In an earlier letter he set this out clearly:

. . . the dialectic of the lowest has the same value as the dialectic of the highest. . . . Both bear the stigmata of capitalism, both contain elements of change. . . . Both are torn halves of an integral freedom, to which, however, they do not add up. It would be romantic to sacrifice one to the other. (18 March 1936, in Adorno and Benjamin, 1999: 130)

Much of the value of the Frankfurt School, and its legacy for the study of culture, is secured only through a sophisticated reading of their work that does not discredit Adorno’s political project. His motivation is materialist and the difference of the materialist model of culture from those 19th-century developmental tables of anthropology (that Marx read in the work of Morgan) are worthy of note. For Marx, the level of civilization is crucial to the mode of production and the needs and wants of, for example, workers. In the Communist Manifesto, Marx and Engels identify the bourgeois mode of production as necessarily expanding everywhere, it ‘batters down all Chinese walls’ and ‘compels’ all countries to adopt ‘the bourgeois mode of production’ (Marx and Engels, 1848/1952: 8). This is the source of much misreading however, as Marx was later at pains to point out that his developmental schema of shifts in the modes of production was only a ‘sketch’ and not to be taken as a blueprint or prediction for all parts of the world. The analysis was one that proceeded at a high level of abstraction for Marx and the detail, for example the details of culture – he refers specifically to books and paintings, and the work of teachers in the teaching factory – were all ‘peripheral phenomena’. At the level of abstract analysis, these matters could ‘be ignored when considering capitalist production as a whole’. They could be ‘left for later’ (Marx, 1867/1967: 1049). This does not mean that culture is not significant for Marxism, only that at the level of abstraction that identifies the general mode of production, the specificities of cultural production are not significantly different from production as such. Adorno’s effort takes its cue here to show that specific moments of bourgeois culture are industrialized in necessarily similar ways.

This becomes crucial where Adorno identifies how every commodity tries to be unique. While noting, with Horkheimer, that ‘culture now impresses the same stamp on everything’ (Adorno and Horkheimer, 1944/1979: 120), Adorno also recognizes that the standardization of mass products had even to ‘standardize the claim of each one [product] to be irreplaceably unique’ (Adorno, 1991: 68). These were, however, ‘fictitiously individual nuances’ (Adorno, 1991: 35), examples of the rule of the ‘iron grip of rigidity despite the ostentatious appearance of dynamism’ (Adorno, 1991: 62). Yet Marx’s claim that the bourgeois system batters the Chinese wall until it adopts the bourgeois mode of production does not mean that we all become the same. Here lies the crucial misunderstanding of those who think that the commodity system simply compels uniformity. On the contrary, it is clear that cultural difference is industrialized such that we adopt the mode of ‘a smorgasbord of cultures, our society subsists on the mass consumption of variegated and heterogeneous lifestyles’ (San Juan, 2002: 6).

Of course ‘culture’ at this level is also a matter of interpretation. This is the problem with culture as something people have – is it what they do or what they are? As culture morphs from something you have to something you do, it becomes clear that today culture is not equivalent to identity. It is by now established that culture is not something simply to be understood or to be translated in the old anthropological sense without cognizance of the politics of translation and the situatedness of subjectivity. In any case, each translation is a new creativity – and certainly confidence in fixed positions on culture is unstable. No translations are correct; they are creative, more or less with fidelity, never exact, always new. Culture as identity cannot be perfectly translated; cultural artifacts can be remade in other codes. Here the philosopher Jacques Derrida is helpful on idiom – the multiple meanings of a word in one language do not necessarily map the same way in another. Language is a limited model for culture, and text as a metaphor for the social also has limitations that exclude specificities and/or the political context of interpretation (Geertz, 1988).

Here culture as idiom might be supplemented with the idea that it becomes less a bounded entity and more of a resource as increasing ‘parts’ of culture are drawn into market relations. Instead of a culture you belong to (unambiguous identity, fixed in place), the culture industry replaces identification with cultural activity, and so the exchange value of culture comes into focus. Unfortunately, and increasingly in cultural studies, this happens in a restricted way. Postmodernist theorizing thrives here where the total (and totalitarian) cultural system examined by Adorno and the Frankfurt School is displaced into a foreshortened commodity analysis focused primarily on trinkets and objects. An analysis that reads only the popular first chapter of Capital remains at the level of commodities where Marx emphasized the importance of a cascading sequence of market, production, circulation, credit, the state and so on. This can be seen from examining the presentational organization of the book as a whole. In a way that has similarities with the fieldwork and transcription limits of Malinowskian anthropology, and the symptom not the cure of naïve psychoanalysis, the systemic and abstract aspects of Marx’s analysis are missed if it is the tables, coins and metaphors that become the object of primary interest (cf. Derrida, 1993/1994). Commodity analysis stops short if it ignores productive structures, public works, collaborative labour, communications systems, legal forms, governance, financing, etc. For example, to take just the impact of law upon the cultural economy, any adequate analysis must include the influence of legal apparatus such as trade negotiations, GATT and tariff debates, copyright and intellectual property legislation – all of which impinge upon the exchange and movement of objects, trinkets, property.

Similarly, the postmodern cultural studies focus upon street culture fails in its explanatory effort if it does not take into account the ways appropriation and reification operate in the context of the night-time economy of regenerated urban centres, thriving on cheap and often ‘illegal’ immigrant service sector workers, themselves trapped on below par wages facilitating the gastronomical multicultural façade in the restaurant enclaves and food malls (see Kalra, 2000, for more on this).

Another example with which to illustrate the ways culture needs to be rethought as part of a wider political system is to see how culture has become a resource for tourism, used as an attraction, an attention grabber and as vehicle for development contracting. From the museum or temple to the backpacker cafe or seedy bar, the marker of culture is a rating in the Lonely Planet or Michelin guide, or an Arts Council grant. The systemic here becomes something like a voluntary management of the cultural market, and conflict is neutralized under a model of negotiated exchange and equivalences. At the level of the social or public sphere there is a similar lack of controversy and, as George Yúdice points out: ‘civil society increasingly looks like an alibi for neoliberalism’ (2003: 158). Under pressure to ‘manage’ the cultural, all manner of institutional bodies emerge with an investment in culture. Culture today becomes ever more a matter of administration:

The notion of culture as a resource entails its management, a view that was not characteristic of high culture or everyday culture in the anthropological sense. And to further complicate matters, culture as a resource circulates globally, with ever increasing velocity. (Yúdice, 2003: 4)

While I do not think all circulation of culture is merely a further complication, nor am I convinced that circulation velocity is best calculated only as acceleration (multiple speeds of the circuits of capital were already outlined in Marx, 1847), clearly the management of cultural resources is a key problematic. Culture as a resource is the debased mediation of trinkets and structure. Entire departments of the civil service and bureaucracy are engaged with documentation and form-filling to ensure that adequate quality outcomes, audit trails, accountabilities and appraisal criteria are in place. Here culture attains exchange-value and is valorized-recuperated in the most abstract ways. The subsumption of identity (as ‘monitored’ object) must necessarily close off that which cannot be contained. Abstraction here transmutes an open process into a compendium of product registers, and drags them to market.

In a related reification (of the commodity – its fetish character), the idea that culture is itself emancipatory in its non-hegemonic versions accommodates the subcultural to the ghetto on the one hand and opens it up for (rampant commercial, not revolutionary) celebration on the other. Where cultural studies™ becomes a glorification of resistance without context we can indeed accept San Juan’s taunt that culture as a substitute for politics becomes ‘an apology for commodity fetishism’ (San Juan, 2002: 228). It is not difficult to agree where he follows Francis Mulhern, who warns that:

There is no space, and in fact no need, for struggle if all popular culture, abstracted from ‘high’ culture and from historical realities of inequality and domination, is already active and critical, if television and shopping are already theaters of subversion. (Mulhern, 1995: 40)

The targets here are writers like John Fiske and Danny Miller, but for me the problem is best encapsulated in the title of Scott’s book Weapons of the Weak (1985). Where the ‘independent’ or ‘autonomous’ recombative or resistive reception of media product or ideology is achieved by working-class boys (Willis, 1977), or where bourgeois conventions are challenged by Gangsta rappers and subcultural stylists (Hebdige, 1979), does the culture industry tremble at, or celebrate, the diversity of industriousness? Punk, rap, Ché t-shirts and books on ‘resistance’ have all become items for purchase in high street stores. This is not to say resistance should be dismissed as inconsequential, but the tendency towards uncritical celebration needs to be evaluated. The logic of audience resistance, for example, implies surely that all audience members are creative (consumers). If this is so, a radical democratization of media is on the cards, breaking with the producer–spectator hierarchy and opening production to all. A failure to deliver the requisite redistribution of resources impedes this opening of creativity and allocates ‘resistance’ to a limited register. The optimism that sees the Internet as a vehicle for mass active participation forgets the massive profits ensured by the commercialization of ‘new’ media – itself differentially accessible across race, class, gender and geography. Thus, in the commodity embrace, the diminutive celebration of resistance and its egalitarian logic, in writers like Scott, Fiske (1988), Miller (1995) and Clifford (1997), elides the significance of struggle, and those who struggle are reduced to a ‘weak’ – disorganized, circumstantial and specific – belligerence. Organized anti-colonial movement is again unacknowledged by those who set themselves up as manager-translators. Ironically, the charge that Adorno was elitist is made from a position that ignores the special privilege of the manager who translates (a cultural broker at the very least; a refined aesthete, perhaps; pencil-sharpener more often; certainly web-connected). We do well to remember how the cultural industry is suited to a viewpoint that can pacify political struggles (Malinowski arrives with the police) – the volatility of change and organized resistance is erased when the translated ‘culture’ must be fixed in snapshot form for sale in the knowledge market.

So it is not without a purposefully ironic echo of Tylor’s definition of culture as that ‘complex’ of ‘art, law, morals, custom’ that we might turn now to Algiers. In the context of struggle for a popular democratic revolution to liberate Africa from colonialism, Frantz Fanon wrote:

A national culture is the whole body of efforts made by a people in the sphere of thought to describe, justify and praise the action through which that people keeps itself in existence. (1968: 155)

Surely ‘culture’ includes those most important, and too often under-reported, too quickly forgotten, or effectively erased, moments – irruptions – of popular democratic mass struggle liberation. The past century is replete with examples to which only the military right (armed with CIA ‘contra’-style resourcing) seems carefully to attend. Russia, China, Algeria, Korea, Cuba, Nicaragua, Palestine, Nepal . . . the cultures of people’s movements are themselves a heritage.

Thus, to schematize: the ‘cultural transcription’ model of Malinowskian fieldwork required the myth of the omnipotent and all-seeing ‘translator’. Later this transmutes into other fields with the area studies specialist (and the new media orientalism of the world cinema specialist, or the sociologist and policy maker on ‘ethnicity’, where the race relations industry and ethnic arts funding tends to codify both identity and subsequently activities). A critical appraisal would find that the commissars of culture are the ones to be interrogated and the critique of the authority of the translator should suggest a more nuanced line. The authority of style questioned under contextualizing political conditions that include anti-imperial movement and struggle, from the internationals, India, China, Vietnam to Iran/Iraq, would suggest a more problematic context for evaluating those turtles of Geertz. The categories, events, histories for consideration here, in terms of impact often disavowed, but shaping intellectual movements, are of course open to interpretation. Is it so radical to insist that interpretation of culture include cultural movements, nationalist culturalist uplift, cultural pedagogy and the cultural revolution?

The overall argument might suggest a trajectory that begins by noting that Culture in Europe was first conceived as high culture, and its civilizational categorizations were marshalled across its versioning of world ‘history’. This was later complemented by an emergence of the notion that everyone has culture, there is even a working-class culture, mass culture, and here an anthropological notion ascribes culture to all, however unevenly rewarded or valued. After critiques of imperialism and of anthropological ‘authority’ this notion is further displaced by the global adoption of culture as a resource that transmutes cultural uplift and cultural revolution for the culture industry: tourism, for example, or national and regional film funding councils. The ideology that maintains this co-option of culture as resource includes ethnicity, difference and identity in the global context. These terms may be debated. Difference, for example, seems particularly suitable for a digitized, transglobal cultural marketplace. And isn’t the promotion of ethnicity and diaspora not an uncritical celebration of circumstantial privilege and opportunism in exactly that place where a more organized, even nationalist, conceptual apparatus is necessary to build alternatives to imperialism?

In the 21st century, the old debate between those who see the important sites of cultural creativity to be ‘interstitial’ versus those who cling to a more essentialist notion of culture may now be so old it’s obsolete. What might have been characterized – or caricatured – in a series of opposed foci such as syncretism versus coherence; centre versus periphery; diaspora versus nation; third space versus tradition; postcoloniality versus nationalist anti-colonialism – are all now superseded somewhat by the global predicament of war, terror, poverty and death. The categories of culture as resource or as commodity either defend against desperate backs-tothe-wall suicide bombing, or from colossus single superpower overkill; fear at home or homeland security crackdowns. The culture of terror threatens, but we go on.

Culture is both playground and commodity; it is the refined and profound, mundane and extreme. Culture is simultaneously crossed by identity, tradition and change; resource, bulwark, contest. It is the lullaby of a symphony on CD, or the sweet sigh of a junkie’s fix hitting the vein. It is that collection of pots and pans . . . and they are for sale. It is what makes us human, in a vast variety of, sometimes still changing, ways. It is not something wholly separate from the politics of commerce, nor religion or hate, and it behooves us to remember this – to seek out its analysis, which is culture too. It is a contested domain, and for good or worse, it is our ‘predicament’ that we cannot yet do without (Clifford, 1988). We live in it, there is no other choice, even for Robinson alone with Friday on his island. You are soaking in it. Encyclopaedias too.

And so at the end we should return to a dialectical and mediated understanding of the homology between local and global versions of culture. The becoming particular of culture might be traced through various incarnations and avatars in bounded form, identity, commodity and culture as a resource; the becoming universal in developmental schemes, (naïve) modes of production projections, cultural activity and culture industry. The mediation would be to look to the process of local struggles with universalist support. For solidarity across differences, for a liberation of all that relies upon the liberation of each. For the lessons of translation that would learn to learn from below (Spivak, 2000).

