# Generative Classifications

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Generative Classifications

Luciana Parisi

Keywords antigeneaology, microvariations, rhizome, self-organization, symbiotic sex, turbulence

W <sup>ith</sup> <sup>Darwin’s</sup> <sup>(1993)</sup> <sup>The</sup> <sup>Origin</sup> <sup>of</sup>Species, historical processes of individu- Species, historical processes of individuation challenged Linnaeus’s 17th- and 18th-century taxonomic practices of classifications, in which time played no role. In the Linnaeus classification system, the movement of time was subordinated to the fixed and hierarchical order of nature predicated on types or essences (Plato’s transcendent essence and Aristotle’s natural kinds). In other words, the classification of types, ordered according to principles of resemblance, identity, analogy and opposition, defined continuity and fixity in nature (Deleuze, 1994) resting on a congealed version of time – an eternal becoming the same – where no variation can happen.

Darwin’s theory of evolution marks a breaking point in taxonomic classifications as it inserts historical events back in the formation of kinds highlighting that movement or change in time defines variations in species. In other words, species, far from being fixed types, are individuals composed of unique features statistically accumulating over time in relation to the population or collectivities (e.g. reproductive collectivities) of which they are part. In this sense, individuals are the results of accidents in history, of movement in time. Darwin’s theory of evolution opens up the classification of types to processes of speciation where variations in populations and between populations define the genealogical evolution of the individual. Thus species are the result of variations in the movement of time. By bringing back variations in individual species, Darwin brings back difference in genealogical classification. By opening types to variations in populations, Darwin also exposes the idea of degree of perfection, or hierarchical order in nature, to relations between rates of change. Rates of acceleration and deceleration vary from species to species according to divergent territories, nutrient sources, births, deaths, migrations and so on. Thus, movement in time is reintroduced by accounting for the relation between populations and between their velocities of variation. In other words, the Darwinian ‘descent with modification’ introduces variations in practices of classification and thus suggests the construction of a genealogy of the individual accounting for its collective formation in the movement of time.

However, there are at least two important yet problematic aspects of Darwinian evolution that explain the process of speciation and its genealogical classification. On the one hand, the action of sorting the ill- from the best-fitted adaptation performed by natural selection and, on the other, the centrality of sexual reproduction, which guarantees the isolation of the gene pool of a species from external genetic influences. In a sense, Darwinian descent with modification relies on an entropic notion of time whereby the threat of increasing accumulation of variation marks the tendency towards disorder in nature, which is, however, constantly re-balanced by natural selection through the elimination of the unfitted. Such entropic notion of evolution ensuring speciation by regulating variations indirectly coincides with the centrality of sexual reproduction, which ensures the isolation of one gene pool from the rest. In other words, constant regulation and filiative reproduction define the genealogical classification of variation (read difference).

Whereas genealogical classification does account for variations in evolution, it still subjects variations to natural selection as a sort of reactive device against their disordered proliferation and to sexual reproduction that constantly redirects variations in a filiative genealogy. Here the range and scope of variations is not determined in advance. For Darwin, variations occur randomly. Yet, there are limits to sustainable variations depending on their viability and reproductive success. In other words, variations that attain some evolutionary advantage defined by natural selection and their endurance in sexual transmission will not be lost in evolution. The relations between populations and their diverse rates of change and between species and territories then remain somewhat limited to a predetermined notion of difference as always already actualized in an individuated phylum and lineage.

Genealogical classification in Darwin’s evolution then seems to miss out the capacity of difference to generate difference. This is a point of contention between Henri Bergson’s ‘creative evolution’ and Darwin’s emphasis on natural selection and adaptation. For Bergson (1983), natural selection acts as an external force that negates the self-differentiating capacities of adaptation in the individual. In other words, in Darwin’s evolution difference is always already given, actualized or predeterminate by a negative force of selection. Bergson rather argues that difference is the result of continual processes of self-differentiation – i.e. of the capacity of the organism to differentiate itself from itself under certain pressures and conditions. Hence, adaptation is never passive but is the outcome of the virtual actions of the environment on the organism whereby the latter unleashes unprecedented potentials of differentiation. Variation in evolution does not derive from a tendency towards accumulation regulated by natural selection. Rather variations are imbued with potentials to generate new variations. Far from a tendency towards collapse (disorder or entropy), evolution for Bergson is a tendency towards the continual regeneration of variations linking together the past with the future in a continual splitting of time. Each present variation emerges from the double yet coexistent tendencies of time towards the past and the future. Here the generative capacities of variations entail that evolution far from deriving difference from filiative genealogy – i.e. from already actualized differences linearly transmitted from parents to offspring – rather exposes difference to duration outlining its heterogeneous composition and virtual differentiation. In this sense all variations – and thus not just the best fitted ones – are motors of evolution. The process of speciation here entails a notion of difference that is open to its own becoming in duration or non-linear continuity, rather than linear development, between the past and the future. Thus, difference in duration brings into question filiative genealogy. It points at the anti-genealogy of difference: difference is always collective and always under construction in relation to a field of potential variations in nonlinear evolution. Difference between species and between members of the same species therefore always already partakes of a heterogeneous plane that virtually links all differences. In this sense, the classification of difference is confronted by the continual generation of novel variations by means of intensive self-differentiation.

This notion of self-differentiation can also be explained through the notion of autopoiesis – or self-making – as used by Maturana and Varela (1980). Maturana and Varela argue that autopoiesis precedes evolution and reproduction. Autopoiesis defines the circular interactions of heterogeneous elements, which are at the core of the organization of life. The notion of recursivity or circularity indicates preservation by repetition, defining the way autopoiesis is conserved at every point as organisms evolve. Even if structures change – defining what Maturana and Varela call ‘structural drift’ – organization is conserved. In this sense, self-organization cuts across the scale of evolution from single cells to cellular aggregates, whereas structure relates to the specific order of cellular organization. This process of self-organization explains the emergence of novel variations beyond natural selection and passive adaptation.

For example, Stuart Kauffman’s (1993) biophysical study of evolution highlights how autopoietic – autocatalytic – genetic networks generate novel variations at the edge between order and chaos. Autopoietic organization explains the emergence of novel patterns of variation in non-linear dynamics of evolution. Rather than explaining novel variations in evolution as the result of natural selection sorting best from illfitted accumulating variations, non-linear dynamics points out that the momentum of bifurcation or declination from linear trajectory is the source of emergence of new variations in evolution. Prigogine and Stengers (1984) define this momentum as turbulence. They draw on Lucretius’s notion of the clinamen, the slightest movement in the angle of declination of a laminar flow initiating turbulence (Deleuze and Guattari, 1987; Lucretius, 1994; Serres, 1982).

Kauffman’s analysis of non-linear dynamics of evolution argues that rates of variation accelerate at bifurcation points (critical threshold of change), challenging the assumption that natural selection sets order on the gradual accumulation of variations. In contemporary evolutionary biology the role of acceleration and deceleration in evolutionary rates has become crucial to understand variations within the same population. Difference here entails differential speeds. The velocities of variation have also indicated the phenomena of long jump adaptations ‘where genetic alterations jump beyond the correlation length of the landscape’ or beyond the margins of territorialization to produce new variations (Kauffman, 1993: 117). Thus, variations are not the outcome of natural selection, but emerge through the parallel network of self-organization between populations and territories poised at the edge of a phase transition from one state to another. Kauffman compares these points of transmission values to singular zones of intensity existing at the phase transition between gaseous and solid states (too little and too much chaos or order). He argues that ecosystems (composed of populations and territories) may need to be poised at the edge in order to maximize their emergent computational capacities (1993: 237).

Far-from-equilibrium dynamics in self-organizing genetic networks expose the co-evolution and co-adaptation of organism and environment. These non-linear dynamics explain ecosystems as composites that are themselves connected to one another through the molecular velocities of evolutionary rates. Selection does not impose an order of fitness to these networked systems. Rather, it is immanent to their regulatory circuits as it acts at singular degrees of order. Kauffman suggests that at the heart of a living system is a network of channels that is able to catalyse its own reproduction. Hence, the genome, rather than a small aggregate of individual genes directly selected by a superior order, is a complex adaptive system composed of networks of genes and their production that interact with one another in regulatory circuitry. The network dynamics of genetic organization also challenges Dawkins’s model of evolution based on the unit of selection, the genetic material acted upon by natural selection. This dynamics reveals that even a single cell is a cooperative colony that is not independent of the environment, and does not emerge from a gradual accumulation of variations.

Thus, structures, forms or individuals are the indeterminate results of self-organizing networks of microvariations. Macro forms of life are generative to the extent that they are imbued with potentials triggered from the turbulent dynamics of molecular self-organization. This implies no linear correspondence between micro and macro levels of process and vital activity. Only indeterminate differentiation can account for the generative process of individuation. Individuals are generative macro forms of life that do exhaust but intensify molecular potentials to differentiate. Hence what changes is not just the micro-organization of macro forms of life. The latter are open to turbulent variations too. In this sense, the structure is itself generative, open to transformation.

Generative individuation entails not only selforganization and co-evolution (or structural coupling) between organisms and environments, but also what lies in-between, in the middle of species, lineages and phyla. A generative sense of classification also implies variations stemming from the symbiotic connection or parasitic relations across bodies from distinct evolutionary kingdoms. This is more than highlighting the existence of hybrids in evolution. Symbiotic variations point to a contagious plane of evolution whose individual outcomes never resemble the kingdoms they were derived from. Deleuze and Guattari (1987) define this symbiotic alliance as a ‘machinic phylum’: a transversal evolution linking kingdoms by means of contagion, a source of generative variations or becomings where each species results from thousand of symbiotic combinations. Hence individual classification can only imply a multiplicity of layers whose singular connection generates an individual. In other words, a machinic phylum explains generative evolution in terms of a networked architecture open to change according to the movement of microvariations composing it through their transversal symbiotic alliances. Symbiosis shows that the distinction between environment and individual is violated by the intersection of widely divergent species that have no genetic relation and that do not simply co-operate but combine, merge for long periods and generate novel metabolic systems. Symbiosis as a source of novel individuation occurs at many levels of scale enmeshing two or more heterogeneous populations followed by the eventual co-evolution of the partners.

Lynn Margulis (1971) re-elaborated the theory of endosymbiosis in the 1970s to argue that the motor of variation and novelty in evolution is placed in far from equilibrium bacterial networks of communication that connect species, lineages and phyla. Bacteria have no species and are not individuals. They are colonies of open communication ready to re-engineer themselves under certain pressures. Their reproduction bypasses the genealogical tree of sexual mating. Rather, for bacteria a quick contact is enough to send and receive information across the entire bacterial genome. Margulis defines this transmission as bacterial sex. Bacterial sex lays out a machinic phylum of connection between micro and macro scales of evolution, where an individual species is always traversed by micro levels of variations, which are sources of its own potential mutation. Here difference does not only entail collective differentiation but processes of continual transmutation, i.e. mutations emerging in the middle zone of connection, the phase space of transition between one order of difference to another. In this sense, classifications can become rhizomatic mappings of self-organizing structures open to their own potential mutation on a contagious plane of transition across evolutionary scales.

