# Virtualities Rob Shields / Defining Virtuality

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Virtualities Rob Shields

Keywords Bergson, Deleuze, ideal, immaterial, intangible, virtual

E<sup>veryday</sup> <sup>life</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>culture</sup> <sup>are</sup> <sup>intangible</sup> <sup>in</sup> <sup>the</sup>same sense that the term is used in econ- omics where ‘intangibles’ confer value in the ‘new economy’; for example, ‘goodwill’ built up toward a business or corporate image, the collective effectiveness of teams, as well as an organization’s overall ‘knowledge’. These can be operationalized in activities such as ‘service’ that can be assessed and scored. Intangibles have become assets for investment purposes and measures of economic sophistication.

Intangibles such as ‘culture’ have become more integrated into the knowledge society as part of this economic logic. A ‘talent’ might be performatively actualized in a specific work, performance or oeuvre. Thus, intangibles describe a capacity for action or creation rather than a specific action or thing (Patriotta, 2003) – positive types of emergence that generate valued outcomes, results and behaviours.

Intangibles are often a mixture of abstractions, potentials and ‘virtualities’ – ‘things’ that have a ‘real’ existence, even if they can’t be seen or touched. Virtualities are not just ‘ideas’ but things: a code, habitus or class that exists even if one cannot treat it as a tangible object. Gender is a case in point – not a tangible ‘thing’ or materiality, not simply ‘sex’, but rather a performative identity, a theoretical object with predictive power, independent of the age or form of the body itself. Even the body has been argued to be much more than its material ‘stuff ’ (Butler, 1993). One could add race – neither just ethnicity nor skin colour but something held to exist in popular racisms. Yet racialization is neither reducible to a single material aspect of a body nor even a single category of embodiment – the shape of noses or other equally debunked trait which has been latched on to as an indicator of difference. Signs are independent of a given set of print characters or vocalizations. ‘Social facts’ including identity and social groupings are intangible but are widely felt, defended and held to exist – community, the public, gender, race, the ‘global’.

There is a politics in and of the virtual. When challenged on one’s object of inquiry one needs to be able to precisely defend not only the terms of research but its objects and foci. ‘Society does not exist’ was the infamous comment of Laclau and Mouffe parroted by Margaret Thatcher against the social sciences. Realism in the social sciences defended central objects of research such as class, locality and gender (cf. the work of Bhaskar, 1991; Harre, 2002) – things that exist in virtue of other relations (of production) or are manifest only in their effects (i.e. virtualities, as defined below). ‘Society’ was not defensible within a reductionist Cartesian ontology, a nominalism of physical objects. Ironically, even if it is an abstraction within neo-conservative economics, ‘the market as understood by economic and political actors is as much a virtuality as society (Carrier, 1998).

Twenty-five years of emphasis on materialism has impoverished the examination of intangibles. In the case of cultural research, it is essential to have an epistemology and ontology which deals with more than the material. In attempting to critique conservative discourses on, for example, innovation, a sound base for critique, notably of the virtual and of probabilistic entities, is necessary in order to avoid false problems and definitional debates (Bergson, 1970; Grosz, 1999). This is essential to avoid having progressive social science research and analysis being co-opted into managerialist epistemologies of knowledge and is a requirement for critical reflection on the role of social science knowledge within contemporary political economic regimes.

## Defining Virtuality

We need to make explicit the oblique references to intangibles and the Virtual (Grosz, 1999: 25; Hardt, 1993: 16) on which we will focus (see Shields, 2003). Dictionaries define the Virtual in everyday life as ‘that which is so in essence but not actually so’, such as a child’s claim to have ‘virtually completed’ their homework. More philosophically, the Virtual designates objects and states that exist but are not tangible, not ‘concrete’. The Virtual is known only indirectly by its effects. Dreams and memories are famously defined by Marcel Proust in his correspondence on Remembrance of Time Past as virtual: ‘real without being actual, ideal without being abstract’. Proust’s comment provides an important model for the subsequent but often inconsistent use of the term (Bergson, 1988; Deleuze, 1994, 2000). Drawing on Proust’s quotation, these ontological categories are summarized in Table 1.

Table 1. Tetrology – Relation of ontological categories of existence. Continuous movement takes place between categories (e.g. actualization, abstraction), governed by social ritual (e.g. rites of passage), contested (e.g. religious war), symbolized by mythic figures (e.g. angels, aliens, ghosts) and signified in everyday terms (e.g. design, chance, déjà vu, miracle)
<table><tr><td></td><td>Real</td><td>Possible</td></tr><tr><td>Ideal</td><td>virtual (e.g. memories)</td><td>abstract (e.g. concepts)</td></tr><tr><td>Actual</td><td>concrete (e.g. material)</td><td>probable (% e.g. risks)</td></tr></table>

The Real is both Concrete (material) and Virtual. Similarly the Ideal is not only a matter of abstractions but includes the Virtual as the ‘ideally-real’. The Probable is known mathematically. It is possibly the greatest accomplishment of modern calculation and social science knowledge. The Probable can be easily grasped as the ‘actually possible’. At the other extreme of the Possible is the absolutely Abstract, an ‘ideal possiblity’. Each is distinct in its spatial and temporal characteristics – Table 1 is a matrix of spatial scales and past, present and future.

The Virtual itself can be said to be a capacity to be actualized as a singular, concrete object. Actualization is performative – the Virtual itself is a multiplicity which can be actualized in different ways. If it is known by its effects, then it is known through a specific instantiation, not as a whole. It thus retains its creative character as an ontological category pertinent to discussions of change, becoming, genesis, development, emergence, autopoesis, the genetic power of codes as well as of codings themselves.

For example, as objects wear or bodies age, their concrete materiality changes, but they retain their virtuality – their identity and their coherence with themselves. This close relation between the actual and the Virtual, in which a quality becomes the essence of the matter, also appears again and again in contemporary understandings of the Virtual. Objects are ‘the point of indiscernibility of two distinct images, the actual and the virtual’ (Deleuze, 1986: II 82; 1994: 209–10). Differentiation is the primary quality of this relation. The Concrete is not a copy of the Virtual – the relation is not one of resemblance or identity (Deleuze, 1994: 212) as it might be between the Concrete and abstract representations such as concepts or images. Unlike the realization of the Possible as the Real, actualization is an inventive drama (Deleuze, 1988: 101) in which there is a ‘contraction’ of virtuality which ‘always takes place by difference, divergence or differentiation. Actualisation breaks with resemblance as a process no less than it does with identity as a principle’ (Deleuze, 1994: 212).

Virtualization is creative questioning – it opens up problem frames (milieux, problematiques) to critically question cultural formations, ‘the way things happen’. Virtualization moves from situations (the actual) to create problems, ‘the knot of constraint and finality that inspires our acts. Final causes, the “why” of the situation . . .’ (Lévy, 1998: 174). The Virtual is neither absence nor an unrepresentable excess or lack. It troubles any simple negation because it introduces multiplicity into the otherwise fixed category of the Real. Tangible, actually real phenomena cease to be the sole, hegemonic examples of ‘reality’. The logical identity of the Real with these phenomena is broken apart, allowing us to begin to conceptualize processes such as becoming in terms of emergence and dialogism (cf. Bakhtin, 1981) rather than only as a dialectical as a negation of existing identities (Laclau, 1996: 20–46). It allows us to designate and defend as Real those intangibles we most cherish: community, identity, trust . . .

The real qualities of the Virtual, such as a memory of an event, distinguish the Virtual from the unreal or even surreal qualities of the Abstract. But the strength of Table 1 is that it allows us to both distinguish the Virtual from – and relate it to – worlds of material existence, the mathematical worlds of probability and possible occurrences, and the abstract world of pure idealizations. These relationships are mediated by human agency, the flow of time and concurrence of place – something that is captured in the everyday language of surprise at transformations, the calculation of risk and the invoking of spirits. A risk or myth, an event or dream draws on all aspects of the Real and Possible. Contemporary cognitive science and neurology shows Proust to be incomplete: in any dream, one could find not only the Virtual but the concrete-present of neurochemistry.

Process and flow such as realization and abstraction are more dominant than reified categories. Idealization and Actualization describe movements between the Ideal and the Actual. Within discourse and social process, there is constant reference back and forth between categories. Traffic between them is heavily controlled through cultural protocols including manners, rituals, socially legitimated narrative forms and more complex, contested, formations of convention. These include cultural habitus as well as more time-limited and spacebound conceits and performances.

