# Knowledge as an Ecology

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Knowledge as an Ecology

Susantha Goonatilake

Keywords biotechnology, Buddhism, coevolution, epistemology, knowledge and information lineages, ontology, process, South Asia

K mation, can be considered as an ecology, a mation, can be considered as an ecology, a many-splendoured jungle brought about by evolution. Such knowledge can decode or read reality as in science. It can create new reality(ies) through technology, that is, through the application of science. Or it can create reality(ies) as in stories, art, etc. Or it can transform reality(ies) as in some mind, body and non-human technologies.

Knowledge, and in its lesser form, information, is historically delivered to us in the present with knowledge and information lineages stretching back millennia or centuries or shorter periods depending on the nature of the knowledge/information transmission lines, whether they be oral, the hand-written word, the printed word or the digital form. These knowledge/information transmission lines change, responding to their physical and cultural environments, creating new knowledge/information and excising old knowledge/ information. Each such lineage possesses built-in ontologies, epistemologies as well as the resultant concrete knowledge/information. Ontologies and epistemologies could often be implicit and not formally expressed in the knowledge/information.

But in regions where there have been formal discussions – and proper organizations for such discussions – formal ontologies and epistemologies have emerged. They have emerged for instance in Greece and South Asia. One sees a wider variety of formal thinking on ontologies and epistemologies in South Asian thought. The core civilizations of the world with their formal apparatuses for discussion and onward transmission in the form of the written word allowed different regional lineages of knowledge/information to emerge. There was cross influences across regions, yet there was a distinct regional flavour to the different knowledge trees that emerged.

One of the civilizations that influenced the making of Europe, through Greece, was Sumer, a civilization with close connections to the Indus culture that was contemporary with it. Archaeological finds indicate that close trading connections and other contacts were maintained between the two regions. The language of both the Greeks and the Aryan invaders of the northwest Indian subcontinent, as well as the intervening Persian Empire, had a common source. There are thus interesting similarities between the gods of the ancient Greeks and the Vedic gods, as well as similarities between the societies depicted in the epic poems of the Homeric and Vedic traditions. Greek historian Herodotus wrote that Darius 1 (521–486 BC) would frequently call Greeks and Indians together for counsel and discussion. Later, Aristoxenes (350–300 BC) mentions a dialogue on human life between Socrates and an Indian philosopher (Chowdhury, 1988). Possibly because of these links, some of the ideas prevalent on the subcontinent from 700 to 500 BC – which are found in the later Vedic hymns, the Upanishads, and in the philosophies of the Buddhists and the Jains – appear in later Greek thought. For example, the search for one reality in the Upanishads is echoed by Xenophanes, Parmenides and Zeno, the founders of Greek mathematics who sought the One Reality. Pythagoras, one of the founders of Orphism, is alleged to have travelled widely and been influenced by the Egyptians, Assyrians and Indians. Almost all of the religious, philosophical and mathematical theories taught by the Pythagoreans were known in India in the sixth century BC (Rawlinson in Goonatilake, 1998). Thus, Pythagoreans, like the Jains and Buddhists, refrained from destroying life and eating meat.

The concept of karma, representing the ‘cycles of necessity’, was also central to the philosophy of Plato, for whom rebirth is due to the hand of necessity, men being reborn as animals or again as men, a belief common to all major South Asian religious systems. Vitsaxis (1977) has shown that in structure and method, general approach, and the growth of parallel lines of thought on specific points, the two traditions show common features.

Empedocles (490–430 BC), a disciple of Pythagoras, propounded the four-element theory of matter, consisting of earth, water, air and fire, and the four-humour theory of disease, later followed by Hippocrates. This has parallels with the earlier pancha bhuta concept of prthvi, ap, tejas, vayu and akasa – earth, water, heat, air and emptiness (ether) – and with the tridhatu of the earlier Rig Veda and the tridosha of Ayurveda. One could note that the pneumatic system in the Hippocratic treatise On Breath is theorized in the same manner in the Indian concept of Vayu or Prana.

Similarly, atomic theories occur in the two systems, appearing earlier in South Asia than in Democritus, taught by Katyayana, an older contemporary of the Buddha. And Heraclitus’s belief that everything is in a state of flux is preceded in more sophisticated language by the anicca and anatta discussions of the Buddhists. The influence of South Asia on Greek thought is firmly expressed by Clement of Alexandria in the second century AD when he says that ‘the Greeks stole their philosophy from the barbarians (Halbfass in Goonatilake, 1998: 30).

From the end of the 16th and beginning of the 17th centuries, with the exponential growth of science in Europe and its spread across the world, one sees a tendency for regional civilizations to come under one hegemonic whole, a process accelerated through the present globalization. But the present is also characterized by a shift to Asia whereby regional elements can enter the dominant knowledge system aided by Asians working in science and technology pursuits in both the West and Asia.

But the knowledge/information field is not limited to that of human culture. There are historically derived lineages in biology (3.5-billionyear-old genetic system) and extra-somatic computer-based knowledge/information trees (say, 60 years old) with, respectively, their own knowledge/information trees. These three systems – the cultural, the genetic and the artefactual – are in the expanding world of biotechnology and advanced information technology beginning to merge and exchange information across the three lineages and their respective knowledge/information jungles. With massive computer storage and processing of cultural information through information technology (IT), and the bringing in of biological processes into IT as well as new biological developments which transform our very human modes of apprehending the world, the merging of cultural, biological and IT knowledge/information has profound implications.

If in the future we will be constructed and reconstructed – from biology, culture and artefact – what should be our epistemological, philosophical, ethical, and subjectively felt guiding principles? If ‘we’ would then be ‘cyborgs’ and hybrids, what should the interiority of robots, of constructed hybrids be as they navigate reality and tunnel through time in our lineages?

The person is not a ‘what’ but a process, a thought in line with Buddhism’s view that the universe’s components are in a state of impermanence, of ceaseless movement; nothing is durable or static. Being is only a snapshot in the process of becoming, lasting only the length of one thought. There is no stable substratum of the self; the self is just a stream of physical and psychological phenomena that is always perishing. One analyses oneself, knows oneself only to realize that there is no self in the first place. In Buddhism, this elimination of the sense of self sets one free. The realization that the self is a process means that the future becomes open-ended. In the Buddhist analysis, unsatisfactoriness and anxiety become essential to the ‘I’ because these are the I’s response to its own groundlessness.

This is the phenomenology of flow for human thought, and we could extrapolate this perspective to the other two lineages. The Buddhist analysis also suggests a moral compass for the future of merged knowledge streams; such a perspective includes a profound moral code of altruism, and it is not entirely farfetched to think that these principles could also apply to future scenarios.

A study which evokes some of the same philo sophical approaches in charting the future technology is Varela et al.’s (1993) The Embodied Mind. They propose a bridge between the mind as conceptualized in science and the mind of everyday experience, through a dialogue between Buddhist meditative practice and cognitive science. The approach was applied to a variety of themes in neuroscience and cognitive psychology, artificial intelligence and evolutionary biology. In doing so, they approach what we considered as the three lineages, namely the internal flow of our thoughts (the culture within the minds), the flow of genes (evolutionary biology) and the flow of ‘artificial thoughts’ (artificial intelligence). Varela and his colleagues evoke the flow patterns that one observes internally through Buddhist meditation and find here the key to tackling the other two realms. They tackle the problems of non-self and of everflowing streams, and describe the dynamics of the three lineages. Their discussions are located in specific debates with the research communities in these three areas. They reject the subject–object dichotomy that arises in different forms in all the three lineages.

They consider that the inside and outside of the lineages jointly move forth, ‘enacted’ by the subject and the external object. A process of coevolution results because the environment is not given but is enacted and brought into being though a process of coupling. The world is not taken as a given, with the organism representing or adapting to it. Their Buddhist approach transcends this duality, the outcome being co-determined by both the inside and the outside. This position would be the same, whether one’s perspective is humancultural or that based on artificial intelligence. One would act as the environment for the other, and together they would enact an unfolding future. Tackling the problems of the future requires radical reorientations, sometimes returning to very old observations.

Encyclopaedias are universal compendia of available information. Any new encyclopaedia must recognize the new non-Diderot world. This is the re-emergence of non-European civilizations and the merging of biological and digital information with the cultural. The new encyclopaedia must reflect this as well as the ontological and epistemological bases on which the different turning points of the knowledge tree/jungle have occurred. This would imply that ontology and epistemology should be made overt in the encyclopaedia and not implied as universal. Such ontological and epistemological concerns would also be germane to the biological and digital aspects when viewed from the point of view of evolutionary epistemology.

Moving around in this hybrid information jungle evokes a comparison with exploring the jungle by the forest dwellers. The latter are immersed in a tangle of information extruded by thousands of plant and animal organisms that surround them. They would sniff around and explore only one or two, ignoring the bulk. So it is in the emerging new jungle of information. The new encyclopaedia would help us hunt for new information that their histories suggest are interesting, while ignoring other information carriers and their contents.

