# Encyclopaedic Explorations / The New Encyclopaedia Project / The Structure of the Current Issue / The Supplement / The Encyclomedia to Come?

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

## Encyclopaedic Explorations

In thinking through the structure of the current special issue and the project at large there are a number of key issues which have emerged.

## The New Encyclopaedia Project

The first is the scope and boundaries of the volume and the larger project. The usual way to make an encyclopaedia is to appoint senior editors to gather together discipline editors who make lists based upon the classifications which are seen as relevant. The encyclopaedic device of A–Z listing allows for an expandable series in which material which does not fit the usual categories can be inserted. It is this exhaustiveness, to potentially be able to find some preliminary information on an unknown item, however obscure, which is part of their appeal. At the same time, there is also often the facility for a disciplinary reassembly of concepts: the using of special index guides to disciplines which provide reading-order lists, which could enable the reader to construct an introductory textbook from the material. In the early days of the project, along with colleagues and postgraduates at Nottingham Trent University, we began by looking at encyclopaedia entry listings in order to think through both the structuring of the authorized knowledge in use and the major absences and exclusions which became apparent if we tried to think more globally. This Sisyphean task was soon abandoned in favour of the focus on clusters, which proved to be a useful initial solution to both the problems of scope and relevance. In effect, it made us focus down from the exhaustive mega-list, to start from where we were located in time and space and the set of conceptual issues with which we were familiar through our interests and work in Theory, Culture & Society. Cluster topics such as the media, megacities, consumer culture, religion and food offered the potential of a relatively circumscribed ‘middle range’ set of topics. Each cluster topic could be addressed as a separate assemblage, which could be thought through in an inter-disciplinary manner. Clusters could be addressed via the excavation of various genealogies along with the delineation of the various interests which have sought to stake out and impose a particular set of classifications, an order of knowledge. The spatial ordering of the knowledge production of the particular cluster topic – the location, direction and intensity of knowledge transmission routes and media around the world, along with their power potential and legitimation processes – was also seen as a significant aspect.

The advantages here are in terms of the problematization of conventional modes of addressing a cluster topic. But also in terms of a potentially deliverable project, which should be centrally seen as a research project, not a book-keeping, data-gathering exercise. Important here is the practical side of the project, the way in which the delineation of the various dimensions of the cluster topic has been addressed in workshops, colloquia and extended editorial group meetings in various parts of the world. If we are arguing for a more dialogical form of global knowledge, then we have to begin the dialogue in our own research and writing practices.<sup>15</sup>

It is also important to emphasize that the New Encyclopaedia Project is a project, something experimental and in process. The construction of an encyclopaedia of global knowledge is an unbalanced dream worthy of a Borges piece. Yet, rather than completeness and the aporias of remaking the Library of Babel, we would emphasize the essential unfinished and unfinishable nature of the project. The New Encyclopaedia Project should be seen as more of an encyclopaedia in ruins than a bright, shiny new city of knowledge. Or better, the structure is something akin to the megacity (one of our next cluster topics) in its mixture of forms and generation of unexpected emergent qualities and domains, which defy definitive mapping.

## The Structure of the Current Issue

Second, the current issue on Problematizing Global Knowledge, which is the first volume of the project, should, therefore, be regarded as a prototype which exemplifies these structural dilemmas. In proposing a problematization, we are trying both to draw from the different traditions of critique, recognizing the different stakes for the politics of knowledge across the globe, as well as experiment with new techniques and cross-disciplinary analytical tools. This experimental apparatus is put into practice in this special issue through a structure that works at three interrelated levels. In the first place we have considered knowledge in terms of the broader epistemological framework that determines or circumscribes its production, namely the meta-concepts and meta-narratives that come to operate as foundations or generative ground for any particular corpus of knowledge, to which we have added the need to make visible the sites at which knowledge is variously produced, authorized, disseminated and inserted into a public arena. These three sections – meta-concepts, meta-narratives and meta-sites and institutions – form the major guiding classification within which we can endeavour to rethink global knowledge. The idea here in highlighting these broad categories is to indicate that principles and assumptions outside particular specialisms, for example an idea of modernity and scientific objectivity and their association with a secular foundation, invariably function as part of the epistemological protocols that determine what kind of arguments may be admissible in establishing legitimate knowledge in any particular discursive formation. Furthermore, broad categories like gender and race have effects right across specialisms. We have tried to encourage contributors, as much as possible, to make these effects visible in the writing of entries and supplements.

At the same time, the sets provide a device for indicating affinities and contrast amongst the material collected; they are recognizable topics, for example, religion, the university, embodiment, science, that refer to areas of debate and concern amongst an informed public. Additionally, this ordering has allowed the editorial team to insert cross-disciplinary approaches within the structure itself. More could clearly have been done here, but we were limited by both space and time. For instance, several of the sets – media, library, hospital, nature, nation are obvious ones – are ‘under construction’. So the entries and supplements in any one set are meant to be indicative of the aims, and to trigger the thought of other possible items that would more fully fill out the sets.

## The Supplement

Third, we have sought to guide contributors in the writing of entries and supplements by providing them with a number of documents which outline the project aims and spell out how it differs from a conventional encyclopaedia. We have sought to encourage the writing of entries which have a wider sense of disciplinary and classificatory formation and can provide a sense of the struggles out of which apparently secure conceptual order emerged. The intention has been not to encourage contributors to write as authorities, but more to de-authorize by making visible the contested processual basis of knowledge formation. This should be coupled with an awareness of alternative genealogies, counter-memories and stoppages in the formation of particular conceptual lines.

A key form here is the use of supplements, which should not be considered as dilettantish remnants but more as prisms which make visible another possible configuration of the concept or way in which the entry could have been written. The use of supplements is important, as the logic of the supplement can be said to manifest the critical logic of the project, in so far as it lays bare the relationship between the field of knowledge and the frameworks through which that field is continuously produced. It also points to the unfinished, incomplete nature of entry writing which we have mentioned and is central to the structure of the New Encyclopaedia Project. Indeed, a tension is thus instituted between the entry and its supplements, although within the scope of the new encyclopaedia entries are not proposed as authoritative statements which summarize the latest state of knowledge about specific topics, but already have begun the work of problematization and de-hierarchization.

The supplement thus provides the space for making visible the absence-presence of what has been erased, marginalized, covered over or misrecognized in the emergence of the dominant gaze. This may not entail a direct dialogue and contestation of the entry – for example in the ‘history of the victors’ with regard to elite historiography, or the way a dominant paradigm consigns previous approaches to a history of error as its lapsed or out-of-date past, the way Occidentalist accounts of knowledge discount the contributions from other cultures that were nevertheless constitutive, or the way cognitivism in the sciences side-lines the affective dimension of existence. More generally, the supplement reveals a lack at the heart of any discourse that attempts to establish itself as self-sufficient or that presents its authority as sovereign or immanently present, as plenitude; this lack nevertheless remains as trace (of a necessary deferral), or of the forgetting of a constitutive ‘outside’ or excess, that deconstructive work brings to the surface. It is also the place where debates regarding approaches and method can be presented to guide the reader. It is thus a point of departure, and can be of more significance than the entry from the point of view of innovation. In the hardback edition of this issue, which will follow shortly, we have tried to further subvert a sense of fixed structure by inserting quotes and images that open up alternative themes and configurations. In effect, we have sought to supplement the supplements.

## The Encyclomedia to Come?

Fourth, the exploration of lines of connection is something which is central to a digital version of the project, something made possible through hypertext. We are only just beginning to think what an encyclopaedia can do. Perhaps, as we mentioned earlier, we need a new term to point to the increased mobility in working the space between the encyclopaedia and the archive. In some ways what is emergent is more of an encyclomedia – a circling, returning and spiralling through knowledge in many different connective forms. At the same time we have a degree of ambivalence about the use of this new term. The term loses the ‘pedia’, the educative aspect, with its connotations of ethical education and forming of the person. In addition, media can cut a number of ways, indicate both extension, the availability of more information, which can mean more facts at the finger tips through new media such as the Internet; but also intensity, the qualitative shifts of levels, the shock of new connections and opening up of new directions/dimensions for creative invention.

Encyclomedia could well operate as a useful additional term to encyclopaedia, pointing to the creative exploration of the space between the archive and the encyclopaedia. The social and cultural sciences today have to deal with mediated everyday life and public institutions, which suggests that the media are both a topic and a resource. It is something academics need to study and theorize to make sense of the contemporary world. Yet they are also something we use in the form of writing and researching devices, and increasingly in teaching and seminars with multimedia presentations to students and colleagues involving images, sound, music, diagrams, video. This centrality of the media points to a number of significant aspects. First, there is creative research practice: the need to learn how to handle and navigate the enlarged archive of academic material (the potential global archive, or inter-archive drawing on the world’s digitalized libraries and archives). Second, the analysis of the expanding public and private storage systems, the ‘storage-mania’ in which ordinary people, as well as corporations, institutions and collectivities, purchase, collect, record, catalogue, classify, edit and store material in digital format (via iPods, webcams, mobile phone photos and clips etc.), as well as exchanging and publishing material in new formats, including Internet sites. The archivist surfaces from curating dusty cardboard boxes in the depths of the library basement into the everyday surveillance and recording of the world illuminated by the light of thousands of screens. This is the dream of the world of ubiquitous media, with embedded communications chips to make all spatial locations smart environments.

Digital media enable us to think beyond the book, or the working desktop covered with piles of opened books, journals and photocopies as our writing resource base, to the screen with its own virtual desktop, writing space or ‘window’ and Internet connections. Or better, it points to our various modes of to-ing and fro-ing between the two modalities. It is important we attempt to theorize this new process of knowledge formation both in the possibilities for research and writing and also in the presentation of material. This is one of the central aims of the New Encyclopaedia Project. It is important that we explore ways of showing the process of knowledge formation. There is still the tendency to regard an article or book as a finished object, when of course we know this is not the case. There is also the tendency to focus on and interpret the final object, but we know from the accounts of the lives of artists, writers, poets etc. that there are many illuminating turns in the process in which earlier draft material can be seen as of equal significance to the ‘final’ result. There is an interest in the process of drafting, researching, discarding and recovery of ‘rubbish’. Matisse, for example, devoted over a hundred sittings to one portrait, which underwent many radical transformations, which reportedly made the sitter weep over the disappearance of earlier renditions, now forever lost (see Antliff, 1999: 199). With digital recording devices and digital writing and editing devices it is possible for this process of knowledge formation to be made more readily available, despite the caveats about capturing performance and the everyday mentioned earlier. An article can be linked to its own archive of related material and earlier drafts, as well as inter-archiving to cited material and sources. It is something of this capacity for the Internet that Tim Berners-Lee (1999) had in mind when he envisaged the Internet as a free-net where we could hypertext jump across to every text, before the intellectual property rights and clickand-purchase merchants moved in. Yet something of this still remains possible, and we can envisage the experience of researching and reading becoming less of a linear exercise, with more scoping in and out of a range of related (distant) texts. If the knowledge unit of production for academics ceases to be an object (the book, or article) and more an unstable field, festooned in links and accompanied by its own set of para-sites and commentaries, then the alleged linearity of writing and the alleged integrity of the author, the authority of the author, could potentially diminish in significance.

In the NEP we are seeking to explore some of the dimensions of this process of knowledge formation by experimenting with a prototype which takes its point of departure from the encyclopaedia. The continuum we seek to move along ranges from the creative and innovative dimensions of research and writing we have mentioned above, to the necessity of teaching and writing in succinct and accessible ways, given the responsibility to teach students and be understood by the general public. We would argue that the encyclopaedia, and especially the digital encyclopaedia linked to the archive we have discussed, is a useful device for focusing on the importance of both ends of the continuum.

