# Information / The Military Use and Development of the Concept of Information / From the Military Concept of Information to the Theory of Information Society / ‘Information’ as an Arena of Struggle

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Information

Shunya Yoshimi (Translated by David Buist)

Abstract Although the concept of information is an inherently qualitative entity implying the capacity for meaning creation, in the historical development of this concept there has been a consistent emphasis on quantitative aspects. The generalization of the information concept from a specialized military term to a concept of broad social application occurred during the period when society as a whole became militarized in the 1930s and 1940s. After the Second World War, with the development of systematic information theory and the spread of computers in society, the military associations of the information concept gradually became obscured. But the popularity of information society theory in Japan and the USA indicates a need to review the military associations of its key concept. Today, with the development and spread of numerous global and local media, the information phenomena are experienced in a manner that far outstrips the narrow confines of the concept’s history. So the concept of information needs to be understood as a field of struggle in which different definitions confront each other leading to the creation of new practices and alternative concepts.

Keywords information, knowledge, wisdom

he development of the concept of ‘information’ in the 20th century is paradoxical in one very striking respect. Considered derivationally, and also theoretically, ‘information’ necessarily implies the creation of meaning. However, under the growing influence of Shannon’s information theory, this inherent aspect of meaning creation has been lost. In the present day, ‘information’ has come to be understood primarily as the central element of capitalistic database processing systems. As its derivation suggests, ‘information’ originally referred to the process of imparting ‘form’ – of imbuing a spirit – to some entity. Information is the process of ‘giving form to something’. It involves finding patterns or reading messages in the objects of observation (whether these be natural or social phenomena). Such ‘patterns’ or ‘messages’ are not reducible to mere ‘data’. They are educed recursively by observing the actions whereby life forms select meaningful patterns from within their environment. ‘Information’, therefore, cannot be reduced to bit units. The concept of ‘information’ has its basis in the life process whereby difference is discovered in the environment.

Thus, information is an inherently qualitative entity implying the capacity for meaning creation. Nevertheless, in the historical development of this concept, there has been a consistent emphasis on quantitative, rather than qualitative, aspects. ‘Information’ clearly has a place among other related concepts, such as ‘symbol’, ‘representation’, ‘language’, ‘knowledge’ and ‘wisdom’. However, there is a tendency to see ‘information’ as the most superficial and ephemeral of all these concepts. Information is generally denied any profundity of meaning.

Let us consider, for example, the concept of ‘knowledge’ to which ‘information’ is often compared. Knowledge is generally understood as something capable of accumulation or storage. When the knowledge possessed by an individual or collectivity increases, this is understood to mean that the subject concerned has accumulated more knowledge. In other words, there has been an increase in the knowledge held in stock and available for use. The concrete symbol of knowledge is the library, or the collection of books owned by a learned person. As this metaphor implies, the concept of knowledge is profoundly related to writing. Of course, knowledge itself pre-dates the Guttenberg Bible, and existed well before print media became widely available to the public. Nevertheless, before the printing press, the distribution of knowledge was severely limited and largely monopolized by monarchical and priestly authority.

In contrast, ‘information’ is essentially conceived as a ‘flow’. It is something that circulates from one place to another, but is not necessarily stored anywhere. Information is associated with ‘news’ about persons and events brought to us from a distance. The word is often used in reference to enemy ‘secrets’ obtained through espionage. The typical manifestations of ‘information’ are such things as bulletin boards, posters, or magazine supplements. Even in ancient times, people did treat certain forms of knowledge as ‘flow’ rather than ‘stock’. To this extent, information is not a new phenomenon. However, it was only with the development of capitalism that information surpassed knowledge and assumed a central position in the world of human consciousness, rather than being left on the periphery of knowledge as before. This reversal of the hierarchy between ‘knowledge’ and ‘information’ was promoted most especially by the development of electronic communications and mass media.

In this context we also encounter the concept of ‘wisdom’ – the third element of the triad I am considering here. Generally speaking, wisdom is something neither stored nor circulated. It is something that is simply discovered by individuals or groups. In some cases, it may exist inherently in the environment. Wisdom is often passed on from one generation to the next as a form of inheritance. It is embodied symbolically in the elders and storytellers who pass it on. If knowledge is something that is gradually stored up, and information is something that flows and circulates, then wisdom can be characterized as that which for ever returns. Wisdom is something to which people constantly return in their search for truth (Burke, 2000). In ‘folk societies’ – what Lévi-Strauss called ‘cold societies’ – wisdom is the normative form of knowing. Indeed, wisdom – not knowledge or information – has been the dominant element during most of the history of human consciousness (Lévi-Strauss, 1962). The supporting medium of wisdom is to be found in neither telecommunications nor in books, but in the culture of face-to-face oral transmission.

## The Military Use and Development of the Concept of Information

What I have said up to this point is valid so far as concerns the concept of ‘information’ as generally understood today. However, my purpose is not to pursue further the present-day meaning of the concept, but rather to clarify the socio-historical context through which it came into being. Concepts are inherently historical by nature. They cannot exist independently of the context from which they derive their meaning. The purpose of my investigation is therefore to find out how, and by whom, the word ‘information’ has been used. How has its meaning been fixed amid the complex web of discourse, and to what forms of technological or policy practices has it been linked? These are the questions I seek to answer through a concrete historical analysis.

Since ancient times, information has been assiduously collected and managed by state authorities. Monarchs of pre-modern states were often very keen to gather information on every region within their domain. In commercial towns of the ancient and medieval periods, it was generally understood that the flow of information and the trading of goods were inseparably connected. As shown by Peter Burke, numerous surveys were undertaken to gather information on the native inhabitants in the New World territories colonized by Spain in the 16th century. At around the same time, merchants in Genoa, Venice and Florence were exchanging massive quantities of information through the medium of letters. Later, the Dutch East Indies Company built up an international information network. Throughout history, the collection of information has been one of the main activities of dominant political and economic powers (Burke, 2000).

However, it is only comparatively recently that information has come to be understood as a legal or policy concept, as opposed to simply being an item gathered, managed and traded. The formal organization of information in this way seems to be a relatively recent phenomenon. Before the present period, modern states were more concerned with the organization and management of ‘knowledge’, rather than ‘information’. Numerous institutions were set up for this purpose, including libraries, museums, archives, encyclopaedias, maps and statistical compilations. These are all very characteristic features of modernity and have spread throughout the world since the 19th century (Anderson, 1983). However, since the early 20th century, states have shown an increasing propensity to focus on the conceptualization and management of the ‘flow’ of information, rather than the ‘stock’ of knowledge.

I will now demonstrate this historical process by outlining the development of the ‘information’ concept in Japan. The concept of ‘information’ is usually translated as ‘jouhou ’ in the Japanese language. However, the history of the formation of this concept in the various countries of Asia, including Japan, is far from simple.

The most influential proponent of ‘western civilization’ in late 19th-century Japan was Fukuzawa Yukichi. (He was also the founder of Keio University.) In a book he wrote in 1879, Minsei Isshin (Renewing the Life of the People), he asserted that ‘information technology’ was the very essence of modern civilization. ‘Information technology’ at that time was represented by four things: the steam locomotive, the telegraph, the printing press and the post office. According to Fukuzawa, the concept of ‘knowledge’ embraced not only theoretical reflection, but also a dimension of broad observation and experience. This horizontal dimension of knowledge he referred to as ‘information’. Through the medium of the aforementioned ‘information technology’, the world would become smaller and the social perception of time would be transformed. Fukuzawa claimed not only that ‘the telegraph would shrink the surface of the earth’, but also that ‘if steam were added to the telegraph, time would shrink, things would become more plentiful, and human life prolonged’. He believed that the modernization of a small Far Eastern country could be attained by bringing about the penetration of all areas of its society by ‘information technology’ (Fukuzawa, 1959[1879]).

Fukuzawa might thus be described as the first ideologue of the ‘information society’ in Japan. However, it was Mori Ogai who actually introduced the use of the word ‘jouhou ( ) to translate the western concept of ‘information’. Mori is well known as one of the most illustrious figures in modern Japanese literature. At the same time, he was extremely active in military affairs, rising to become the territorial army’s chief medical officer (thanks largely to his adeptness at German). In 1901–3, he published a Japanese translation of Carl von Clausewitz’s On War, in which the following definition is given: ‘Jouhou ( ) is the totality of knowledge about the enemy and enemy nation, and it is therefore the foundation of our country’s plan and action in war’. Even before Mori, the army had used ‘Jouhou ( )’ as a translation for the French word ‘rensainument’ in an 1876 translation of a French military treatise (Nakamoto, 1993). Other words, such as ‘chouhou ( )’ and ‘houchi ’, were frequently used in the Japanese military to convey the same sorts of meanings as ‘Jouhou ( )’. The Japanese interest in ‘information’ clearly began among the military.

However, for ordinary Japanese people, ‘Jouhou ( )’ had for a long time simply conveyed the meaning of a ‘report on a situation’. Jouhou is a compound word represented by two Chinese characters. The first character, pronounced ‘jou ’, originally included such meanings as ‘mind’ or ‘soul’, ‘condition’ or ‘appearance’, and ‘pity’ or ‘sympathy’. The second character, ‘hou ’, embraced a diversity of senses, including ‘retaliation’, ‘reporting’ and even ‘secret relations’ (i.e. adultery). Other words containing the character ‘jou ’ also refer to matters relating to intimacy between the sexes: a ‘joujin ’ is a ‘lover’; ‘jouyoku ’ means ‘sexual desire’, and ‘joushi ’ is a suicide pact between lovers. It is perhaps these associations of the component characters of ‘Jouhou ( )’ that have discouraged its use as a translation for ‘information’ in the Chinese language. In Chinese, ‘information’ is generally rendered as ‘xinxi ’, and is written with completely different characters from ‘Jouhou ( )’.

However, until the early 20th century, ‘Jouhou ( )’ was not the most commonly used word to express the idea of a ‘report on a situation’ (although its use in this meaning had begun to increase). Until that time, the word ‘shinbun ’ was more frequently employed (Yoshimi, 2000). Nowadays, the word ‘shinbun ’ is used exclusively to mean ‘newspaper’, but it used to have a broader meaning embracing all forms of news and reporting. ‘Shin ’ means ‘new’ and ‘bun ’ means ‘hear’. When compounded, these two characters expressed the meaning of ‘something newly heard’. With the growth of the newspaper industry, the sense of ‘hearing’ was gradually lost, and the word came to apply only to the printed medium of news. Over the course of the 20th century the boundaries between concepts such as ‘Jouhou ( )’, ‘shinbun ’ and ‘houchi ’ gradually shifted.

During the 1920s and 1930s, in Japan as elsewhere, the concept of ‘information’ came to be closely associated with the aspect of military ‘intelligence’. This change of emphasis was largely a product of the system of all-out warfare instituted in the First World War. During this time, the warring countries of Europe all set up intelligence bureaus with the aim of manipulating the flow of information for strategic purposes. The Japanese government quickly learned to follow this trend, and set up its own department for the management of ‘Jouhou ( )’. This was eventually elevated to cabinet-level status and became one of the central organs of state power. Under the wartime system built up in the 1930s (and first half of the 1940s), all aspects of ‘information’ were comprehensively managed in accordance with the aims of war. This included everything from print media, radio broadcasting, film and posters to rumour, personal correspondence and graffiti. At the same time, other countries, including Germany and the US, also rapidly developed agencies for the management of information in accordance with military objectives. The formation of the ‘information’ concept was thus linked globally with the system of all-out warfare.

Indeed, not only in Japan, but also in the US, the growth of the ‘information’ concept was based principally in the military structures of the Second World War. Claude Shannon’s information theory, Norbert Wiener’s theory of cybernetics, and the foundations of computer science laid by John Von Neumann all grew out of American military research, which had been conducted for the purpose of guided missile technology or code-breaking.

It was from such a historical context that ‘information’ came to be chosen as a key concept embracing not only military intelligence in the classical sense of espionage, but also the whole field of communications and computer technology. Social scientists also came to be involved in mass communications research at the same time, but this research too was linked to military propaganda objectives, focusing especially on the use of the new medium of radio broadcasting (Hardt, 1992).

## From the Military Concept of Information to the Theory of Information Society

When we examine the history of the information concept in Japan, we detect a general shift in the principal area of application from the military to the economy. Even before the modern era, information had flowed in the towns and roadways through the media of books, print, letters and rumour. The period of early modernization then witnessed the rapid development of what could be called an ‘information system’ consisting of museums, libraries, cartography and statistics. However, until the early 20th century, no clear distinction was drawn between ‘information’ and ‘knowledge’. It was only then that the word ‘Jouhou ( )’ attained any special status and eclipsed other related words such as ‘shinbun ’ and ‘houchi ’. It was the systematization of knowledge for wartime mobilization that raised the specific social importance of ‘information’. What had once been no more than military ‘knowledge about the enemy’ came to be seen as a matter of crucial strategic importance for society as a whole.

The concept of the so-called ‘information society’ developed almost simultaneously in both Japan and the US during the 1960s and 1970s. As is well known, this idea was advocated by such people as Fritz Machlup (1962), Daniel Bell (1973) and Alvin Toffler (1981). Each of these promulgated their own key phrases, such as the ‘knowledge industry’, ‘post-industrial society’ and the ‘Third Wave’, and each contributed in their own way to what eventually came to be known as the ‘information society’. There is little need for me to go into details about these theories and their popularization as visions of the future for the masses over a span of nearly two decades, mostly in the US. I will focus instead on the development of the ‘information society’ concept as it unfolded in Japan. From the 1960s to the 1980s, there were a series of cyclical booms in the popularity of this concept in Japan. These did not necessarily reflect any influence of ideas from the US, but rather occurred simultaneously against the background of similar historical conditions in the two countries.

Japanese ‘information society’ theorists are fond of the assertion that ‘information society was conceived independently in Japan and has nothing to do with Machlup or Bell. ‘Information society’ is promoted as an export from Japan to the rest of the world. Indeed, the origins of the Japanese discourse on ‘information society’ go back as far as 1963, with the publication of articles on the ‘information society’ by Umesao Tadao in the journals Housou Asahi and Chuuou Kouron. Umesao employed a biological analogy to characterize the transition from ‘industrial society’ to ‘information society’. The physical structure of an animal can be divided into three parts: the endoderm (digestive and respiratory organs), the mesoderm (skeletal, muscular and reproductive organs) and the ectoderm (brain, neural and sensory organs). According to this model, industrial society was said to be founded on the ‘mesoderm’ of ports, transportation and construction, while ‘information society’ would involve a shift to a basis in the ‘ectoderm’ of information, communication, mass media, education and culture (Umesao, 1988).

Around the years 1967 and 1968, words like ‘informatization’ (jouhouka ) and ‘information society’ (jouhou shakai ) came to be employed strategically by futurologists, economists and the government. In 1968, Masuda Yoneji published Jouhou Shakai Nyuumon (An Introduction to the Study of Information Society). In 1969, Hayashi Yujiro published Jouhouka Shakai (Informatized Society). The latter sold over 100,000 copies and became a best seller. The ‘information society’ boom in Japan thus pre-dates the popularity of that concept in the US. In 1971, a group of leading social scientists and information society theorists collaborated in the production of a 20-volume series called Kouza: Jouhou Shakai Kagaku ( Lectures on Information Social Science). The inherently optimistic nature of information society theory seemed to capture the generally optimistic mood of the times. Japan had entered the era of high economic growth, having overcome the hardship of postwar recovery, and had just witnessed the Osaka Exposition, which was the ultimate symbol of the newfound prosperity. Discourse on the ‘information society’ not only dominated the mass media, but was increasingly incorporated into Japanese public policy-making.

Against the background of this popularization of the ‘information society’ concept in Japan, it began also to be exported to other countries. Of all the proponents of this idea, it was Masuda who became the most internationally famous. Not only was he the first to coin the term ‘information society’, but it was also his particular vision of what this word meant that was diffused wherever he travelled on his many international lecture tours (Masuda, 1968). With the development of new communications systems and computers in the 1970s, the concept of ‘information society’ came to be used in Europe and North America by such people as Bell and Toffler. This reflected a trend that had already become well established in Japan before the beginning of the 1970s.

Of course, when viewed from a wider perspective, the popularity of ‘information society’ theory in Japan can be seen as a response to the emergence in the US of theories about the ‘knowledge industry’ and ‘post-industrial society’. As many critics have already pointed out, ‘information society’ theory suffers from a number of serious deficiencies both in its American and Japanese versions. The first problem is that it tends to ignore the qualitative dimension of information. It views everything in terms of social changes measured in quantitative terms, such as the increase in the amount of information flowing in society, the information industry’s rising proportional contribution to total economic output, or the growing size of the information sector in the employment structure. These quantitatively measured changes are seen as the causal factors behind major overall socio-structural transformation. This approach can be challenged from two perspectives. First, it can be said that information society theory fails to give due attention to the potentially conservative effects of quantitative changes, simply reinforcing the existing social order. Secondly, one may wonder whether the increasing influence ascribed to ‘information’ should really be seen solely in quantitative terms. There are qualitative differences among the various forms of information that cannot be reduced to the variables of capital and labour power. This surely has crucial implications for our understanding of ‘information society’.

The second limitation of information society theory is of course its tendency toward technological determinism. Notwithstanding a small minority of pessimistic theorists, the ‘coming of the information society’ is almost universally greeted with great optimism. It is generally assumed that information technology alone can fundamentally alter society. The exact nature of the technology cited as the explanatory variable has changed with the times. At one time it was television; later it was the main-frame computer; then it was the computer network, and most recently, mobile media. Despite this variation in which technology was cited as the greatest cause of social change, the idea that ‘new information technology’ would bring about a more advanced ‘information society’ has remained constant. Since the 1970s, many empirical studies on the social structuring of technology have been carried out. These demonstrate the fundamental social embeddedness of all technology, thus undermining the notion that technology can be viewed as an independent variable causing social change. By the 1980s, it is safe to say, the presupposition of technological determinism underlying information society theory had collapsed.

The third problem with information society theory is its reliance on a unilinear and teleological conception of social development. Theorists such as Daniel Bell and Masuda Yoneji presented stage theories of social change that were so clear-cut and schematic that they could almost be caricatures: agricultural society was succeeded by industrial society, which in turn was about to be overtaken by the post-industrial ‘information society’. The transition from industrial society to ‘information society’ was seen in terms of simplistic dichotomies: from steam engine to computer, from factory to information network, from physical production to intellectual production, from market economy to the work-sharing economy, and from labour movement to citizens’ movement. Bell simplified history into three stages: pre-industrial, industrial and post-industrial. He saw a transition from ‘games between nature and man’ to ‘games between man and man’. This, he asserted, would lead to an expansion of mental labour in specialized technological services.

## ‘Information’ as an Arena of Struggle

I have just outlined the principal characteristics and problems of information society theory in the 1960s and 1970s. To put it in a nutshell, information society theory reduced quality to quantity, saw social change as being determined by technological change, and adhered to a unilinear stage model of history. What is striking is that these are precisely the characteristics that embody the industrialization and modernization process since the 19th century. Through the principles of mass production and scientific management, modern industrial society has succeeded in reducing ‘quality’ to ‘quantity’. It has consistently made investments in technology and pursued economic growth through technological advancement. Furthermore, this modernization process is both the result and the cause of the teleological model of developmental stages. Clearly, there is nothing ‘post-’ modern about information society theory. It is no more than a faithful reproduction of the principles of ‘modern’ industrialism adjusted to fit the ‘new’ conditions of information technology. Inherent to information society theory – in all its varieties, from Bell and Toffler to the Japanese theorists – is the very modern idea of centralized control from above.

This may be related to the fact that the concept of ‘information’ was originally disseminated in the context of military control and manipulation. As I have already noted, the establishment of the concept of ‘Jouhou ( )’ in Japan occurred in concert with the formation of a system for all-out warfare, with the Cabinet Information Office (Naikaku Jouhou B ) at its summit. ‘Information’ was therefore from the outset heavily associated with such things as military ‘intelligence’ and ‘propaganda’. This association between ‘information and the military is not unique to Japan. It can also be seen in the formation of information theory in the US. The generalization of the information concept from a specialized military term to a concept of broad social application occurred during the period when society as a whole became militarized in the 1930s and 1940s. With the development of systematic information theory and the spread of computers in society, the military associations of the information concept gradually became obscured. It thus took on the appearance of an inherently neutral and universal concept.

The popularity of information society theory in Japan and the US since the 1960s indicates a need to review the military associations of its key concept. To the extent that the information concept is still understood within the framework constructed by Shannon, Neumann and the information society theorists, a continuity clearly exists with the military intellectual history of the Second World War. Just as the life of the wartime system was prolonged under the ‘quasi-war’ conditions of the Cold War, so too the concept of ‘information’ retained its wartime ideological connotations even after it had been put to wider use in the ‘postwar’ era of the Cold War (Robins, 1999: 131–46).

With the development and spread of numerous global and local media, the information phenomena of the present day are experienced in a manner that far outstrips the narrow confines of the concept’s history (Lash, 2002). Even in the field of information science, there is a trend toward redefinition of the information concept in such a way as to include the dimensions of meaning and value, thus avoiding the problem of quantitative reductionism. Nowadays, much of the knowledge linked to the concept of information does not fit neatly within the traditional boundaries of computer science. The concept of ‘information’ is now being linked with concepts of the humanities and social sciences, including language, signs and symbols, texts and images. Thus, the information concept is being applied to a wider area of knowledge and daily practice than before, and in the process its meaning is expanding beyond the takenfor-granted horizons of military and information society theory (Nishigaki, 2002).

I began by outlining a concept of ‘information’ as the action of life ‘giving form’ to things. This is a very different concept of information from the military and industrial use of the term. This suggests that ‘information’ is not something that can be reduced to some common origin or definition. Information needs to be understood as a field of struggle in which different definitions confront each other leading to the creation of new practices and alternative concepts. Indeed, the reason why it is worthwhile for us today to pursue the concept of ‘information is not so much because it has so many different possible definitions, but rather because of the relations of struggle among the hegemonic dimensions of this concept formed within the modern military-industrial system. There is a constant need for reflection on the conceptual foundations underlying the discourse of ‘information’ in contemporary society. We must be vigilant about exactly what is happening in the conceptualization process when diverse phenomena are categorized and highlighted as forms of ‘information’. As the information concept comes to embrace more and more areas of society, it necessarily acquires greater and greater complexity. This complexity will then provide further opportunities for diverse discursive strategies, including both struggle and accommodation.

