# Skin Aesthetics

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Skin Aesthetics

Leora Farber

Keywords aestheticization, appearance, bodyimage, body-modification, cosmetic surgery, women’s bodies

ar from being a neutral point of transition inscribed with layers of politicized associations. A primary signifier of racial identity, it is also a visible marker of hybridity and crosscultural/racial mix. It may thus be the site of masquerade when passing for a privileged racial group. Given the historical legacy of skin as determinant of privilege/inferiority within body politics, skin colour forms a fulcrum around which identities are constructed. As such, it has been/is a site upon which racial power is commonly enacted. The skin surface bears traces of racially based punishment: a history of whipping, branding or rubber bullet wounds might be inscribed on the skin as scars or welts.

Skin forms a screen on which the body’s ability to heal itself is revealed, while simultaneously registering its inevitable demise. As a site of visible deterioration, skin holds particular currency for westernized women, and (increasingly) men, as this signifies the nemesis of the western ideals of slimness and youth. This article will explore how, particularly for westernized women, skin might be a site onto which dualities such as submission and resistance, excess and control are played out in relation to these ideals. This text will touch on how skin, as a register of the body’s margins, could be considered as a site of cultural, political and personal control, agency and contestation for westernized women. Selected artworks from the exhibition Skin: Surface, Substance and Design (2002) curated by Ellen Lupton at the Cooper Hewitt Design Museum, New York City, will be referenced in order to explore ways in which contem porary artists have articulated these concerns.

Several artists/designers featured in the Skin exhibition propose skin as being akin to an external fabric, which might be crafted in ways that mimic the fabrication of femininity according to the dictates of the heterosexual, white male gaze. For many westernized women, skin becomes akin to an external/internal garment that might be materially (through cosmetic surgery procedures such as liposuction) or metaphorically fashioned, altered, perfected and possibly discarded. Tissueengineered skin, currently intended as a means by which to manufacture living replacement parts for the body, allows for future imaginings of how, subject to the dictates of fashion, skin might actually be purchased, worn and replaced like a garment. This idea is articulated in Carla Murray and Peter Allen’s Skinthetic series (2001; see Lupton, 2002: 92–3), in which these designers propose futuristic digital designs for consumer branding, which are implanted into the skin. Their Chanel series (2001) shows the quilted pattern derived from Chanel’s brand identity as implanted into a female torso. The skin of the garment becomes continuous with the skin of the body; brand label and skin become one, suggesting how skin (and the wearer’s body) might be branded to carry associations of a particular lifestyle or image. As a by-product of postmodernity, skin could thus become the ultimate medium for self-expression and consumer choice. With current cosmetic surgical procedures and cosmeceuticals, skin (and by extension, the body) is already a commodity item which ‘. . . can be . . . reshaped, restyled and reconstructed to meet prevailing fashions and cultural values’ (Davis, 1995: 17).

The means by which such material and metaphorical skin-crafting is exercised may be through arguably self-imposed practices of bodily control, including control over quantity and/or quality of food intake, exercise regimes, eating disorders and/or through biotechnological aid in the form of cosmetic surgery. Although cosmetic surgery is the only one enacted directly upon the skin, all these practices affect the body’s margins, which are determined by its skin contour and muscle tone. In a culture governed by repression and release, the greater the subcutaneous layer of fat, the greater the loss of control is signified. Gain of fat alters the skin’s margins; age produces sagging and wrinkling, both of which affect the definition of a taut, contained bodily outline. In the war against nature to prevent the loss of slimness and youth, skin becomes a site of constriction, containment and control. Naomi Wolf (1990: 177) sums up this idea with her observation that for contemporary westernized women, skin is the equivalent of the 1950s girdle – a girdle which is ‘made of their own flesh. They can’t take it off at night.’

This analogy between skin and fabric is chillingly articulated in Margi Geerlinks’ photographic series, Gepetto 1 and 2 (1999). Geerlinks’ images show a grey-haired man in a white lab-coat behind a sewing machine, under the needle of which is the flesh of a young woman’s body. Naked, she lies draped, like a swathe of fabric on the table before him, her skin ready to be stitched up. The two cotton reels in the machine are in Caucasian fleshtone colours. The images imply that, as dressfabric may be cut and sewn according to a predetermined pattern, so skin might be crafted in ways that mimic predetermined masculine constructions of femininity. With their overtones of a surgeon in the operating theatre, evoked through the predominance of clinical, white surfaces, the images suggest further parallels between the craft of tailoring a garment to fit a stereotypical body size and cosmetic surgical procedures that re-fashion appearances to conform to idealized measurements.

The surgeon’s craft approximates two historically gendered creative professions: the seamstress (female) and the sculptor (male), whose medium is not fabric or marble but skin. Many surgeons promote themselves as sculptors who fashion human flesh to create a body, which mimics the so-called perfect human form. This image of perfection may be traced back to high art, particularly classical and neoclassical canons of beauty, which emphasize proportion, harmony, symmetry and balance and privilege associated values such as unity, autonomy, closure, singularity and totality. These values of presence have particular currency in gendered terms. As Lynda Nead (1992) argues, if the female body has historically been regarded as base, unformed, undifferentiated matter, then the conventions of high art are a means of controlling this unruly body by placing it within the secure boundaries of aesthetic discourse. These fix the dangerous boundaries of female sexuality, transforming the female body into a symbol of containment. Skin becomes the containing outer boundary, which defines the body’s contours.

Conception of the surgeon as seamstress and sculptor is explored in my video, titled Four Minor Renovations (revamp, refurbish, retouch, refine) (2000), which shows an edited version of four live cosmetic surgeries: breast-augmentation, bat-ear pinback, eyelift and facelift. Tightly cropped and set in slow motion, the documentary-style footage shows the surgeon’s gloved hands cutting, stretching and stitching flesh. In an attempt to expose the invasiveness of these normally hidden procedures, this work allows viewers access into the private inner sanctum of the operating theatre. They thus, as Allara (2001) suggests, ‘become . . . privileged witness[es] in the studio of the Artist-God molding woman/earth out of formless matter . . . In a triumph of technology, form is divorced from matter, and body becomes image.’

The footage also shows how the techniques employed in the seamstress’s craft of tailoring a garment to fit a particular body size are closely aligned to the surgeons’ technological craft of body-modification. Sequentially, the surgeon’s actions mimic garment-making techniques: the ideal pattern is drawn onto the skin in dotted lines, the skin is cut, excess is removed and skin is secured into its new shape with a series of sutures. As a new garment is ironed once sewing is completed, so the skin is now creaseless from having been stretched into shape. Explaining why she requests her patients to stand up while she administers liposuction, New York dermatologist Pat Wexler (cited in Dominus, 2002: 50) notes that she feels ‘like a seamstress draping fabric – you can’t do it on someone lying down’. Through isolation of parts to be re-fashioned, cosmetic surgery physically transforms the material body into a sign of visual culture; a literal and material reproduction of westernized ideals of beauty.

Control may also be exerted in non-invasive ways such as the injection of Botox (botulim toxin) and through use of fillers such as Restalene, Collagen, Artecoll and Micro-fat. Injections of Mico-fat and Collagen are used to smooth out shallow lines, rendering the skin smooth and supposedly dewrinkled. Reinforcing the parallels between garment and skin, Wexler (cited in Dominus, 2002: 51) compares women who wear wrinkled skin in public to the social inappropriateness of ‘wearing a wrinkled suit to an interview’. Boxtox is a toxic substance, which paralyzes the facial muscles to prevent the inscription of lines on the skin, resulting in facial rigidity that denies any register of human emotion. Allara (2003: 2) observes that such freezing of women’s faces might produce either a ‘grotesque or . . . a new, unabashedly anti-natural ideal of beauty’. Recalling media images of mechanized cyborgs, she asserts that these frigid faces represent a type of beauty that dissolves any remaining opposition between the supposedly natural and human-made. No longer confined to the classical western ideal of high art, or even to the sculptural mediums of marble or clay, beauty is redefined; faces and bodies become artworks and media images manufactured by and for mechanical reproduction.

While the image reproduced might reference a range of media options, underpinning each is precisely this repetitiveness of assembly line production. Thus, in spite of the potential that cosmetic surgery offers for technological reconstruction of bodies and identities, in actuality, its products tend to be traditionally gendered and racialized. According to contemporary definitions of creative production, art is concerned with innovation, and craft with the perpetuation of traditional norms. It thus seems fitting to consider the surgeon’s handiwork as craft: rather than a recreation of personalized identity which enables women to be all they can be, appearances produced invariably conform to cultural and ideological standards of normality and beauty, which are based on western media ideals. Although still a marker of racial difference in terms of colour, skin signifies homogeneity, as the surgeon’s scalpel remakes difference into sameness.

Feminist critiques often position the recipients of cosmetic surgery as victims of cultural exploitation – women are viewed as colluding with and reinforcing patriarchal patterns of power and authority. However, it is also important to acknowledge Kathy Davis’ (1995) assertion that cosmetic surgery might empower women to assert or negotiate their feminine identity from within the cultural and structural constraints of a gendered social order. Cosmetic surgery is an example of tensions between women’s objectification and their attempts to negotiate their identities from within a broader context of western visual culture. These tensions shift between the female body as object and the embodied feminine subject, as women attempt to negotiate a sense of bodily agency in relation to controlling cultural discourses. Thus, rather than overt condemnation of cosmetic surgery and its impact on the female body, it seems more useful to address the unequal relations of power that underpin the drive to fashion the body in such a way that it meets westernized standards of normality and beauty. Allara’s (2001) observation that ‘. . . the problem is one’s relative position of power and powerlessness within a technological regime’ sums up this ambiguity between resistance and complicity. Thus, in its complex relation to various controlling political trajectories and regimes, skin is materially and metaphorically contested terrain: a site wherein agency, freedom of choice and individual empowerment conflate with the pressures of cultural power and tensions of social/personalized control.

