# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

## Introduction

In 1786, William Jones gave an address to the Bengal Asiatic Society in which he made a statement that was to change the face of European intellectual life:

The Sanskrit language, whatever its antiquity, is of a wonderful structure, more perfect than the Greek, more copious than the Latin, and more exquisitely refined than either, yet bearing to both of them a stronger affinity, both in the roots of verbs, and in the forms of grammar, than could possibly have been produced by accident; so strong, indeed, that no philologer could examine them all three, without believing them to have sprung from some common source, which, perhaps, no longer exists. (Asiatic Researches [1788] cited in Poliakov, 1974: 190)

Jones’ pronouncement initiated an ‘Indomania’ throughout Europe as scholars looked to Sanskrit for an origin to European languages that went even deeper than Latin and Greek. What remained in the aftermath of Indomania was the entrenchment of Orientalism and the vast expansion of philology. For the next century, European ethnologists, philologers and historians were to be obsessed with the Orient and the Indo-European group of languages because these seemed to offer an explanation of the roots of European civilization itself. This linguistic revolution was supported further by the philosophical arguments of Schlegel and Schelling who suggested that the Orient and the Occident had common roots. Jones’ statement was revolutionary because existing conceptions of linguistic history supposed that language development had taken place within the 6000 years since creation, with Hebrew as the source language and other languages emerging by a process of degeneration. Jones’ declaration ushered in a new conception of linguistic history, but because language was so deeply implicated in concerns about national and cultural identity, ‘the authentic and useful science of linguistics became absorbed in the crazy doctrine of “racial anthropology”’ (Poliakov, 1974: 193). The link between language and identity, particularly the link between the diversity of languages and the diversity of racial identity, gave rise to the discipline of ethnology, the precursor of modern anthropology.

Orientalism is sometimes taken to be simply a way of defining and ‘locating’ Europe’s others. But as a group of related disciplines, Orientalism was, in important ways, about Europe itself, and hinged on arguments that circulated around the issue of national distinctiveness as well as racial and linguistic origins. Thus, elaborate and detailed examinations of Oriental languages, histories and cultures were carried out in a context in which the supremacy and importance of European civilization was unquestioned. Such was the vigour of the discourse that myth, opinion, hearsay and prejudice generated by influential scholars quickly assumed the status of received truth (Said, 1978). For instance, the influential French philologist and historian Ernest Renan (1896: 85) could declare confidently that, ‘Every person, however slightly he may be acquainted with the affairs of our time, sees clearly the actual inferiority of Mohammedan countries’. We can be in no doubt about Renan’s audience, nor the nature of the cultural assumptions he and they shared: ‘All those who have been in the East, or in Africa are struck by the way in which the mind of the true believer is fatally limited, by the species of iron circle that surrounds his head, rendering it absolutely closed to knowledge (1896: 85).

The confidence of such assertions is partly an indication of the self-confidence engendered by the huge popularity of writers like Renan and Gobineau. But it is, at a deeper level, the product of the unquestioned cultural dominance of Europe, maintained economically and militarily over most of the rest of the world. Through such statements as Renan’s, the ‘production’ of Orientalist knowledge became a continual and uncritical ‘reproduction of various assumptions and beliefs. Thus, Lord Cromer, who relied a great deal on writers like Renan, could write in 1908 that, while the European’s ‘trained intelligence works like a piece of mechanism’, the mind of the Oriental, ‘like his picturesque streets, is eminently wanting in symmetry’ (Said, 1978: 38). The superior ‘order’, ‘rationality’ and ‘symmetry of Europe and the inferior ‘disorder’, ‘irrationality’ and ‘primitivism’ of non-Europe were the self-confirming parameters around which the various Orientalist disciplines circulated. But what gave these disciplines their dynamism and urgency, at least in the beginning, was the need to explain the apparent historical connections between Europe and its Oriental forebears.

The identification of the Indo-European group of languages was to have incalculable consequences in world history. Not only did it disrupt conventional notions of linguistic history, and give rise to a century of philological debate, but it quickly generated theories about racial origin and development, as language and race became conflated. The ‘Indo-European’ group of languages, at different times called the ‘Japhetic’ languages (after Noah’s son Japheth, distinguished from the ‘Semitic’ and ‘Hamitic’ languages that derived from his other sons Shem and Ham), or ‘Indo-German’, began to be called ‘Arian’ from their supposed origin around Lake Aries in Asia. The term Aryan gained widespread authority in 1819 from the efforts of Friedrich Schlegel (Poliakov, 1974: 193). This term came to symbolize an idea close to the hearts of European states – that a separate language indicated a separate racial/national origin. Schlegel’s rhetoric in galvanizing German youth with the myth of an Aryan race early in the 19th century began a process that led eventually to the rationalization of the Holocaust in the Second World War. The concept which had the potential to unite peoples of wide cultural disparity – the Indo-European community of languages – peoples as diverse as Indian, Persian, Teutons and Anglo-Saxons, became the source of the most strident racial Manicheanism as it fed deeply-ingrained European racial pretensions.

In short, Orientalist analysis almost universally proceeded to confirm the ‘primitive’, ‘originary’, ‘exotic’ and ‘mysterious’ nature of Oriental societies and, more often than not, the degeneration of the ‘non-European’ branches of the Indo-European family of languages. This quest for origins, however, created a desire to know the other, a desire that was most evident in translation studies.

