# The Logic of Possible Worlds

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# The Logic of Possible Worlds

Neil Turnbull

Keywords global culture, logic, world

or the pre-Socratic philosophers of ancient product of a primordial ‘harmony’ between an emergent inquiring mind and the wider cosmos in which it was embedded. Thus for the pre-Socratics, ‘knowing’ was always a matter of engagement with a deeper ontological process – the logos – and was, in large part, a cosmological form of engagement. If the early Greek philosophers had any idea of logic at all, it was very far removed from the highly mathematical notions of ‘correct reasoning’ and ‘truth-preserving calculation’ that have been dominant in modern western philosophy since the 19th century. In fact, Greek philosophy probably did not have an explicit and separate idea of ‘logic’ or ‘the logical’ in the modern senses of these terms, and if we can unearth a vague sense of either in ancient Greek philosophy we can see that logic was closer to something that we would now call ‘intuition’ and associated with what we would now term ‘ethics’. This was not only true of ancient Greek thought but also of Confucianism, where logic was understood as a form of thinking that allowed human intelligence to map the ‘intelligence of heaven’ and achieve spiritual enlightenment. Interestingly, this was also true for Roman Stoics, for whom logic was the means for attaining a state of tranquilitas (Hadot, 1995).

It is only with the emergence of mathematical science and its philosopher apologists in modern rationalism and empiricism that we begin to see the emergence of a purely technical, formal and calculative logic. Since the 19th century, and in Anglo-American analytic philosophy in particular, this technical logic has developed in two ways: into a formal logic that is perhaps closer to mathematics and computing than philosophy, and a philosophical logic that claims that the study of logic can reveal necessary truths about the nature of mind, meaning and the world. These two logics were not, and are not, entirely separate disciplines however; and innovations in formal logic have given rise to a repository of new logical techniques and artificial languages that, in turn, have allowed for metaphysically revisionist claims of various kinds. And in addition to the predicate calculus of the 19th century, analytic philosophers have gone on to invent a wide array of new non-standard logics: tensed logic; epistemic logic; doxastic logic; deontic logic and – perhaps the most important of all – modal logic. These new formal logics have made possible innovations in philosophical logic and, ipso facto, have allowed new kinds of philosophical problem to be posed and old philosophical problems to be posed in new ways.

Modal logic is the logic of possibility, contingency and necessity. Interestingly for students of globality, modal logicians have created a technical trope to frame and test their logical intuitions: the idea of a possible world. In modal logic, the world as it currently exists is known as the actual world, and possible worlds are seen as modalities, or states, of the actual world. For some modal logicians, most notably David Lewis, possible worlds are seen as real in that they are understood to represent latent ontological possibilities existing in actuality (Lewis, 1986). In modal terms, there is a possible world where I can speak in Sanskrit, but not one where I am in two places at the same time. In this view, all possible worlds exist ‘logically side by side’, some worlds being logically accessible to each other, some not. Thus modal logic allows us to conceive of ‘the world’ as the totality of possible worlds existing in logical space.

This idea has its roots in the Enlightenment philosophy of Leibniz, but has been recently extensively developed by Saul Kripke and Hilary Putnam. In the discourse of possible worlds, an idea/statement is necessarily true – cannot not be true – if it is true in all possible worlds. Likewise, an idea/statement is possibly/contingently true if it is true in at least one possible world. For example, according to Kripke, there is a possible world in which Aristotle was not the teacher of Alexander – this being merely a contingent truth – but there is no possible world in which Aristotle is not the person that he is: that is, where Aristotle is not Aristotle (Kripke, 1984).

Thus modal reasoning has been used to argue for a kind of biological essentialism. According to Kripke, in every possible world in which a particular person exists, that person is essentially related to the sperm and ovum from which they were conceived. Thus, in Kripke’s view, there is no possible world in which any person has a different genetic makeup from the one they now have. If they did, they would not be the person that they are. Putnam has used similar modal arguments to put forward a kind of scientific essentialism where the essences of substances are given by their chemical composition. Thus, for Putnam, the fact that water = H<sub>2</sub>O is true in all possible worlds in which water exists, and hence is a necessary truth about water (and so modal reasoning, in this case, demonstrates the ‘truth’ of scientific realism).

Modal logic has thus resurrected the mediaeval notion that there are de re necessities (necessary properties of things). This represents something of a revival of metaphysics, especially Aristotelianism, in contemporary analytic philosophy, and runs counter to the Enlightenment doctrine – typified by Hume’s philosophy – that necessity is ‘all in the mind’. However, the idea of possible worlds may have other, less metaphysical, uses. For if we accept that the idea of a world is never simply a logical notion but always a cultural and a historical one, then one way of conceiving the conceptual terrain of global culture is to see it as grounded in a set of interlinking possible worlds – some of which are ‘accessible’ from worlds geographically and/or culturally adjacent to them, some of which are not.

If the epistemology of global culture is conceived as requiring a cultural-ontological mapping of the interrelations between possible worlds, then the problems involved in understanding the architectonics of global knowledge can be stated somewhat differently: is there a possible cultural world ‘without logic’? When conceived anthropologically the answer is probably ‘yes’. But can there be a reflexive theoretical understanding of world-knowledge without an organizing logic? If we equate an understanding of world-knowledge with its conceptual mapping, then we must concede that some organizing logic is necessary. Thus logic, as a normative standard for thinking about thinking, may retain its status as a cognitive necessity in global contexts – even though we may be forced to accept that the topos of conceptual encounter, wrought by the global flow and counter-flow of ideas between accessible cultural worlds, will, in time, give rise to new logics.

