# 12 Theory, Culture & Society 23(2–3)

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

## 12 Theory, Culture & Society 23(2–3)

mobility of this relationship and draws attention to what is emergent in present conditions with the shift to ‘immaterial labour’ and to the different functioning of affect in corporate global capitalism and the new, de-centred and de-territorialized, and in some sense virtual apparatus of rule which characterizes Empire. For Negri (2003), the key move in Marx’s theory of ‘the real subsumption of labour by capital’ – and thus in his theory of value – is the theorization of technology within the conceptual limits of labour power, and thus ultimately within the purview of exchange value within capitalism. This approach neglects the understanding of being as both technical-being and as being-in-time, an understanding that at one level relates technics to time (Stiegler, 1998) and at another level relates cognition to affect. If Lazzarato is correct about contemporary capital’s freeing of time from the repetition of the past, one must then take seriously the implication that this short-circuiting of time by capital abolishes the time of the collective and allows the veil of visuality to obscure the collaborative and cumulative nature of work, preventing its coming-into-view, as Arendt might say. A problem then arises as to the process of liberation – the time to come of the creation of a new being out of the productive cooperation of the multitude, in Negri’s (2003) and Lazzarato’s analyses. For Negri the break with the pre-Einsteinian, and Marxist, concept of time and its relation to production and value implies that ‘time cannot be presented as measure, but must rather be presented as the global phenomenological fabric, as base, substance and flow of production in its entirety’ (2003: 29). In his development of an alternative view, one which conceptualizes time as multiplicity and as linked to collectivity (Negri notes this view in the Chinese tradition) and as what ‘changes the past into the future’ (Borges cited in Negri, 2003: 31), he argues for an ontological paradigm of time, namely, as ‘the fabric of the whole of being’ (2003: 34), and being as temporal being (the reference to Heidegger is explicit in Negri). So the move is towards an idea of constitution and becoming, of decay and invention.

Whilst Negri works through the problems of futurity through the analysis of antagonism – and there are other analytics of the relation of technology, time and the production and mutability of life (for example, Grosz, 2004; Massumi, 2002) – we would like to highlight the point of view of anticipation and orientation in considering the within-timeness of being, that is, the attention to historicity that considers that our past does not so much ‘follow along’ as ‘go ahead’ in its tending-towards (Heidegger, 1987: 41). One implication – following still the standpoint of being as a becoming – is that what has been is operative, as equipment, as memory, as tradition, as trace, in the present. Globalization introduces a new scale in this process, involving knowledge and its accumulation as memory and potentiality on a world scale. This suggests the enlargement of the archive to include marginalized or dissident knowledges, along with its continual incorporation and reactivation in the search for new ways of being.

The statement that ‘behind all scholarly research stands the archive’ now encounters the fact that the archive in question is becoming the global archive. It is also becoming a digitalized archive, one in which the past records and artefacts are not only subject to digitalization but one in which life is ‘lived under the gaze of the digital will to archive’ (a sort of complicit Truman Show existence). Yet one of the interfaces for the archive is the encyclopaedia. In this special issue we are not just seeking to problematize global knowledge but arguing that the relationship between the archive and the encyclopaedia is also unstable and that the space between the archive and the encyclopaedia is worthy of investigation.

