# Translation in China Fan Jinghua

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Translation in China Fan Jinghua

Keywords Jieyongci loanword, fanyi translation, qujing quest for the scriptures, Xixue Western learning

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>translation</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>texts</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>Chinese</sup> <sup>has</sup> <sup>helped</sup>to configure Chinese cultural identities to configure Chinese cultural identities throughout history, and will continue to reconfigure the future of Chinese popular and intellectual culture, perhaps to an extent that has found no equal in the West. Contemporary researchers have customarily divided translation practices into four or five peak periods, each of which has emphasized different genres of writing. These peaks are Buddhist scriptural translations from around the second century to the 11th century, Jesuitical-Protestant translations from the late 16th century to the early 18th century, ‘Western learning’ translations from the mid-19th century to the early 20th century, and fiction translations at the turn of the 20th century, in addition to the current translation of Western social sciences starting in the 1980s.

The cultural effects of translations during these periods function differently, especially in the politico-ethical significance for the translator, the text and the context (referring respectively to the mediator, the message and reception/effects). Research needs to be done on the extent to which the historicities of the socio-cultural context determine which translations are enacted, and how they operate, and the degree to which the tangible and symbolic presence of the translator and the author function in the reception of the translation. This presence, which may be considered to be symbolic when the translator can preface or footnote, and tangible when the translator can orally interpret the original texts, is of great significance in ‘empowering’ or elucidating the text in the target language.

The early translation of Buddhist texts into Chinese was mostly done by local religious practitioners, whose presence should be seen as a form of the message embodiment, as both author and on-site interpreters of the texts. In the sense that they made every effort to utilize expressions from Taoism to interpolate Buddhist scriptures and integrate the religion into Chinese culture, they were double betrayers due to their in-between cultural position. This double betrayal is argued to have established Chinese Buddhism (in contrast to Buddhism in China), from which Zen was developed. The more ‘faithful’ Sanskrit-loaded translation by Xuan Zang (602–664 AD) came later at a time when the cultural ‘capacity of tolerance’ and confidence would subject any foreign cultural influx to domestication and naturalization, or at least allow the translated texts to be rendered into what Benjamin termed as die reine Sprache.

The ambivalent function of the translators is privileged in the figure of Xuan Zang, whose monastic name Tripitaka might be literally translated as ‘Buddhist scripture oeuvre’. While the configuring function of Buddhism in Chinese cultural identities cannot be overestimated, Buddhism has not reached a hegemonic status in Chinese thought and intellectual history, no matter how well it has been acculturated and incorporated. Since Xuan Zang’s journey to ‘the West’, which was popularized and secularized later in the novel A Pilgrimage to the West (The Monkey King) (Wu, 1965, 1977–1983), the ‘quest for the scriptures’ has come to mean ‘learning the way of accomplishment’, which may imply a voluntary effacement of subjecthood. This implication is found in various expressions in later periods, especially when China experienced politicocultural crises, most notably in the late Qing dynasty and post-Mao period when conservative reformism and radical Westernization kinked in a dead knot.

In contrast to that of Buddhist texts, the translation of Christian texts did not share the same fate. The presence of the missionary-translators, who were both interpreters and practitioners in the truest sense, did not achieve the status of the Buddhist practitioners, partly because of the cultural diffidence in the Ming-Qing Dynasty that crippled a fuller introjection of Christianity into

Chinese culture as a complementary way of life. Matteo Ricci, despite his personal charisma and the successfully appeasing manner of his practice, was essentially acclaimed as a translator of natural science texts (that seemed to be more urgently needed at that time in China) and as a translator of Chinese classics into Latin in the West.

Later in the 18th century, the declining national power reached an extent that intellectuals began to describe Chinese culture in terms of its inferiority. Some of these thinkers turned to the West, and later to Japan after the Meiji Restoration (1868–1912), for possible ways to restore the nation to its previous status. Again, translation became analogous to Xuan Zang’s ‘quest for the scriptures’, but this time the texts were mostly works of the social and natural sciences. This period of translation from the beginning had a very practical application, generally devoid of religious implications, whether of Buddhism or Christianity. The translators aimed primarily at the social elite, although the Enlightenment spirit was part of their motivation. The explication of terms was thus of great significance, since the translators’ absence from these texts (compared with religious works) demanded their intelligibility. This wave of translations might be said to have started the ‘modernization process’ of Chinese thought. But the fact that Yan Fu’s famous neologism for Huxley’s ‘theory of evolution’ eventually gave way to Japanese loanwords might be an indication that this Enlightenment period was essentially an incomplete project. Yan Fu’s three standards of translation (fidelity, sanity and elegance), which were in the spirit of scientific precision, were mostly applied to the translation of literary works of the early 20th century. The ‘modernization process’, above all, actualized a wholly new language, the vernacular Mandarin Chinese, whose valence was more apt for the scientific logic in the ‘West Learning’. In this sense, a new writing system had actually transcended the entailing debate over the role of ‘the scriptures’ or the foreign ways of accomplishment.

The dispute over the standards of translation can be seen as yet another evidence of the translatability of not only the language but also the culture that was integral to the scientific spirit and the social system that stood behind it. However, after the collapse of Imperial China, the need to resort to literary works to establish a modern Chinese language hijacked the impetus for the re-excavation of classic Chinese. The easily available Japanese kanji and other semantic loanwords, therefore, made classic Chinese literally obsolete. The subversive function of translation wrapped in the Enlightenment Project was carried forward after the Cultural Revolution period in Communist China. Since the

1980s the intellectual elites have been synchronously translating different schools of Western social thought, for a time rendering the Chinese thinkers ‘muddled’ or wavering in influence. With the increasing virtual (co-)presence or simulacrum of (co-)presence of the author and translator ‘actualized’ (for example by the prefacing author for Chinese versions and the translators’ apprenticeship under Western eyes), translation in contemporary China is becoming an instrument for subverting the institutional and cultural power bases, and for struggling for discursive power. The current scene is also complicated by the mixture of the ‘enlightenment project’ with the ‘subversion project’, which is part of the hard-to-die ‘revolution complex’. This situation is rendered even more complex in light of the faltering divisions between indigenous Chinese and exogenous Western thought, whether in terms of language or philosophy.

