# Translation: Politics and Ethics

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Translation: Politics and Ethics

Couze Venn

Keywords colonization, heterogeneity, indebtedness, monolingualism, untranslatability

homogenizing ambition of Anglo-American as universal language and because of the systematic attempt by neoliberal discourse to colonize every socio-economic, administrative and cultural practice through the re-transcription of these practices into the idiom of neoliberalism. This translation-as-colonization opens them to a restructuring – or ‘modernization’ and ‘liberalization’ in the rhetoric of neoliberal governance – dictated by a corporate, market logic. The effect is the institution of a monolingualism that abolishes the possibility of alternative worlds for it abolishes the distinctions and differences that mark these practices with regard to the values they inscribe and the alternative socialities they enact. A wider questioning about translation emerges here, in addition to the problems associated with translation-ascreolization across cultures occasioned by migration and diasporic displacements. It relates to the language and the discursive spaces in which can be articulated a challenge to such imperial moves.

It was in 1979 at a conference in Montreal, this place that repeats itself as French-but-not-quite, that Derrida developed a number of points about translation that have come to occupy a central place in the debates about signifying practice. Quebec was a fitting location for this questioning, since it has been for a considerable time the site of cultures in translation – French, British, Inuit, American – multiply inscribed in colonialism, and thus marked by the weight of history and the disjunct spatiotemporalities that attach to language when questions of identity, authority, authenticity and the proper surface in relation to power differentials. The already well recognized problems that attach to translation, particularly the necessity to translate if one is to speak to the other at all, thus the question of address, set against the fact of incipient untranslatability, and issues concerning (counter)appropriation, loss, survival and heterogeneity, acquire a sharpness when located in the context of unequal authority to speak and to name. Colonial subjugation relies on the violence of interdicts and the sovereignty of the law of the mightier to impose its language;

but the imposition of a common tongue which subjugation decrees is undermined by the fundamental inadequacy or inappropriateness of any register to fully render the phenomenal and experiential world; something of the world remains untranslatable and unpresentable, harbouring alterity and testifying to what exceeds representation.

This is admirably expressed in Friel’s (1981) Translations dealing with the British effort to replace Gaelic place names in Ireland in the 19th century with the approximations required by the standardized English of colonial administration, an exercise of dispossession that deprives the people not only of a cultural space and its language but of the commonality of a shared memory inscribed and encrypted, that is, inscrypted, in the language. As with other instances of linguistic dispossession in the period of occidental imperialism, the Gaelic proper names, it transpires, are laden with their own narratives of place and deeds, ‘mythologies of fantasy and hope and self-deception – a syntax opulent with tomorrows . . . [a] response to mud cabins and a diet of potatoes . . . to . . . inevitabilities’ (1981: 42). For the English, in the figure of the cartographer Lancey, it was a matter of remaking the land as colonial territory, for the Irish it was a question of surviving colonial re-territorialization and of finding a new idiom in which to preserve the ‘images of the past embodied in language’ (1981: 66). In the play, the failure by the colonial agents to properly translate any of the Gaelic names arises from an underlying disrespect for or ignorance of the scene in which proper names erupt as trace. It is also of course a matter about the addressee in translation, and thus about the recognition of the other in language: to whom is the message directed? What does one want the addressee to hear? How does one make visible or audible what is invisible or inaudible in the original? Whose language claims the right to name? These different stakes in translation oblige one to recognize the effects of power, more so today when ‘certain people must yield to the homohegemony of dominant languages. They must learn the language of the masters, of capital and machines; they must lose their idiom in order to survive or live better’ (Derrida, 1996: 30). In the example I have signalled, the differend separating the two sides exemplarily demonstrates the danger when translation takes place across power differentials, for the effort to translate proper names ‘inscribes the scene of translation within a scene of inheritance and a space which is precisely that of the genealogy of proper names, of the family, the law, indebtedness’ (Derrida, 1988: 104).

My intervention aims to tease out a number of issues starting with this question of the proper name. The definition that Derrida gives in a parenthesis in Freud’s Legacy will indicate the approach I will pursue; he says ‘any signified whose signifier cannot vary or be translated into another signifier without a loss of signification induces a proper name effect’ (Derrida, 1987: 312). Yet the proper name – Auschwitz, Rwanda, Biko – demands both that it be translated, that is, it demands recognition and a response, and yet that it remains untranslatable, that is, that its singularity as event or as the who be respected. The proper name conceals the trace of the untranslatable even as it calls out for a translation that allows it to become visible and thus acknowledged. Indebtedness requires this visibility of the trace. For instance Auschwitz, while it resonates with Hiroshima at the metaphorical level, cannot substitute for it: both proper names demand that their particularity be respected, precisely because the point of view of indebtedness and responsibility underline the particularity of the event even as it judges it according to universal ethical rules. The requirement of both translatability and untranslatability that the proper name makes highlights the dilemma at the heart of translation; this is complicated by the fact that every proper name is multiply inscribed in a variety of narratives and a spatiality that circumscribe its meaning. For example, for cultural theory and philosophy, Auschwitz has become spliced into discourses about modernity and the postmodern so that, as signifier, it now occupies a place determined by the mass of connotations that have accumulated in its wake. In the thought of Lyotard, it stands for the catastrophic sign of the failure of the Enlightenment’s ethical project, and it announces the birth of the postmodern (although the latter is itself modernity’s child), while for the Jews it signals the Shoah and the threshold of a different destiny still being played out. Translation thus requires a hermeneutics, of the unsaid as much as of the already-said, informed by a genealogy of the concept.

The dilemma brings to light also the undecidable character in translation, for every translation sets out with the ideal of perfect translatability, thus with the assumption of a universal language into which every particularity can be transposed. Yet it flounders because the difference between the particular and the universal repeats the differences between cultures, traditions, biographies, dialects, registers and codes that resist transposition from one language or register to another, from one culture or tradition to another. It is well to bear in mind too that the seeming purity of national languages itself conceals the polyglot, heterogeneous and diasporic character of all languages. Equally, national languages, in their emergence alongside the birth of the nation-state, attempt to erase or marginalize differences that arise from class, gender, ethnic, and regional conflicts and inequalities. Translation disturbs, or ought to disturb, the underlying reality that these differences signal, for they occupy the place of the unconscious of every language.

To the multiplicity of languages and registers one must add the fact that in any case the signified exceeds the signifier, since every encoding loses something of the referent even as it adds a whole culture to the signified. For instance, when it is a matter of expressing the experiential, one needs to recognize that a fundamental dimension of identity like the sense of place and belonging involves an intricate mix of sounds, smells, landscapes, social space and feelings that defies adequate expression in any one register, including the linguistic form. It is worth pointing out in this respect the relative neglect of the sonic/acoustic, touch, and other sensory registers that graphocentrism has induced when it comes to the problematic of the adequate expression of one’s experience of being-in-the-world, with implications for the kinds of signifying practices that would communicate that experience. The predominance of teletechnologies today presents its own problems. Cross-cultural translation comes up against this range of obstacles when it is a matter of fidelity to the locatedness of cultures and their ‘lieux de memoire’ (Nora, 1984), pointing once more to what is untranslatable and to an immanent undecidability in translation. By the same token, and also for the reasons I have noted above, the problem of translation opens every language to a series of disruption regarding its claim to speak for a consensual community: at the level of national languages, at the level of a universal language, and in terms of the authorizing processes that sanction the proper and the adequate. A politics of translation thus appears, to add to the ethical question about indebtedness and responsibility.

My final remark follows from the last point; it pertains to the models of translation that would respect the ethical implication in the desire to speak to the other that translation makes. Ricoeur (1996: 12), examining the problem from the point of view of the ‘ongoing debate between the right to universality and the demand of historical difference’, suggests three models: that of linguistic hospitality that plays host to the other’s culture, that of the exchange of memories in which the translator takes responsibility ‘in imagination and in sympathy, for the story of the other’ (1996: 7), and the model of (a non-forgetful) forgiveness. The first involves the ability or willingness to dwell in two languages in order to effect a transference across the ethical and spiritual categories of the other/the addressee; the second calls for ways of narrating and remembering that reconfigure the past of narrator and addressee with the aim of giving new life to the ‘unfulfilled future’ buried in the past of every culture that an ethical telling recognizes and revives; a labour of rememorizing (to invoke Toni Morrison’s term) is involved here akin to a psychoanalytic working through. The third model responds to suffering, one’s own and the other’s, but by proceeding from the suffering of others, so that one imagines ‘the suffering of others before re-examining one’s own’ (1996: 9); this means that ‘the work of forgiveness must be grafted on to the work of memory in the language of narration’ (1996: 11). Underlying Ricoeur’s discussion is the necessity to overcome the repetition of violence that has afflicted the history of encounters within Europe; clearly the same concern applies to encounters and exchanges between Euro-America and the rest of the world, and between new ethnicized publics reconstituted from the legacy of previous colonialisms and subjugations. This repetition is stuck, on the one hand, in the disavowed knowledge of the suffering inflicted, and, on the other hand, because the rhetoric of the nation-state and of ethnic essentialism and egocentric philosophies of the subject induce the forgetting of the fundamental heterogeneity of cultures and the heteronomous character of identities. It is clear that the ethical force in the translation ethos that a commitment to the reduction of suffering in the world motivates must challenge the totalizations and exclusions which monolingualism and monoculturalism produce, whether in the shape of neo-liberal colonization of the lifeworld or in the mimicry that the culture of new Empire breeds.

