# The Inhuman

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# The Inhuman

Neal Curtis

Keywords affect, event, heterogeneity, Lyotard, other, self

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>inhuman</sup> <sup>is</sup> <sup>perhaps</sup> <sup>most</sup> <sup>readily</sup> <sup>under-</sup>stood as a moral category, designating actions and practices that contravene in the most extreme way the parameters set for acceptable human behaviour. Ironically, however, the inhuman is thus a category that constitutes and saves the human; it upholds the human in its certainty and rectitude, projecting all animality and barbarity outwards. However, there is another inhuman, one that has been most eloquently described by Jean-François Lyotard, and which, while remaining a constitutive outside, constitutes us not in the certainty of our knowledge, practices and moral codes, but undermines our certainty, deposes the subject of knowledge

Halberstam, J. and I. Livingstone (eds) (1995) Posthuman Bodies. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.

Haraway, D. (1991) Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. London: Free Association Books.

Hayles, N.K. (1998) ‘How Does It Feel to Be Posthuman?’ URL (consulted July 2005): http://framework.v2.nl/archive/archive/node/ text/default.xslt/nodenr-70187

Hayles, N.K. (1999) How We Became Posthuman. Chicago, IL and London: University of Chicago Press.

Hayles, N.K. (2002) Writing Machines. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Hayles, N.K. (2005) ‘Computing the Human’, Theory, Culture & Society 22(1): 131–51.

Pepperell, R. (2003) The Posthuman Condition. Bristol and Portland: Intellect.

Waldby, C. (2000) The Visible Human Project: Informatic Bodies and Posthuman Medicine. London and New York: Routledge.

Nicholas Gane is Reader in Sociology at the University of York. His publications include The Future of Social Theory (Continuum, 2004).

and questions our ordering of the world. While the inhuman understood as evil reinforces our sense of self and secures our autonomy, this other inhuman, understood as that which escapes and yet animates us, is the moment of both radical disruption and radical dependence. In this regard the inhuman does not serve the human but is a challenge to it.

With regard to the inhuman understood as evil, it is never we who are inhuman; it is always the other. When we kill it is done in the name of freedom and is done for the sake of the human. When they kill it is in the name of tyranny or extremism; it is an outrage and is absolutely inhuman. Of course, the eradication of the inhuman, or at least the war against its terror, legitimates the global extension of what is most human, understood today as the pacific beneficience of an invisible economic hand. Thus, despite the supposed processes of decolonization the inhuman remains essential for empire, underpinning as it does the logic of ‘development’, the flow of capital and the expansion of the ‘free market’. In this sense the inhuman is integral to the maintenance of a system, whether that be the moral code of a community (a community that increasingly defines itself in an exemplary way as human) or the institutions of a new world order. Against this the inhuman understood as the remainder, or that which resists, institutes a politics that is at once humble, sensitive and experimental. An inhuman politics as a politics of the remainder refuses the arrogance that celebrates the end of history and the victory of a single, vindicated model of the good society; it demands probity when dealing with events in order that their singularity is not lost in the haste to comprehend them according to the well-worn narratives of our habitual sense-making practices; it demands that we think in new ways, invent new concepts, new rules for understanding, new criteria for judgement and new modes of representation. Ultimately a politics of the inhuman refuses any notion of totality, finality and completion. As Lyotard reminded us, the inhumanity that consolidates the system ‘must not be confused with the infinitely secret one of which the soul is hostage’ (1991: 2), and it is with this conception of being held hostage that the otherwise hidden inhumanity of the remainder can be further described. Specifically we are hostage to the inhuman in that it is continually and permanently ‘before us’ in the dual sense of its antecedence and our exposure to it. In other words, the inhuman is the temporality of events, the happening of which we can never fully grasp, as well as our openness to them, an openness that first animates the soul.

With regard to the temporality of events, the event disrupts the assumed authority of the subject of knowledge. The event is a singularity that precedes and exceeds reference; it is prior to and heterogeneous to discourse. The event is the advent or presentation of the It happens rather than the signification of the What happened. In keeping with analyses of time offered by Augustine and Husserl, the presentation of events is something that becomes more remote, more elusive, the more thought directs itself to it:

Because it is absolute, the presenting present cannot be grasped: it is not yet or no longer present . . . Such is the specific and paradoxical constitution of the event. That something happens, the occurrence, means that the mind is disappropriated. (Lyotard, 1991: 59)

The inadequacy that thinking suffers in relation to the happening of events is masked, however, by the haste with which we claim to have made sense of them. The training of the mind to subsume sensible data under this or that concept tends to contribute to the privileging of narrative over event, and of the general over the particular. Force of habit turns the mind towards what is the same rather than what is different or singular in our encounter with events. We deploy determinate judgement in instances where our judgement should be reflective; we assume a rule for judgement when one is still to be found, with the consequence that thinking becomes increasingly insensitive and lacking in probity. ‘No event is at all accessible if the self does not renounce the glamour of its culture, its wealth, health, knowledge and memory’ (Lyotard, 1988: 18). These become the pretexts that prevent any genuine encounter with the event. All events, even the most destructive or potentially catastrophic, get caught in the pretext in which, for example, the ‘West’ guarantees and underwrites the human. This is one of many narratives that allow us to make sense of the world, but one that also hides what is most demanding in the happening of events. Given that the full deployment of these sense-making processes is the sign of the mature human, the infant thus becomes an analogy for the inhuman. To think the inhuman remainder, to think in relation to this categorical excess or heterogeneity, demands we renew ties ‘with the season of childhood, the season of the mind’s possibilities’ (Lyotard, 1992: 116).

The inhuman, then, is the advent of events, but it is also their affect. If, in the Hegelian schema, the human is the movement of the soul towards the absolute knowledge of self-consciousness, the inhuman is rather the affectability of the soul where the self is animated by a ‘recurrent alterity (Lyotard, 1991: 59). The inhuman, thus conceived, stipulates that the soul does not affect itself, but is affected from outside. The soul is not the motor of history, but the site of a calling, a birth in response to the affect or touch of the sensible, and it marks the absolute dependence of one on the other. No affect without soul, no soul without affect. In this scenario the soul can never be complete in itself. The soul is without autonomy. Without the sensible it is threatened with privation, or anaesthesia. The touch of the sensible ‘tears the inanimate from the limbo in which it inexists’ (Lyotard, 1997: 243). All science and all knowledge are beholden to this prior touch, to this donation, and avant-garde artistic and literary forms are charged with bearing witness to these events and to this affective dependency. Ordinarily, in an attempt to hold at bay the feeling of dissonance produced by this touch that undermines the comfort and harmony of the habitual, this exposure is reduced to an almost mute ‘second life’, albeit one that continually ‘opens little parentheses’ (Lyotard, 1997: 118) in the ‘first life’ of conscious speaking and doing that marks the mature subject. This secrecy of the second life is treated with suspicion. It does not support public exchanges, easy translation, or comfortable communication as is demanded of all politically rational humans; and it is neither good nor beautiful. The second life instead generates the incommensurate, the experimental, and the difficult, even the sublime, and it is here that it too approaches the monstrous and the dreadful.

This inhuman second life is of a part with that which resists and that which remains. At the end of history we are supposedly without remainder, or rather the remainder is simply the invalid and the illegitimate. Understood as evil, the inhuman remains the cloak beneath which the supposedly ‘legitimate’ system continues to expand, but conceived as dissonance, dissensus and heterogeneity, the inhuman places demands upon our thinking and interrogates our knowledge in a manner that may yet offer us a way to refigure our relations with difference and with others, beyond the system and without prejudice, maybe, even, beyond terror.

