# Writing

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Writing

Steve Clark

Keywords appropriation, Derrida, distanciation, eurocentrism, language/linguisticality, Plato, Ricoeur, text/textuality, translation theory, voice/self-presence, writing

E<sup>ven</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>address</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>question</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>writing</sup>presents a daunting prospect. As with any of the central aspects of human-language use, simply to attempt to define the basic object of study may appear a fatally hubristic enterprise. Whether regarded as amorphous totality or endless accumulation, there appears no stable external vantage from which the proliferation of discrete graphic entities may be mapped, ordered, or mastered. The worldliness of script seems potentially limitless: incorrigibly plural, intransigently diverse. As such the problem necessarily becomes one of writings, and the movement between both individual texts and the apparently incommensurate cultural traditions out of which they have emerged.

The problem of writing, if narrowed for pragmatic convenience, and approached anthropologically, becomes a question of genealogy: the chronology of ethno-linguistics from the Sumerians onwards (c. 3000 BC). From this perspective, its most verifiable origin would be book-keeping. The stark recitation of name, commodity, and amount develops into tax records, military instructions and imperial administration: a practical mnemonic, primarily a device for information retrieval, and a tool for state-building, and as such the prerogative of bureaucratic functionaries rather than a shared and distinctive human capacity. Writing implies recognition but not necessarily inclusion or even comprehension (evident in the Egyptian genre of tomb-inscription designed only to be read in the Pharoah’s afterlife). Even its utility value could fluctuate wildly: in AD 764 the Japanese Empress Koken printed one million dharanis or Buddhist charms to celebrate her new dynasty: a six-year project, entirely unread, followed, perhaps understandably, by a 200-year hiatus in printing.

Mediums of inscription varied: pottery, skins, sometimes metals, subsequently waxed tablets. Continuous script became possible after the breakthrough of papyrus: a necessary condition for widespread literacy was the boom in its production after the Ptolemaic dynasty took over Egypt, establishing a major trade with their original Greek culture. The Chinese probably borrowed the concept of script from the Middle East, but were the first culture to produce an approximate equivalent of paper: the technique of pulping silk and spreading it over frame containers (first described in AD 105) was kept a state secret and monopoly for several hundred years. With this, as with many other technologies, Chinese innovation preceded Europe, but remained undeveloped due to a lack of commercial exposure to market forces and the maintenance of a high degree of centralized control.

Even in this area the ratio of hard evidence to speculative conjecture renders hypotheses of origin irreducibly metaphorical if not metaphysical. This is the option that will be adopted for the remainder of this brief survey. It will begin with the problematic classically established in Plato’s Phaedrus, look at Derrida’s commentary, the Pharmakon (1972; translated 1981), and examine two possible lines of response in Ricoeur’s recent work, Memory, History, Forgetting (2004) and Sur la traduction (2004).

The Greeks had possessed some kind of rudimentary script from around 2000 BC; writing took on a new authority with the appearance of inscriptions on public monuments from around 700 BC, designed to be viewed rather than read. Overall literacy rates were probably very low: estimates suggest that perhaps 15 percent of the adult male population by 480 BC were semi-literate, reducing to around 5 percent if women and slaves are included. Demographically, at least, Plato in his dialogue Phaedrus may have been unduly alarmist. During his lifetime, however, two major developments in writing occurred: a massively enhanced ability to formulate abstract concepts, and the division of historical from fictional narrative (Thucydides crucially asserting the primacy of documentary sources).

Polemics such as Plato’s represent a countertradition positing the spoken voice as guarantee of authenticity. Such a position, however, overlooks both potential duplicity within the context of verbal interchange (the figure of the Sophist), and the creative augmentation of meaning permitted by the durability of inscription (most obviously in Plato’s own dialogues). The opposition of speech and text does not apply, for example, to Egypt, where all script was verbalized by the scribewitness; and private reading only emerges as a prominent social practice after both Socrates and Plato, with Aristotle a bibliophile par excellence, and a new generation of intellectuals such as Hippocrates using writing as a means of knowledge transmission.

According to Plato, Phaedrus recites a work on the duties of a lover to Socrates who insists he must have been reading from a presumed written original. Words retain a majestic silence; they are fixed, cannot be modified through interaction or response, and so are always a potential mode of imposition. The performative paradigm is that of law-making. Conversely the medium of writing may be regarded as too promiscuous: drifting, open to competing interpretations, subject to no single forum of arbitration. Thus it may prompt responses from an inappropriate addressee, and be spurned by those towards whose attention it is directed. It means simultaneously too much and too little and so both assumes and relinquishes authority. (Socrates’ famous misgivings on this point, it should be noted, would have been shared by approximate contemporaries such as Confucius and the Indian Brahmins.)

A second classic passage introduces the myth of the Pharmakon. The Egyptian king Thamus goes to the god Theuth to assess the usefulness of various human arts. Writing will make the Egyptians wiser and improve their memories. However, it will also produce forgetfulness because it will allow dependence on external written marks and therefore the mind’s own powers of retrieval and recognition will decline. The semblance of wisdom will displace truth itself: pupils will read without the oversight of a teacher and so remain unaware of their own lack of genuine judgement.

As Derrida argues, discussion of the intersection of the spoken and written word is particularly prone to a self-annulling nostalgia for origins (evoked only through the medium which is to be repudiated). (Empirically, oral ability and power of retention undoubtedly weaken with the onset of literacy, though this is counterbalanced by the acquisition of higher-order structures of categorization.) Yet if writing may be regarded as a form of internalized constraint, erasing certain modes of communal participation in knowledge, it also serves to emancipate from, or at least empower negotiation with, spatial and temporal limits. If it may be linked plausibly to the reign of ontotheology, through religions promoting text in order to preserve sacred scripture, this also has the effect of a democratic (rather than deconstructive) dissemination of the word.

Hence the constitutive ambiguity of writing as poison and remedy seized upon in Derrida’s commentary, The Pharmakon, one of many bravura performances from the late 1960s and early 1970s. Writing is saved from Plato’s indictment at the cost of rendering it indistinguishable from sophistry, which is thereby instated as the normative condition of language. Running polemics are directed against both a Platonic-Husserlian ideality of meaning (from a broadly Heideggerian perspective) and various scenarios of anthropological fabulation. Origins of language narrated in terms of empirical acquisition or proto-social contract assigning meaning to sound lack explanatory clarity compared to the premise of the system being always already there. Writing as cultural stage must be distinguished from methodological postulate, the latter seemingly inseparable, in Derrida’s account, from a Eurocentrist bias, though this fails to take into account the evolution of either Asian traditions (the process of adaptation of Chinese script in Korea and Japan), or the almost exclusively propagandistic and sanguinary functions of Mesoamerican writing, alternating between sanctification of the monarch and commemoration of human sacrifice.

The history of texts (as governed by a seemingly a priori principle of indeterminacy) shows an alarming proclivity to swallow the history of history per se: ‘textuality being constituted by differences and by differences from differences, it is by nature absolutely heterogeneous and is constantly composing with the forces that tend to annihilate it’ (Derrida, 1981: 98). This process is ‘reined in by metaphor, metaphysics and theology’: thinking outside it would bring the closure of an entire metaphysical epoch with unforeseen but presumably headily utopian results: ‘the future can only be anticipated in the form of an absolute danger’ (Derrida, 1974: 4). Obviously a degree of circumspection is required before buying the whole package, which takes the opposition between speech and writing as paradigmatic of a whole series of oppositions structuring the field of Western metaphysics, with the prior term privileged over the latter: soul/body, inside/ outside, presence/absence, light/dark, truth/falsehood, form/matter. There is no point of mastery over this textual system into which any individual is always already inserted. Meaning is determined not by authorial intention but by formal exigencies of a logic of play (jeu, chance, gamble) whose outcome remains unpredictable. These displacements become a model for any dialogic context: hence writing paradoxically takes priority over speech.

Ricoeur seems to come from a more sober if not repressed tradition. He remains committed if not to univocal meaning at least controlled polysemy, and also to the concept of text as subject to a dialectic of explanation and understanding. Writing permits distanciation, the condition of formal analytic procedures. Yet his most recent work displays striking continuities with the deconstructive perspective both in acknowledged indebtedness and governing problematics.

The origin of writing can only be left to myth. It will be not the object of a science but only of a history which is recited, a fable that is repeated. There is no alternative but to accept the condition of original separation: ‘the writing of beginnings presupposes itself as already existing in order to think of itself at its birth’. The fundamental question raised by the myth of Babel is simply why more than one language exists. Rather than opt for theological extrapolation of the fallen word, this condition of what Derrida terms ‘absolute heterogeneity’ poses the task of translation, with the acceptance of loss permitting the work of worldmaking. So rather than a move from inscription as singular artefact to omnivorous textuality, the ethical imperative of writing may be defined in terms of endless but specific transitions between texts.

Derrida’s reading of Phaedrus insists on tightly coordinating the different functions of key terms in different contexts. Ricoeur accepts the potentially infinite contextualization: the translator must move to and fro between words and phrases to the level of the spirit of an entire culture. Even apparent coincidence may be deceptive, concealing multiple refigurations of key terms (‘maîtremots’). One never finishes explaining, but this process posits an address outwards to another who shares neither our language nor our beliefs. The problematic can be stated phenomenologically as the spacing of signs within the temporal continuity of the verbal flow. For Derrida (co-teacher of a seminar on Husserl with Ricoeur at the Sorbonne at one point), the Husserlian premise of the inevitable externality of the phonetic/graphic signifier with regard to the animating intention is reversed. Plato may have dreamt of a memory with no supplement; but rather without the supplement, no memory. ‘The exteriority of writing’ produces ‘its power of maleficent penetration’ and ‘that process of doubling in which we are fatally entrained’.

For Ricoeur, this externality (or, in his preferred term, ‘distanciation’) is what permits the interrogation of the document, and so resists the vulnerability of verbal dialogue to bad faith. Furthermore there may be a positive function of writing as monument: an element of the sacral and liminal. It should not be required to replicate the process of living memory: it survives the death of the writer not as a betrayal but as a form of commemoration, a material trace signifying those who have lived. The archive, product of bureaucratic convenience, also allows the living to be defined through and alongside the dead: ‘history continues to be born from the taking of distance which consists in the recourse to the exteriority of the archival trace’.

Derrida’s exegesis is heavily reliant on reactivating resonances of the original Greek, with subsequent movement between writings regarded as merely the attempted neutralization of the play of language. Ricoeur refuses this broadly Heideggerian ideal of regression to meaning: translation is not an occlusion of etymology but a restoration of force (‘pulsion’). Invoking Quine’s model, the compatibility between any two writings could only be measured by invoking a third text, an ideal language which does not and cannot ever exist: there will always be a split (‘écart’) between equivalence and exact adequation. The original is only ever replaced by another original: the dream of perfect correspondence only ever leads to bad translation. The only legitimate criticism lies in an effort to retranslate, a desire which indicates a surplus of energy. Dissatisfaction indicates neither the inadequacy of prior attempts nor the discovery of hitherto concealed secrets: but as an impulse to make one’s own language less provincial and exclusive, open it to the point of view of and so welcome the stranger. The project thus achieves exemplary ethical status: the refusal of selfsufficiency by moving between writings becomes a kind of birth (‘natalité’), counterbalancing the funereal power of the text as sepulchre, signifying but also preserving the memory of those who have been. The Enlightenment ideal of transparent classification, the universal library, must be abandoned along with any messianic pursuit of an eschatological purity. It must be replaced by an ideal of hospitality (‘hospitalière langagière’) which combines love of one’s own language with acceptance of otherness. Resistance is motivated by fear and hatred of the outsider, seen as a menace to our linguistic heritage and identity. The movement between languages may appear insurmountable (as in Chomsky, ‘bien infranchissable’), but the empirical rejoinder is in this case a devastating one: since translation exists it must be possible. This in turn becomes the ethical ideal of conduct to others within one’s own language, towards those who are not strangers: it is always possible to say the same thing otherwise (‘autrement dit’, perhaps better translated as to and for the other, otherly).

The interest of this recent position lies partly in its reformulation of Ricoeur’s earlier hermeneutics founded on the dialectic of explanation and understanding of writing conceived in terms of singular artefacts. Instead of a move to generalized textuality (or linguisticality if one prefers Gadamer), it now posits endless transitions between specific writings. Rather than the deconstructive or Heideggerian unmasking of false origins, acceptance of our condition within writing (as ‘nomads errants’) implies an opportunity for creative reconstruction and ethical openness to the other. Writing implies writings. This in turn entails a world of divergent but not therefore hostile or incompatible languages and traditions: comprehension of that multiplicity may then become a model for ethical openness to the other both within and outside our own heritages.

