# Leben

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Leben

Josef Bleicher

Keywords Bergson, Dilthey, form, Geist, life, metaphysics, Nietzsche, Simmel

L<sup>eben</sup> <sup>(Life),</sup> <sup>together</sup> <sup>with</sup> <sup>Geist</sup> <sup>(Spirit),</sup>represent the core defining concepts in represent the core defining concepts in German philosophy in the 200 years of its most flourishing period, marked at either end by the names of Kant and Heidegger. These concepts together define a shared ground that also helps to characterize German philosophy: concern with activity, development, history, tension and resolution, and a transcendental mode of inquiry. One of the difficulties of tackling Leben is that Life runs counter to form, yet somehow has to be captured or described through form, which means there will necessarily be a lack of clarity and precision. Georg Simmel (1858–1918), one of the foremost exponents of the Philosophie des Lebens, saw it as the third stage of western philosophy. In the first place there was Greek philosophy, resting on the concept of Substance: a persisting substratum as the core of all being and cognition. Secondly, there was modern philosophy with its stress on movement and mechanical form, which aimed to uncover the laws that render it calculable and thus comprehensible. More recently, the third stage suggests a redirection in the form of a Verlebendigung, an enlivening of the conception of the world and our knowledge of it. Leben is the metaphysical principle that issues forth subject and object, and provides their ontological and epistemological common ground (Simmel, 1912).

At its core, Leben serves as the antithesis to static conceptions and a one-sided focus on consciousness or reflexivity. Formal constructs themselves issue from Leben, and are its expressions. Leben ‘throws up’ intellectual activity, and no amount of internal, self-oriented ruminations will gain any insight into the true grounding of this enterprise. The contrast between the calculative reductionism found in the mechanistic universe of Newton and Kant is developed by Simmel in his essay on Kant and Goethe. The pantheistic reverence of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832) for the ceaseless creativity of nature provides the grounds for his refusal to write a conventionally ‘philosophical’ account of Leben. But during his life-time, the Verlebendigung of philosophy started to take root. Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860), an ardent admirer of Goethe, is considered by Simmel the first Philosopher of Leben. He reflected on ‘Leben as such’, rather than enquiring about the meaning or value of an aspect of Life. Leben as such is characterized by a ‘will to Life’ which engenders all manifestations of the human and natural world. Yet, in its urge to come into realization, it causes pain and suffering, false hopes and disillusionment as it stimulates desire and striving. The higher developed the species, and within humanity as the apex of creation the individual, the more sensitized, hence exposed to suffering, they will be. While art, as self-sufficient insight into Life, and in particular music, can provide genuine but brief respite, the only lasting solution lies in renunciation and the denial of the will – and thus of Life. Schopenhauer is indebted to Indian philosophy in his account of Leben as futile illusion and as suffering, until the taming of the will through selfdiscipline, withdrawal from the world, and its meditative contemplation become effective.

Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900) responds to the problematic of Leben in a diametrically opposite way. Rather than renouncing Life’s quests, our task is to give full expression to them. As the stream of Life propels us forward, its energy should be drawn on also to move upwards, to transcend transgressively all conventionalized normalcy with its Life-inhibiting norms and precepts. This is the progression which Nietzsche famously encapsulated in the notion of the Übermensch. For Nietzsche, all intellectual and aesthetic content and values are merely realizations of the process of Leben, with the ‘will to power’ having Leben itself as its real essence. While Nietzsche’s philosophy of Leben is focused on human existence and the specific values and merits engendered by the former, Henri Bergson’s (1859–1944) ambitions are more wide-ranging. In one respect, he retains a link with earlier Romanticist critiques of the newly emerging scientific ethos (echoing Goethe’s reservations against the reformulation of reality in terms of mathematical science); on the other, he articulates a vitalistic conception of Life that reverberates in present neo-vitalist discourses. All that exists, whatever its form or content, represents a specific emanation of the elan vital.

Bergson counterpoises mechanistic conceptions that privilege fixed spatial relationships and, through acts of cognition, dissect the stream of consciousness into isolated segments, to his holistic and vitalistic insights. Here ‘intuition’ can access Life as livingness (être vivant) by immersing itself into the flow of life, or life as flow (durée), a dynamic, ‘organic’, inter-connectedness of whole and part and as the absolute continuity of psychological reality. Bergson’s lebensphilosophic outlook stresses the primacy and centrality of Life, as the unity within continuous change. As such, it situates itself in relation to the Ur-dichotomy, forever associated with the names of Parmenides and Heraclit, of assigning primacy to either the substantively fixed and durable or the eternally flowing. Pointing beyond Bergson, Simmel (1914) suggests that perhaps philosophy will take its next step and place itself beyond this opposition to see these as two modes of revelation of the unity of metaphysical Leben.

Wilhelm Dilthey (1831–1911), too, insists on the crucial insight that Leben can be made intelligible only from within Leben. Bergson pointed to Intuition as the mode of understanding that can immerse itself into the flow of Life. Dilthey draws on the verstehen, everyday understanding, which he re-defines and develops into the mode of cognition characteristic of the Geisteswissenschaften (human sciences/humanities), in contra-distinction to the descriptive and analytical methods of the natural sciences. As a mode of participating in Leben, verstehen leads us ‘inside’ the objectivations of Leben which, as such, are in themselves meaningful forms. This privilege, that is the direct internal access to the meaning of the object (another human being, history, art, etc.), on the basis of shared Leben, involves Dilthey in the problematic of objectivity. Wedded to the Kantian project of establishing the scientificity of the human sciences, in the shape of a ‘Critique of Historical Reason’, Dilthey remains tied to methodological presuppositions of the natural sciences, and in particular the Cartesian separation of subject and object. Reluctant to take the full step into Leben and thereby move beyond the abstractions and methodological artifice of the empirical-analytical sciences, as Bergson had demonstrated, Dilthey remains caught within the antinomies that a courageously consequential Lebensphilosophie should have undercut. His later work does, however, see a shift from a psychological conception of verstehen as introspection and empathy towards a hermeneutic one. The subjectmatter of history and other objectivations arising out of the flow of Leben are here related to their structuring context that imparts them with their meaning. This way, verstehen is an act of interpretation, of relating a part to its overarching whole, thereby elucidating the meaning of both reciprocally. Leben constitutes the ultimate meaningcontext and horizon, as well as the preceding fundament on the basis of which subject and object (as co-subject) can enter into the communicative process that is verstehen.

It was his younger colleague and earlier protégé, Simmel, who undertook the step towards an ontology of Leben. His final work, Lebensanschauung, contains as the first chapter ‘The transcendence of Leben’, in which he moves towards the concept of ‘absolute Leben’ as the grounding of Life’s flow, its trials and tribulations, creations and boundaries. A core feature here is the opposition of Leben and Form that he had analysed in ‘Der Konflikt der Kultur’ (1918) as one between the unceasing flow of Life and the Forms it needs to assume, which then come to oppose this very flow as hardened objectivations (Simmel, 1997). Now this opposition is dissolved in the sense that both appear as moments in the totality of absolute Leben. The latter provides the ‘absolute unity between the continuity that is Leben and the individuality that is predicated on Form. But under the sign of the ‘absolute Leben’, all such dichotomies melt back into it. The central schema of the opposition of subject and object that announced the core question of modern philosophy itself appears as a retroactive construct, a crystallization of thought emerging from the flow of Life that misunderstands itself as an original epistemological problematic. Leben is self-transcending; it is ahead of itself, reaching beyond itself. Simmel offers the complementary definitions of Leben as Mehr-Leben and Mehr-als-Leben to elucidate this central point.

As ‘More-Life’, (absolute) Leben incorporates within itself all relativities; it encompasses any oppositions the intellect may establish as it freezes elements of dynamic Life into detached Forms. Past and future melt into the present moment as Life refuses to be dissected abstractedly and asserts its enveloping dynamic. Even ‘human immortality’, suggests Simmel, could be just the accumulated sense, directed into an immense symbol, of the transcession of Leben beyond itself (Simmel, 1997 [1918]: 15). It is ‘more-Life’ since, at every moment, it draws something into itself in order to transform it into Leben. Life requires Forms, yet it needs more than Forms. As ‘More-than-Life’, Leben encompasses both physiological Life and the Life of the mind, as it expresses itself in the meaningful forms of its creations. The latter possess independence from the stream that generated them, and autonomy as to their content. They stand outside Life, as it were. Yet this paradox disappears with the realization that in the field of the intellect, as in all products of human creativity, Leben has elevated itself beyond itself, and thereby remained with itself. The intentions and meanings contained in autonomous objectivations of mental Life it comes to recognize as its very own.

Simmel’s contribution to the analysis of Leben reaches beyond the confines of philosophy proper, and into the fields of biography, aesthetics and sociological diagnosis of his times. Here, Goethe serves as an exemplar of a successful life, an organic unity of life and work, which Simmel considered the hallmark of true Leben. In his major monograph of Goethe (2003, orig. 1913), and numerous essays written on this subject afterwards, Simmel uses Goethe in contrast to ‘modern man’, the Sachmensch and the exigencies of ‘professionality’. The purposive habitus of the Sachmensch (the expert functionary) has come about through the focus on goal orientation, rather than growing from the roots (Simmel, 2003: 151).

But what is the place of Leben in a civilization that, with increasing success, is learning to manipulate the very essence of human existence while endangering this, and other forms of life, through the heedless degradation of the living environment? From Goethe through Bergson to Simmel, the critique of ‘mechanistic’ Science and its effects on social and intellectual life provided the agenda for the philosophy of Leben and Lebensphilosophie. Now the ‘life sciences’ themselves have taken over as the lead sciences. They are reshaping the parameters and preconditions of human existence, and their transformative drive has been announcing itself in the growth of biomorphic conceptualizations and jargon that have entered the social and natural sciences as well as everyday talk (Fraser et al., 2005). In an already largely objectified social world they are about to complete the scientistic project and are assuming to play God.

