# Democracy to Come

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Democracy to Come

Irving Goh

Keywords cosmopolitanism, ‘democracy to come’, friendship, hospitality, reject

n his discussion of the cosmopolitical and the debate about the ‘end of history’, Derrida (1997c: 41) points to the ‘to-come’ character   
of democracy as something that is intrinsic to the   
idea of democracy. The implication is that there   
can be no final state of democracy, no end to its   
history since openness to the event and to   
becoming are aspects of the openness to alterity,   
that is, an ethic of hospitality that underlies   
democracy. The history of democracy since Kant   
has become aligned with the history of an occiden-

talist cosmopolitanism. But should this be its final form?

Democracy today wants to give itself to anyone. This is testified to by its cosmopolitan dissemination since the 20th century, and its autodeconstructive history as a multiplicity giving place to fictions of itself, as demonstrated by Jacques Derrida in Rogues: Two Essays on Reason (2005). One might say that democracy’s giving itself to the world at large involves a certain hospitality, for that giving involves inviting and receiving (just about) anyone. Today, democracy’s state of hospitality appears to be reaching perfectibility, as almost all states in the world have taken on a more or less democratic countenance. And yet there can be no doubt that, at the beginning of the 21st century, there is a sense that democracy is in retreat. Instead of plural and heterogeneous democracies, we witness only states deferring to the singular hospitality of American democracy. One even ought not to be ‘out of step’ with the latter, as the rhetoric of contemporary geopolitics goes. In the face of this democracy, Derrida also maintains in Rogues that there is still not yet democracy in the world. For Derrida, it remains for one to reason with, or reject, present democracy. And one ought to remain open to the arrival of that which surprises any present form of thought or act of democracy. That is at least the dual task of Derrida’s ‘democracy to come’, in duel with the cosmopolitan democracy that we experience and have come to know today. Here, I would like to suggest that for ‘democracy to come’ to continue to have a chance now and in the future, there needs also an exposition of a right to reject this cosmopolitan hospitality.

One could perhaps already sense the emergency of such a violent and supplementary force of the right to reject hospitality, notwithstanding the fact that Derrida’s ‘democracy to come’ simultaneously calls for an ‘unconditional hospitality’. For Derrida (2001), the right to hospitality, which is the unconditional duty of welcome to the stranger as well as the (Kantian) conditioned right exercised in any practical hospitality to expel anyone and/or anything that threatens the security or sovereignty of the host, is understandable. But the rejection of hospitality is almost unthinkable. ‘Unconditional hospitality’ speaks of a sense of letting anyone or anything arrive into one’s space or care at any time, and without demand for or expectation of any kind of return. But if a right to reject hospitality were to become categorical today, as a supplement to ‘democracy to come’, it would only be because present ‘American’ cosmopolitan democracy seems to have appropriated for itself a semblance of ‘unconditional hospitality’. Because it works via a ruse of ‘unconditional hospitality’, one ought to be vigilant against that. American democracy has assumed a posture of ‘unconditional hospitality’ because almost every democratic state in the world defers to it, as argued above; and it takes them in. If these states submit themselves to the hospitality of American democracy unconditionally, it is only by the seemingly irresistible reason of the incomparable politicomilitary force of American democracy, as that which alone can secure a cosmopolitan peace and security. American democracy after all has demonstrated its ability to saturate cosmic space with teletechnological imaging machines, seeing the world from above, and keeping watch that nothing deviates from it. With such a cosmo(s)-political technics, justified by the ‘reason’ of cosmopolitan peace and security, almost nothing escapes being under the architecture, otherwise known as the hospitality, of American democracy. This is the terrifying simulacrum of 21st-century cosmo(s)- political democracy. We are not even citizens of this democracy as the ‘invited hostage’, which Derrida talks of in situations of hospitality (‘hostage’ because, as guest, one always assumes certain performatives demanded of the space of hospitality). We have not been ‘invited’. We do not even desire to enter or even approach it. And yet we are already automatic citizens of it.

A democracy that would sidestep this present state and State, then, must reason with, if not contest, 21st-century (American) cosmo(s)- political democracy. And that is why the violent supplement of a right to reject hospitality becomes necessary within the thought of hospitality. I suggested that this supplement potentially also displaces Derrida’s thought of ‘unconditional hospitality’. But let it be said here that the right to reject hospitality is not at all an unthinkable inhospitality. Instead, it is the immanent freedom to choose not to enter into a given relation or hospitality. It is the right to just turn away. The recognition of this right or freedom is, however, somewhat unarticulated in Derrida’s ‘unconditional hospitality’, which remains very much on the side of the potential giver of ‘unconditional hospitality’. But to remain on that side in a thinking of ‘democracy to come’ would risk ‘unconditional hospitality’ becoming an end-game for the other, in which an enclosing hospitality, like that of cosmo(s)-political democracy, is given, such that one cannot find an exit. Again then, for a ‘democracy to come’ that will liberate itself from the totality of cosmo(s)politanism, the supplementary right to reject the perverse hospitality and the given citizenship of the state, and State, of cosmo(s)-political democracy is imperative today.

Finally, this supplementary right to reject (hospitality) here is just about giving it exposition. It does not call for an institutionalization of such a right. Neither does it seek to prescribe a method for enacting it. Like Blanchot’s recognition of the force of ‘refusal’, the force of rejection is to be thought of as something that is within us, something that has always already been our potentiality in the face of an as if reasonable ‘reason’. In the face of the latter, like that of American cosmo(s)politan democracy, for example, there will be some of us who will simply and immediately disagree and just reject it, without noise or without submitting this refusal to the performatives of a constitutional debate within the boundaries of institutions. Among this ‘some’, there is a sharing of a certain friendship, a friendship without relation, or an anonymous friendship among strangers just sharing the silent force of the reject. One may regard this radical friendship as ‘non-canonical’, as Derrida would say. And that would place the right to reject (hospitality) back in the spirit of a ‘democracy to come’. For ‘democracy to come’ is also a question of friendship, according to Derrida, except that the friend there will not be one who is teleologically determined from the naturalized history of friendship. Democracy or ‘democracy to come’ is in search of that ‘non-canonical’ friendship that goes beyond all political, ideological, and ethical affinities. It is in search of that figure who maintains his or her right to reject or abandon whatever conditions or limits. The actualization of that right to reject, without reproach, would be the sovereign decision of a free (powerless) body within a space that promises the multiplicities of freedom that democracy promises. It would be the first step towards a freedom that allows anyone to choose freely, to choose outside the false choice of being with a cosmo(s)-political democracy or against it. For a ‘democracy to come’ tomorrow, one must let arrive this figure who affirms the right to reject (hospitality), this friend who is somewhat a little roguish.

