# The Unclassifiable

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# The Unclassifiable

Maria Esther Maciel

Keywords Atopia, classification, encyclopaedia

A <sup>ccording</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>dictionaries,</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>word</sup>‘unclassifiable’ means what cannot be included within a class or category; what cannot be precisely defined or qualified. It has therefore an intrinsic affinity with the Greek word atopos (!-"#\$#s), which, besides referring to that which is not fixed in any place, also characterizes what is strange, extraordinary, inopportune (Bailly, 1950: 303).

Roland Barthes (1990: 34), in A Lover’s Discourse: Fragments, uses the word atopos to designate ‘the unclassifiable, of a ceaselessly unforeseen originality’. For this purpose, he explores the double sense of the word topos, which in Greek means both place and discourse. By the force of the negative prefix a-, atopos would therefore mean not only what cannot be confined in a single place, but also what ‘resists description, definition, language, which is maya, classification of Names (of Faults)’ (Barthes, 1990: 35). And to this he adds the idea that the atopos is always the unqualifiable, as it is very difficult or even impossible to speak of it or about it.

In The Pleasure of the Text, Barthes (1973) returns to the word atopos, now converted into a working concept, in order to discuss what he calls the ‘texte de jouissance’, that is, the text that defies the doxa and veers away from the arrangements of language. To articulate this concept, he starts from the idea that language is regulated by a ruthless topos that always makes it come from some place, from a space delimited by the laws of grammar and the dictionaries. Texte de jouissance would be, in this sense, that which proclaims the fallacy of this topos, that which destroys or even contradicts its own discursive category, its genre, defying the canonical structures of language itself. In opposition to the texts connected to a comfortable practice of reading, the a-topical (or unclassifiable) text would potentially make the reader uncomfortable and shake his/her foundations. It is from these considerations that Barthes formulates his concept of écriture.

Paradoxically, the unclassifiable can also be associated with the idea of heteropia, since we can also use the word unclassifiable to designate what may be included (even if provisionally) in several places at once, given the often contradictory diversity of its parts. In this case, all the categories in which it might be included are insufficient to accommodate it. In each category it maintains its troublesome difference, its explicit alterity. In this sense, since it moves among various topoi, it does not allow itself to be enclosed in a single one.

But would not the unclassifiable leave open the possibility of the creation of new categories that could include it, since the taxonomic systems themselves are not definitive? We might argue that the unclassifiable exists because the available and legitimated systems of classification are insufficient and are not able to contain the complex diversity and multiplicity of the world, since they obey above all the principles of similarity. As Foucault (2000: 14) said in The Order of Things, ‘the history of the order imposed on things would be the history of the Same – of that which, for a given culture, is both dispersed and related, therefore to be distinguished by kinds and to be collected together into identities’. In other words, every taxonomy requires the principle of the least possible difference among things to sustain itself. Still, thanks to that which resists the laws of taxonomy, that is to say, difference, such systems are always in the process of reformulation, revealing their insufficiency and precariousness.

Georges Perec (1999: 139–205), in Penser/ Classer, develops an amusing theory of systems of classification – as Roy Boyne shows in detail in the entry Classification – evincing how tempting the idea of distributing the whole world ‘in terms of a single code’ is, although we know that ‘unfortunately, this does not work, has never even begun to work, will never work’ (Perec, 1999: 190). In other words, he recognizes the fascination of the act of classifying at the same time that he proclaims its instability. But he believes that admitting the precariousness of the criteria of classification ‘won’t stop us continuing for a long time to come to categorize this animal or that according to whether it has an odd number of toes or hollow horns’ (Perec, 1999: 190). It is the consciousness of this paradox that leads him to adopt humour and irony in order to, as Boyne states, ‘emancipate classification from its functions for social utility, freeing it for the creation of serendipitous wonderment’.

In one of the essays of this book, Perec even makes an inventory of possible taxonomical criteria (some of which are quite absurd) to organize his library. But he ends up admitting that ‘nearly three-quarters of the books have never really been classified’ (Perec, 1999: 153–4), because they are difficult to put in order or impossible to classify. From this circumstance arises the need to create a new category for them, that of the etcetera, which is in fact a category used by Borges in his famous essay ‘The Analytical Language of John Wilkins’ (Borges, 1999: 229– 32), which is also mentioned by Boyne in the Classification entry along with some critical references to Foucault’s interpretation of the Borgesian text. In this essay, as it is known, the Argentinian writer, to describe the ambiguities, redundancies, arbitrary nature and deficiencies of the Wilkinian linguistic system, evokes an apocryphal Chinese encyclopaedia that classifies animals in a dozen unusual categories, listed in alphabetical order. The etcetera is inserted precisely in the L category.

The fact that Borges’s etcetera comes not at the end of the list, as would be expected, but before the last two categories, inevitably grants it a more solid status within the whole, which creates even more surprise in the reader and breaks with the predictability of the very classificatory logic of conventional systems. Whence the questions: would this etcetera be the topos par excellence of the ‘unclassifiable’, and, by extension, the category that is lacking in all the taxonomic systems in general? By combining the rules of classification with the parodic laws of fiction in the same discursive space, would not Borges be showing that a classification of the universe or of knowledge that is not arbitrary, provisional, and conjectural is not possible, since all surveys/orderings tend, in their limits, to reveal the character of what is naturally uncontrollable and unlimited?

We might mention, as an example of this insufficiency of taxonomic systems, the fact that Linnaeus – who established in the second half of the 18th century not only the bases of modern taxonomy but also a binomial system of nomenclature in the field of Natural History – himself repeatedly revised and enlarged his Systema Naturae (1735), to the extent that his contemporaries complained of the ‘volatility’ of his model, which changed with each edition, in the face of the proliferating diversity of the animal world and consequently the discovery of new zoological differences that would not fit into the categories already defined (cf. Ritvo, 1997: 15).

We might also recall the frisson that the discovery, in Australia, 1799, of the platypus caused in British scientific circles right at a time when taxonomy was enjoying enormous prestige and was rigorously supported by the laws of triumphant rationality. Considered a puzzling animal, the platypus caused perplexity in the naturalists of the time by being a hybrid creature of about 50 cm, with no neck, with webbed toes, a beaver-like tail, a duck-beak, a flat body covered with a darkbrown coat, and posterior limbs equipped with poisonous spurs. The females lay eggs but feed their young by internal nipples. Thomas Bewick, a British naturalist of the time, observed: ‘the platypus is an animal sui generis: it appears to possess a threefold nature, that of a fish, a bird and a quadruped’ (Ritvo, 1997: 3). We could add that it is an a-topical animal par excellence: unclassifiable, strange, extraordinary, original and inconvenient – a challenge therefore to the zoological canon and systems of classification.

Harriet Ritvo (1997), in The Platypus and the Mermaid – and Other Figments of the Classifying Imagination, says that this animal was first described as a mammal, which triggered a controversial taxonomic debate in scientific circles. Dissected by anatomists, it was even included in the class of amphibians, although many scientists saw in it an ‘astonishing union of the characteristic distinctions of all the classes’ (Ritvo, 1997: 3), a union that, centuries later, would continue to stimulate the thought and imagination of theorists of taxonomy such as Umberto Eco, who in 1997 adopted the animal as the ‘hero’ of his book Kant and the Platypus. He even argued that, contrary to what was thought, the platypus was not made from an amalgam of all animals, but all animals were made from a part of the platypus. He asks:

How could one reconcile the beak and webbed feet with the fur and the beaver tail, or the Idea of beaver with the Idea of an oviparous animal; how could one see a bird where there was a quadruped? Kant would have found himself in the same situation as Aristotle when, after drawing up all possible rules for distinguishing ruminants from the other animals, no matter which way he turned, he never managed to find a place for the camel, which eluded all definition by genus and differentia. Had Aristotle tried to make one fit, he should have had to chase another ruminant, the ox, out of its own definitory space. (Eco, 1997: 81)

Here, Eco shows that due to the lack of sufficient criteria for classification, the definition of an unknown phenomenon often ends up by being formulated through analogical approximation, which leads us to claim that the imagination comes in where classification fails. In the lack of criteria to precisely define an unknown object, one has to invent new forms – metaphorical or not – to describe and specify it.

In this aspect, the fantastic descriptions of the fauna of the so-called New World made by the 16th-century European travellers are exemplary models. In their accounts, the monstrous images of the tropical animals were not contaminated only by recollection of the fantastic texts of the old bestiaries, but also derived from an epistemological insufficiency. In that time there was no satisfactory taxonomic system that could offer the necessary scientific underpinnings for the radical alterity of the Latin American animals to be rationally named, described and categorized. As Foucault explained, the knowledge of the period constituted ‘an unstable mixture of rational knowledge, notions derived from magical practices, and a whole cultural heritage whose power and authority had been vastly increased by the rediscovery of Greek and Roman authors’ (Foucault, 2000: 48). If, on one hand, the rationality in which the modern western world would come to recognize itself was already taking shape, on the other, this rationality still did not discard the taste for the extraordinary and the respect for ancient knowledge. It is in this way that the first attempts at careful inquiry of the animal kingdom made by Renaissance naturalists were a amalgam of descriptions, classifications, citations, fables, mythological stories, possible and impossible observations about the use of animals both for medical experiments and for magical practices. This was an amalgam that could be defined as a kind of encyclopaedic knowledge. In this sense, it could be conceived as the most appropriate model for including an unclassifiable animal like the platypus. As Umberto Eco (1999: 226) states, the encyclopaedic model – which is ‘uncoordinated by nature, with an uncontrollable format’ – makes possible a flexible and inexhaustive multiplicity of knowledge, even if controlled by certain principles of organization like the placing of entries in alphabetical order.

Considering the ‘unlimited semiosis’ of the encyclopaedia, Eco (1984) even compared it to Deleuze’s rhizome, in which every point can be connected with any other point. According to Eco, the encyclopaedia, contrary to what the Enlightenment thinkers proposed, does not reflect an ordered universe in a univocal and rational way, but supplies rules, ‘generally myopic’, so that ‘according to some provisional criterion of order’ it seeks to give meaning to a disordered world whose criteria of order escape us (Eco, 1989: 337). In this sense, such a model would clash with the dictionary scheme, which, by circumscribing its references in a linguistic order, works to register the properties of words in a succinct manner. Encyclopaedic competence, on the contrary, definitely excludes ‘the possibility of hierarchizing the semantic marks, the linguistic properties, and the semes in a single, uncontroversial way’ (Eco, 1989: 333–7), serving to map the life of a culture as a system of interconnected semiotic systems.

Therefore, as a taxonomic device, the encyclopaedia – taken in its dimension of incompleteness – offers itself as the most adequate model for an unclassifiable age like the present, in which the borders between cultures, languages, genres, arts and disciplinary fields intersect, expanding more and more into the hybrid and the transdisciplinary. This is a ‘hypertextual’ era, in which the speed and multiplicity of information explicitly de-authorizes and disestablishes the very idea of classification, demanding a reshaping of knowledge beginning from a more open, dialogical, and even paradoxical perspective, as if today everything were under the restless sign of the platypus, of the unclassifiable.

In the field of contemporary arts, this new ‘hypertextual’ horizon can be identified, for instance, in the encyclopaedic work that Peter Greenaway has been doing in his films, operas, installations, artworks and literary texts. By employing an intricate net of transdicisplinary knowledge, several aesthetic languages, cultural references and diversified technological resources, he has come to convert his oeuvre into a sort of cross-media project with multiple entrances, connections and unpredictable ramifications. In order to do that, he has incorporated some taxonomic procedures – in the format of lists, catalogues, numberings, inventories, statistical censuses, etc. – to show ironically the insufficiency of these devices for a satisfactory ordering of the multiplicity/diversity of the contemporary world. This can be seen, especially, in his recent project called Tulse Luper Suitcases, a kind of ‘encyclopaedia of encyclopaedias’, which includes three feature films, a television series, 92 DVDs, CD-ROMs, several books, some art exhibitions and Internet sites, all built up based on a sophisticated technological apparatus and audacious aesthetic procedures. The three films of the series, with plenty of narrative artifices, intertextual references and technological experiments, constitute a new kind of cinema that gets away from the limits of the screen to expand in several other artistic spaces, bringing to the cultural setting of this new millenium a provocative model of open and rhizomatic encyclopaedism, tuned up to the heterogeneous (and unclassifiable) space–time of contemporaneity.

