# Science Operating in Economic, Cultural or Political Fields / Science as Practice / Collective Elaborations of Science / Theorizing with Science / Making Science Art / Acting in Science by Doing Social Science / Conclusion

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

## Science Operating in Economic, Cultural or Political Fields

A first major task for social and cultural analysis is to make sense of how science operates and meshes with political, financial, commercial and popular cultural processes, ranging from micro-subjectification to global assemblages (Ong and Collier, 2005). The entwining of science with contemporary relations of production is well and extensively analysed, but the modalities of linkage, and the ways sciences take shape, seem to shift constantly. From the

Enlightenment through 20th-century critical thought, the power of science is valorized positively or negatively in terms of reason as an ordering force, marshalling and controlling natural phenomena and discovering laws and regularities. For philosophers ranging from René Descartes, Immanuel Kant and Friedrich Nietzsche to Martin Heidegger, and for recent cultural or historical studies of science such as Barbara Duden (1991) or Lisa Cartwright (1995), the operational power of science stems from its abstract appropriation of existing forms, matters, bodies or relations. Carolyn Merchant (1980: 43), for instance, argues in this vein when she describes the development of modern science as involving ‘a slow, but unidirectional alienation from the immediate daily organic relationship that had formed the basis of human experience from earliest times’. From this standpoint, the task of social and human sciences is to unmask science, to show how science constructs a total world view within which all phenomena are mathematized or mechanized. This world view, precisely because it treats the object of knowledge as fully knowable, ruptures connections between subjects and objects. Indeed it institutes a separation between subjects and objects, between knower and world. It inscribes relations between things in the world as mechanical, as governed by laws of cause and effect.

The objectivity of science, and claims made in the name of objectivity, have been criticized as partial and distorted on several grounds. According to the feminist philosopher of science, Sandra Harding (1993: 8), Western science systematically marginalized individuals and other existing knowledges: ‘European science has progressed primarily because of the military, economic and political power of European cultures, not because of the purported greater rationality of Westerners or the purported commitment of their sciences to the pursuit of disinterested truths’. Science functions as an instrument of power. Feminist analyses have argued that sciences naturalize ‘social-cum-cultural constructs’ of gender, sex and nature (Jordanova, 1989: 5). Scientific ideas and concepts contain, in other words, ‘implications about matters beyond their explicit content’ (1989: 2). ‘The biomedical sciences deploy, and are themselves, systems of representations’ (1989: 5): they contain metaphors, analogies, personifications, images and literary devices that can be analysed as ideological and normative programmes. They serve interests and maintain cultural patterns (1989: 39; cf. Stafford, 1994). Objectification has it own contingent circumstances and effects. The historian and philosopher of medicine, Barbara Duden (1991), for instance, describes how scientific knowledge of human reproduction is lived, encountered and interpreted by women in contemporary America, in contrast to German women of the 18th century. Accounts of different encounters with scientific knowledge show that the scientific world view proceeds unevenly, at different rates and in negotiation with a panoply of other forces. Other theorists examine this question in terms of political economy, regulatory frameworks and scientific policy instruments, investigating the interactions of science, law and state (Jasanoff, 2005).

These critical approaches to science, however, retain a distinction between the practical content and the social context of science, with their analyses focusing on the latter. This means that the power of science is figured as derivative of social forces. The limitations of this figuration are explored, and sometimes overcome, within the field of science and technology studies.

## Science as Practice

Three decades of work in the social studies of science have established an alternative treatment of science. Theorists have repeatedly rejected critiques of science as anti-social or noncultural form. Instead they have argued that even in its most abstruse theoretical constructs or highly technical practice, science turns out to be just as local, particular and contingent as anything else. The efficacy of the sciences, their effectiveness in the world, their translatability or universality, can be shown to be historically produced and culturally specific because they are cultural or social. Every general attribute of science, ranging from the figure of the scientist (Shapin and Schaffer, 1989), experimental practice, fact (Latour and Woolgar, 1979), or scientific apparatus (Pickering, 1995) through to scientific concepts is analysable as a skein of relations between bodies, gestures, habits, things and signs put together in specific locations (Lynch, 1993). All science is situated knowledge (Haraway, 1991). This is still a contentious assertion outside social and cultural studies of science, but its ongoing relevance is hard to deny. Whenever a science is examined, its results, it modes of existence, its practices, institutions, theories and ideas, no matter how global in appearance, can be traced back to contingent conditions. For some sciences, this tracking might involve more arduous work than others. The high-profile epistemologies of physics pose different analytic challenges to field-historical sciences such as ecology, ethology or epidemiology.

Science studies’ analysis of science renovates concepts of society just as much as science. Theories such as ANT (actor network theory) no longer treat the social as an explanation of the scientific (as in some social constructionist accounts of scientific knowledge). The social, the scientific and any other domain of the collective (culture, media, economy, state, etc.) are constructed together:

We collectively elaborate an emerging and historical event which was not planned by any participant and which is not explainable by what happened before the event or what happens elsewhere. All depends on the local and practical interactions in which we are presently engaging. (Latour, 1994: 50)

If sciences are no longer seen as grounded in the social or the historical context, where do they come from? Where does their productivity and force arise? Their advent and development, in all its cultural, economic, technical and political complexity, becomes conceivable only as ‘local and practical’ interactions, elaborated ‘collectively’. This treatment of science as event has been echoed in anthropological and cultural studies of science. For instance, Paul Rabinow (1999: 180) writes that ‘[f]rom time to time, and always in time, new forms emerge that catalyze previously existing actors, things, temporalities, or spatialities into a new mode of existence, a new assemblage, one that makes things work in a different manner and produces and instantiates new capacities. A form/event makes many other things more or less suddenly conceivable.’ New assemblages make new things conceivable, unfurl new temporalities and spatialities. In various forms, sciences generate new distinctions, classifications, boundaries and differences that bring different configuration of force to bear on existing identities, groups and institutions. This general argument has been instantiated in different venues and at different scales. Pickering’s (1995) account of contemporary high-energy physics as a ‘mangle of practice’ parallels Shapin and Schaeffer’s (1989) well-known historical investigation of Boyle’s 17th-century air-pump. Lily Kay’s (2000) historical account of the entwining of information theory, cybernetics, structural linguistics and molecular biology in post-Second World War biology broadly concurs with Anne-Marie Mol’s (2003) exploration of how a single scientific object, such as a particular disease, turns out to be temporally, spatially, socially, and materially multiple.

## Collective Elaborations of Science

Beyond the major dimensions of critical engagement with science lingers another long deferred question: what can the non-scientific knowledges do with the sciences that is not a pale imitation or representation of them? What would be the best form of relation to science for the human sciences? This question lies behind recent work in the history and philosophy of science that attempts to address the singularity of sciences without reducing them to generic notions of the social. In her book The Invention of Modern Science, for example, the Belgian philosopher of science Isabelle Stengers (2000: 58) writes:

I want to show that the singularity of the sciences does not need to be denied in order to become discussable. In order to make scientists actors like any others in the life of the city (the ‘political’ preoccupation), it is not necessary to describe their practice as ‘similar’ to all other practices (the ‘sociological’ preoccupation).

Discussion of the singularity of the sciences is in contrast with the many earlier attempts to understand their generality. For Stengers (2000: 67), the key component of any transformed relation between human and natural sciences resides in understanding the singularity of sciences, and, at the same time, ‘avoiding any way of describing them [the sciences] which implies that scientists have a privileged knowledge of what this difference that singularizes them signifies’ (original emphasis). We cannot assume, in other words, that scientists have better access to the significance of the singularity that constitutes their work. The work of social scientists, theorists and other analysts, then, is to enter into discussion with each other and with scientists in such a way as to frame scientists as actors in a collectively elaborated event. These discussions could take different forms encompassing theoretical, artistic and activist dimensions.

## Theorizing with Science

Contemporary philosophical, social and cultural theory is magnetized by certain sciences. These sciences are no longer objects of critique as they were in much critical theory of the last two centuries. Evolutionary biology, and Darwin’s work in particular, is increasingly regarded as a well-spring of concepts, approaches and styles of argumentation vital to theoretical invention. The philosopher Elizabeth Grosz (2004: 8) writes that ‘Darwin creates a real committed to a concept of temporal becoming. He creates a science in which history, and thus the eruption of unexpected events, is central, in which life is focused on and a response to local and global events’. She treats Darwin’s writings as a source of concepts of history, becoming and events. Darwin’s theory of evolution is linked to political and feminist projects by the pivotal concept of life, a primary contemporary object of knowledge, production and experience. Similarly, the theorist Manuel DeLanda (2002) has argued in painstaking detail for the development of ‘intensive sciences’ through ‘mechanism-independent processes’ located in recent physical and life sciences. Both authors regard science as a lever against abstract essences or ahistorical universals that plague social thought.

In a similar way, certain high-profile sciences can be treated as a source of epistemological challenges. The work of Karen Barad (2003) engages with quantum physics. Like many philosophers and physicists, she argues that quantum mechanics challenges existing notions of subject, object and action. However, she goes further than many others in presenting the experimental apparatus and the theoretical propositions of quantum mechanics as materials that can be used to question any separation between observer and what is observed. Much of the undeniable fascination of such projects is that they transport scientific concepts and results into the orbit of theory-making within the humanities and social sciences. They remain problematic in certain respects. Theory is developed at a certain distance from science, a distance that hazes over conflicts, differences and practices in science. They tend, then, to bracket out the contested nature of scientific knowledge, as established by social studies of science, in important ways. Science becomes itself data to be interpreted by theory. The political-cultural problems of engaging with science in this way are largely left to one side, since the interlocutors for science-infused social theory lie almost exclusively within the humanities and social sciences themselves. Scientists are no longer actors here; at most they are the bemused inventors.

## Making Science Art

Not only philosophers and cultural theorists, but many more artists have begun to work with scientific practices, materials, concepts and scientists themselves in diverse ways. Scientific instruments or materials (supercomputer, petri dish, tissue culture, MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] scan, telescope, etc.) becomes part of the work. The phenomena or results generated in scientific practice are taken up in artworks, and the process of doing science itself has figured in some performance. Artists collaborate with scientists to create works that make scientific theories or the cultural implications of science perceptible in different ways.

Sometimes working within scientific institutions or laboratories (as, for instance, in the many artist-in-residence programmes burgeoning around biological and biotechnological research), sometimes themselves developing scientific expertise (as in the case of artists such as the Critical Art Ensemble, Natalie Jeremijenko or Eduardo Kacs), some of these projects could be seen as contributions to the public understanding of science. Their funding by research foundations and trusts such as Wellcome Trust or NASA suggests that from an institutional standpoint, art has become an important vehicle to carry science into the public sphere. However, many of the art projects are not reducible to this. The arrest of the artist Steven Kurtz by the FBI on charges of bioterrorism in the USA in May 2004 indicates that state sensitivities to artists working with scientific materials are quite complicated. Even within art institutions themselves, the status of these works is uncertain. SymbioticA, a group of artists based in Perth, Western Australia, develop installations that contain biological materials such as living tissues. During exhibition, these works have evoked disgust, outrage or horror in spectators. What does it mean for an artwork to generate such a response when it is based on scientific practices or materials?

## Acting in Science by Doing Social Science

Other scholars begin from conventional forms of social scientific observation of science and scientists. Mutating methods developed within anthropology and sociology, they move towards active engagement with the life of science. Combining the use of ethnographic methods, critical science studies and feminist politics, the American anthropologist Rayna Rapp (2000) participates in the production of scientific knowledge. Taking the notion of multi-sited ethnography in new directions, Rapp works in laboratory and clinical settings, engages in diseaserelated activism, spends time with families and community groups, and undertakes lengthy interviews with women undergoing amniocentesis, sometimes becoming an informed advisor or even friend. In some clinical settings Rapp acts as a medical translator, feeling unable to refuse to become involved when women and couples cannot understand the information provided to them in English. In other settings, she is asked by clinicians to provide impromptu support to ‘crisis-racked’ patients, and to provide criticisms and suggestions to clinical teams (Rapp, 2000: 21). Rapp also describes strategically using the popular media (Ms Magazine) to promote her study and to collect data through encouraging women to write to her about their experiences (2000: 19). In relation to the science of amniocentesis, Rapp spends six months learning the manual tasks associated with karyotyping, cutting and pasting laboratory images of chromosomes. This ‘informal internship’ at the prenatal diagnostic laboratory (2000: 191), she argues, helps her to understand the scientific processes of genetic testing as a form of affective labour, in which difficult decisions are made about the meaning of scientific data and what results might mean in individual cases.

Many of Rapp’s methods recast the traditional role of the anthropologist towards one that privileges political feminist engagement without distancing from the production of scientific knowledge. Rapp consciously works at the boundaries of mainstream social science, testing the limits of what Donna Haraway (1991) calls situatedness. Her empirical terrain, she suggests (1991: 12), is ‘open-ended and unbounded’. The field, for Rapp (2000: 19), is never neutral and her participation in the field constantly ‘contaminates’ the supposed objectivity of the traditional ethnographic stance. In her own writing, this engagement opens the possibility of juxtaposing materials from the multiplicity of fields constituting amniocentesis in contemporary America. This non-hierarchical juxtaposition of different fields (the laboratory, the clinic, the media, the community group, the family) raises the profile of pregnant women as ‘moral pioneers’ or ‘moral philosophers of the private’ by understanding them, just as clinicians, scientists or technicians at the laboratory bench, as actively participant in the life of science (2000: 306). A major finding of Rapp’s study, she states (2000: 307), is that, like scientists and clinicians, women involved in amniocentesis ‘really think’.

In a different form of experimentation that is openly linked to affects of canine love and sex, Donna Haraway’s (2003) recent work with dogs represents an experimental engagement with science. Building on her previous analytic work on technoscience, Haraway’s The Companion Species Manifesto combines an analysis of canine genetics and social genealogies of dog breeds with stories about her own experiments with dog agility trials and personal history. This combination generates a situated affective account of people who work with dogs as active in the production of science. She (2003: 3) argues that ‘[t]he practices and actors in dogs’ worlds, human and non-human alike, ought to be central concerns of technoscience studies’. Haraway’s method of working with these materials – dogs, dog trainers, stories – in this work is heavily framed by biological understandings of animal and plant ecologies. For instance, she (2003: 31) uses the concept of co-evolution to enmesh nature and culture: ‘Coevolution has to be defined more broadly than biologists habitually do . . . . [I]t is a mistake to see the alterations of dogs’ bodies and minds as biological and the changes in human bodies and lives, for example in the emergence of herding or agricultural societies, as cultural, and so not about co-evolution’.

In contrast to readings of evolutionary theory such as that of Elizabeth Grosz, the account of dog and human life Haraway proposes here is firmly located in contemporary sciences such as population and developmental biology. It does not attempt to extract non-metaphorical conceptual content from these sciences. Rather, it takes them up in sometimes surprisingly direct ways. Working with the concept of co-evolution directly from science, she also broadens it, and risks making scientific statements such as ‘I suspect that human genomes contain a considerable molecular record of the pathogens of their companion species, including dogs (2003: 31). Such statements have unstable tendencies. They are irreducible to natural or cultural determinisms that mistake local and provisional terms such as ‘nature’ or ‘culture’ for the world. Rather, they attest to the enmeshing of life and signification, to the convergence of ‘trope and flesh’, to the fact that ‘flesh and figure are not far apart’ (2003: 32).

What is at stake in such statements for the social sciences in relation to science more generally? Taking co-evolution of humans and animals seriously means occupying a complex, ambivalent position. Haraway (2003: 97–8) writes that ‘[t]hrough their dogs, people like me are tied to indigenous sovereignty rights, ranching economic and ecological survival, radical reform of the meat-industrial complex, racial justice, the consequences of war and migration, and the institutions of technoculture’. While this covers much ground that we have not engaged with here, the trend of these connections is to link scientific knowledges with political problems that sometimes seem quite remote. The analysis of ‘multi-directional flows of bodies and values’ (2003: 9) in The Companion Species Manifesto seeks to re-imagine ‘grasslands ecologies and ways of life’ (2003: 97) that were taken apart by the ranching practices of which the dogs in question were part.

## Conclusion

Almost everyone eats, breathes, perceives, moves and sometimes thinks through science or its products. People understand themselves as organisms, as lifeforms, or as matter (even if we go on to dispute how we came to be that); we handle and apprehend energies, materials and forces in different forms and processes invented under the aegis of science. In the different trajectories sketched above, the cultural and social analysts of science occupy precarious and difficult positions. What do their approaches open up? At stake here is a notion of responsibility associated with experimentation. Isabelle Stengers (2000: 148) writes:

Every scientific question, because it is a vector of becoming, involves a responsibility: ‘Who are you to be asking me this question?’ ‘Who am I to be asking you this question?’ These are the interrogations that the scientist, who knows the irreducible link between the production of knowledge and the production of existence, cannot escape.

Stengers (2000: 89) argues that scientific questions are ‘vectors of becoming’ because they invent ‘the power to confer on things the power of conferring on the experimenter the power to speak in their name’. A scientific question makes something new in the world. This is not because scientific knowledges drive technological applications, but because they are events, they make a difference between before and after. Responding to an event entails responsibility. Questions of justice, politics, morality and power are never far from these events. In asking questions of science, social and cultural analysts also produce vectors of becoming and assume responsibilities that are fundamental to collective life.

