# Enlightenment (Zen Buddhist) / Ignorance

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Enlightenment (Zen Buddhist)

John Whalen-Bridge

Keywords Buddhism, (the) Enlightenment, mind, religion, Rorty, Zen (or Zen Buddhism)

W <sup>hat</sup> <sup>is</sup> <sup>enlightenment?</sup> <sup>Enlightenment</sup> <sup>in</sup>a Buddhist context refers to an individ- a Buddhist context refers to an individual’s awakening to the true nature of mind, but this definition always chases itself since this ‘true nature of mind’ remains ineffable. The Zen tradition – and the Zen tradition of Far Eastern Buddhism has had the greatest influence on contemporary uses of the term – is most insistent about the necessity of a transmission ‘outside of words and letters’, meaning it is important as an experience rather than as an idea. While it is correct to say that Buddhism presents itself as a non-theistic religion, there are in practice many kinds of Buddhists, and one must therefore generalize with caution about what a Buddhist view of ‘enlightenment’ would be. For some practitioners, a reified notion of Buddhist enlightenment corresponds to the belief that through meditation and/or magical purification practices one can, over the course of a certain number of lifetimes, become a spiritual superman who will not undergo rebirth. This belief would seem to suppose a protected, permanent ego and would, thus, be at odds with central Buddhist tenets of impermanence of selfhood or other forms of identity. At the other end of the spectrum of Buddhist beliefs, a process-oriented notion of enlightenment challenges that formation and works with the luminous archetype of total, complete enlightenment as an imaginary standpoint that functions to help human beings live optimally. ‘Enlightenment’ in this sense would designate more a hermeneutical position than an achieved, particular state of mind.

For most Buddhist speakers, the radical contingency of thought described by pragmatist philosophers such as Richard Rorty has long been a given. It is partially useful to examine similarities between Buddhist views and the claims of western skeptical thought. The most important Buddhist doctrine is known as the ‘Four Noble Truths’, and it is found in the Maha-parinibbana Sutta. These truths are: that dukkha (pervasive unsatisfactoriness) is universal. Second, we experience dukkha because we have not overcome desire: grasping is the origin of suffering. Third, it is possible to extinguish suffering if we can put an end to grasping. Finally, the Eight-Fold path is the set of instructions about how best to end grasping and so to find release from suffering.

The central paradox of Buddhism is that suffering is universal, and yet the cessation of suffering is possible. One understanding of the apparent contradiction between the first and third Noble Truths is to line them up chronologically such that pain is displaced by nirvanic bliss. Another understanding is that ‘pain’ does not disappear whereas ‘suffering’ (the psychological amplification of pain) can disappear. The Vietnam veteran Claude Anshin Thomas (2004) does not present himself as a person who has left suffering behind at all in his examination of his own suffering, At Hell’s Gate: A Soldier’s Journey from War to Peace. Rather, he movingly and convincingly describes the transformation of his relationship to it. Some readers will nevertheless scratch away at the doctrinal point: Can one ever be completely free from suffering? The epigraph to At Hell’s Gate is a ko¯an, case 20 from The Book of Serenity, in which Fayan (known in Japanese as Ho¯gen) says, ‘I don’t know.’ Guichen (aka Kueich’en or, in Japanese, Jizo¯) responds, ‘Not knowing is most intimate.’ In the first chapter, Thomas describes the terror of battle as experienced by a 17-year-old soldier: ‘Soon there were one dead,

# Ignorance

two wounded. I didn’t know whether to shoot or be quiet. I decided to be quiet because I didn’t really know what else to do.’ ‘Not knowing’ goes through a number of incarnations in this text. The passive not-knowing of the boy becomes the active not-knowing of the man. Not knowing means accepting rather than judging or attempting to negotiate with what may be a horrific reality. We shrink from what is horrific, but ‘not knowing is most intimate’. The traumatic paralysis of the frightened soldier becomes, in time and through practice, the acceptance of the sitting meditator. We recall Fayan and note the differences, but we also see the interdependence of two apparently incommensurable moments. Many kinds of ‘not knowing’ are woven into this account, but the waiting and not knowing morph from pain and judgment to a patience that allows for genuine insight.

