# Persian Poesis / Reference / Technology / I / II / III / IV / V / VI / VII / VIII / IX / X

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Persian Poesis

Michael M.J. Fischer

Keywords cultural politics, ethical dilemmas, hieroglyphic imagery, Iranian cinema, new media circuits

n the 1990s, Iranian film became the most celebrated of national film traditions because of a poetics, a poesis, that speaks to the contemporary condition. It is a poesis that is deeply informed both by modernist traditions (many leading Iranian filmmakers attended film schools in Europe and the United States) and by Iran’s own cosmopolitan traditions – a double play paralleling those of French New Wave films in the 1950s and 1960s, of Italian neorealist films in the 1940s and 1950s, Eastern European films in the 1960s and 1970s, and Chinese Fifth Generation films in the 1980s and 1990s. French New Wave films played a part both in remaking postwar France through images of ‘fast cars, clean bodies, decolonization and the reordering of French culture’, as Kristin Ross titled her 1995 book, and, reciprocally, in providing international images for rethinking Hollywood and the images of American modernity. So too, films from Iran in the 1990s and early 21st century speak to their own domestic cultural politics and at the same time to more general ethical dilemmas in a world torn apart and pushed together. There is something about the minimalism, deliberate pacing and subjectivities of these films that speaks to a world caught in the aftermath of religious tensors (stoicisms, purity logics, disciplinary moralists) and in the aftermath of wars received no longer stoically but through the recog-

nition of post-traumatic stress syndrome and the increasing use of trauma as a metaphor of and for the current human condition.

This double function can be seen in the image of plastic and wooden prostheses dropping from the sky on parachutes to one-legged Afghans running on their crutches to catch these international relief offerings (in Mohsen Makhmalbaf ’s 2001 film Journey to Kandahar, Safar-e Qandahar). Images of mine-devastated bodies and countries are global ones, not particularly Iranian ones. Yet this image joins a series of strong hieroglyphic images in recent Iranian films. The titles already are visual: Shrapnels in Peace being recycled as scrap metal, Blackboards doubling as protection against helicopter gunships, Rain filling footprints, Red Ribbons marking off mined land, The Time of the Drunken Horses (mules) being used to cross borders by subsistence smugglers, cameras functioning as the inability to forget trauma and poverty (Marriage of the Blessed) and as alternative courts of appeal (Close Up), recycled antennae to determine when the Americans will invade Iraq (Turtles Also Can Fly). For American and Western audiences, this emergent visual idiom provides both counter-discourse (what war does in the name of ‘collateral damage’) and a profound commonality (we are all invested in the ideals of justice, cooperation, dealing with each life as precious, freedom and ethical choice).

The uptake of Persian imagery into cosmopolitan circuits goes back to at least the Gathas of Zoroaster, acknowledged in classical Greek texts, absorbed into the eschatological imagery of the monotheisms, and paralleled in the Vedas of India.

The Persian Empire, with its Zoroastrian liturgical forms of legitimation, was the conceptual organizational alternative to the network of small Greek city-states. The dialectic between the two generated much thought about political forms, mercantile systems, iconic versus non-iconic religiosities, postal systems, epic poetry and forms of knowledge and wisdom.

In the 20th century a new set of modernist initiatives wove Iranian creativity into world consciousness through new media, reaching new audiences. Folklore, new forms of poetry, new forms of short story, novels and theater were, for reasons of language, addressed mainly to domestic audiences. But posters and film, by taking advantage of visual languages, were addressed also to international, diasporic and transnational audiences. Posters of the 1977–79 revolution, for instance, fused the artistic traditions of Islam with those of third-world revolutions, intermixing their distinctive palettes and icons, and disseminated them via photography and television.

The diaspora, after the Revolution, began to have a profound feedback effect, beginning with television in Los Angeles beamed back to Iran, and then exploding with the Internet in the early 21st century, when Persian became the fourth language of bloggers after English, Spanish and Portuguese, providing a new space of contestation not only over freedom of speech and politics, but also over informal and formal modalities of writing. Persian rock, and other music fusions of traditional and contemporary forms, began to rework the soundscape, e.g. the group O-Ham, or the film music of Mohammad Reza Darvishi who draws on his skills as an ethnomusicologist as well as composer. The calligraphic photography and video of Shirin Neshat (in which black-and-white figures of chadored women expose dense calligraphic script on face, feet and hands); the powerful vocals of Susan Dehlim (both mystical and modernist visceral); the production of stylized taziyeh passion plays at New York’s Lincoln Center with performers from Isfahan and with animal handlers from Chechnya; and in

Fukuoka, Japan, the seven Iranian teams of high school and college computer science and engineering students, male and female, competing in the sixth international RoboCup (robotic soccer) competitions – all these problematize stereotypes of Iranian culture whether seen as corrupted by religious modernist-fundamentalists or as reactionary and backward by secular cosmopolitans inside Iran and abroad. Indeed, the film Secret Ballot delightfully satirizes both Tehran’s efforts to introduce democracy to rural provinces of Iran, and implicitly American efforts to force democracy in the Middle East. And an older film, The Suitor, delightfully satirized the fundamentalism of Iranian immigrants in New York struggling against the fundamentalist imaginary of Christian apartment superintendents listening to their evangelical radio preachers as they call the police to complain about ‘terrorists’ in the apartment above, while in fact it is only hapless immigrants trying to figure out how to slaughter a sheep by Islamic rules in the bathtub.

## Reference

Ross, Kristin (1995) Fast Cars, Clean Bodies: Decolonization and the Reordering of French Culture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Michael M.J. Fischer teaches at MIT and is the author of Iran: From Religious Dispute to Revolution (Harvard University Press, 1980; 2nd edn, University of Wisconsin Press, 1990); Debating Muslims: Cultural Dialogues in Postmodernity and Tradition (with Mehdi Abedi, University of Wisconsin Press, 1990) and Blind Owls, Mute Dreams, and Dispersed Knowledges: Persian Poesis in the Transnational Circuitry (Duke University Press, 2004); as well as Anthropology as Cultural Critique: An Experimental Moment in the Human Sciences (with George Marcus, University of Chicago Press, 1986; 2nd edn, 1999) and Emergent Forms of Life and the Anthropological Voice (Duke University Press, 2003).

# Technology

Scott McQuire

Abstract This essay traces the increased centrality of technology to social life across the period of modernity. It examines major shifts in thinking about technology which underpin the shift from industrial to post-industrial society, and the emergence of concepts such as ‘technoscience’ and ‘technoculture’. It argues that a critical analysis of technology must probe the way that histories of technological progress have been implicated in colonial hierarchies privileging the West. In examining the extension of technology from machines that make things to ‘machines that think’, including biotechnology and computerized ‘aritificial life’, something implied in every historical iteration of technology is laid bare: defining the technological activates the border between nature and culture, and goes to the heart of what it means to be human.

Keywords cybernetics, new media technology, post-industrial society, technoculture, technology

## I

The mechanical eye, the camera, rejecting the human eye as crib sheet, gropes its way through the chaos of visual events, letting itself be drawn or repelled by movement, probing, as it goes, the path of its own movement. It experiments, distending time, dissecting movement, or, in contrary fashion, absorbing time within itself, swallowing years, thus schematising processes of long duration inaccessible to the ordinary eye. (Vertov, 1984 [1923]: 18–19)

Dziga Vertov’s Man with the Movie Camera (1929) was arguably the last great work of the Constructivist avant-garde. It was Vertov’s most ambitious film, not only exploring the accelerated experiences of modern urban life, but also locating them in relation to the industrial

structures supporting its emergence. The famous scenes of the female worker at the spinning machine in a textile factory – the sector which assumed paradigmatic status in Marx and Engels’ history of material production – are buttressed by investigations of coal mining and power generation. Annette Michelson argues that Man with the Movie Camera constitutes ‘the synthetic articulation of the Marxist project, concretized in every detail of an unprecedented complexity of cinematic design’ (in Vertov, [W]e will sing of the nightly fervour of arsenals and shipyards blazing with violent electric moons; greedy raiIway stations that devour smoke-plumed serpents; factories hung on clouds by the crooked lines of their smoke; bridges that stride the rivers like giant gymnasts. (Marinetti, 1909)

1984: xxxvii). This ‘unprecedented complexity’ is the elaborate montage which Vertov developed for his film. If its first aim was to analyse concrete events, such as the movements of a worker at a machine or the passage of a tram on a busy street, it also sought to locate cinema as a form of industrial production in itself. To this end, Vertov brings the entire process of making the film, from the collection of ‘film facts’ by the camera-man to the editing of the footage to its screening in front of an audience, into the orbit of the film’s formal reflexivity.

Vertov’s rhetoric extolling the role of science, technology and the engineer in order to ‘bring people into closer kinship with machines’ (1984: 7–8) was shared with many other avantgardists of European modernism. The bombast of Marinetti’s 1909 Futurist manifesto, which begins with the memorable account of the technological birth of the ‘new man’ following a car crash, found echoes in numerous places, but especially in the revolutionary ferment of the new Soviet Union, where technological transformation was fetishized as the ingredient that might enable an industrially ‘backward’ country to make a historic leap forward. The Leninist

[W]ith the development of the Internet, and with the increasing pervasiveness of communication between networked computers, we are in the middle of the most transforming technical event since the capture of fire. (Barlow, 1995: 36)

slogan ‘Soviets + Electricity = Communism’ was symptomatic of the prevailing faith that the fusion of a vanguard form of political power with advanced technology was enough to conjure a new way of life.

What can be learned from Man with the Movie Camera from a vantage point where so much has changed – not least the fact that the vanguard role of machine technology has been displaced by infor-

mation technology? One point is that Vertov’s enthusiasm – it was to be the title of his next film – for the machine is symptomatic of an ideology of technology-led progress which can be traced not only along the official highways of capitalism, but also in the works of its most influential critics, including Marx. While the utopianism of such attitudes has been subject to sustained critique at least since the 1940s, the cyberspace-dotcom episode of the 1990s proves they are eminently capable of resurfacing. If a level of boosterism can be expected for any new technology, the fact that otherwise sober analysts such as Lawrence Lessig (2001: xxii) could describe the Internet as ‘the greatest technological revolution since the Industrial Revolution’ should give us pause for thought.

The second point is the fact that cinema – at least, Vertov’s cinema – is already ‘a machine for thinking with’. (Hence Lev Manovich’s adoption of Man with a Movie Camera as a template for his typology of ‘new media’ language.) This understanding complicates the current fashion for positing computer and information technologies as a decisive break from older industrial technologies, interrupting the linear narrative of technological change that is still too often a default position. Vertov’s desire to use cinema as the means of analysing and revealing the new world produced by industrial technology poses a question that remains relevant: to what extent can the technological apparatus be used to make sense of the profound technological transformation of the world?

## II

Technology, in the sense I have begun to use here, referring not only to a particular machine or practical method but also to a more general and interlocking system, is a relatively recent usage. The word derives from the Greek and Latin root techne meaning ‘art’ in the broad sense

The bioelectronic ‘frontier’ is an appropriate metaphor for what is happening in cyberspace, calling to mind as it does the spirit of invention and discovery that led ancient mariners to explore the world, generations of pioneers to tame the American continent and, more recently, to man’s first exploration of outer space. (Dyson et al., 1994)

of ‘skill’ – an etymology brought to the fore by Heidegger, Winner and others. The modern distinction between science and art as separate bodies of knowledge distinguished by object and method, although emergent in European thought by the 17th century, was not fully consolidated until the mid-19th century. By this time the meaning of technology had narrowed to the ‘practical arts’, exemplified in the emergence of the split between knowledge (science) and its practical application in a selected field (technology).

In modern times, technological thresholds have frequently been used to designate particular eras or historical periods. Archaeologists speak of the ‘stone age’ and the ‘iron age’, while the 19th century is often called the ‘steam age’ – a designation rapidly taken over in the 20th century by a succession of others, including the ages of electricity, the motor car, radio, television, the space age, the information age, the knowledge age and so on. Embedded in these designations is an understanding of the distinctiveness of ‘modernity’ equated with the technological achievements of ‘the West’. While technological achievements of 'the West'. While

modern transport and communication technologies were fundamental to projects of colonial expansion and imperial administration in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and underpin the global market of the 21st, the presence or absence of specific technologies has often been read as a marker of cultural [T]he clock has been the foremost machine in modern technics; and at each period it remains in the lead: it marks a perfection towards which other machines aspire. (Mumford, 1934: 15)

‘backwardness’. Interrogations of Western ethnocentrism in relation to technology are recent and still limited. Most accounts of technology, whether critical or uncritical, focus on developments within the West, or the impact of those developments ‘on’ other cultures. Technology is something that comes from the West and does something to other people in other places, such as the ‘Third World’ – a framework which, even when well-intentioned, denies both agency and contemporaneity to the ‘other’. My account here is shaped by this history, even as it tries to sketch its historical limitations.

While it is easy to dismiss designations such as the ‘steam age’ or the ‘information age’ for their obvious failings, particularly their deterministic tendency to repress the constellation of forces – political, economic, cultural – underlying technological transformation, it is neverthe-

less important to recognize them as symptomatic of the increasing centrality of technology to modern life. Metaphor and rhetoric have long been conditioned by prevailing technologies. However, when Descartes characterized the universe as a clock and God as an Eternal Clockmaker, he was proposing a mechanistic ideal far removed from both the limited technological accomplishments and the

A person is not a head and arms and legs. That’s trivial. A person is a very large microprocessor with a million ties, a million small parts, and these are arranged as a thousand computers. (Minsky, 1999[1996]: 244)

collective experience of the 17th century. When contemporary proponents of artificial life, such as Langton, describe the universe as computational, or the human body is conceptualized as an information processing system, these references draw on technological forms which have already substantially reworked the lifeworld that many people experience.

The increased centrality of technology became evident in the post-Second World War discourse as concern shifted to what Habermas dubbed the ‘scientization’ of technology, what Latour called ‘technoscience’, or what others call ‘technoculture’. When technology no longer refers only to machines, but to media forms and ‘machines that think’, as well as to biotechnology, nanotechnology and ‘artificial life’, we have reached the threshold of what Scott Lash (2002) aptly calls ‘technological forms of life’. This threshold lays bare something that is implied in every historical iteration of technology: defining the technological not only activates the border between nature and culture, but goes to the heart of what it means to be human.

## III

Writing in the mid- to late 19th century, Marx is characteristic in not using use the term ‘technology’. Nevertheless, the advent of machine production is critical to his materialist conception of historical dynamism. While Marx argued that capitalism emerged at least a century prior to widespread industrialization, The Communist Manifesto (1848) stresses the revolutionary impact of technological innovation in manufacturing, agriculture, transport and communication:

I operate as a man–machine interface – that is, as a technological form of natural life – because I must necessarily navigate through technological forms of social life. . . . Because my forms of social life are so normally and chronically at-a-distance, I cannot navigate these distances, I cannot achieve sociality apart from my machine interface. (Lash, 2002: 15)

The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has created more massive and more colossal productive forces than have all preceding generations together. Subjection of Nature’s forces to man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, steam-navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole populations conjured out of the ground – what earlier century had even a presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap of social labour? (Marx and Engels, 1977: 48)

While Capital contains detailed descriptions of the deleterious social effects of machine production and the factory system on the worker, Marx’s structural division between the forces of production and the relations of production favours a relatively neutral conception of technology in which the key issue is political control over surplus. Yet there is an ambiguity running through Marx’s understanding of technology which is noteworthy insofar as it sets a pattern that recurs throughout the next century.

On the one hand, his early formulations at times seem deterministic, deriving complex social changes from technological thresholds. In The Poverty of Philosophy (1847) he famously asserts:

In acquiring new productive forces men change their mode of production; and in changing their mode of production, in changing the way of earning their living, they change all their social relations. The hand-mill gives you society with the feudal lord; the steam-mill, society with the industrial capitalist. (Marx, 1976: 165)

Counteracting this ‘mechanical materialism’ are Marx’s later insights into the way commodities – including technology as ‘capital instruments’ – assume an enigmatic appearance of autonomy from their producers. If ‘all commodities are only definite masses of congealed labour time’ (1887: 46), this social relation is concealed by the fetishization of exchange value that characterizes commodity relations within mature capitalism. While subsequent critiques of the Marxist theory of labour value have often noted its failure to adequately theorize the productivity gains enabled by technological change, Marx’s analysis of the manner in which modern technology appears as something external to human effort, and therefore outside social control, remains active.

‘Neutral’ understandings of technology, in which the central problem is not so much the ‘essence’ of technology but the need for its rational use according to new forms of political control, were dominant in the West at least up until the Second World War. Not surprisingly, this stance informs the ‘scientific management’ theories of Taylor, published in 1911, which sought to facilitate the adaptation of the inefficient worker to machine production. It also underpins the more critical views of those such as American political economist and sociologist Thorstein Veblen, for whom technological change necessitated the end of the market system and private property in favour of central planning by an engineering technocracy. Even Lewis Mumford’s (1934) magisterial history of technics, written in the United States at the height of the great Depression and prior to the advent of the ‘New Deal’, treats technology in relatively neutral terms, opposing Veblen’s engineering technocracy with the advocacy of rational planning informed by humanist values. While Mumford treats the ‘paleotechnics’ of the 19th-century factory system almost entirely as a regression in terms of the ‘good life’, he is still hopeful that better planning can alleviate the crisis. His conclusion forecasts a ‘Neotechnic’ era, based on long-distance transmission of electricity, allowing decentralization of production and the dispersion of the concentric industrial city into modern garden cities. A similar hope informs Siegfried Giedion’s monumental Mechanization Takes Command (1948), which investigates the technological transformation of areas such as housing, furniture and food. However, for Mumford this potential was to remain unrealized; by the time of The Myth of the Machine (1967–70), he was far less sanguine about the technological future.

## IV

In the post-war period, significant changes in the concept of technology accrue into a critical mass in two directions. One is marked out by Norbert Wiener’s Cybernetics, which stands as a tutor text for a new paradigm in which, as he put it, scientists had ‘become aware of the essential unity of the set of problems centering about communication, control and statistical

mechanics, whether in the machine or in living tissue’ (1948: 19). The cybernetic model depended on two related shifts: first, understanding information as a purely quantitative and probabilistic entity entirely divorced from semantics and, second, understanding human neural structures in terms of binary information flows. Wiener’s radical move was to equate living systems and machines, displacing the

From that time it became clear to us that the ultra-rapid computing machine, depending as it does on consecutive switching devices, must represent almost an ideal model of the problems arising in the nervous system. (Wiener, 1948: 22)

classical paradigm of clockwork automata whose mechanical regularity exposed human fallibility in favour of information processing machines capable of modelling the complex behaviour of organic systems. Like many other technological developments, this shift had been vastly accelerated by the demands of total warfare: Wiener’s work at MIT on anti-aircraft systems capable of predicting the evasive patterns of enemy pilots in the US was complemented by the code-breaking research of Turing and others in England.

The cybernetic paradigm has exercised continuing influence over contemporary scientific understanding, notably in underwriting subsequent developments in biotechnology. The success of the Human Genome Project in garnering massive research funding, which led to the earlier

than expected completion of its mapping phase in mid-2000, depends on a cybernetic understanding of the lived body as a computational system running on a genetic program in which DNA figures as ‘the code of codes’. This conception of the body as a complex system made up of sub-systems that can, in principle, be taken apart and re-assembled effectively supports a ‘montage’ theory of human evolution, along the lines elaborated in Richard Dawkins’ The Selfish Gene (1976), where genetic programs are assimilated to

In this vein, Walter Gilbert, author of The Code of Codes (1992), looks forward to the day when ‘Three billion bases of a sequence can be put on a single compact disc (CD), and one will be able to pull a CD out of one’s pocket and say, “Here’s a human being; it’s me”.’ (Gilbert, 1992: 96)

computer programs and ‘selection’ is presented as an algorithm. In fact, these models effectively reverse Wiener’s earlier attempts to humanize the machine in favour of a mathematical concept of the human. They also largely ignore later developments in cybernetics, such as Maturana and Varela’s (1980) autopoiesis, which theorized decentralized and distributed control and feedback systems, in favour of a model reinstating central control.

## V

If cybernetics, with its ambition of uniting diverse scientific fields including mathematics, neurophysiology and engineering, marks one major post-war paradigm for thinking technology, its opposite was the increasing scepticism towards the form of rationality manifested in modern technological life. A key text is Heidegger’s 1955 essay ‘The Question Concerning Technology (1977), inspired by a communication from Ernst Jünger who once declared technology to be the metaphysics of the 20th century. In it, Heidegger develops ontological themes shared in some respects by others, including Marcuse (1964, 1998), who was Heidegger’s student from 1928 to 1932, Ellul (1967) and Habermas (1971).

Heidegger (1977: 4) argues that regarding technology as neutral means ‘we are delivered over to it in the worst possible way’. Famously asserting that the ‘essence of technology is by no means anything technological’, Heidegger (1977: 4, 13) treats technology as a stance towards the world – what others might call an ideology – insofar as it constitutes an instrumental ‘mode of revealing’. Unlike the bringing-forth of classical poeisis, modern technology is a challenging forth (Herausforrden, meaning to summon to action, to provoke). This challenging of nature transforms it into what Heidegger dubs a ‘standing-reserve’ (Bestand) in which every element is calculable, orderable and substitutable.

The earth now reveals itself as a coal mining district, the soil as mineral deposit. . . . Air is now set upon to yield nitrogen, the earth to yield ore, ore to yield uranium, for example; uranium is set upon to yield atomic energy, which can released either for destruction or peaceful use. (Heidegger, 1977: 14–15)

It is from this perspective that Heidegger can characterize the essence of technology as Gestell (enframing), and reverse the common-sense chronological relation between science and

Ellul’s La Technique was published in 1954, while Marcuse’s essay on ‘Modern Technology’ dates from 1941. However, Heidegger’s essay deserves precedence insofar as he began exploring related themes in 1936–38, in the wake of his notorious ‘commitment’ to National Socialism.

technology: modern physics is not modern because of its technological apparatus, such as the glass for test-tubes and lenses that Mumford (1934: 124–31) identified as crucial, but because it conceptualizes nature as ‘a coherence of forces calculable in advance’ (Heidegger, 1977: 21).

Heidegger’s transhistorical characterization of modern technology as the ‘destining’ of a tendency present since the inception of metaphysics can be felt in the work of Marcuse (1998: 48) when he writes of a ‘technological attitude’. It can also be felt in Ellul’s (1967: xxvi) all-embracing concept of ‘la technique’ defined in 1963 as ‘the totality of methods rationally arrived at and having absolute efficiency (for a given stage of development) in every field of human activity’ (emphasis in original). But where Ellul deliberately subsumes all other social and political

Capitalism did not create our world; the machine did. . . . At the present time, technique has arrived at such a point in its evolution that it is being transformed and is progressing almost without decisive intervention by man. . . . There is but one method for its use, one possibility. Lacking this, it is not a technique. (Ellul, 1967: 5, 85, 97)

determinations into the efficient logic of technology, Marcuse retains a more dialectical account. The ‘technological attitude’ has transformed the function of individuality – which at its inception in the Enlightenment had a critical edge because the society into which it was born was ‘not yet rational – into a conformism destructive of individuality. Marcuse (1998: 46) gives the example of a car journey, organized by the logic of maps, signposts and travel guides: ‘Giant advertisements tell him when to stop and find the pause that refreshes. . . .

Business, technics, human needs and nature are welded together into one rational and expedient mechanism’. Foreshadowing his influential One-dimensional Man (1964), Marcuse stresses that the totalizing nature of the technological system means the individual cannot choose to ‘opt out’:

There is no personal escape from the apparatus which has mechanized and standardized the world. It is a rational apparatus, combining utmost expediency with utmost convenience, saving time and energy, removing waste, adapting all means to the end, anticipating consequences, sustaining calculability and security. (1941/1998: 46)

Rather than being the handmaiden of the established apparatus, beautifying its business and its misery, art would become a technique for destroying this business and this misery. (Marcuse, 1964: 239)

Marcuse’s analysis of the conversion of technology from means to end shares much with the image of a technologically homogenized ‘mass society’ proposed by other members of the Frankfurt School, including Habermas (1971) for whom technology formed a second strand of administration complementing

the bureaucratic domination analysed by Weber. Like Adorno, but also like Heidegger, Marcuse locates the potential critique of this limited rationality in art: recovering the richness of an older form of techne is positioned as the key to overcoming the narrowness of the technological attitude.

## VI

Urban legend has it that Marshall McLuhan’s Understanding Media (1964/1974) sold more books during the 1960s than any other English-language text except the Bible. Whatever its truth, such an assertion at least registers the extraordinary public impact of McLuhan’s work, which rode the zeitgeist of television, coinciding with the Telstar satellite’s (launched in 1962 and used for the first satellite link-up of all five continents for a live television broadcast in 1964) confirmation of the medium’s global reach. Drawing heavily on Harold Innis’s concept of the ‘bias’ of different communication technologies, according to which durable media such as clay tablets were time-biased and favoured small-scale, stable societies, while paper

During the mechanical ages we had extended our bodies in space. Today, after more than a century of electric technology, we have extended our central nervous system itself in a global embrace, abolishing space and time as far as our planet is concerned. . . . As electrically contracted, the globe is no more than a village. (McLuhan, 1974: 11, 12–13)

was space-biased, favouring administrative relations extending across large territories, McLuhan focused on the transformation of spatio-temporal experience, and thus on ways of knowing and experiencing the world:

For the ‘message’ of any medium or technology is the change of scale or pace or pattern that it introduces into human affairs. (1974: 16)

Like Innis, McLuhan extolled the importance of printing in laying the foundations for nationalism, an argument later influentially adapted by Benedict Anderson. McLuhan also followed Innis in fundamentally dividing ‘oral’ and ‘literate’ societies, according to a concept of writing as the ‘technology’ proper to civilization, which Derrida notes has long operated to authorize deeply racist and ethnocentric accounts of human development. Where McLuhan departed from Innis was in positing electronic communication as a third wave which promised to overcome the fragmenting effects of print media, producing a new type of consciousness.

Resentment towards McLuhan’s showmanship and pop vocabulary, if not the more measured critique of his deterministic history by those such as Raymond Williams, accelerated the decline of his star, before he was resurrected as the patron saint of Wired in the 1990s. Unsurprisingly, this return occurred at a moment when the scale, pattern and pace of media was again in transition, as the rapid growth of networked computers helped to orchestrate a new phase of global society.

If the technological annihilation of space and time was something that Marx and others had flagged in the 19th century, its late 20th-century manifestation differed in the degree to which the intertwining of the global and the local now saturated everyday life. Since the mid-1970s, McLuhan’s understanding of technology as sensory extension has been reprised by Paul Virilio,

but this time as catastrophe. For Virilio, every new technology necessarily presumes a new ‘accident’. Given that the communication technologies which succeeded the transportation technologies of the 19th century have now reached ‘light-speed’, the technological accident can no longer be localized; the generalized accident of ubiquitous ‘real time’ communication produces nothing less than the exhaustion of the spatio-temporal dimensions of the world. This abolition of the distance and perspective,

The initially confined rise of the dynamic, at first mobile, then automotive, vehicle is suddenly followed by the generalised rise of pictures and sounds in the static vehicles of the audio-visual. . . . From now on everything will happen without us moving, without us even having to set out. (Virilio, 1989a: 112)

which was once the frame for properly ‘human’ experience, erodes memory, urbanism and now, with what Virilio calls the ‘third revolution’ of nanotechnologies and transplants, results in an endo-colonization of the body. Animating Virilio’s understanding of technology is its intimate connection to militarization: the dromopolitics inaugurated by the breakdown of feudal society analysed in Speed and Politics (1986) leads directly to the vision machine of War and Cinema (1989), which in turn spreads implacably to become The Vision Machine (1994) inhabiting modern culture. The atomic bomb begets the ‘information bomb’; in Ellulian manner, Virilio (1995) declares that ‘Totalitarianism is latent in technology.

## VII

One problem with proclaiming the technological ‘annihilation’ of time and space is that it inevitably positions the present as the apex of the historic process, and leaves little room for conceptualizing further change. In fact, as Schivelbusch (1986) has pointed out, similar

‘Annihilation of time and space’ was the topos which the early nineteenth century used to describe the new situation into which the railroad placed natural space after depriving it of its hitherto absolute powers. (Schivelbusch, 1986: 10)

rhetoric first emerged as long ago as the 1820s, when the invention of steam-powered trains radically transformed the way that people saw and experienced the landscape. If the emergence of the ‘global village’ threatened what Virilio (1986: 135) and many others saw as a ‘geostrategic homogenization of the globe’, beneath this current – and perhaps responding to the same forces – different conceptualizations of technology began to emerge in the 1970s. In the context of this essay, four strands stand out.

The first is the emergence of variously named programmes for the social study of science and technology from the early 1970s. Of particular importance in this context was the pioneering empirical research conducted at the Salk Institute of Biological Studies in La Jolla, California by Latour and Woolgar and published as Laboratory Life in 1979. Where earlier approaches largely accepted a definition of technology in terms of instrumental rationality and efficiency – even critical accounts by those such as Marcuse and Habermas, which positioned this as a false rationality – Latour and Woolgar undermined this myth on its own terms by removing ‘laboratory life’ from its ‘black box’ to focus on the role of institutional politics and interpersonal relations in constructing scientific ‘fact’ and directing technological development.

The word black box is used by cyberneticians whenever a piece of machinery or a set of commands is too complex. In its place they draw a little box about which they need to know nothing but its input and output. (Latour, 1987: 2–3)

The second major shift was the emergence of feminist critiques of knowledge, science and technology by those such as Evelyn Fox Keller and Sandra Harding, as well as endeavours to reinscribe women into the history of scientific and technological innovation. An important shift in this context is marked out by Donna Haraway’s 1984 ‘Cyborg manifesto’, which explicitly sought to build a new political myth

by conceptualizing the relation between humans and technology as irretrievably hybridized without recourse to some prior unified or organic body. In this respect, Haraway occupied similar uncertain ground gestured to by Derrida when he argued, contra Heidegger’s privileging of language as the dwelling-place of Being, that ‘tekhne does not happen to language’, or evoked by Latour’s recasting of subject–object relations into actant–network morphisms. At

The machine is not an it to be animated, worshipped and dominated. The machine is us, an aspect of our embodiment. We can be responsible for machines; they do not dominate or threaten us. We are responsible for boundaries; we are they. (Haraway, 1991: 180)

stake in all these moves is rejection of the separation of ‘the essence of technology’ from the human, but in a way that does not assimilate the human to the cybernetic-mathematic paradigm.

A third significant change was the emergence of critiques of the impact of Western technology on developing nations, particularly the technoexperimentation of the so-called ‘green revolution’, which fed into investigations of alternative and

appropriate technology. Latour’s (1987) reinscription of science as ‘local knowledge’ alongside the indigenous knowledge systems it has always sought to marginalize by virtue of its claim to universality, also placed the issue of indigenous technology on an agenda that had long excluded it by definition. However, despite a few exceptions, such a shift toward thinking the contemporaneity of the indigenous and the modern has not entered the mainstream of science technology and society studies. However, it has been more influential in fields such as art history, notably through the journal Third Text (1987–) and cultural studies.

A related shift was the fact that leadership in technological production no longer belonged so exclusively to the industrialized West. When US video artist Vito Acconci imperiously claimed in 1984: ‘Wherever it is located, theoretically, art video is grounded, practically, in America’ (1993: 29), he was ignoring the extent to which the hardware on which he depended, such as monitors and cameras, was in fact made in Japan. By the 1980s, Japanese rivalry in electronics and microelectronics, including leadership in new technologies such as computer games, as well as competitive advantage in automobiles and consumer white goods, underpinned the burgeoning ‘bubble economy’. As other so-called ‘Asian tigers’ followed suit, new anxieties became evident in the industrialized West, rivalling the Sputnik shock of 1957. However, on this occasion the challenge to the deeply entrenched assumption that technological leadership is a ‘natural’ right accruing to the West in general and the US in particular, was not so easily assuaged, as a more complex map of global technology emerged in the 1990s.

## VIII

In 1993, Nicholas Negroponte (founding director of MIT’s Media Lab) wrote his first column for the inaugural Wired magazine, extolling, among other things, that ‘prime time is my time’. For Negroponte, who had been working on human–computer interfacing since the 1960s, the

time was right to spread the word; in the columns later collected into Being Digital (1995), the key word is choice. Contradicting the suspicion towards technology underwriting Virilio’s image of latent totalitarianism, and largely ignoring the questions raised by feminism, postcolonialism and social studies of science, Negroponte casts the digital era as one of enhanced individual choice and personal freedom. The ‘old media’ such as the broadcast television networks, which have ‘all the dogma of the

We will probably see a national information-computer-utility system, with tens of thousands of terminals in homes and offices ‘hooked’ into giant central computers providing library and information services, retail ordering and billing services and the like. (Bell, 1968: 4)

analog world’ (1995: 181), are unfavourably compared to the digital future in which universal access will be streamlined by computer management of information choices:

My VCR of the future will say to me when I come home, ‘Nicholas, I looked at five thousand hours of television while you were out and recorded six segments for you which total forty minutes’. . . . It will do this by looking at the headers. (1995: 179)

Beneath his conversational informality, Negroponte’s future-casting continually and revealingly slips into an imperative tone: ‘The change from atoms to bits is irrevocable and unstoppable (1995: 4). Negroponte’s work exemplifies the rebranding of technology during the 1990s, as

miniaturized and mobile digital devices – from personal computers and hand-held games consoles to cell phones and MP3 players – were successfully marketed as icons of personal liberation. Dwarfing the actual commodities, at least in their early manifestations, was the overarching specular creation of cyberspace, the founding myth of the digital era passing seamlessly from the fiction of William Gibson’s Neuromancer (1984) to the ‘fact’ plied by those such as Howard Rheingold and Michael Benedikt a few years later. For the prophets of VR (virtual reality), the key question was also choice,

The methodical movement of recorded music as pieces of plastic, like the slow human handling of most information in the form of books, magazines, newspapers and videocassettes, is about to become the instantaneous and inexpensive transfer of electronic data that move at the speed of light. In this form, information can become universally accessible. (Negroponte, 1995: 4)

only now the choice was not a democracy of consumption but the future of human being. Paralleling the rhetoric of biotechnology, Rheingold argued:

VR vividly demonstrates that our social contract with our tools has brought us to a point where we have to decide fairly soon what it is we as humans ought to become, because we are on the brink of having the power to create any experience we desire. (1991: 386, italics in original)

[T]echnology is absolutely, 100 percent, positive. (Kevin Kelly, executive editor of Wired, cited in Keegan, 1995: 39)

The rapid flowering of ‘Californian ideology’, in which digital technology was cast as the next phase of human evolution, drew on a long tradition which Leo Marx aptly termed the ‘technological sublime’.

One function served by the short-circuit of the ‘new economy’ in the dotcom bust of 2001 is that it at least cleared some space for a more nuanced assessment of digital culture.

## IX

Marx had almost nothing to say about the impact of technology on culture – a lacuna that Walter Benjamin generously attributes to the fact that capitalism was in its ‘infancy’ when Marx undertook his analysis. Benjamin’s ‘Artwork’ essay (2003), written during his exile in Paris between 1935 and 1939, famously takes up the impact of ‘technological reproduction’ in the cultural realm. In effect, Benjamin theorizes what Vertov’s Man with the Movie Camera had sought to enact, positing a privileged relation between film and the demand to compre-

The illusionary nature of film is of the second degree; it is the result of editing. That is to say: In the film studio the apparatus has penetrated so deeply into reality that a pure view of that reality, free of the foreign body of equipment, is the result of a special procedure, namely, the shooting by the specially adjusted photographic device and the assembly of that shot with others of the same kind. The equipment-free aspect of reality has here become the height of artifice, and the vision of immediate reality the Blue Flower in the land of technology. (Benjamin, 2003: 263)

hend a technologically transformed world. For Benjamin, the key question is not simply knowledge of technology but new modes of knowing enabled through technology – an approach that remains instructive in thinking about the circulation of digital information in the present.

For Benjamin, the ‘second degree’ illusion of film montage corresponds to profound changes in social experience as the industrial city displaced ‘nature’ as the primary lived environment. What first appears in his 1927 essay on Russian film as the ‘dynamite of the fraction of a second’ becomes the ‘optical unconscious’ of the 1930s, a technological lever capable of liberating the masses from the prison-house of the industrial city. However, it is a mistake to assume, as Mark Poster (1995) does with his ‘second media

age’, that Benjamin was unswervingly positive towards ‘new media’. Film’s ‘shock’ capacity is intensely ambivalent: as much as it can blow everyday reality apart to reveal its hidden springs, it can also render the fragments indifferent to history. Cinema thus occupies a crucial place in the dialectical movement of history: it is both a symptom of the hold of modern technology over consciousness and a lever for unlocking that hold.

This ambivalence is apparent in the more sanguine formulation of cinema Benjamin offered in ‘Some Motifs in Baudelaire’, written in 1939 alongside the final version of the ‘Artwork essay:

There came a day when a new and urgent need for stimuli was met by film. In a film, perception conditioned by shock [chockförmige Wahrnehmung] was established as a formal principle. What determines the rhythm of production on a conveyor belt is the same thing that underlies the rhythm of reception of film. (2003: 328)

Here film is aligned, not with the dynamiting of the social world by revealing its ‘optical unconscious’, but with the system of industrial training. Benjamin is drawing on Marx’s comparison between ‘training’ and ‘practice’: where practice depends on skills acquired over time from experience, training depends upon the strict division of labour and the fragmentation of work tasks. For Marx (cited by Benjamin, 2003: 329) the unskilled worker on the assembly line ‘does not make use of the working conditions. The working conditions make use of the worker.

The political ambiguity of cinema thus turns on whether its radical impact – its capacity to break the world into fragments, dismantling old patterns and enabling new relationships to be imagined – will be reduced to another mode for industrial training of the senses. For Benjamin, this is finally not so much a question of the formal process of fragmentation, as Adorno feared, but a question of meaning. Can ‘distracted’ perception generate collective meaning capable of entering individual experience, and thus become the conscious basis for recognition of the conditions of one’s existence?

## X

This ambiguity, described in 1927 by Benjamin’s contemporary Siegfried Kracauer as ‘the gofor-broke game of history’, is helpful in situating the ambivalence of the ‘global information society’ orchestrated by contemporary digital networks. On the one hand, technologically mediated ‘flows’ radically undermine the traditional social consequences of space and place; on the other hand, as Sassen (1991) observes, new information technologies are integral to the emergence of ‘global cities’, which concentrate command and control functions in the global economy. This produces radically uneven spatial textures in which intimacy at a distance is juxtaposed to the disjunction of physically proximate areas and the virtual exile of communities lacking appropriate technology and resources. In the same ambivalent vein, decentralized

person-to-person communication offers significant structural challenges to the media and communication forms that dominated the 20th century, yet ‘the technologies of freedom’ celebrated by de Sola Pool (1983) are produced by corporate oligopolies whose scale and global reach is unprecedented, and is matched at every step by the extension of personal surveillance. New media networks enabled the rapid

The records of Mohammed Atta, on CCTV tapes and digital logs, were collected not because he was doing anything unusual or deviant. . . . Data-gathering is routine, generalized, and distributed across almost every sphere of daily life. (Lyon, 2003: 97)

coordination of rolling global political campaigns against war in Iraq, yet the health of workers making computer chips, like the disposal of old First World computer equipment in the developing world, remains largely invisible. And, despite the pervasive rhetoric of freedom, the potential of peer-to-peer networks is being reshaped in the wake of Napster via a combination of technological and legal patches designed to protect existing content owners, who are fast shifting consumers to lucrative time-based licensing models of consumption.

In Gilles Deleuze’s terms the digital era represents a shift from ‘disciplinary’ to ‘control societies. Where disciplinary societies depended on moulds, physical structures such as Bentham’s panoptic architecture, control societies operate by modulation, a flexible form of active moulding defined by the ubiquity of digital information. Yet the flood of information that characterizes digital culture is both the extension of control and the possibility of its disruption. The crucial issue is still the threshold Benjamin identified as a consequence of the technological destruction of aura: how to develop a ‘politics’ commensurate to technological modernity, so that information can be made meaningful, not just as the stance of isolated individuals but as a collective understanding capable of entering individual experience of the technologically transformed world. The widespread and unfulfilled demand for a new sociality extending beyond the confined technological boundaries of the market is registered in the advertising strategies of mobile phone companies, as much as in contemporary art, which Nicholas Bour-

The old sovereign societies worked with simple machines, levers, pulleys, clocks; but recent disciplinary societies were equipped with thermodynamic machines presenting the passive danger of entropy and the active danger of sabotage; control societies function with a third generation of machines, with information technology and computers, where the passive danger is noise and the active, piracy and viral contamination. (Deleuze, 2002: 319)

riaud has perceptively characterized in terms of ‘relational aesthetics’ manifested in the emergence of artworks which are no longer objects or images but modes of social connection in themselves.

