# The Enlightenment / The Enlightenment / The Long Counter-Enlightenment

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# The Enlightenment

Couze Venn

Abstract For different reasons, and with different political goals at stake, the fundamental principles advocated by the Enlightenment are being challenged by both the left and the right. This entry sets out to clear a critical space for examining what is at stake in the present in interrogating its legacy as discourse for imagining alternative transmodern and transcolonial futures. A re-evaluation of the Enlightenment by reference to concepts of equality, liberty, emancipation, justice and becoming(s) is central to that task.

Keywords counter-Enlightenment, emancipation, evolution, informationalization, project, reason, transmodernity

## The Enlightenment

In 1984, on the occasion of the 200th anniversary of Kant’s essay ‘What is Enlightenment?’, Foucault wrote an essay of the same title in order to examine its legacy for the present. His claim that this event ‘has determined, at least in part, what we are, what we think, what we do today’ (1984: 32) triggers many questions and suggests an inheritance that needs to be interrogated, and not only in relation to the modern discourse of philosophy that Foucault’s rhetorical ‘we’ is meant to signal. To begin with, the invocation of a communal ‘we’ in the context of a supposedly postmodern age, while harbouring the spirit of the cosmopolitan universalism that the Enlightenment championed, comes up against the evidence of increasing and systematic inequalities and differences at all levels that obliges one to consider who is the addressee of the statement. Furthermore, inheritance today is bound up with a notion of inhabitance that directs attention to the reality of diasporic and contested places and spaces that trails the whole history of modernity with it. It is necessary therefore to make visible not only the broader epistemic and cultural context of the Enlightenment as a grand narrative, but also to question it regarding the purchase it may have now in the current moment of a world re-ordering which is set on countering its convictions about equality, liberty, fundamental rights and the promise of emancipation.

Kant, of course, did not invent the Enlightenment, though his reflections on the topic have given us key passages about the essential role of reason and critique in the progress or ‘maturity of humanity’, as he saw it, that have indeed come to encapsulate for many the salient features of Enlightenment as a project. Foucault’s own discourse, by focusing on Kant, refigures this project in terms of a particular trajectory towards ‘a critical ontology of ourselves’ that, unfortunately, obscures its more explicitly political dimension. For these reasons, I want to present here a different reading of the Enlightenment, not in order to engage in some futile critique of Foucault or Kant – since their essays are in fact both still productive from the point of view of an interrogation of the present – but in order to re-examine the stakes in posing the problem from the point of view of knowledge today and against a background of emergent socialities and great turbulences in the world that remind one of the conditions of emergence of the Enlightenment.

When conceptualized as a project, the Enlightenment invariably calls up, and merges into, the concept of modernity as a project. At the theoretical level, Habermas would be the figure that one associates with this convergence, both in his critique of the subversion of its radical potential because of the privileging of instrumental rationality in the historical elaboration of the project, and in his enduring faith in the possibility of the completion of its emancipatory goals. Lyotard counterposes a different perspective when he argues that the distinguishing trait of modernity is precisely that it presents itself in the form of a universal project, that is, as an Idea to be realized. According to him, its main goals expressed in the metanarratives of modernity are ‘the progressive emancipation of reason and of freedom, the progressive or catastrophic emancipation of labour (source of alienated value in capitalism), the enhancement of the whole of humanity through the development of capitalist technoscience’ (Lyotard, 1988: 31). To contextualize this idea of project, I will point to the fact that emancipatory discourses, or at least discourses that promise the possibility of escape from a presumed initial imperfection of the human being, have existed in all cultures, grounded in the idea of redemption or salvation or maturity, necessitating sacrifice and a process of self-reflection and discovery. This is often expressed in the idea of a journey towards something like the purification of the soul, a liberation from all-too-human defects through the acquiring of wisdom. These narratives of emancipation require that we free ourselves from the hold of the desires that keep us in a state of dependency or immaturity; the ‘pilgrim’ is counselled to seek out instead the knowledges that are meant to have a liberatory and transformative effect. Before modernity, such narratives referred to a religious discourse and inscribed their own grand or master narratives, so that the promise of the salvation or perfectibility of souls, and what that meant from the point of view of being saved from the abyss of finitude, cycles of rebirth, or the state of fallenness, was guaranteed by a transcendental realm or force to which it was imperative for the believer to submit. This foundation in religion is far from the notion of the history of emancipation that aligns it with the linear and progressive unfolding of humanity’s destiny that one encounters in the discourse of modernity; instead one encounters different temporalities where it is a matter of fixed trajectories and returns, of obedience and sacrifice, of listening to the proper.

By contrast, the master narratives of the Enlightenment insist on the secular foundation of its emancipatory enterprise, and on linear temporality. It distinguishes itself from other stories of human becoming by placing itself under the banner of reason and in the directing hand of the autonomous subject rather than that of religious doctrine and a divine being or purpose. The discourse of modernity, in breaking with previous systems of thought, refuses ideas that refer emancipation to a transcendent authority: God or fate/Karma. It claims to owe nothing to anyone except the effort of rational subjects and agency. It becomes its own authority. From the Enlightenment onwards, this authority is vested in Science. One needs to bear in mind the metaphysics of presence (Derrida, 1982) which this episteme covers over, though I shall draw attention rather to the break with the relation of faith to knowledge that this implies; it is something to which I will return presently, for it relates to conditions supporting contemporary servitudes. Today, as Lyotard (1993) notes, the idea that one has to labour and wait for emancipation is erased in the postmodern condition that not only desires to shorten the delay, but to instrumentalize the project of emancipation in the idea of development, and I would add, the equation of the latter with the notion of modernization itself.

I think it is important to highlight yet another feature which I will argue is determining, and that opens up the question of the political, namely, the idea of revolution. Kant locates its centrality for progress, and Lyotard has explained the extent to which it is precisely the ‘enthusiasm for revolution’, that is, the desire for a sociality yet to come, rather than specific advances in knowledge or progress in some aspect of society, which itself functions as the sign that attests to the ‘maturity of humanity’ (Lyotard, 1983: 244, 245). What I am thinking about here is the willingness to imagine and seek through action an unprecedented world, guided by nothing more than this idea of a possible or alternative world, brought about through human action. The readiness or disposition to contemplate such revolutionary change, inspired by the Enlightenment thought, is one of the key marks of modernity. It finds its initial instantiation in the French and American Revolutions, exemplary gestures of starting anew that have been repeated many times since. It could be pointed out that religions too have explicitly sought to effect such total transformations, for example, in the case of Judaism, Christianity, Islam, which explicitly condemned the previous system of beliefs and values against which they defined themselves and advocated an entirely new form of sociality. The difference, however, is that religious revolutions do not imagine their own disappearance or mutation as an integral part of the process; indeed quite the opposite, for, in rejecting the previous world, they propose a new order that would forever be founded on the new unchanging and unquestionable doctrines and principles – the commandments of God, the Book, the scared texts – (though schisms abound). Buddhism, interestingly, does not quite fit any of these models. By contrast, modernity posits a process of becoming. It brings the command of temporality itself within the perimeter of human agency, no doubt an excessive ambition with its own totalizing and totalitarian temptations. In this it differs from all other projects of emancipation or salvation.

It could, of course, be argued that other periods have known ambitious universalizing projects that similarly sought to establish a social order with a global, imperial reach, for example, in China at various points and with regard to Islamic expansion that stretched from the Balkans to Indonesia and central Africa. In relation to modernity’s expansionary enterprise, one could point to the emergence of vernacular modernities, and counter-modernities, in response to colonial subjugation and capitalist exploitation, and indeed to modernity’s own subjugating grasp (Gilroy, 1993). A brief look at the ideas that motivated the Enlightenment will bring to light the specificities of its discourse that enable one to judge competing projects of emancipation, as well as to rethink the narratives that continue to be both the stakes in the legacy of the Enlightenment and the inspiration for imagining different futures.

Central to the politics of Enlightenment thinkers was the rejection of the deep-seated belief that inequality and poverty were inevitable and reflected the natural state of human societies. This situation – of fixed social ranks, including gender relations, legitimated and essentialized on the basis of an idea of natural order or an idea of divine law, coupled to the claim of the divine authority of sovereigns – prevailed not only in Europe but in all other cultures (except perhaps small tribal communities). By contrast, people like Voltaire, Condorcet, Rousseau, or Diderot blamed existing social arrangements, and what they called civilization, for the unjust systems that had appeared everywhere. They thought change necessitated the rejection of the doctrines and values, including religious ones, that sustained such ‘imperfect’ systems, and that rational knowledge would be the means to put an end to them and bring about the ‘perfectibility of human kind’. Emancipation therefore meant precisely this break with the old, mostly feudal and ‘traditional’ societies, with their fixed relations of power and religious ideologies and restrictions. It is a fundamental shift, especially when one reflects that today new forms and doctrines of naturalizing inequalities have emerged, for example in socio-biology and neoliberalism, supported by large sections of the press, while older religious doctrines continue to be used to underwrite inequalities of gender throughout the world. Enlightenment thought therefore still presents a challenge to such common sense and the dogmas they inscribe.

Condorcet, for example, believed that the new ‘social art’ based on rational knowledge would abolish the inequalities that existed within nations as well as between nations; it would bring about equality between men and women and among the ‘races’. He argued that a system of social insurance rather than charity should be established, and ‘free trade’ instituted (though this was proposed in opposition to the prevailing trade monopolies and the licensing and restrictions of trade enforced by the state). He, like many of the encyclopaedists, advocated the abolition of slavery and the independence of the colonies, while he thought that the Enlightenment would help free Asia and Africa from ‘our trade monopolies, our treachery, our murderous contempt for men of another colour or creed, the insolence of our usurpations’ (in the Sketch, 1795). Paradoxically, the same Condorcet talked about the ignorance of ‘Savages’ and described Africans as barbarous, therefore needing the West’s helping hand, or ‘aid’ in today’s terminology – a familiar scenario. Kant, of course, expressed it in terms of Europe’s responsibility and destiny to ‘give laws’ to the ‘less advanced’ regions of the world, as Derrida (1997)

points out in his discussion of the cosmopolitical. This paradox reveals the tension that existed between, on the one hand, the ethical and political goals of the Enlightenment as a project and, on the other, its instrumental purposive thrust, in alliance with capitalism and colonialism, which increasingly became dominant, especially with Liberalism and in the mechanical and scientistic version of Marxism; thus, it is possible to argue that elements of a counter-Enlightenment were latent inside Enlightenment thought.

Other elements need to be added to give a firmer purchase on conditions today, and on the debate about contemporary counter-Enlightenment. I would underline Montesquieu’s farreaching argument that the separation and balancing of powers, between the executive, the judiciary and the administrative elements of state power – a principle enshrined in the American Constitution, but threatened almost everywhere by recent strategies seeking to secure the ‘society of control’ – were absolutely essential to guarantee democracy and to avoid despotism. Diderot, similarly, in arguing against the foundation of sovereignty in religious dogma, warned that there was but ‘one step’ from ‘fanaticism to barbarism’ and the curtailment of liberty. Interestingly, given contemporary developments in neurological and life sciences, in complexity theory and particle physics, he also supported the view of the interconnections between mind and matter and living and inorganic matter. One must note that the basis for his support for a flat ontology rested in the materialism prevailing among radical intellectuals at the time, though a different basis was proposed by Emilie du Châtelet – mathematician and translator of Newton, Voltaire’s lover and collaborator – who belatedly came to favour the Leibnizian standpoint and defended vitalism, after her earlier support for the prevailing Newtonian world-view. If one were to add the birth and disputes about political economy, principally as developed by Turgot, whom Adam Smith visited and learned from, and about natural history, say, the differences between Buffon and Linnaeus regarding taxonomy, and the views about speciation developed by Cuvier and Lamarck, we would have many of the key areas and questions that have now resurfaced as part of the critique of modern regimes of truth.

These then radical ideas, debated for years by Enlightenment intellectuals, translated into a project of social change based on planned progress and development for which education, social contract and social insurance were central. The Encyclopédie, edited by Diderot and D’Alembert from 1751, not only promoted these positions, but was itself seen as the vehicle for the gathering of knowledges from across the world and their diffusion to all parts of the world. By the time of Kant’s essay on the Enlightenment in 1784, knowledge was equated with what we now understand as science, and reason was allied with the view of freedom as the unconstrained use of one’s reason in the critique of prevailing conditions and ideas; this, he asserted, was a necessary condition to achieve the ‘maturity of humanity’. Let me add that these revolutionary principles were widely supported, evidenced in the French and American Revolutions and the principles they defended, such as liberty, equality, fraternity, enshrined in slogans and in the American Constitution, though fraternity, as we know, did not in practice include non-white people; Tom Paine’s Rights of Man notably sold 250,000 copies in 1793.

I am going to propose that we regard Darwin’s idea of evolution through ‘natural selection as the exemplary product of the Enlightenment, although it came a little later, initially in the Notebooks of 1837–40, the Sketch of 1842 and the Essay of 1844. The early arguments in Darwin’s writings, bearing revealing titles like ‘Man, Mind and Materialism’ (1838), ‘Essay on Theology and Natural Selection’ (1838), the Transmutation Notebooks (from 1837), systematically addressed the issues and positions as formulated by many of the key thinkers of the Enlightenment, rehearsing the arguments about Creationism, about taxonomy and speciation (Buffon, Cuvier, Lamarck, Linnaeus, Herder), about rational necessity, the naturalization of reason, and so on, citing many of the authors who contributed to the Encyclopédie and referring to all the key debates (Venn, 1982). Evolution inaugurates the break with Creationism and the idea of divine intervention, and with accounts of nature and the place of human species in it that tried to preserve the thesis of a divine order in nature, specifically in the theories of Natural Theology (that rationalized nature) and Design (that conflated purpose and necessity in nature), and the notion of the Great Chain of Being. Today one associates the theory of evolution with the linear temporality and the eschatology that supports the standpoint of progress and development, markers of modernity. Clearly, the Darwinian problematic of speciation could not have been put together without the theories established in the age of the Enlightenment; correlatively, it re-inscribes all the ambivalences that one finds in the discourses constructing its episteme, correlating history, life, causality, subjectivity, and emancipation. Thus, on the epistemological and ontological side, the theory of evolution supports the central pillars of Enlightenment discourse yet lends a hand to positivism by adding scientific weight to the identity: rational = scientific = natural = lawful that began to be formulated with the Enlightenment; one finds this epistemology at work in the sciences of the social and in the emergent biopolitics of the 19th century (see Venn, 1982, for a detailed analysis). On the political side, the shifts it encouraged feed into the radical movements for fundamental change in society, inscribing a loose alliance between the ‘dangerous classes’ and dangerous ideas.

Furthermore, one is struck by the way in which the positions in dispute split along political lines in the 19th century, with those supporting Design and a providential cosmology opting for a politically conservative status quo while the materialists and evolutionists aligned against them and for a secular and radical political philosophy of progress directed by human intentions. One must emphasize that the correspondence between theory and politics is far from the neat and straightforward relationship one might imagine, for evolution has nourished both radical and conservative politics, depending on context, e.g. invoked in support of women’s suffrage in the 19th century, as well as in support of the later eugenics movement, sociobiology, and racism. In radical re-readings today, it is aligned with the recognition that difference, chance, variation, multiplicity and the processual are immanent to temporal becomings (Grosz, 2004).

We need to bear in mind also that the 18th-century context of the elaboration of the Enlightenment saw a major transformation in Europe as a military, colonial, economic and technological power, so that by the mid-19th century China, Japan, and the Arab world that had so far paid little attention to Europe, convinced that it was merely an insignificant part of an underdeveloped and ignorant backwater of the world, suddenly realized they had a major power to contend with. The turn to Europe and to the ‘West’ from that time to seek out their knowledge and their way of doing things, and the shift in power relations that accompanied the post-Enlightenment period, is well known and has shaped the process of modernization. The relation of knowledge to social change played out differently outside Euro-America, for instance, in the view about an Asian project of modernity proposed by Fukuzawa Yukichi and others in Japan from the 1860s, and Tagore and Gandhi in India from the 1920s, according to which (what they understood as) Asian knowledge and values would combine with Western technologies and science to serve different, non-Western modernizations. In the Arab world it was both a matter of accommodating the new ascendant modern spirit, for example, with regard to the foundation of the state, and of the reconfiguration of Islam (in the work of S.H. Nasr and I. al-Faruqi, for example) as part of countering the Enlightenment’s epistemology that asserted an opposition between religion and science, faith and reason.

## The Long Counter-Enlightenment

What does it mean for the present? First, I’d like to point to the instrumentalization of the project of the Enlightenment, discussed by Habermas and the Frankfurt School. I have shown in Occidentalism (2000) that the privilege of instrumental or technocratic rationality is historically and conceptually tied to the co-articulation of colonialism and capitalism in the unfolding of modernity. Furthermore, technocratic rationality is affiliated to key elements of Enlightenment epistemology such as logocentricsm, mechanism, rationalism; it rhymes with the world-view of history as linear progression and its hierarchization and homogenization of cultures.

One must also note the postmodern and postcolonial critique of modernity’s grand narratives, especially concerning the Eurocentric privilege in the discourse of humanism and its claims about the greater good of society that the modern project was meant to deliver. Lyotard’s The Postmodern Condition (1984) is the text that brings the different elements of this critique together, pointing to two key developments: first, the bankruptcy of the claims of the master narratives in the light of Auschwitz as sign of the failure of modernity’s project at the ethical level – one should add in this context the violences and pauperizations caused by European colonialism and capitalist imperialism, often under cover of the liberal-humanist ‘civilizing mission’ as Frantz Fanon noted nearly 50 years ago.

Second, the elimination of the critical dimension central to any project of emancipation through the operationalization of knowledge in the performative criteria of efficiency and productivity. Drawing attention to the transformations occurring since the Second World War, for example, in linguistics, informatics, cybernetics and intelligent machines, in problems of computers and their languages and the effects of information-processing machines, Lyotard says:

The nature of knowledge cannot survive unchanged within this context of general transformation. It can fit into the new channels, and become operational, only if learning is translated into quantities of information . . . The old principle that the acquisition of knowledge is indissociable from the training (Bildung) of minds, or even of individuals, is becoming obsolete and will become even more so . . . Knowledge is and will be produced in order to be sold, it is and will be consumed in order to be valorised in a new production: in both cases, the goal is exchange. Knowledge ceases to be an end in itself, it loses its ‘use-value’ . . . Knowledge in the form of an informational commodity indispensable to productive power is already, and will continue to be, a major – perhaps the major – stake in the worldwide competition for power. (1984: 4, 5)

There is much more in the text that I must leave aside. My aim here is simply to highlight the altered role of knowledge in the wake of the mutation of instrumental rationality into the ‘tele-techno-media-scientific, capitalistic and politico-economic’ figures of truth, to use Derrida’s (2002) terminology. It is important to underline that the opposition between religion and science, which a ‘certain tradition of the Enlightenment’ decreed, dissolves the relationship between faith and knowledge and erases the distinction between the two that alerts critique to be vigilant about the ‘theologico-political heritage’ of claims to truth and trust that religion and science both make (Derrida, 2002: 63–6). The Enlightenment’s absolute opposition to religion replaced the monotheism of divine order with the monotheism of reason, and allowed the monolingualism of positivist science to speak the truth of being. Thus, without this recognition of a relationship between faith and knowledge at the level of foundation, and without the recognition of what cannot be presented or translated – from one faith to another, from one experience to another, from one episteme to another – it is tempting for either religion or science to constitute itself as a self-referential system that maps into itself, so that visions of alternatives are erased through the kind of informationalization analysed by Lyotard. What is erased in the process is the domain of the ethical itself, and thus the promise of justice or liberation from oppressions and iniquities that are the ultimate ends of emancipation. Fertile grounds for fanaticism and fundamentalism are opened up, cultivated in contemporary counter-Enlightenment conditions.

My second point about the relation of knowledge to a project of emancipation relates to the mutation of the modern imaginary of modernity into the postmodern problematic of development. The latter retains the idea of linear temporal sequence whereby what come later is seen as always better than what had preceded, with the implication that this earlier stage must be rejected to allow the new to emerge. However, this newness is not judged by reference to a project of emancipation as understood within the Enlightenment’s vision of increasing equality and liberty and ethical maturity, but within the scope of efficiency and productivity. Thus, not only does this problematic of development re-inscribe and naturalize the colonial and evolutionary classification of nations in terms of a hierarchy of development, a model which is still powerful in political economy and that dictates that ‘developing’ states will always have to play ‘catching up’. It eliminates the grounds for imagining alternative forms of sociality and alternative polities consistent with the Enlightenment ideals of historical becoming as emancipatory. Thus it ensures that development can only be understood within the conceptual frame of a (re-)modernization equated with neoliberal ‘structural adjustments and ‘liberalization’ programmes and the sufferings they inflict. Knowledge, instrumentalized and informationalized, has come to operate as counter-Enlightenment. It is Benjamin’s vision of progress as the angel of history leaving ruins behind as it rushes towards a sightless future. I will use two examples to briefly examine some implications of the arguments I have been presenting, namely, the case of the market in derivatives, and the case of genetically modified foods.

The derivatives market concerns trading on the stock exchange centred on the predicted future values of assets; it is thus a trade in virtual assets, ultimately based on nothing but financial and information technologies that combine probabilistic knowledge and calculations with computer simulations of the future. The derivatives market generates value out of the future as resource. Derivatives have quickly become by far the most important element of finance capitalism. For example, the figures for the past five years indicate that this trade in its various forms has expanded to become the biggest business in the world, exceeding in value annual world GDP. Even in 1997 its combined annual value was \$675 trillion compared with a world GDP of \$147 trillion in 2000 (Arnoldi, 2004). But, like all capitalist ventures, it must calculate and manage risks and intangibles like market moods even as it bets on uncertainty. In particular, it must attempt to minimize risk by making risk itself the object of a system of calculation as well as what provides the ground for the complex practice of gambling that trading on the futures market involves.

My point is not about this virtual world of finance that informational technology has produced (a good account is given in Lee and LiPuma, 2002). It is about the fact that it is time itself which is being traded, and the extent to which the drive to minimize the risks involved means the abolition of the future as emergence and as indeterminate becoming. Basically, with the derivatives market, capital is obliged to organize the present in such as way as to ensure the future conforms to what has already been predicted by the probabilistic calculations. In order to ensure the future happens more or less as anticipated, capital must abolish contingency even as it plays with it, and it must bring everything within the order of the orderable and the calculable – paradoxically using the sophisticated, and potentially disruptive, mathematics of complexity theory, chaos theory, fractals. The future thus becomes an extension of the present, and the present an intensification of the future. Capital controls the present by controlling the future. Extending some ideas from Deleuze and Guattari, one can say that it is time itself which is being colonized. Information and its maximization are crucial here – as were statistics and probability theory (of Quetelet) for the Enlightenment’s ‘social art’ – and so is the predictability of human action. But risk continues to haunt capital in the form of the indeterminate and the event – not only natural disasters, climate change, corporate crashes, but also the fact that the ‘natives’ get restless and think of resistance, and knowledge is always provisional, and newness erupts out of the complexity of world (and from the Thing, which I must leave out). Capital deals with the uncanny spectrality of the event by killing: the future-as-difference, and anything and anyone who introduces uncertainty and resists calculation and informationalization. The temptation of totalitarian thought is precisely to abolish recalcitrant difference; in this way it makes truth and faith coincide. And, importantly, this coincidence of truth and faith is the basis of all fundamentalisms.

The implication for transmodern and transcolonial critique is the extent to which the postcolony and its resources – water, power, labour, forests, minerals, products, etc. – are the assets that function as ‘supplement’ for the virtual assets derivatives trade upon. Without the oil, foods, diamonds, critical materials like coltan, uranium, and so on, the rest of the machinery and imaginary with and on which finance capitalism operates would not work; the ratio of market value to assets would break down (as it did in the case of the dot.com crash). Capital must acquire these material assets and control them, indeed informationalize them, that is, own them as immaterial property. But this immaterial property has the capacity for material actualization: as capital, as corporate and individual wealth. Another implication is that the abolition of the future as difference eliminates the possibility of alternatives. This too is part of a new form of colonization. Indeed, a global map of the location of the kinds of assets I have mentioned, e.g. oil, coltan, uranium, coincides with a map of military and ethnic violence, and a map of postmodern ‘enclosures’ and pauperizations. If we were to define the postcolonial, or rather the transcolonial as a virtual space, that is to say, a space of potentiality and unprecedented becomings, it follows that it must resist the logic at work in these intensifications of inequalities.

My second case, that of GM foods, will reinforce the arguments about ownership and the society of control (Hardt and Negri, 2000). Today anyone, anywhere can grow wheat or corn, raise chicken, and so on, that is to say, survive without having to pay a licence to anyone for the genetic information of the wheat or the corn. Let us call the knowledge that makes this agriculture possible wealth-knowledge, in contrast to property-knowledge, bearing in mind here the important distinction between wealth and property that Arendt underlines. Wealthknowledge, as collective capital, is a form of inheritance, belonging to a collectivity, it is part of the common good, it belongs to the language of heteronomy (Derrida and Stiegler, 2002). What GM foods introduce through new varieties of seeds and, soon to come, biotechnologically modified animals, are new strains and specimens that are supposed to be more resistant to pests and diseases and also have greater yields. But knowledge of new plants and animals as genetic information is owned by the biotech corporations. The GM seed as bar-coded information is the property/knowledge that one must buy and use under licence. The logic of genetic modification in the current global economic system is that knowledge that was once free will in the future be owned by those who already have most of the wealth and economic power. Indeed, the industry is producing varieties with ‘terminator genes’ that make the seeds infertile so that farmers cannot use them. The interesting scenario then is to imagine the situation in which the biotech companies will own most varieties of seeds and breeds of animals, the native varieties will have become contaminated through genetic pollution and eliminated as viable crops and species. Wealth-knowledge will have been converted into propertyknowledge worldwide, privately owned in its immaterial form. Once again, the logic of the informationalization of knowledge in the context of capitalism, institutionalized in Trade-Related-Intellectual-Property-Rights or TRIPs, is to acquire as assets the wealth of the world. As with derivatives, the future is being bar-coded.

Already the experience where GM seeds have been introduced, as in Canada, India, Africa, Brazil, is that farmers must buy new seeds each year and are not allowed to save them from their crops. The history of the Green Revolution points to the real dangers for ‘developing countries. Introduced from the early 1970s, the new varieties of, for example, rice were meant to have greater yield, but needed new pesticides and chemical fertilizers to fulfil their potential, and could not be grown alongside other crops. Only the wealthier farmers could afford them, and poorer ones were made destitute. Interestingly, from 1974–2000 farm gross income grew by 300 percent but net income fell because the suppliers took 100 percent of farmers increased gross returns. For example, the Green Revolution did help India to increase food production, but the poor cannot afford to buy this extra food which is kept in vast silos where it mainly rots away or is eaten by rats. The mechanisms I am describing reproduce and deepen inequalities of wealth and power.

The decisive issue is the implications for subjectivity and for politics of the emergence of the biomediated body, the prosthetic body and its mediatized prosthetic memory, that advances in bio-info technologies promise. From the point of view of the ownership of knowledge-as-information, one wonders who will own one’s genetic information and one’s body. For instance, what will happen when one can no longer rent or pay for the body parts one has ‘acquired’, or the medicines and nutrients that will maintain the biomediated body? And, shall we see in the near future the emergence of human farming, concerned with the production of human babies, kidneys, blood plasma, and so on, sold as commodities? Does the commodification of knowledge produce the commodification of life and a new biopolitics (of the biomediated and genetically modified body)? And what does all this mean for the role of knowledge in the process of political liberation from exploitation and oppressions?

A few brief points to conclude. Through the examples and the transformations that I have described I have tried to show that the location of knowledge by reference to a project of emancipation such as that of the Enlightenment has become very problematic and is in crisis. The capitalist context is crucial, and so is the legacy and continuities of colonialism in other forms, including the colonization of time – I should note here that I understand colonialism to refer to any system of subjugation and exploitation based on the homogenization and privileging of a centre, an origin, a sovereignty or a world-view, or their permutation. The informationalization of knowledge without an archive and without a critical language and practice undermines any politics that aims to alter the relations of power and privilege. The politics of knowledge within Enlightenment thought, in spite of its ambivalence with regard to Europe’s others and to capitalism, intended to bring about forms of socialities that would be more just. We now have a great deal more knowledge than in the 18th century, yet inequality and poverty and the gap between rich and poor, after a period of improvement, is moving back towards the distribution of opportunities and freedoms as it was at the time of the Enlightenment. Globally, inequalities of wealth, gender, and race are once more being normalized in the form of new servitudes, hastened by kleptocracies. The commodification of knowledge, incited by its mediatization and informationalization, amplifies tendencies inherent from the beginning in the great shifts that announced modernity. An age of fanaticism has appeared, evidenced in market fundamentalism as much as in a variety of religious fundamentalism, preparing the ground for a century of despotism. The question for knowledge now is about the kind of world for which it is being recruited and repositioned, as a postmodern technics or techne, divested of ethical substance. What emerges for the work of reorganizing knowledge which the New Encyclopaedia Project is undertaking is the interconnections between a politics of memory, a politics of information and knowledge, and the link between the encyclopaedia and a new discourse of emancipation, that is, a new, necessarily post-colonizing, thus a transcolonial ‘enlightenment’.

