# Civilizationalism

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Civilizationalism

Kuan-Hsing Chen

Keywords civilizationalism, colonial identification, little subjectivity, nationalism

C<sup>ivilizationalism</sup> <sup>is</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>ultimate</sup> <sup>level</sup> <sup>of</sup>expression of ethnic nationalism. One of expression of ethnic nationalism. One of the most powerfully dangerous articulations emerging in the historical scene is civilizationalism. It is perhaps not an exaggeration to say that, in the 1990s, the most influential academic essay on earth was Samuel Huntington’s (1993) ‘The Clash of Civilizations?’. For better or worse, the US right wing imperialist stand taken by Huntington has drawn responses from all over the place; essays, conferences, books, policy consultations, etc. have been generated within (rather than outside) the Huntington problematic. His simple and easy cutting up of the globe into seven or eight spaces has in effect constructed a new civilizational identification forcing everyone on earth to take one on. The Huntington proposal to the US state power, at the end of the essay, seeks to exploit conflicts so as to maintain world hegemony, which will no doubt, if state machines are bought into the Huntington problematic (which seems to be the case in practice), generate global racism, nationalism and regionalism, not to mention a reactionary form of civilizationalism. Unfortunately, the US foreign policy after the September 11th incident has indeed echoed Huntington’s proposal, treating the Islamic civilization as the target enemy.

In sharp contrast to the colonizer’s strategic mapping, the most articulate form of civilizationalism formulated by intellectuals in the (ex)colonized societies comes from the Delhi-based, prominent social psychologist Ashis Nandy. In The Illegitimacy of Nationalism: Rabindranath Tagore and the Politics of Self (1994), Nandy argues that nationalism is a by-product of western colonialism, and hence illegitimate. According to his reading of Tagore and Gandhi, if Indian nationalism works on the level of the nation-state, civilizationalism operates in the larger historical space of Hindu civilization, which functions to resist being trapped into the colonial system of the nation-state. One has to be reminded that Nandy’s formulation was grounded in his earlier seminal work, The Intimate Enemy: Loss and Recovery of Self under Colonialism (1983), which was a self-conscious theoretical undertaking in the tradition of Fanon and Memmi. For him, unlike the Huntington aggression, the importance of Indian civilization is for the colonized subject to hold onto their own traditions in order to create new traditions. Tradition, and its reinterpretation, then becomes the empowering ground on which the long lasting cultural impacts of western colonialism can be combated, because the West has deeply penetrated not just our social structure but also our culture and mind.

Although the differences between the offensive colonialist Huntington and the postcolonial populist Nandy are clear enough, the civilizationalist interpellation has to be carefully cautioned. The Huntington–Nandy clash on civilization discloses a wider structure of feeling, a cultural imaginary, not limited to the Indian or the US case. It perhaps projects an emerging realization in the so-called postcolonial context. That is, for the (ex)colonized, nationalism is no longer the panacea, once magnified into global capitalism; the hierarchical structure of the nation-state more or less continues the established order of colonialism, which could not compete with its forerunners in Europe; at this moment, perhaps only by bringing out a ‘higher’ and ‘larger’ category, civilization, could seal the unsealed scar. The inventing and reinventing of signs familiar to the popular imaginary and then articulating them to a higher form of universalism is to regain the confidence to ‘at least’ beat the West in cultural imagination. This is perhaps one form of psychoanalytic identification of the ‘postcolonial’ imagination.

In a way, the signs of ‘China’, ‘India’, ‘Islam and ‘the Orient’ are not necessarily nationalist concepts but emotional signifiers; to reclaim ‘a five thousand year history or four thousand’ is once again a reaction and response to, shall we say, ‘post colonialism; it does not have concrete substance, but interpellates the scared subject to feel one can reside more safely in a world of cultural identity crisis. The danger here is of course that these socalled non-western big civilizations might fall into the logic of colonial competition, a struggle over representing the Other of the West, to occupy the center space of the non-West. Is this a reproduction of ethnocentrism in structure? Isn’t the center still the opposing West? Isn’t there an exclusionary practice? Isn’t the appearance of the ‘North and South’ divide, beyond political-economic levels, expressing a symptom on the psychoanalytic account?

Surrounding these big civilizations, how do the little subjectivities, which do not have larger ‘civilization’ to hang onto, or are now forced into an identification proposed by Huntington, handle their destiny and feeling of marginalization? Sri Lankan anthropologist S.J. Tambiah’s account (1986) of the island’s relation with the Indian subcontinent brings out what I call the complex of ‘little subjectivity’ vs civilizationalism, which resonates in other geo-colonial relations if, for instance, one displaces the term Sri Lanka with Taiwan or Canada, India with China or the USA.

The point is the Huntington interpellation has historical-psychic support. The real danger is that Huntington’s US proposal to interpellate civilizationalist identity can be an ‘upgraded’ imperial nationalism. The Huntington Clash has already generated enormous antagonism from China and Southeast Asia, where all the nationalist-civilizationalist reactions are sucked into his framing rather than challenging the framework as a whole. Those geographical spaces with no clear belonging to the bigger civilizations are now forced to take sides and are boxed in by the Huntington categories. Sites where there are potentials to be more syncretically hybrid might be forced to change their affiliations. Australia used to claim to be ‘a multicultural nation in Asia’; but once the conservative government was in power, the state identification has shifted toward a multicultural ‘western’ nation in Asia. The island of Singapore might have to be moved physically somewhere else to avoid being forced to make the impossible choice.

If nationalism is to be watched, civilizationalism needs to be watched with higher intensity.

