# Preface/Exergue

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

## Preface/Exergue

A preface can precede a scholarly work by explaining the author’s intention, why the book was written, and by indicating its context in earlier or contemporary works treating the same topic. G.W.F. Hegel’s famous ‘Preface’ to The Phenomenology of Spirit (1977) rejects the customary assumptions that are protected by the conventional apparatuses of knowledge as inadequate to a work such as The Phenomenology, which is concerned essentially with truth. Hegel is rebelling against the way conventions of academic discourse tend to frame the statements of a work, thus undermining its deeper intellectual processes. Framed in terms of its statements, a philosophical system would be evaluated by the criteria of truth and falsity and thus, inappropriately, regarded as something that can be accepted or rejected. Hegel wrote the preface to The Phenomenology in the way many prefaces tend to be written, that is, after the main work had been completed. Many regard it is a considerably more elegant and coherent restatement of the great work that we now find appended to it. Many scholars have since taken Hegel’s frustration at conventional framing techniques further. Jacques Derrida (whose work more fully interrogates in its practice the conventions of scholarly framing) constructs his Glas, a book on Hegel and Jean Genet, so that it both dispenses with yet includes every convention of the knowledge apparatus: the title does not amount to a full word; the text begins in mid sentence and ends without completing its final sentence; it proceeds in two columns that are related to each other only by chance from time to time; and it is constructed from sections of commentary and argument with glosses, citations, reflections and asides embedded haphazardly throughout. Despite the deliberately chaotic dispersal of the knowledge apparatus, the text nonetheless includes some of the most lucid and sustained critical reading found in his oeuvre.

