# Poetic Knowledge / 1 The Context for Debates about Poetic Knowledge / 2 A Negative View of Poetic Knowledge (Position B2–) / 3 Poetry as Feeling: Another Negative View (Position B2–) / 4 Poetry as Different from Science (Position B1) / 5 Poetry in Competition with Science (B2) / 6 Binary Modes and their Problems / 7 Poetry as Knowledge (Position A) / 8 The Global or Intercultural Dimension

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Poetic Knowledge

Rajeev S. Patke

Abstract Whether poetry gives knowledge or not is a question that has been debated from a variety of perspectives, depending on how a society or a culture defines knowledge, and on the function it ascribes to poetry in relation to that definition. The civilizations of Asia and the Middle East have generally taken the line that poetry deals primarily with affects, emotions and feelings. The West has had a more complicated history of responses. One way of making sense of this history is to map rival claims as split over the idea of scientific knowledge, where it affects notions of the poetic function. The mapping, through all its manifold branches, gives clear indications that claims to knowledge – both those made on behalf of poetry, and those denied to poetry – depend more on assumptions, predispositions and cultural conditioning than on rational argument or critical debate. The resulting variety also suggests that the cultural relativism that affects such debates is unlikely to arrive at resolutions except of the contingent kind.

Keywords cognitive poetics, language and epistemology, poetry and knowledge

## 1 The Context for Debates about Poetic Knowledge

Debates about the relation between poetry and knowledge are a significant feature of the diversity that characterizes all human civilizations. In any given system of belief that individuates a person, a community or a culture, the idea of poetic knowledge entails a conscious or involuntary preference for one of two mutually incompatible beliefs: that poetry is a form of knowledge (Position A); that poetry and knowledge correspond to different human faculties, which entail activities and produce results whose values are either complementary (Position B1), or opposed (Position B2).

The claim for poetic knowledge in its weak form merely alludes to the fact that poetry can transmit forms of knowledge derived from other domains; in its strong form, poetry is claimed to produce or embody knowledge uniquely. Position B1 sustains a tension between the relative worth ascribed to two differing conceptions of knowledge; Position B2 dissolves the tension in favour of one or the other conception. To think of poetry as a form of knowing integrates knowledge into wisdom, while it diversifies the idea of truth into a manifold that includes the spiritual and the aesthetic (Position A). To think of poetry as distinct from knowledge (Position B) turns the idea of knowledge away from the claims of religion and the arts towards an ideal of truth derived from mathematics or symbolic logic, ‘the true’ split off from ‘the good’ and ‘the beautiful’. Each position ascribes a nature and function to poetry in relation to an idea of knowledge and a corresponding evaluation of either. Position A values an idea of knowledge that gives central place to poetry, while Position B splits poetry from knowledge and produces two divergent off-shoots: one regards each as apt to its sphere (Position B1), the other disparages one at the expense of the other, giving us a view of poetry as useless or worse in matters of serious thought or knowledge (Position B2–), or a view that defends poetic knowledge as complete and accuses science of being limited in its approach to the idea of truth and blind to the ideals of religion or spirituality (Position B2+).

The simplest way of distinguishing between whether the idea of poetic knowledge functions in a given belief system as an article of faith or as a sterile oxymoron is to recognize how the weight of beliefs is distributed across a see-saw which tilts on the question of whether knowledge is defined as knowledge-of-x (Quine calls it knowing-that) or knowledge-as-y (Quine calls it knowing how), where both x and y are functions of value, x refers to propositions with global applicability (as in mathematics and science), and y refers to mediated representations whose applicability is bound by context and historicity (as in the arts). The metaphor of a ‘tilt’ can be applied in another sense, as an ongoing contestation in which knowledge is a field fought over by rival ideas of ‘the true’, ‘the beautiful’ and ‘the good’. Any claim concerning knowledge entails as its predicate an idea of truth that is evoked either solemnly, as in the equation between truth and beauty in Keats’s ‘Ode on a Grecian Urn’, or as in the sardonic wryness of Wallace Stevens’s ‘The Man on the Dump’, who evokes the object of what might well be a chimerical pursuit as ‘the the’. An Introduction to Arab Poetics (Adonis, 1990), for instance, claims with reference to an Arab poem, ‘the knowledge in this text is not about certainties, nor is it an answer, as is the case with the knowledge offered by religion or philosophy. On the contrary, it is a questioning’ (1990: 69).

Position A supports a notion of knowledge that does not differentiate between the imaginative, the rational and the spiritual dimensions of consciousness or experience. It alludes to an origin for poetry in oral cultures, where it embodies as well as transmits knowledge, combining knowledge-of with knowledge-as. Oral poetic forms serve multiple functions. They are at once expressive, affective, communicative, didactic and cognitive in their use of language, rhythm and form; and they articulate shared beliefs concerning the nature of reality and of human existence through songs, symbols, myths, legends, historical narratives, incantations and rituals. Orality held the linguistic articulacy central to poetry close to the imaginative, speculative and regulative reason of ancient religion and philosophy. As poetry moves away from its origins in collective and anonymous orality, defenders of the idea of a unified field for poetry and knowledge face increasing opposition from the division of intellectual labour that subsidizes the development of science.

Position B can sometimes appear to share part of its conception of knowledge with the endorsement of poetic knowledge in oral cultures; but on the whole, and especially as we slide on the see-saw from Position B1 to Position B2–, it prefers to give knowledge a very different emphasis, as referring primarily to an archive of abstract and universally applicable propositions produced by human reason as descriptions of whatever is included in the idea of the physical universe. This archive is subsidized by a belief in the innate order of the ‘reality’ alleged to underlie sensory phenomena, whose principles are treated as amenable to rational explanations, as an end in itself, and also as means to varying degrees of power over the ‘reality’ whose properties they formalize into scientific knowledge. This latter function has ensured the usefulness of science to society, and its commensurate power, which includes the power to persuade society to its system of values and the place assigned to poetry in that system.

The history of the equation between science and a specific conception of knowledge is characterized by a progressive subdivision of intellectual endeavour, which began with the separation of science from speculative philosophy and religion. The subsequent division into the various ‘hard’ sciences (astronomy, chemistry, physics and the life sciences), and the development of the social sciences (economics, sociology, anthropology, psychology, linguistics, etc.) has extended the scope of scientific (and quasi-scientific) inquiry into various aspects of human experience. At the same time, the application of scientific methods to the study of human nature and society has had to moderate the ‘truth’ recoverable from such projects by the limited degree to which the social sciences are amenable to reason, susceptible of orderliness, and able to sustain claims to knowledge as something other than the local outcome of ongoing contestations between interpretive ideologies. For example, Jean Rancière (1994) remarks that the modern revolution in historical scholarship brought about by the Annales group ‘consists in knowing how to recognize, in the siren song of the scientific age, the threat of ruin of historical study, the dilemma hidden under the propositions of its scientificization: either history or science’ (1994: 6).

## 2 A Negative View of Poetic Knowledge (Position B2–)

The dialogues of Plato provide one of the earliest and most influential negative evaluations of poetry as performance and representational art. Plato’s Socrates condemns poetry as an art that is derivative and unreliable in respect to the real or the true, and unsound and dangerous in respect to the good (Ion, Republic, Laws). Plato’s love of abstraction turns away from the phenomenal world in order to develop a notion of reality that rejects transience, idealizes truth as that which transcends the world of Heraclitean flux, and fixes on a realm of immutable ideas and forms as the conjunction of the true, the beautiful and the good (Phaedo, Symposium, Phaedrus, Timaeus). Ironically, the influence of Plato permitted his vision of ‘the true’ and ‘the good’ to subsidize far more positive estimations of poetic knowledge, as in Plotinus and Shelley, while Wordsworth’s ‘Intimations Ode’ provides a remote descendant to Plato’s Pythagorean belief that our knowledge of the ideal forms of reality originates in our previous existence, which makes learning a kind of recollection or anamnesis. It is worth noting at this point that, somewhat ironically, Plato’s dismissal of inspiration as proof that poetry or its recitation has no creative control over what is uttered is routinely turned on its head, not only by those who take the idea of inspiration positively, but also by those who give credit to intuition and other suprarational processes of creation which access parts of consciousness or the creative unconscious that are not readily comprehensible to reason, as in the link made by poets like Coleridge and Keats between the creative function and states such as sleep and trance.

## 3 Poetry as Feeling: Another Negative View (Position B2–)

The claim that poetry deals solely, or primarily, with feelings comes in defensive and aggressive versions. The first view generally finds voice among those who have a low opinion of poetry. Sometimes, it is asserted even by poets, as in the case of Basil Bunting, who is reported as conceding

poetry contributes nothing much to the process of thought, being mostly silly or thoroughly conventional in its philosophical content, or else borrowing any worthwhile system of ideas it may contain from some prose writer – Dante from St Thomas, Lucretius from Epicurus and Democritus. Many poems we consider masterpieces contain little or no thought. (Murray, 1997: 372)

The poet’s affiliation to his vocation can only be defended by supposing that Bunting hopes to rid himself of demands that look to poetry for what it cannot give, in the hope of getting better recognition for what it can do. In any case, he manages to sound more concessionary than is common among defenders of poetry.

## 4 Poetry as Different from Science (Position B1)

The commonest view among philosophers, scientists, educationists and even poets is that poetry attends to issues of aesthetics and craft, educates feeling and composes affects, giving emotions and dispositions room to experience in ways that enhance and sharpen the human capacity for pleasure, discrimination and sensibility. It argues that poetry need not be required to give the type of knowledge defined by knowledge-of-x and dominated by science; instead, it endows poetry with powers within the domain of knowledge-as-y. Sometimes this position adopts the attitude that poetry does not produce knowledge, it embodies something different from that which science produces. The Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics summarizes this dichotomy as follows:

The objects of study in science are objective phenomena the truth values of which constitute ‘facts’; the objects of literary study, on the other hand, are intersubjective meanings and values generated from an object which is itself a structure of forms. (Preminger and Brogan, 1993: 931)

The bland version of this division-of-labour thesis may be illustrated through Quine: ‘Truth preoccupies the alethic pole of the intellectual sphere and beauty the aesthetic pole . . . The alethic pole exerts the main pull on science . . . The aesthetic pole is the focus of belles letters, music, art for art’s sake’ (Quine, 1987: 17). Another version of the separation can be sampled through I. A. Richards, who gave currency to the notion that poetic propositions were ‘pseudostatements’ concerning experience, which did not entail truth-claims, and the corresponding distinction between the ‘emotive’ discourse of poetry and the ‘referential’ discourse of science. A third version is represented by Deleuze and Guattari, whose respect for art brings along with it a firm separation of functions, in which the arts are said to deal with percepts and affects, philosophy is said to deal with concepts, and science is said to deal with referential propositions about reality (Deleuze and Guattari, 1994: 197).

## 5 Poetry in Competition with Science (B2)

Broad agreement on splitting poetry from science leaves room for another type of variation, which does not sustain an amiable attitude towards the split enforced by science. Instead, it expresses general or historically contingent anxieties that the dominance of science disparages the kind of knowledge accessible through poetry, and blinds society to the dangers inherent to the narrow notion of knowledge promoted by science (B2+). This position can be illustrated by Goethe’s Faust, which allegorizes a profound anxiety about the temptation enshrined in the dream of knowledge unfolded by science (or that which Max Weber has taught subsequent generations to recognize as the disenchantment of magic). In more contemporary terms, the Australian poet Les Murray offers resistance to the dominance of a specific construction of knowledge:

Human beings have two main modes of consciousness, one that is characteristic of waking life, one we call dreaming . . . Harmony between our two modes of life promotes health, and . . . aesthetic experience is the supreme harmony between them . . . A poem, or any work of art, enacts this wholeness and draws us into it . . . I call properly integrated poetic discourse Wholespeak, while discourses based on the supposed primacy or indeed exclusive sovereignty of daylight reason I call Narrowspeak. (Murray, 1997: 317, 319)

A 20th-century variant on an old Thomist position that endows poetry with an exalted claim to knowledge of truth can be sampled from the writings of Jacques Maritain. In The Degrees of Knowledge (1932), he notes that the notion of knowledge through connaturality had a long history in Western thought before Thomas Aquinas, which became a commonplace in the Thomist tradition, and had analogues in the writings of the Indian philosopher Ramanuja (12th-century AD) and in the Indian tradition of devotional (bhakti) literature.

Charles Altieri illustrates another, more modern and systematic form of defence based on the idea of connaturality. He argues that asking poetry for knowledge as defined by Enlightenment ideals is to fall into the trap of supposing that humanity embodies a teleological drive to know itself. Altieri’s defence involves an alternative system of value which builds on the affective force of poetry in terms derived from Spinoza. In The Particulars of Rapture (2003), he describes the idea of the conatus as ‘a very general form of purposive orientation exercised by all living agents in their efforts to persist in their own being’ (Altieri, 2003: 15). His argument attempts to provide a teleology of the arts based on the body’s awareness of affects, that is, on how its conative powers are deployed. In a related essay, ‘The Concept of Force’, Altieri focuses on how Modernist art resists the impersonal subject positions and universalizing abstractions fundamental to the community of science. He invokes Hegel on the concept of force (from The Phenomenology of Spirit) to argue that art objects intensify the capacity to ‘keep us fascinated by what remains an “other” to discursive intelligence, an “other” keeping intelligence dialectically aware of its own limitations’. Thus art ‘does not allow self-sufficiency to any knowledge position satisfied by description and by subsuming particulars under generalizations’; instead, it ‘extends this sense of irreducible otherness to the domain of emotions evoked and constructed with the work of art’ (Altieri, 1998: 88–9).

A different approach, which lives within binarism, but invokes the poetics of Gertrude Stein and Charles Olson to make a claim on behalf of ‘common knowledge’, is developed by Don Byrd, in The Poetics of the Common Knowledge (1994), drawing upon Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela’s notion of ‘autopoesis’ from The Tree of Knowledge: The Biological Roots of Human Understanding (1987), and promotes an argument whose flavour can be sampled briefly through his invocation of a distinction from Wittgenstein, between sentences which can be replaced by others without radically altering our understanding of what is conveyed, and sentences in which something that is expressed only by these words in these positions, which Wittgenstein equates, along what may be recognized along Coleridgean lines with poetry.

## 6 Binary Modes and their Problems

Deleuze and Guattari are respectful towards poetry, Quine bland, Bunting self-lacerating, Murray suasive, Maritain effusive, Altieri defensive-aggressive. Their arguments do not follow the same path, but they all endorse a binary mode of thinking which dissolves the tension of weights distributed across the see-saw tilting on the question of whether knowledge is defined as knowledge-of-x or knowledge-as-y. Those dissatisfied with all such positions argue that binary thinking is reductive and simplistic. They challenge the split endorsed by Positions B1 and B2 by arguing that poetry and philosophy are interwoven inseparably in metaphor: they revoke the separation of rational from metaphorical language and thought by arguing that the metaphorical process plays a role that is simultaneously constitutive and disruptive of the concepts cherished by philosophy and science.

One version derives from Nietzsche, who warns that ‘Truths are illusions about which it has been forgotten that they are illusions . . . Everything that sets man off from the animal depends upon this capacity to dilute the concrete metaphors into a schema’ (1989: 250). Derrida joins forces with Nietzsche in order ‘to explode the reassuring opposition of the metaphoric and the proper’ by demonstrating how ‘Metaphor is less in the philosophical text . . . than the philosophical text is within metaphor’ (Derrida, 1982: 270, 258).

Another version is represented by recent developments in the field of cognitive poetics, whose exponents (for example, George Lakoff and Mark Johnson) make several claims that overturn much conventional thinking about metaphor. They argue that metaphor is indeed cognitive, but that this function is not confined to poetry (thus they disband the separation of poetic from conventional metaphor), nor to language (thus rendering it primarily conceptual), and basically entails cross-domain mapping, which can be analysed, in respect to its linguistic manifestations, in terms of certain sets of primary mappings. Cognitive poetics thus modulates the claim that ‘poetry gives knowledge’ towards the idea that metaphor gives knowledge, and not through poetry alone but through concepts, including concepts that find expression through language.

## 7 Poetry as Knowledge (Position A)

The claim that poetry is the highest form of knowledge divides into two camps: the first treats the idea of poetry as a special kind of language use; the second treats poetic knowledge emblematically, as a type of knowing shared by all the arts. Debate over the cognitive function attributed to metaphor overlaps partly with the second position. It subdivides on the issue of whether the cognitive function of metaphor is regarded as unique to poetry (arguing with Vico and others that all language was originally figurative) or is dispersed through all types of language-use (which obliterates or discards the attempt to distinguish ordinary from poetic language). Paul Ricoeur, for instance, in The Rule of Metaphor, distinguishes between poetry, which develops what he calls a ‘tensional’ conception of truth, in contrast to speculative thought (as in philosophy), which he characterizes as based on ‘distanciation’: ‘the splitting of reference and redescription of reality submitted to the imaginative variations of fiction’ (Ricoeur, 1977: 313).

Aristotle exemplifies the first position when he ascribes an entelechy to each mode of human activity, and distinguishes the mode of poetry from that of history as being more philosophical in providing knowledge of universals while history confines itself to knowledge of particulars (Poetics, IX). Aristotle’s influence also makes room to argue for mimesis as a source of knowledge-as-representation. Sir Philip Sidney’s affirmation that poets do not lie because they do not affirm truth-claims provides another variant of the argument; Hans Vaihinger’s The Philosophy of ‘As If ’ (1911) provides a 20th-century version of the idea enshrined in Marianne Moore’s remark that poems are like an ‘imaginary garden with real toads in them’.

The second position may be exemplified through a number of writers who differ vastly in how they make their claim but remain united in the estimation awarded poetic knowledge. Shelley’s Defence of Poetry asserts that poetry is ‘at once the center and circumference of knowledge; it is that which comprehends all science, and that to which all science must be referred’ (Shelley, 1977: 503). Heidegger invokes the Greek notion of knowing as aletheia, and art as techne (‘a bringing forth of beings . . . out of concealedness into the unconcealedness of their appearance’; Heidegger, 1971: 59), in order to argue that all art is ‘in essence poetry’ (1971: 73). A related argument involves the claim that the poet as namer is also a truth-sayer: this variation can be sampled from Walter Benjamin’s theological version: ‘Man is the knower in the same language in which God is the creator’ (Benjamin, 1996: 68).

## 8 The Global or Intercultural Dimension

Claims on behalf of poetic knowledge, especially of the strong kind, are perhaps unique to Western poetics. An intercultural perspective on the typical system of value in any poetical system outside the West brings up an affective-didactic norm in which poetry transmits knowledge-of in a weak sense and embodies knowledge-as in a strong sense. The latter operates along the axis linking the experience embodied in the poem and its presumed effect on the listener or reader. In Sanskrit Criticism, V.K. Chari reiterates the ancient belief that ‘Poetry is preeminently emotive discourse, a presentation of human feelings through their objective conditions, in the manner stipulated by Bharata’ (Chari, 1990: 227–8). Earl Miner concurs:

In Sanskrit practice, teaching and delight exist together, being almost indistinguishable in the Indian merger of the sacred with the erotic; much the same is true of some Islamic mystical poetry . . . In the main, Chinese preferred the moral version. In the main, Japanese preferred the wide range of non-moralistic affectivism. (Miner, 1990: 27, 234)

What this brief survey will have suggested is that debate concerning poetic knowledge achieves resolution or consensus only in local or temporary ways. Its ongoing nature suggests that the underlying issues might be matters of belief and desire rather than rationality of argument, although the terms in which they get discussed tend to blur such distinctions.

