# Body Image/Body without Image

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Body Image/Body without Image

Mike Featherstone

Keywords consumer culture, identity, movement, proprioception, reflexivity

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>double</sup> <sup>character</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>human</sup> <sup>body</sup> <sup>has</sup>often been noted – we are a body and we often been noted – we are a body and we have a body; we see and are seen: our body is the platform from which we see the world and also an object in that world which is seen by others. This simple insight can be taken in a number of directions. On the one hand, this division of the seeing/seen can be used to retain a strong division between body and mind with the assumption that the body can be known and governed by the mind as in the metaphor of the body as a platform for seeing. It is assumed that the mind can actively marshal the body to facilitate the construction of a satisfactory body image which will enhance self-worth and self-identity.

Against this sense of a docile body which can be reflexively monitored, disciplined and altered by the mind, there are those who advocate the investigation of the ways that the mind itself is embodied and delimited by the ‘horizons of the flesh’. Here our basic analytical conceptual knowledge of the world is seen as relying on metaphors which derive from bodily experience and which become embedded in language, suggesting the need to be aware of ‘the body in the mind’ (Lakoff and Johnson, 1999). Yet if we think of the body as generative, the emphasis can shift to the body’s potential to vary, to be inventive, to be always in motion: as something that moves and feels (Massumi, 2002).

This suggests that it is insufficient to see the body as merely a surface to be inscribed, as a carrier of social signs. The body is clearly a potential, in process and movement, something which goes beyond itself. Yet it is also understood as an image – something that is a resemblance or likeness, a mirroring. Indeed it has been argued following Paul Shilder that ‘the body image is essential to the body, which cannot even become a body without this reduplication of itself (Ferguson, 1997a: 6). At the same time, the body image is more than a picture of how we look, a mental construct of our appearance. It is not a fixed projection – rather a variety of images that have accumulated from the past. Indeed if we examine the ‘labyrinth of unfinished cultures’, it is possible to detect in history a range of body images. It has been suggested that more recently there has been a move from the classic bourgeois ego with its closed and singular body image, to an emptying of the body image, the body as a shifting surface on which enigmatic traces are recorded (Ferguson, 1997b). A more ambiguous and open body image is related to a more ambiguous and open sense of self.

This contrasts with influential sociological theories of the body such as that of Anthony Giddens (1991), in which the body, formerly seen as a fixed part of nature, is now in ‘late modernity’ open to ‘colonization’ and reconstitution through a range of technologies and body projects such as plastic surgery, body maintenance, health fitness and diet regimes. Giddens’s assumptions about the reflexivity of actors investing in body projects in order to enhance their self-identity clearly chimes with many of the ways which consumer culture advertising and self-help transformational literature and advice columns present the body (Featherstone, 1982), especially the way the body is objectified and seen as governable by the self within consumer culture. Yet the fact that we are surrounded by images of youth, fitness and beauty within magazines, advertising, television and the urban landscape does not mean that people necessarily believe or follow the naive cause and effect self-improvement logic with its ‘if you look good you feel good’ rationale.

The assumption is that people reflexively evaluate their bodies and appearance and operate with a relatively accurate and coherent body image – in effect the body has been objectified and assessed as ready for transformation. This is akin to the classic bourgeois ego with its closed body image: able to take charge and transform its body and identity, a position central to the narratives of individualism, rational choice and market behaviour. It is interesting here to note that one of the main theorists of identity Giddens draws on is Erik H. Erikson, a strong proponent of ego identity and advocate of our capacity to assess, direct and control the direction of identity development through life.

Yet it would seem that appearance and body image are not always so easily objectified and subjected to the direction of the self. Shelly Budgeon (2003), for example, in research on young women in Britain, mentions that attitudes to cosmetic surgery suggest that altering the body was more about transforming the way the body was lived, not how it looked. There was a greater sense of the lived body as a process, with surgery enhancing the sense of agency, with the emphasis on ‘doing’ rather than ‘looking’. This goes beyond the sense of ‘me the subject’ directing ‘the body as object’ (or project), or calculatingly adopting disciplinary technologies to enhance appearance; a more ambivalent, less coherent sense of embodied self.

It is possible to suggest that there are two main types of body image operating within contemporary consumer culture. Firstly, we have the body image as the physical appearance of the body, based upon the body as object: a static image, in which the movement and unfolding of the body are captured as in a photographic image – a still snapshot. This well-formed image is akin to the photographic proof of one’s body image and correlated self-identity that is made available within consumer culture advertising and publicity of the success of ‘make-overs’ and ‘shape-overs’. This objectively achieved effect is very much in line with the emphasis upon vision to the exclusion of other senses: we are what we look, and physical appearance is everything.

This first type can be related to Massumi’s (2002) discussion of mirror-vision which relates to seeing oneself as others see one and entails seeing various frozen poses of oneself. Massumi contrasts this with a second type, movement-vision. Here there is not a generalizing subject, a self-identical observer who recognizes the object as the same. Rather the subject-object symmetry of mirrorvision is broken and there is the space of movement, of dislocated perspectives and transformation. Massumi sees this accumulation of relative perspectives as involving the transformation of subject–object relations, giving rise to the body without an image. This is not just a nonlinear form of vision, but something which enlists other bodily senses and sensibilities.

Important here is proprioception – not tactile or visceral sensibility, but the sensibility which relates to muscles and ligaments, which register conditions of movement and translate the body’s encounters with objects into a muscular memory of relationality, a cumulative memory of skill, habit and posture. Proprioceptive memory operates within the dimensions of the flesh: we feel the tenseness of muscles, the pull of joints, the pressure resistance from an accelerating vehicle. In contrast to the eyes, which operate within the space of mirror-vision, and tend not to register movement, but rather interrupt movement to produce formed images, Massumi (2002: 59) argues that ‘movement-vision is sight turned proprioceptive, the eyes reabsorbed into the flesh through a black hole in the geometry of empirical space’. Here vision is far from the ‘all-seeing eye’, but rather acts as a mixed mode of perception which registers both form and movement; for it to enter into the realm of pure movement it must discard form for the flesh, with movement-vision entailing the flexing of the ‘retinal-muscle’ along with other proprioceptive sensations.

Furthermore, if we turn from considering the spatial dimension of proprioception to its operation in time, the body without image entails the eclipse of the subject in emotion as we encounter an interruption, an event. Here the body without image registers via an additional sensibility to that of proprioception: the visceral sensibility (interoception) registers excitations from the five ‘exeroceptive’ senses before they can be fully processed by the brain. We think here of the immediacy of a ‘gut feeling’, which precedes our sense of sight or sound. As Massumi (2002: 61) puts it, ‘movementvision as proprioception subtracts qualified form from movement; viscerality subtracts quality as such from excitation. It registers intensity.’ Viscerality is seen as the perception of suspense, which jolts the body into a ‘space of passion’, to register degrees of intensity. The ‘unit of passion’ resulting from this coupling together of the visceral and proprioceptive sensibilities, Massumi tells us, ‘can be called an affect: the ability to affect and openness to be affected’. He adds:

An emotion or feeling is a recognized affect, an identified intensity as reinjected into stimulusresponse paths, into action-reaction circuits of infolding and externalization – in short, into subject–object relations. Emotion is a contamination of empirical space by affect, which belongs to the body without an image. (Massumi, 2002: 61)

The capacity to move between different registers, between the mirror-image and the movement-image, between affect and emotion, between the subject–object and the sensation of visceral and proprioceptive intensities, then, suggests we need more work to understand the unmediated participation of the flesh in the image. It points to the ways in which body image and the body without image are linked and the inability to recover or salvage the latter into the former. Those who write on embodied habitus such as Pierre Bourdieu, when he talks about the movement of the body in sport; or Inoue Shun (this issue), when he analyses the struggles of the German philosopher Eugen Herrigel in trying to learn and make sense of the embodied habitus needed for the art of kyudo (Japanese archery); or Michael Taussig (1991), when he extends Benjamin’s account of the flâneur to discuss the ‘tactile eye’, have the sense of the body without image and its role in habitus formation and deformation.

If, as Massumi argues, affect is central to the understanding of our information and imagebased contemporary culture, then we also need to address the question of new media. It has been contended by Hansen (2004) that the new digital technologies, far from heralding the elimination of the body to produce a world of disembodied information in which human beings become obsolete, will actually enhance the role of affectivity and the role of the body as the crucial creative filter of images. Hansen draws on Bergson’s discussion of the affective pre-discursive body as the active source of meaning which creatively selects from the external universal flux of images. The importance of the body as a framer of information becomes more central with digital ized media. The new media enhance the capacity for the displacement of vision as the primary sense: in effect vision becomes ‘haptic’, or proprioceptive in the sense mentioned in the above discussion of Massumi. This points to ‘a shift from a dominant occularcentric aesthetic to a haptic aesthetic rooted in embodied affectivity’, as we find in contemporary media art, to the centrality of the body in the framing or ‘forging’ of the digital image (Hansen, 2004: 11). This is a long way from the visual bias and representational mode we find in the concept of body image in the approach generated by Paul Schilder and also the popular psychology of self-help consumer culture reflexive body projects and body image work. It points to the need to conceptualize the body without image and the movement from ocular perception to affectivity and sensory complexity in the formation of our embodied knowledge. The theorization of this process is even more important in a global context in which more people will invariably rely on and use new media, not just as a mode of entertainment, but in the context of their education, work and generation of their means of orientation.

