# Simulation

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

## Simulation

Nicholas Gane

Keywords code, hyperreality, materiality, real, simulation, virtual, war

imulation is a key feature of the contemporary capitalist world. As a concept, it has been addressed by thinkers as far flung as Guy Debord, Paul Virilio, and Umberto Eco (Cubitt, 2001), but is most closely associated with the writings of Jean Baudrillard (1993a; 1994). In his famous Symbolic Exchange and Death (1993a, orig. 1976), Baudrillard maps three orders of western culture or simulacra that have emerged since the Renaissance. The first of these is the classical order of the counterfeit, where one-toone copies of nature are produced that cast signs along with social relations in a single, synthetic substance, most notably stucco. This capturing of nature through artistic or theatrical means was superseded by the Industrial Revolution, and the mass production of objects and signs. In this, the second order of simulacra, it is no longer the reproduction of nature but rather the ‘indefinite reproducibility’ of things that counts. With this, the series rather than the ‘original’ becomes of primary significance. Baudrillard’s work here chimes with Walter Benjamin’s analysis of the work of art in the age of mass production, which considers the extent to which objects are stripped of their aura once they become technically reproducible. But Baudrillard goes further by introducing a third order: the order of simulation. In his view, the age of industrial production is short-lived for ‘as soon as dead labour gains the upper hand over living labour . . . serial production gives way to generation through models’ (Baudrillard, 1993a: 56). At

Democratic Civil Society’, Yale Law Journal 106: 283–387.

Rose, Mark (1993) Authors and Owners: The Invention of Copyright. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Anne Barron is a Reader in Law at the London School of Economics. She is the author of articles on a variety of issues in legal theory and copyright law, and is currently completing a book on the institution of copyright for Cambridge University Press.

this point, a third order of simulation is said to emerge: ‘there is no more counterfeiting of an original, as there was in the first order, and no more pure series as there were in the second; there are only models from which all forms proceed according to modulated differences. Only affiliation to the model has any meaning . . . (Baudrillard, 1993a: 56).

Baudrillard’s analysis of these different orders, which he (1993b: 5–6) later connects to different configurations of economic value, has proved enormously influential across contemporary social and cultural theory. Many commentators, for example, have attempted to map differences between modern and postmodern culture in terms of a shift from the second to third orders of simulacra. Such a shift is said to involve a movement from the mass production of physical commodities to the production and circulation of the exchange-, sign- or brandvalue of objects (for a concrete analysis of this process see Klein, 2001). Baudrillard himself has little if anything to say about the postmodern or postmodernism per se, but does give a provocative account of the global dynamics of an emergent culture of simulation. In his reading, such culture has three inter-related features. The first is that computer modelling can be used to design and ‘crash-test’ objects or ideas by running them through different imaginary scenarios, which in turn predict and perhaps shape events before they take place. The second is that reality is giving way to hyperreality – that which is more real than the real. Baudrillard, for example, talks of the ‘hyperrealism of simulation’, and suggests that technologies, in particular digital media, increasingly shape our capacity to know the world (including key events such as the Gulf War), and with this blur the boundaries between what is ‘real’ and what is virtual or mere ‘appearance’. In these terms, reality is not understood to be a universal phenomenon, as is generally presumed, but rather is treated as a historically specific construct. Finally, the order of simulation is founded on a world of code. This might well be the surface code of local or global signifiers, brands or logos, or the deeper binary codes that both underpin and are produced by computational machines. Alarmingly, Baudrillard sees a shift towards binary values at all levels of culture, and even life in the form of a genetic code. He declares, for example, that ‘digitality is among us. It haunts all the messages and signs of our society, and we can clearly locate its most concrete form in the test, the question/answer, the stimulus/response’ (Baudrillard, 1993a: 62). In other words, culture can increasingly be coded into, and thus be reduced to, either a yes or a no, a 0 or a 1.

This presentation of digital culture has been hotly contested. Critics such as Katherine Hayles see in Baudrillard a tendency to abstract simulated environments from the technologies that make them possible. She declares: ‘If simulation is becoming increasingly pervasive and important, however, materiality is as vibrant as ever, for the computational engines and artificial intelligences that produce simulations require sophisticated bases in the real world’ (2002: 6). Others, by contrast, have used Baudrillard’s theory of simulation to produce concrete analyses of contemporary global culture. Nick Perry (1998), for example, draws on Baudrillard’s theory of hyperreality to explore cultures in which it is no longer possible to distinguish clearly between reality and representation, and which instead produce endless ‘original copies’. James Der Derian (2001), meanwhile, has developed Baudrillard’s (2004) remarks on the virtual nature of contemporary warfare into a more general analysis of the fading boundaries between violence and entertainment. For Der Derian (2001: xi), contemporary culture is underpinned by the emergence of a ‘military-industrial-media-entertainment network’ in which ‘made-for-TV wars and Hollywood war movies blur, military war games and computer games blend’ and ‘mock disasters and real accidents collide’, in the process of which new configurations of ‘virtual power’ are said to emerge. The most striking examples of such power are to be found in current forms of ‘virtual’ and ‘virtuous’ war, which, for Der Derian, confuse and pixilate ‘war and game on the same screen (2001: xvi), and beyond this join ‘the human mimetic faculty for entertainment and gaming’ with ‘new cyborg programs for killing and warring (2001: xx).

Baudrillard’s concept of simulation, however, has yet to be exhausted. If his orders of simulacra are read genealogically rather than in linear fashion (as in Hayles, 2002), they can be seen to compete against each other for ascendance. The consequence of such a reading is that simulation is not a universalizable or totalizing end-point to history (as suggested by Cubitt, 2001) but rather one powerful dimension of a global culture that continues to have many competing logics and principles. This, in turn, opens possible new lines for the analysis of a globalizing world in which different orders of production and value are drawn increasingly into contact and potential conflict with one another. Baudrillard’s early work, for example, emphasizes the power of symbolic exchange – primordial forms of gift exchange that lie outside of the logic of western orders of value – to disrupt the precession of simulacra. In the early 1990s, Baudrillard also added a fourth (dis)order to the scene: the fractal or viral (Baudrillard, 1993b). These realms might, in turn, open ways of thinking about the concept of simulation that have yet to be fully developed. For while Baudrillard’s notion of hyperreality has had wide appeal, few have followed his attempt to re-think simulation against the backdrop of chaos or fractal theory, or in connection to symbolic or singular forms that are radically other to western conceptions of value. It is along these lines, however, and in the light of recent analyses (Hayles, 1999, 2002) of the embodied nature of the virtual age, that new conceptualizations of simulation, and of simulated global cultures, might be forged.

