# Anthropology and Japanese Modernity

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Anthropology and Japanese Modernity

Kaori Sugishita

Keywords imperialism, modernity, postmodernism, westernization

A lthough the discipline of anthropology is<sub>embedded</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>different</sub> <sub>socio-cultural</sub> entities, the West remains the primary ‘we/here’ that produces knowledge about ‘others/ there’, thanks to its political, economic and academic dominance. Hence it is worth investigating the development of anthropology in the non-West with regard to different manifestations of ‘modernity’, which was originally a self-image of the West, a state of rationality and civilization that the dominant entity attributed to itself. Japan, a non-Western nation, has engaged with modernity as such in relentless pursuit of Western power, wealth and knowledge. The operation of anthropology in this process is twofold; on the one hand, Japan as ‘others/there’ has been scrutinized by the dominant West, while, on the other, it has joined the West, as ‘we/here’, in subjecting ‘others/there to the same scrutiny. In fact, Japan has become a locus of anthropology comparable to the West in terms of ethnographic and theoretical range. However, Japanese anthropology lacks critical perspectives on itself, as illustrated by its constant failure to objectify Japanese modernity, the particular conditions under which it has developed.

Japan’s engagement with modernity traces back to the restoration of imperial rule (1868); with the feudalistic regime of shogunate and its policy of national isolation abolished, Japan set out to catch up with the West in the name of ‘enlightenment’. Anthropology was introduced to Japan in this course for modernization, mediated by Western investigation into the origins of the Japanese. Brought to a ‘shocking realization’ that they were observed by Westerners (Shimizu, 1998: 115), the Japanese vigorously produced knowledge about their origins, differentiating ‘we/here’ from ‘others/there’ in the North and the South. Such scholarship contributed to the modern attempt of Japan to forge its unity as a ‘nation-state’, which unfolded against a backdrop of the emergent world order centred on the West (Askew, 2003: 138). In search of a national identity with which to arm itself, Japan desired to join the West as dominant entity, thereby keeping distance from Asia, the subordinate entity of which it hitherto formed a part. This led on to the development of imperialism in Japan, affecting anthropology therein; ‘we/here’ increasingly considered itself superior to ‘others/there’, even with regard to the West, let alone vis á vis Asia (Askew, 2003: 136–7).

Japan embarked on imperialist ventures with the Sino-Japanese war (1894–95), which resulted in the annexation of Taiwan. Following the Russo-Japanese war (1904–05), Korea and Micronesia were also added to the Empire. Correspondingly, Japanese anthropologists started to conduct research abroad, like their Western counterparts, assuming the power-based prerogative to observe ‘others/there’ (Shimizu, 1998: 117). Given its concern with the origins of ‘we/here’, anthropology served, in effect, to justify the Empire by establishing a prehistoric relationship between the colonizer and the colonized (Askew, 2003: 143). As it became more oriented towards contemporary ‘others/there’, the discipline meshed with imperialism at its height. In the 1930s and throughout the Second World War, the government was eager for the information that could be utilized in colonial administration and military operation (Nakao, 2000: 32). While imperialism did not entirely co-opt anthropology, the former facilitated the latter by not only securing access to ‘others/there’ but also providing a rationale for overseas research. As a matter of record, the Empire envisaged itself as a ‘Great Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere’, based on a self-righteous cause that Japan shall release Asia-Pacific regions from Western colonial rule.

Japan thus attempted to dominate the Asia-Pacific region under the guise of an egalitarian crusade against Western dominion over the world. Importantly, this attempt was connected with the nation’s aspiration to go beyond the modernity that had been achieved through ‘westernization’. Under such circumstances, many Japanese intellectuals endorsed the war, seeing it as a watershed in the national struggle to overcome the modern/the Western. It is fair to say that they were obliged to make a compromise between ‘imperial consciousness’ and ‘critical consciousness’ in reflecting on Japan’s modern experience, as social scientists in particular were (Barshay, 1996: 222). However, it is not evident that anthropologists had a critical perspective on Japanese modernity; they were disengaged from the discussions over the issue, while involving themselves in the war effort throughout the Empire. Apparently, anthropologists were so absorbed in ‘others/there’ that they failed to problematize ‘we/here’, particularly its modernization/westernization, of which their scholarship was a byproduct (Yamaguchi, 1966: 23–4). As it turned out, this largely remained a feature of anthropology in postwar Japan.

Defeated in the war over the Asia-Pacific against the West, Japan immediately transformed itself into a ‘democratic’ and ‘pacifist’ nation under American supervision (1945–52). Accordingly, Japanese intellectuals questioned the wartime proposition of overcoming the modern/the Western; the majority considered that Japan was yet to achieve modernity as a positive Western ideal, failing to produce, for instance, the kind of individuals that ‘democratization’ requires (McCormack and Sugimoto, 1988: 2). Meanwhile, anthropologists continued to ignore the question of Japanese modernity, despite focusing on ‘we/here’, having lost access to ‘others/there’. Refreshing their old interest in the origins of the Japanese, anthropologists overlooked modern determinants of Japanese society, such as absolutism, capitalism and land ownership (Yamaguchi, 1966: 26–7). Hence their scholarship was not as relevant to the postwar reconceptualization of Japan as it could have been. More importantly, anthropology failed to engage in self-criticism with regard to its wartime operation; the discipline was implicated in imperialism, the most repugnant problem of Japanese modernity.

With a renewed impetus for modernization/ westernization, Japan pushed forward with the postwar reconstruction. By the end of the 1970s, the nation turned out to be a non-Western economic superpower, outperforming most Western nations. Hence the national agenda of overcoming the modern/the Western resurfaced, coinciding with the emergence of postmodernism, the West’s self-doubt in modernity. The new current inclined Japanese intellectuals to argue that Japan had gone or was going beyond modernity, surpassing the West, with an emphasis placed on the socio-cultural ‘uniqueness’ of the nation. This kind of argument inevitably brought back the ‘fateful decision’ of Japan to transform itself in the image of the West (Miyoshi and Harootunian, 1988: 397), thereby inviting further probing into Japanese modernity. Anthropologists, on the other hand, barely participated in such debates; yet again they were busy exploring ‘others/there’, with ‘we/here’ reduced to a relatively minor field of interest. While postmodernism started to impinge on Japanese anthropologists in the 1990s, it did not necessarily lead them to reflection on Japan and its (post?)modernity.

Postmodern anthropology centred on the West’s attempt to redress the imbalance between subject and object of representation, which arose in part from the official end of colonialism. Modern/colonial anthropology indeed took the form of ‘epistemological dictatorship’ (Fabian, 1983: 140), drawing on the power inequality between ‘we/here’ and ‘others/there’. Japan, albeit a non-Western nation, was not only the object but also the subject in this dictatorship, given its attempt to dominate the Asia-Pacific in place of the West. Hence postmodern/postcolonial currents encouraged Japanese anthropologists to investigate their past implication in imperialism, as well as to challenge the ‘Western academic hegemony’ (Kuwayama, 2004). However, earlier than this, they entertained postmodernism from a purely epistemological perspective, overlooking its political implications for the postcolonial world and specifically Japan as the periphery of the West (Ota, 1998: 175–246). Even now, Japanese anthropologists rarely make an issue of Japan as a particular locus of knowledge production, which not only adds to the Western hegemony but also hinders self-criticism on Japanese modernity.

Japan is possibly the sole instance of a non-Western nation wherein anthropology developed alongside imperialism and colonialism. At the core of this development is Japan’s desire for the West, the main characteristic of Japanese modernity. It is difficult to say if contemporary Japan has overcome modernity; the nation seems to have been modernized/westernized to such an extent that it almost identifies itself with the West, neither coveting nor contesting the modern/the Western. Japan has indeed become an honorary member of the West, thanks to its success in international politics and its economy, including a huge investment in the ‘Third World’. This has enabled Japanese anthropologists to explore ‘others/there in almost every corner of the world, a privilege that was originally limited to their Western counterparts. Given that, they ought to reflect on Japan as ‘we/here’, instead of uncritically identifying it with the West, the dominant ‘we/here’. Japanese modernity is the starting point for such reflections.

