# Singapore’s Routes of Modernity

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Singapore’s Routes of Modernity

Chua Beng Huat

Keywords Asian modernities, communitarianism, multiracialism, Singapore

Mforward narrative in Europe than in the different locations in Asia. In North East Asia, the Confucian cultural zone, a civilization had thrived on its own precepts, beliefs and practices until the arrival of Europeans at a time when the local economy and governance were in decline. Humiliation at the military prowess of the West caused a rethinking of the local culture as ‘backward’, ‘traditional’ against the ‘modernity’ of the West. The desire to be ‘modern’ was as much driven by the need to erase the humiliation as a people, as it was by the need to catch up with the West technologically; the latter being itself a means to the former. Western modernity was therefore never totally taken on board, there has always been an insistence that local, historical cultural resource can provide the necessary concepts for the organization of a new society that will embrace Western science within Asian culture; the latter as essence of the culture, of society and of self, with Western science and technology for economic development. The genealogy of this line of reasoning stretches from the early 19th century to the attempt to develop an ‘Asian Value’ discourse in the late 20th century.

Stepping down the scale to a postcolonial settler place like Singapore, the narrative of modernity is even more truncated. Singapore was a known trading post to the Chinese traders in the 14th and 15th centuries; it was then known as Temasek. By the time of the arrival of the Anglo-East India Company in 1819, the island had scant permanent settlement (Miksic and Low, 2004). This was consistent with the economic geography of archipelagic South East Asia; an island would prosper under an able leader, and when the leader died or declined in power, the residents would move on to another island that was in ascendancy (Scott, 1998: 185). In this sense, archipelagoes do not provide the ‘right’ conditions for state formation that is conceptualized in continental terms. In any case, Singapore would not have been ‘rediscovered’ were it not for European mercantile capitalism of the 19th century, which constituted an earlier wave of globalization of capital. Economically speaking Singapore has, therefore, always been part of the Western ‘modern’, precisely by being a colony.

Under the colonial regime, Singapore thrived as a trading post with an immigrant population hewn from China, South Asia and the neighboring islands in the South East Asian archipelago. No indigenous population was massacred, no local economy displaced, no local cultures suppressed; thus, there was no past to be resurrected when Singapore became an independent island-city-state in 1965. However, on the way to this independence, modern political consciousness had already been ignited by the various political struggles in the homelands of its immigrant-resident population. The most significant of these political struggles were the resistance against Japanese and foreign invasions, followed by the civil war between the Kuomingtang and the Chinese Communist Party in China, the independence movement in India and the bloody revolution for independence in Indonesia (Yong, 2003) and finally, at the end of the Second World War, the communist insurgency in peninsula Malaya. As the local condition of colonial Singapore provided neither material nor ideological basis for the immigrant-residents to invest and develop a ‘national’ identity, they committed their political consciousness and economic resources to the modern idea of ‘nation-state’ to their homelands. Political modernity of the then yet to be Singaporeans was therefore diasporic in origin.

Embedded in this emerging consciousness of politics of nation-state were of course the different strands of modern political thoughts and ideologies. Adherents to these varieties of thoughts and ideologies were public intellectuals who were influential in the ‘modernizing’ of local culture. These cultural developments flowed into Singapore intellectual and cultural spaces through the vernacular schools which were ubiquitous; as a consequence of the negligence of the British colonial government, the different ethnic immigrant-resident communities took care of their own educational needs by building elementary and secondary schools which mirror those of the homelands.

This was particularly so among the majority resident Chinese population. By the early 1900s, with the emergence of republican revolution, all the local Chinese schools adopted Mandarin as the language of instruction, displacing local languages such as Fujian and Cantonese. Following this, the textbooks accordingly reflected the new literary and cultural movements that led up to the May Fourth Movement in 1919, among whose ideological desires was the total destruction of the ‘Confucian shop’. The flow of ideas was reinforced by the flow of people, of individuals who came as teachers in the community schools. Consequently, ethnic Chinese who grew up and went to Mandarin language schools in Singapore, from the early 20th century until the late 1960s, were well versed in the modern Chinese literature, rather than in Confucian classics. These Chinese educated individuals in Singapore went from peasant immigrant roots to contemporary Chinese culture, skipping the classical Confucian traditions. Not surprisingly, their political orientation tended to be left-wing, pro-communist over other ideological tendencies and, significantly in the local context, anti-colonial. The left-tendency was further reinforced by the success of the Chinese Communist Party in 1949; the political investment had paid off in terms of a new ‘nationalism’. From then on, socialist ideology held sway among local Chinese-educated political activists who were able to mobilize the local population into radical organizations, such as trade unions and student organizations (Clutterbuck, 1985: 75–120). This mobilization constituted the base for the decolonization process in the late 1950s, until it was suppressed by the repressive regime of the nascent island-city-state.

Since the formation of Singapore as an independent nation in 1965, the demands of building a modern nation-state and developing an industrial capitalist economy have been imposed on the population as citizens. These processes have been exacted on the population under a repressive state. Since 1968, when the long-ruling regime gained absolute parliamentary power for the first time, the single-party regime has been able to continuously modify the rules of general elections to its political advantage and to stay in power. Consequently, the economic modernization has been spectacularly successful but political modernization, in terms of democratization, has been arrested (Chua, 1994).

The modern nation-state of Singapore also exacts costs in the cultural sphere. Through its emphasis on the economic importance of the English language, which was adopted as the language of public administration and commerce since political independence, and the primary language of instruction in state-run schools in 1974, each successive generation of Singaporeans has become progressively cut off from flows of cultural influences from the PRC, India, Indonesia and Malaysia, for want of linguistic competence. Furthermore, the new nation-state demands the inscription and primacy of a national identity on every individual citizen, over and above all other identities. Through the teaching of a ‘national’ history that casts the ‘left’ as the enemy which was defeated by the current regime, the nascent political modernity of the first half of the 20th century has been progressive displaced by the hegemonic narrative of the existing regime.

In an ironic twist of trajectory, the adoption of English as the ‘utilitarian’ language has unavoidably led to it becoming the dominant language of everyday life of Singaporeans, which consequently leaves them open to influences from the Englishspeaking West, particularly the United States, through its powerful popular culture industries. The fear of American-style liberalism has led to yet another ideological turn. Without a local indigenous cultural past to excavate for a national culture, the existing regime reaches far back into the deep past of the three component ethnic populations for resources to ‘refashion’ as national culture in the name of ‘Asian Values’. These were meant to be distilled from Sinic-Confucian civilization, Hindu civilization of South Asia and Islamic civilization of the Malays (Chua, 1999). The core of these ‘Asian Values’ is a strong version of ‘communitarianism’ in which collective interests are privileged over individual interests, in contrast to weak versions of communitarianism which sees the need to preserve a concept of the social as a balancing act against the tendency of liberalism towards libertarianism (Chua, 2004).

This move towards ‘Asian Values’ is fraught with difficulties. Take the case of the Islamic civilizational root – the state is now faced with the need to confront Islamic fundamentalism within the nation (Kadir, 2004). The Confucian route poses more promise in view of the intellectual interest in the larger North East Asia to fashion a ‘new’ Confucianism that is appropriate to our times. However, as mentioned earlier, contemporary Singaporeans are poorly schooled in Confucianism as a way of life, apart from its translation into a set of routine family practices. In the final analysis, Singapore would still have to wait for intellectual development in North East Asia for the next turn of its cultural modernity.

