# Civilizing Processes

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Civilizing Processes

Stephen Mennell

Keywords civilization, civilizing processes, Elias, habitus, state, violence

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>control</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>violence</sup> <sup>is</sup> <sup>central</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>Norbert</sup>Elias’s theory of civilizing processes, and to Elias's theory of civilizing processes, and to the research tradition of ‘figurational sociology’ to which it gave rise. The theory essentially links the growth of the social constraint exercised by the forces of a state over violent acts to the growth of habitual self-constraint over violent impulses exercised by individual people. Elias stated the kernel of his thesis quite briefly:

if in this or that region, the power of central authority grows, if over a larger or smaller area people are forced to live at peace with one another, the moulding of affects and the standards of the economy of instincts are very gradually changed as well. (Elias, 2000: 169)

Elias’s most famous book, The Civilising Process (2000), which remained the reference point for most of his later writings, was first published obscurely in German (under the title Über den Prozeß der Zivilisation) in 1939, although it became well known only several decades later. One criticism often levelled against it amounts to asking how anyone could propound a theory of ‘civilization’ at a time when the violent nature of the Nazi regime – just on the brink of the Holocaust – as well as of Stalin’s was already evident to anyone who cared to look. A more careful reading of Elias’s book reveals that that is precisely his point: what Europeans from the late 18th century learned to refer to with pride as their ‘civilized’ ways of life are not only the product of a slow long-term process but are also very fragile, a veneer that easily cracks:

The armour of civilised conduct would crumble rapidly if, through a change in society, the degree of insecurity that existed earlier were to break in upon us again, and if danger became as incalculable as it once was. Corresponding fears would soon burst the limits set to them today. (Elias, 2000: 531–2)

Although subsequent writers have shown the relevance of the concept of ‘civilizing process’ in non-European contexts, Elias’s own research was based on a study of European society since the Middle Ages. After an opening section analysing how the word ‘civilization’ (and the related notion of ‘culture’) acquired its heavy load of collective self-approbation for Europeans, there follows the most celebrated part of the book, in which he shows how the manners of the secular upper classes changed from generation to generation – the changing social standards of behaviour and feeling concerning how they ate, blew their noses, spat, went to the toilet, and undressed. Elias shows that ‘rational’ explanations of these changes, in terms of material resources or hygiene, are inadequate, and emphasizes instead the role of competitive social display among a courtly upper class (and among those who aspired to membership of courts) in a context where kings and their government machines were steadily gaining dominance. Only gradually does it become clear that Elias’s fundamental concern is much more with the civilizing of violence than with the civilizing of table or toilet habits. Whence come the courtiers of early modern Europe? They were the product of centuries-long conflicts between many rival warlords, out of which there gradually emerged a smaller number of central rulers, kings who gradually undertook the ‘taming of warriors’ as the key element in the internal pacification of their lands, a central component of state formation processes. (Elias follows Max Weber in defining a state in terms of the effectiveness within its territory of its claim to a monopoly over the means of violence – and, he adds, of taxation, since the means of violence and of taxation are ultimately the same, the state being a close cousin of the protection racket.) The taming of warriors would appear to be a component of state formation processes wherever they have been successful: see, on Japan for instance, Ikegami’s The Taming of the Samurai (1995). It deserves attention in the early 21st century, when the actions of the global superpower have reversed the process, notably in Afghanistan and Iraq.

Far from painting an idealized picture of an inevitable long-term decline of violence, The Civilising Process shows how one major trend in European history was the steady development of the scale of warfare and killing undertaken by the growing states. ‘Elimination contests’ among the numerous local warlords around the beginning of the second millennium AD led on to the emergence of bigger territorial units which over the centuries conducted steadily larger-scale wars with each other, culminating in the World Wars of the

20th century. It is (in Goudsblom’s [2001] phrase) the ‘paradox of pacification’ that internal pacification of a state’s own territory is a precondition of its capacity to wage effective warfare against external rivals. In his late writings, Elias often expressed concern that the process would end in nuclear war and the destruction of the human species; against this, Van Benthem van den Bergh (1992) argued against him that, as long as the Cold War endured, mutually assured destruction (MAD) served as a functional alternative to a worldwide monopoly of the means of violence, exerting a ‘social constraint towards selfconstraint’ upon the (then) two superpowers.

That phrase of Elias’s, the ‘social constraint towards self-constraint’ (2000: 365–79), is more generally relevant to the question of whether broad changes in the overall organization of societies bring about changes in the social and emotional habitus of the people who constitute them. The hypothesis is that with the increasing scale and complexity of society – specifically, ‘longer chains of interdependence’ – people are subject to increasing pressure to exercise foresight and to curb their impulses. In a phrase of Goudsblom’s (2001: 104–6), ‘More people are forced more often to pay more and more attention to more other people.’ This is not dissimilar to the Weberian idea that the growth of trade and markets fosters the growth of rationality, but in Elias’s hands the principle is greatly generalized. More habitual self-constraint over impulsive action goes hand in hand with ‘the advance of the threshold of shame and embarrassment’. And it applies, according to Elias, not just to anticipating in more complex ways the embarrassment that will arise from the reaction of other people if one misuses one’s knife, fork or handkerchief but also to succumbing to violent impulses. What is more, it is suggested that longer chains of interdependence – and especially more even power ratios between the links – are associated with a ‘widening circle of mutual identification’. In other words, people come to be able to ‘feel the pain’ of more and more other human beings.

A good deal of The Civilising Process and a large body of research stemming from it is concerned with documenting whether such changes in the emotional habitus of members of European societies (including the offshoots of Europe overseas) actually took place. In the early Middle Ages, Elias pointed out, the majority of the secular ruling class were leaders of armed bands. For them, war was a normal state of society; they had little other social function but to wage it; they loved battle. It is difficult for the modern mind to grasp the joy and exultation they felt in the clash of arms, but still less easy to come to terms with the sheer pleasure warriors then derived from cruelty, from the destruction and torment of other human beings. But very gradually over the centuries, these military pleasures were subjected to increasingly strong social control anchored in the state organization. Indeed, tighter discipline and control over the impulses – foresight, tactics, strategy – came more and more to be conditions of success even on the battlefield.

It is equally difficult for people today to understand the pleasurable excitement their ancestors experienced in the spectacle of burning heretics, public torture and executions, or of cruelty to animals (on which, see Thomas, 1983), as wellknown and abundantly documented as that is. They too come to be impeded by shame and repugnance, and they too come normally to find expression in only ‘refined’ and indirect forms. One prominent component of this transformation of the impulses of aggressiveness and cruelty identified by Elias is the transfer of emotions from direct action to spectating, a shift towards visual pleasures (2000: 170). The rise and decline of public executions are phases in this process (Spierenburg, 1984). The rise of modern sports is another (Elias and Dunning, 1986). The rules of many sports circumscribe the kinds and extent of violence that can be used, and the pleasure of spectators arises from the ‘mimetic’ character of the contest on the field.

One potential criticism of this theory of the connection between ‘civilization’ and violence control is that it seems to apply more directly to ‘expressive’ than to ‘instrumental’ violence. Even if habitus changes in the direction of people’s having a greater habitual capacity for controlling their aggressive and potentially violent impulses, why should the instrumentally rational use of violence decline? It can be argued that while the central thrust of the process is towards a specific type of conscience-formation, producing feelings of guilt and repugnance with regard to any pleasurable use of violence, on the other hand increasing pressures towards competition, achievement, and the demand for foresight actually facilitate the use of violence in an instrumental way. This is the essence of Bauman’s (1989) argument about modernity and the holocaust, but it is not at odds with Elias’s own studies of Germany and the holocaust (1996). Criminologists and historians of crime (Garland, 1990, 2002; Gurr, 1981; Johnson and Monkkonen, 1996) have found that, contrary to popular belief and despite periodic upsurges, the long-term trend of violence in Western societies is downwards, and the theory of civilizing processes has become an influential component of their explanations of this finding.

