# Junk Space / Bobby Chong Thai Wong and Ryan Bishop

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Junk Space

# Bobby Chong Thai Wong and Ryan Bishop

Keywords architecture, modernization, multicultural space, urbanism

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>rapid</sup> <sup>growth</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>urban</sup> <sup>areas</sup> <sup>that</sup> <sup>began</sup> <sup>in</sup>the 18th century led to numerous theories and practices about the proper and rational use of space. Often the terms ‘proper’ and ‘rational’ emerged from specific historical and intellectual traditions peculiar to European nations. The categories and standards to be pursued for urban space on a global scale were carried forward by imperial enterprises and later international capital and organizations. Usually deviations from these are dismissed as underdeveloped, chaotic or irrational ways of conceptualizing space. What these evaluations ignore, of course, is the larger spatial context in which any specific space occurs. We wish to use two student projects from studios run by Bobby Wong at the National

University of Singapore’s Department of Architecture to explore descriptions and evaluations of urban space at the end of the 20th century made by Rem Koolhaas. Specifically we are interested in exploring his provocative concept called ‘junkspace’, which he claims to be a ubiquitous global phenomenon.

This space has come about through the process of modernization (including globalization) that cannibalizes itself or has exhausted itself or become the apotheosis for the disenfranchised and the dispossessed. Koolhaas (2004) uses the analogy of space junk (that is, debris in outer space floating free of any context or control) to describe this coagulation. ‘If space junk is the human debris that litters the universe, junk-space is the residue mankind leaves on the planet’ (p. 162). The two student examples reveal the strengths and limitations of Koolhaas’ concept, and to modify and supplement this concept we will use the work of Walter Benjamin (1996, 1999) to provide a more nuanced sense of the use of urban space than that allowed by Koolhaas.

Koolhaas’ captions and writings implicitly bestow an abstract quality onto all junk-spaces, rendering them more or less equivalent. But before such ‘abstractness’ totalizes junk-space, we wish to explore some hypothetical projects that would simultaneously support and render problematic the totalizing dimensions of Koolhaas’ analysis. The first is a racetrack town proposed along the Malaysian North–South Highway, a scheme developed by a group of students led by Paul Chang. The studio was investigating ‘Anywhere’ architecture occurring sometime in the mid-1990s, the height of the real estate boom that griped Southeast and Northeast Asia, and the moment as well as sites of numerous examples of junk-space upon which Koolhaas draws. The ‘Anywhere’ architecture, in fact, explicitly manifests the qualities of junk-space insofar as it deploys a range of architectural strategies and assumptions peculiar to modernism without taking into account the context in which the building materializes, as well as ignoring notions of scale and fit. The scheme proposed by Chang’s team zoned strips of land, of approximately four kilometers in width, parallel to and on either side of the Highway as land possible for real estate development. In this space would be built the racetrack town.

The scheme was premised on a reality occurring at the time of immense profits to be made from real estate development, made possible by the construction of the North–South Highway, Peninsula Malaysia. The actual site of placement was irrelevant, befitting Anywhere architecture. The natural topography and vegetation offered no obstacles because they could be overcome by technology. Similarly, knowledge of actual racetrack construction could be overcome simply by copying and transporting virtually in digital form a given track and overlaying it across the said terrain. The Monte Carlo racetrack was chosen. The racetrack forms the basic armature to lay out the other urban elements of the town: mechanical garages, car show rooms, hotels for weekend getaways and so on. Similarly the various urban technologies upon which great profits could be generated from real estate speculation along a major new artery of international transport were replicated and modified in the site. The highway links the flows of goods, vehicles and peoples between nations while the racetrack depends upon the use of automobiles and expenditure of natural resources for no instrumental purpose of transportation, but merely going about in circles with limited traffic. The scheme, therefore, pushes the ‘noble’ profession of architecture into recycling its body parts; signs that are correlated with modern architectural elements (flat roofs, transparency, wall planes and columns as points on plan) that were once thought authentic and original were now constantly being reused, recovered and rearranged. Similarly the term Monte Carlo, which invokes the authenticity of space and its use, is decontextualized and ‘transported’ into a part of the world other than its own site, the racetown. Renamed the Marlboro Race Town, to further link language, space and corporate branding, the town takes on a character oddly reminiscent of but quite unlike that of the original.

The town embodies important elements of Koolhaas’ junk-space through its appropriation, replication, decontextualization and improper use of space/architecture that forces a rethinking of accepted standards and practices in a creative manner. Koolhaas’ junk-space, as exemplified in this project, resembles Benjamin’s notion of inscription as articulated in ‘Painting, or Signs and Marks’ (1917). Inscription reveals a de-historical use of space, one that discounts context and tradition within a given site. The inscription presumes the space as capable of conversion into a tabula rasa, which can be inscribed and erased at will. The racetown reveals such an inscription while also revealing a counter-historical understanding of space. That is, one can attempt pure erasure and pure replication but within the process of replication change occurs. What Chang’s team shows us is a latent and unavoidable political project inherent in even the modernist, ahistorical, apolitical strategies of universal architectural practice. Koolhaas’ junk-space, unlike Benjamin’s notion of inscription, seemingly ignores or downplays these ineluctable aspects of replication and recontextualization.

But there are spaces that might be labeled, pejoratively as ‘junk space’ by Koolhaas that reveal a complexity of embedded local knowledge interacting with global modernity and commenting upon it in ways not grasped by an outsider. Such a fecund, critical use of space can be detected in the second student example: a shopping centre in Singapore located along North Bridge Road on a site between Peninsula Plaza and the Capital Cinema. The scheme, a Master’s thesis by Lim Fun Kit, is driven by a thematic issue called ‘Unveiling the Verses’ and came into being mainly as a result of a number of coincidences. In the first place, there is a coincidental axis of entrances to two important religious structures: Masjid Burhani mosque and St Andrew’s Cathedral transept. These two elements face one another. In the wake of the 9/11 attacks in the USA and the Jamal Islamia incidents in Singapore, the scheme’s deployment of this coincidence between mosque and church took on added significance. The Dawoodi Bohras, members of an Islamist sect hailing from Gujarat and custodians of the Masjid Burhani, while practicing a highly orthodox form of Islam (in matters relating to dress, prayer, physical comportment and food), are also merchants (‘Bohra’ means ‘to trade’) who want to trade and exchange. The confluence of trade and worship, regardless of religious or ideological background, carries particular resonance in Singapore’s history. The proposal examined building a shopping complex with the thought that while exchanging goods and services for money, the building could also become an instrument of the faithful to share Islamist values. This additional form of exchange to be carried out on the site reveals the long historicity of exchange between Islam and Christianity from colonial times to the present while also taking advantage of the import of trade and exchange within Islam itself.

To highlight these levels of exchange, Lim adopted several strategies. First, he had the mosque and the cathedral look at each other by adopting and transposing the morphological structure of the cathedral nave and its columns such that its sectional symmetrical center coincides with the axis, thus framing in perspective the façade of either building depending on the direction of one’s gaze. The use of the Christian motif of the cross interacting with an Islamic site of worship (and trade) does not stop there. Lim goes further by mapping repeatedly the diagram of the cruciform (nave, two aisles and with transepts turned 90 degrees inward in alignment with the nave) from one end of the site to the other. Extensive use of an abstracted crucifix in the design of the shopping complex would be acceptable for Islamic worshippers, because shopping in its 20thcentury guise of mass consumption is largely a global capitalist enterprise which links it to Christian uses of capital and trade that differ from those dictated by Islamic law.

The replications of the transept can be used in various ways to structure space. In total, there are six of these replicated transepts, two of which are used in the plan to form two reflective pools. They are placed in a symmetrical relationship to each other in the mosque/transept axis, and therefore, frame the entrance to the rear of the mosque. The remaining four replicated transepts are transformed into volumetric containers. One of these houses the madrasah while another houses the library.

Because the plan highlights exchange at many different levels, Lim uses the metaphor of the hjab (the dress that veils the Muslim females) to articulate barriers to exchange in the midst of shopping as an activity while at the same time providing the possibility of transgressing barriers. The library walls are formed by transparent glass partitions, with the perimeter book stacks lining the inner sides of the partitions. The many changing gaps found amongst books within each book stack provide visual cues for shifts between the inside and outside of the library. Similarly the space for the Madrasah exposes and transgresses barriers, except it does so aurally rather than visually. The container is made up of solid dense concrete with a perimeter opening that separates the wall from the ceiling. As a result, readings of the Quran can be heard, though not seen, in and amongst the shoppers immediately outside the Madrasah. The architectural metaphor of the hjab is also used in the department store to screen areas specifically dedicated for women’s clothing and lingerie. Within that space, Muslim women can do away with their hjabs without transgressing their accepted practice. Because it is away from the male gaze, women, whether Muslim or non-Muslim, can shop with a sense of privacy.

‘Unveiling the Verses’ operates in a densely allusive and complex environment, and if its appropriation of modernist architectural practices was deemed ‘junk-space’ by Koolhaas for its apparent lack of modernist context, then it would only highlight the fact that every site – every space – contains a range of invisible contexts that shape the visible space in very specific, often contested, ways. What is of further interest in these two schemes, themselves junk-spaces in Koolhaas’ terminology, lies in their emergence. Each has its own narrative, and when seen together with their own images and drawings, correlations can be made with Walter Benjamin’s idea about signs and marks. Benjamin indicates that signs, whether they are made through graphic lines, geometric or written lines, are lines that are printed, scripted over something, while marks emerge from them. In this sense, then, the racetrack town operates an inscription, the lines found in them mere graphic lines that demarcate a racetrack from a background, which could have been made on any landscape. These graphic lines, following Benjamin, only impress a sign. The shape and pattern of the racetrack may or may not be a copy of the real Monte Carlo, something which was not ascertained at the time. As a result there is an air of ambiguity in the scheme. Building types and forms are vague. Besides the grandstand, buildings are mere blocks in the landscape with vague presupposed functions attached to them. Forms and functions can change as and when the aspects of the symbolic, libidinal or the political economy dictates.

The shopping center site, however, works with the mark in ways Benjamin would find familiar, for it materializes the political dimensions of the caption that Benjamin thought essential to understanding and conveying the mark. There is something specifically real about this project, which involves guilt and atonement; very much like Benjamin’s description of Belshazzar’s Feast in the Old Testament. The coming together of the mosque and the cathedral after 9/11 and the entire making of the shopping complex centered on an exchange, disguised as shopping, is a way a community can overcome a present by gesturing towards a future, so that the past, present and the future can be magically fused. The reception of this space – with voices reading the Quran, the visual confrontation between cathedral and mosque, the visual separation between two worlds mediated by book stacks and glass partitions – slows down spatial perception in ways that involve the body. In the case of Koolhaas’s aphoristic analyses of ‘junkspace’, the cognitive is privileged. But as these two sites reveal, the body, the imagination, the mind, space, and local-global context and interaction are more deeply intertwined than Koolhaas’ ‘junkspace’ often allows, despite its provocative potential. Koolhass claims a ubiquity of ‘junk-space’ at the turn of the century and, to a certain extent, bemoans its existence. But the category remains so large and elastic as to perhaps outstrip its usefulness, especially when one delves deeper into the trajectories at play in any specific site.

