# The Knowledge Apparatus / The Title / Epigraph

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# The Knowledge Apparatus

Ryan Bishop and John Phillips

Keywords argumentation, authority, knowledge, representation, rhetoric

A <sup>cademic</sup> <sup>writing,</sup> <sup>more</sup> <sup>evidently</sup> <sup>than</sup>other kinds, has evolved in ways that cannot be separated from the apparatus of the knowledge that it is supposed to serve. The apparatus (from the Latin ap-parare, to ‘make ready’ or ‘prepare for’) consists in several things that together maintain the conditions preparatory for all knowledge. The components of the knowledge apparatus function like appendages, arrangements, mechanisms and even kinds of equipment; yet their evident prosthetic character would be misleading if knowledge was regarded as something essentially independent of its apparatus.

If academic writing reveals the apparatus of knowledge more clearly than do other kinds of writing, then this does not mean that it is absent from other kinds of writing. On the contrary, the knowledge apparatus would be at least implicit in any claim to knowledge (e.g., in journalism, autobiography, or web-logs [blogs]). Knowledge would be nothing without the arrangements, classifications and kinds of assemblage that make it possible, prepare for its emergence, produce it, maintain it and critique it. The conventions, for instance, by which the title and author of a work are identified play very specific functions in preparing for knowledge, as do the several kinds of documentation, attribution, citation and copyright. Where a work neglects any or even all of these conventions, they very often remain implicit, and all the more marked in their absence.

The apparatus of academic writing is homologous in some ways to the functions of the archive, museum, library and other institutions of knowledge, to which we must add rapidly developing kinds of electronic archiving. Conventions, colloquia, workshops and conferences of all kinds play indispensable roles in maintaining and performing the functions of the apparatus. Delving into established historical archives we find that knowledge is indistinguishable from its many forms of documentation in books, proceedings, papers, journals, encyclopaedias, dictionaries and proliferating forms of electronic storage and access. The function of the ‘edition’, and the several, often very specific, kinds of scholarship dedicated to producing the so called authoritative editions of the works of knowledge, cannot be overestimated.

Sources like the internet – which offers free web space for virtually unrestricted global dissemination of data, knowledge and ideas – can illustrate negatively the conditions that the conventions of the knowledge apparatus are supposed to protect. Electronic technologies, though, introduce nothing new to the problem of knowledge. Rather, they exacerbate conditions that always seem to have applied. Knowledge is problematized when people dissimulate or feign the appearance of knowledge by using exactly those conventions that evolved as ways of protecting knowledge from this kind of dissimulation. The rhetorical procedures of citation and the associated ways of documenting proper attribution are evident amongst the oldest surviving manuscripts. Moreover, such manuscripts are themselves responsible for the preservation of previous knowledge by means of citation and attribution. Accordingly the history of knowledge includes, in every era, instances of false attribution, misquotation, plagiarism of many kinds, and spurious appeals to authority. It is, in these ways, always possible to invent a convincing case for knowledge that has little or even no substance in fact, a situation often parodied in fiction, which is in principle free of the truth criteria traditionally leveled at epistemological statements. Nevertheless, without the knowledge apparatus, which constitutes the means by which knowledge is passed on and by which it evolves and mutates, there would be no knowledge. Knowledge might thus be regarded as simultaneously possible yet problematic at the level of the apparatus itself and so knowledge per se – if we were to accept a notion of knowledge somewhat abstracted and thus protected from the random contingencies of its dissemination – ought first of all to be regarded as an awareness of the means of knowing.

By focusing on the apparently marginal and contingent textual procedures by which the apparatus is realized, we draw attention to the basic preconditions of knowledge, its organization and arrangement. A certain level of self-reflexive paradox is inevitable. The preconditions for knowledge cannot easily be made the object of knowledge. It is a matter of making evident (making known) the structures of knowledge itself, which emerge in ways that provide definitive proof of the imperfectability of knowledge. This is not a misfortune. A knowledge constructed and prepared for, always in advance, remains nonetheless open to permanent revision. Attempts to operate outside or beyond, or even without, the conventional knowledge apparatus take the risk of repeating its most sedimented (mystical, hidden) forms, perhaps constructing or reproducing myths of freedom or origin. Or, instead, such risks may pay dividends in the creative disruption of conventional arrangements, revealing (but we hope not too much) the arbitrary element in knowledge production. Global knowledge depends, on the one hand, on the repeatability of the knowledge apparatus, without which knowledge would not travel; but on the other hand, global knowledge is problematized more forcefully where the knowledge apparatus undergoes subtle transformations.

The common notion of the academic text would be that of the paper or lecture presented at a conference or seminar, published in an appropriate specialist journal or bound in the form of a book. The contemporary idea of the book is limited by the historical development of books as we know them: that is to say, bound editions of lengthy written works. This is unreasonably narrow because the Teutonic bóc or ‘written tablet from its earliest known usages was also used to translate the Greek (especially biblical) Biblos and Latin Liber (both ‘written account’). We may thus use book to denote, as the OED suggests,

any treatise written on any material (skin, parchment, papyrus, paper, cotton, silk, palm leaves, bark, tablets of wood, ivory, slate, metal, etc.), put together in any portable form, e.g. that of a long roll, or of separate leaves, hinged, strung, stitched, or pasted together.

Thus today we speak of e books, note-books and i pods, which clearly fill the global criteria. There is no scientific distinction by which we define a book today, but we tend to refer to shorter works by other names, like tract, pamphlet, sketch, or essay. The common element of the book – in whatever sense we grasp it – would be the grammata, the writing. The notion of book thus develops into the modern sense of a treatise or literary work contained in the numerous leaves fastened at book’s back, and which can be accessed at any arbitrary point. The object itself is also a book, without reference to its contents – a sheaf of papers protected by covers and bound (thanks to the art of book-making) – the form into which some specific content of subject matter may be written or printed. Knowledge can thus be dissimulated in the form of a well stocked library. The book itself is similar in status and function to the grammata, the written marks, which it supports. Written marks also supposedly embody the words and ideas that inform them with sense, but – as a basic principle of their possibility – written marks cannot guarantee the safe transfer of sense. The written mark (which is simultaneously a mental and physical phenomenon) could thus be regarded as the minimal unit of the knowledge apparatus.

The apparent particularity of academic discourse, which tends to make the complexity of the knowledge apparatus more evident than do other kinds of discourse, is an illusion at the structural level – a determined one with several different effects (variously privileging and debasing academic discourse depending on one’s perspective). The apparatus that conventions and devices make evident functions across academic disciplines, universities, academies and schools. There would be in principle a corresponding yet differently assembled apparatus functioning at the level, for instance, of the Chinese wu kwon, the Japanese gakko, and the Arabic madrasa. Despite the conventional character of the apparatus (which changes alongside other aspects of historical modality) the distinction between the apparatus and its contingently alterable devices functions as a kind of flexibility, or play. The question thus centers on how we use the knowledge apparatus, how we bring it to light and mobilize it today. We cannot effectively even problematize knowledge without making use of its apparatus.

## The Title

The academic text, as a whole, exemplifies and participates in the perpetuation of a knowledge apparatus. That is, there are formal, constructional components to academic writing that are the apparatus of knowledge itself, not just its articulation. In order to problematize knowledge, global or otherwise, one should have a working knowledge of how knowledge is performed through the various dimensions of the apparatus. The title is the first and most apparent of all textual devices that partake of, while also constructing, the knowledge apparatus. So starting with the title, we notice that it signals a particular relationship between the text (as well as author) and readers. Both a part of the text and separate from it, the title provides the first interpretational strategy for readers to make sense of a text. The title bears a special responsibility, therefore, toward the reader by being simultaneously inviting (welcoming the reader to the text) and controlling (seeking to impose, from the outset, a specific mode of engagement of reader with text). The title of a text is not unlike the title of the aristocracy, in that an aristocratic title reveals specific information about hierarchical, inherited power relations within a society. Similarly the title of a text reveals specific information about reader relations to the power and authority of the text (and author) to which (and whom) readers must submit.

The title also bears the legal burden of a text’s existence, for while the fictional status of the character Hamlet or the theoretical status of the concept of property rights remain relatively free of copyright laws, the text whose name is Hamlet and the scholarly article ‘Property Rights’ are nonetheless bound up with the most complex legal ties. For this reason a title, while it may consist in the same linguistic string as a sentence or phrase found in the work itself (as in Franz Kafka’s ‘Before the Law’, which begins, ‘Before the law there stands . . .’), nonetheless operates according to laws of meaning that are quite independent of those that govern its exact double in the text it names.

## Epigraph

Avoid haphazard writing materials. A pedantic adherence to certain papers, pens, inks is beneficial. No luxury, but an abundance of these utensils is indispensable. (Walter Benjamin)

The epigraph, a short quotation placed at the beginning of a book, chapter or article, might indicate its theme. The term is also used to describe the short inscriptions on buildings or coins. From epi- (upon) -graphein (writing) the epigraph is related to the epigram: a short witty expression originally in verse. The epigraph (cited) from Walter Benjamin’s (1996) ‘One-Way Street is one of his 13 theses on the writer’s technique. The theses (echoing perhaps Karl Marx’s much cited thesis ‘On Feuerbach’, included amongst which is the famous epigram about the point being to change the world rather than just to understand it) provide witty observations on the apparatus of the work’s production, the techniques, tools and modes of labor constitutive of scholarly writing. Normally one would not need to add a glossing commentary on an epigraph, for if it is carefully chosen it will resonate with the text appended to it. Nor does an epigraph imply acceptance of the authority of its writer; in fact it might serve to give notice of a critical reflection, revision or even an outright demolition. An epigram can thus be a form of irony. The epigraph on coins would be inscribed on what is called the exergue, a part on the coin’s reverse for inscriptions. From ex (out) ergon (work), the exergue often names another conventional part of the work that is strictly outside the work: the preface.

