# Social Time Sebastian Olma

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Social Time Sebastian Olma

Keywords Albert Einstein, Henri Bergson, intensive capitalism, Peter Lynds, time

he publication of Einstein’s On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies in 1905 revolutionized our understanding of time. What was to become the most famous paper of 20thcentury physics created turmoil in ‘God’s sensorium’, which, according to Newton, constituted the proper place of time. Time no longer served as an absolute repository of mechanical movements but became the numerical multiplicity of space–time relations, determined by rulers and clocks. Now Peter Lynds, a 27-year-old broadcasting school tutor from Wellington, New Zealand, has published a paper in Foundations of Physics Letters that has stirred up the international physics community once again. Lynds attacks physics for maintaining at its very foundations what in his assessment is a nonsensical notion of time: time as a succession of precise static instants. So far, the reception of Lynds’ paper has been as frantic as it has been controversial (the media frenzy has somehow avoided Britain but entering ‘Peter Lynds’ into an Internet search engine not only generates a host of international press reports on the phenomenon Lynds but also a variety of heated debates within physics discussion forums). The spectrum of reactions ranges from comparisons to Einstein through to musings as to Lynds potential non-existence. Among those sympathetic to Lynds’ analysis is John Wheeler of Princeton, collaborator of both Albert Einstein and Richard Feynman.

Lynds attacks physics for maintaining at its very foundations what in his assessment is a nonsensical notion of time: time as a succession of precise static instants. If there were such things, Lynds argues, it would logically follow that the world remained frozen at a precise instant, ‘as though stuck on pause or freeze frame on a motion screen’ (Lynds, 2003a: 1). This could not be changed by postulating a continuous sequence of further instants, since it is the logical nature of precise instants not to have duration. Thus, in its own understanding of time, physics prohibits continuity and motion to take place.

The solution Lynds offers lies in the fairly outrageous claim that time does not exist at all – or at least not in a way that can be grasped by conventional physics. Time has no existence as physical quantity. This elusion of time, however, is far from being a distinctly modern phenomenon. In fact, Lynds is able to hark back to Zeno of Elea’s motion and infinity paradoxes to demonstrate the historical proportions of the conceptual illusion that he believes to have unveiled. What Zeno’s paradoxes seemed to reveal was the impossibility of motion. A tortoise challenges Achilles to a race, gets a 10-metre head start, and claims Achilles can never pass her. When Achilles has run 10 metres the tortoise has moved a further metre. When Achilles has covered that metre, the tortoise has moved 10 centimetres and so on ad infinitum. In the dichotomy paradox, Zeno maintains that one can never reach a goal, as in order to get there, one must first travel half of the distance. After having covered that distance, one must still traverse half the remaining distance, and half again, and so on. The final paradox that Lynds refers to concerns a flying arrow that will never reach its target because of it being stationary at each instant of time.

Lynds now argues that Zeno’s problems are paradoxes only as long as it is assumed that the respective position of a travelling object, Achilles or the arrow, can be precisely determined:

[T]he solution to all of the mentioned paradoxes . . . is that there isn’t an instant in time underlying the body’s motion (if there were, it couldn’t be in motion), and as its position is constantly changing no matter how small the time interval, and as such, is at no time determined, it simply doesn’t have a determined position. (2003b: 8, original emphasis)

By arguing thus, Lynds clearly and rather surprisingly echoes Henri Bergson’s century-old critique of time’s quantification. For Bergson, Zeno’s paradoxes were due to the illegitimate equation of movement with the space upon which it supposedly takes place (Bergson, 1998 [1907]: 308 passim). The latter is extensive and quantifiable whereas the former is intensive and qualitative. What is being attacked by the unlikely couple Bergson–Lynds is precisely the confusion of intensity (movement, quality) with extensity (space, quantity) to which even relativity theory falls prey. Notwithstanding Bergson’s shortcomings in dealing with general relativity, he correctly reproached Einstein for reinforcing this confusion (Bergson, 1999 [1922]). Although relativity theory did away with the idea of absolute time (time independent of things), it introduced the idea of a multiplicity of mathematically discrete space–time blocs/events, thus upholding an essentially spatialized notion of time (Deleuze, 1988). According to Bergson, physics thus missed the opportunity to depart from a pulverized concept of time toward an understanding of what he called real duration, that is time as lived becoming, as virtual creative flow that is beyond measure.

With Lynds, Bergson’s critique re-emerges in the midst of 21st-century science. What are the implications – we have to ask – of Lynds’ involuntary memory of Bergsonism in our own ‘present’? If there is anything to be learned from this strange encounter, it would seem to begin with the fact that rather than being shunned as an apostate gone over to the side of the crazy philosophers, Lynds has met with an overwhelming response from the physics community (Adam, 2003). In the beginning of the 20th century, it was rather easy for Einstein to denounce Bergson’s proposition of real, qualitative time or real duration as ‘philosopher’s time’ allegedly resting on a dubious blend of physical and psychological time (Bergson, 1999 [1922]: 159). It took almost a century but the heterogeneous reaction to Lynds’ intervention seems to suggest that physics’ attitude is changing.

If time is not a succession of instants, no more is the time of physics determined by a succession of masterminds. It would be more sensible to hypothesize that a particular society’s historical conception of time emerges out of that very society’s material practice. Einstein, far from being the detached, other-worldly genius of popular myth, was of course not only firmly embedded in the cultural and technological Zeitgeist of mature industrial capitalism but was also among the foremost experts on time-keeping and synchronization technology due to his work in Bern’s patent office (Galison, 2003). Consequently, Einstein’s time emerged at the heart of a historical movement characterized by an ever tightening disciplinary grip on time (Foucault, 1977). To put it somewhat schematically, Einsteinian time was the time of the confinements, confinements that needed co-ordination. Factories, hospitals, colonies, prisons, etc. formed veritable space–time blocks whose relative position to one another was of vital importance for the workings of the system as a whole. In retrospect, the disciplinary society at its apex seems rather likely to have propelled the emergence of a notion of time as ‘being kept in an assemblage of space–time containers.

From such an historical perspective, then, the re-emergence of Bergson’s critique of quantification and extensity is today far from surprising. It coincides with the completion of the longue durée of capitalist extension. Globalization has ended some decades ago, followed by an accelerated intensification of capitalism that Negri, Lazzarato, Virno and others have begun to describe. The end of globalization also signals the end of space as pure quantity and its re-emergence as problem, as something that is now invested with time/quality but not as a succession of concrete, confined blocs but as virtual flow. As modernity’s confinements are collapsing, time/quality does not lend itself so easily anymore to spatializing imagination. The phenomenon Lynds is thus isomorphic with postdisciplinary ontology as it finally hits the last bastion of modern epistemology, that is science. In this sense one could understand quantum mechanics as the link between Einstein and Lynds: the ‘smearing out’ of (subatomic) space–time containers as the physical analogy of time/quality (Foucault’s pouvoir-puissance) beginning to leak out of the porous walls of modern confinements. Perhaps such an immediate understanding of ontological isomorphism is pushing it a bit far. In any case, what these analogies try to suggest is that Lynds’ problematization of time appears in fact to be rather timely. It coincides with capital’s increasing virtuosity in managing the problem of the immeasurability of social creativity (Lazzarato, 2002). The biopolitical machinery of unmediated appropriation is already successfully operating on the virtual flows of social creativity – one might think of the project-form that organizes most of today’s immaterial labour, the flows of virtual value on the global finance markets, or simply the productivity of Internet consumers. Even such a cursory glance over some contemporary dispositifs of production highlights capital’s practical adoption of the Bergsonian conception of time that forms the metaphysical background of Lynds critique. As modernity’s four-dimensional space– time blocks mutate into the non-spatial intensity of today’s capitalist production, the socius is liberated from Euclidian prisons in order to be hijacked into vitalist custody.

Lynds seems to articulate this shift for the world of science. His attempt to drive space out of physical time is not dissimilar to the management consultant who tries to drive hierarchy out of the organization. Both are trying to get ‘closer to the flow of qualitative duration. And this is perhaps where the significance of the phenomenon Lynds lies: if Einstein’s actual ‘time revolution crystallized a notion of time that had long been inherent to the material practice of disciplinary capitalism, maybe Lynds’ Bergsonian attempt to unmake this notion indicates that science has once again begun to catch up with material social practice.

