# Life – After Canguilhem

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Life – After Canguilhem

Paul Rabinow and Carlo Caduff

Keywords biology, genomics, information, knowledge.

G<sup>eorges</sup> <sup>Canguilhem’s</sup> <sup>history</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>science</sup>investigates life as both form (le vivant) as investigates life as both form (le vivant) as well as experience and knowledge of that form (le vécu). Hinting at James D. Watson and Francis Crick’s paramount discovery of the double helical structure of the deoxyribonucleic acid molecule, Canguilhem identified in his 1966 essay ‘Le concept et la vie’ a shift in the understanding of life. Dropping ‘the vocabulary and concepts of classical mechanics, physics and chemistry, . . . in favor of the vocabulary of linguistics and communications theory’, life had acquired a new language, Canguilhem observed. Operating with terms such as code, information, instruction, message, meaning, and program, molecular biology resembled neither natural history, nor architecture, nor mechanics; it resembled grammar, semantics and syntax. The problem took a different form; life was now framed in terms of organization through information. ‘If we are to understand life, its message must be decoded before it can be read’, as Canguilhem put it (2000: 317). The structuration of matter and the regulation of functions was set to be explored on a different scale.

In response to the ascendancy of the biosciences, the completion of the Human Genome Project, and a series of gene mapping and DNA sequencing initiatives, commentators have time and again pointed out that a shift has occurred in the epistemology of biology. Human and non-human life, it is argued, is now envisioned at a molecular scale. Recent developments in bioscience and biotechnology have enabled the reengineering of organisms, organs and cells by way of manipulating their molecular make-up. In contemporary biomedicine, the diagnostic and therapeutic endeavor seems increasingly anchored at the molecular level. Biology has come to ‘visualize life phenomena at the submicroscopic region – between 10<sup>–6</sup> and 10<sup>–7</sup> cm’, Nikolas Rose recently remarked. For Rose, this momentous shift of scale amounts to nothing short of a molecularization of life. ‘This molecularization was not merely a matter of the framing of explanations at the molecular level. Nor was it simply a matter of the use of artefacts fabricated at the molecular level. It was a reorganization of the gaze of the life sciences, their institutions, procedures, instruments, spaces of operation and forms of capitalization’, concludes Rose (2001: 13). Tantamount to the capacity of contemporary biotechnology and biomedicine to reshape life at a molecular level is the advent of a new type of biopolitics, or so it seems.

A closer look at contemporary events in postgenomic biology offers a different perspective. Today, we are not witnessing a linear progression towards a general molecularization of life, but rather, and more interestingly, inflections of a rebiologization of life. A series of gene mapping and DNA sequencing projects have revealed the genetic constitution of bacteria, yeast, worms, flies and chimps. The systematic production of genomic data performed on an industrial scale has generated a slew of information. That information, however, has not led to immediate biological understanding. The problem biologists and biomedical scientists face today is how to utilize genomic information to gain biological understanding. It has become clear by now that DNA sequence information does not reveal gene regulation. The specification of when, where, and for how long a gene is turned on or off is still missing. Additionally, it is not always possible to deduce protein function from DNA sequence information. As Roger Brent, a molecular biologist, pointed out in 2000, ‘the most important observation from genome sequence is probably that . . . the function of between 15% and 40% of the proteins encoded by any genome is not apparent from their sequence’ (2000: 170). Identification of polymorphisms in coding sequences, regulatory sites, and splice junctions often yield more questions than answers. The function of non-coding regions, and the consequences of variation in non-coding regions, is unclear.

The recent discovery of non-coding RNA genes that produce functional RNA molecules rather than encoding specific proteins has revealed the limits of the information paradigm of molecular biology. Ironically, as Sean R. Eddy (2001) remarks, a considerable class of genes has remained invisible in the era of complete genome sequences. The mass production of genomic information, moreover, is prone to errors. Roger Brent more generally admonishes that ‘genomic data of all types are typically lower value adding than those obtained from classical ad hoc experimental approaches; they typically do not immediately address the questions about regulation, mechanism, and decision making that are of greatest interest to contemporary biologists’ (2000: 173). The problems are explicable on the ground of the configuration of the project itself. Brent argues that ‘the underlying logic used to make inferences from genomic data [is] in a primitive state characteristic of an observational stage of science’ (2000: 173). Perhaps, then, the definition of life as information was tantamount to that observational mode of biological inquiry.

Today, as is well known, molecular biology reassembles around functional genomics, proteomics and transcriptomics. In the emerging world of post-genomics, the generation of genomic information provides the ground for the biologization of life, making the complex interactions between cells, systems of cells, multicellular organisms, populations of organisms and their environment a focus of heightened attention. In order to understand genomic information, biology reaches out and moves beyond the limits of the molecular scale. It resituates DNA sequences and RNA regulatory mechanisms within highly differentiated cellular networks. It shifts attention from linear causal chains to non-linear dynamics. And it moves from deterministic frameworks to probabilistic explanations. Accordingly, the challenges of postgenomic biology are not only technical, organizational and financial; they are increasingly scientific. Post-genomic biology is driven not so much by efforts in decoding DNA sequences, but rather by testing hypothetical propositions in experimental settings. Electron microscopes, ultracentrifuges, electrophoresis, mass spectrometry, isotopes and scintillation counters are now increasingly utilized not for observational but for experimental purposes.

Reflecting on the implications of the revolution under way in the molecular biology of the 1950s and early 1960s, Canguilhem identified a shift in the epistemology of biology. The definition of life as organization, Canguilhem claimed in 1966, lost ground to a new conception: life as information. Today, this conception has not been totally discredited, to be sure, but its limits have nonetheless become apparent. The accumulation of genomic information has not led to immediate biological insight. The very epistemic status of genomic information is currently shifting from an end to a means of research: in post-genomic biology genome sequences are used as giant reference tools. Research, moreover, increasingly pays attention to complex interactions across multiple scales. The past decade, finally, has witnessed an intensification of the experimental bent of biological inquiry.

Reflecting on the implications of the conceptualization of life as information, Canguilhem was referring to a series of early successes in the endeavor of molecular biology. He was not referring to a particular science when he claimed that mankind makes mistakes when it chooses the wrong spot for receiving the kind of knowledge it is after. Clearly, that knowledge is only partially to be found by way of the molecularization of life. Today, biologists are experimenting with a broad range of spots so as to turn genomic information into biological knowledge. Contemporary inflections of the biologization of life are nothing but an attempt to move things around, once again, in a different manner, so as to flourish and survive. History has moved on, and history will continue to move on – and so should our inquiries. Nonetheless, Canguilhem’s project remains relevant if it is taken as what it was meant to be: a reviving invitation to investigate the unexpected emergence of objects and the unpredictable reconfiguration of forms as they assemble into an ever-shifting understanding of life.

