# Time / Transcending the Earthly Condition / Tracking Time and the Quest for Know-how / Transforming Time / Trading Time / Traversing Futures / 126 Theory, Culture & Society 23(2–3)

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Time

Barbara Adam

Abstract The article argues that the relationship to time is at the root of what makes us human and that culture arises with and from efforts to transcend death, change and the rhythmicity of the physical environment. Time can be tracked through systems of time measurement and later transformed from a process of nature into clock time, a time to human design that is abstracted from context and content. In this form time can be traded with all other times. With contemporary science and new information and communications technologies, which operate in a new all-encompassing temporal spectrum that extends from nanoseconds to millennia, clock time is no longer appropriate to the associated present-oriented transactions and futures are traversed in the dual sense of the word. By historically locating temporal relations, the article provides both a new understanding of socio-cultural relations and a perspective on social change.

Keywords time transcendence, time tracking, time transformation, time trading, time traversal

ime is about god and the universe, life and death, knowledge practices and the human condition. The relationship to time is at the very root of what makes us human. All that we recognize as culture arises with and from efforts to transcend the key delimitations of human existence: death, change and the rhythmicity of the physical environment. Once finitude is tempered by cultural means (positing an afterlife, heroism, myths, for example) new ways to engage with change, ephemerality and rhythmicity (such as the arts, agriculture and architecture) can flourish. Time can be tracked through systems of time measurement and later transformed from a process of nature into a time of human design with new characteristics that vastly extend the power of control at the individual and collective, national and international level. This human machine-time of the West is not only traded globally but used for colonizing purposes, defining in and out groups, distinguishing between the developed, developing and ‘non-developed’ world, designating some activities as productive while rendering others invisible. This by now naturalized machine-time, however, sits uneasily with the lived times of everyday life, the reproductive, sustaining and caring work that is primarily the domain of women across the world, and the processes of nature that are transformed by the temporal imposition and colonization. Moreover, ossified in machine form, clock-time is no longer adaptable to the temporal relations that emerge with contemporary science and communication technologies, and operate in the all-encompassing temporal spectrum, which ranges from nanoseconds to millennia, from the speed of light to eternity. As knowledge practices, clock-time relations need to be appreciated as a source of both the major successes and excesses, the power and the failure of the contemporary, globalized, interdependency. This is nowhere more visible than in approaches to the future, futures that are traversed in the dual sense of travelled and colonized on the one hand and negated, spoilt and polluted for successor generations on the other. Neither the dominant Western institutions nor the West’s conceptual tools are any longer appropriate to the conditions of their making. The focus on time and temporal relations can provide us with a different historical perspective, and has the potential to identify openings for change (Adam, 2004).

## Transcending the Earthly Condition

Culture is inescapably tied to the human relationship to time: to death and the boundedness of human existence, to change, transience, ephemerality and contingence, and to the rhythmicity of the physical and living environment. As the archaeologist Christopher Gosden (1994: 9) assures us, in the past 3.5 million years of known human existence, cultural rhythms have been distinct from natural rhythms. Death has not merely been endured but pondered and related to, finitude ritualized and transcended. Confronted with impermanence, humans have created permanence by a variety of means: through burial and ritual, things and representations, myth and hero-worship, belief systems and institutions. With burial of their dead our earliest ancestors transcended their allotted time on earth. Burial ensured the safe journey to the world of ancestors and created social continuity across generations. Hero worship, in contrast, made life worth living. It extended a person’s existence beyond their grave, their deeds to be sung and told for many generations, their lives elevated as shining examples to their successors. With the production of artefacts knowledge was not just objectified and externalized but it survived into the following generations, thus loosening the dependence on copresence for knowledge to circulate. Many of these cultural constructions and creations endured for tens of thousands of years to be marvelled at by us today: burial chambers and stone circles, tools and pottery, cave paintings and written texts, jewellery and mathematical spheres carved from stone. Belief systems, finally, provided comforting responses to ontological fears and insecurities while political institutions ensured the continuity of the collective beyond the bounded existence of its individual members. It is important to note, however, that while the relation to finitude is a cultural universal, the forms it takes are culturally and historically unique.

Equally, there are many ways to respond to the transience, ephemerality and contingency of human existence, numerous means to impose a socio-cultural will on change processes of the cosmos, nature and the body. One of these responses is to make time stand still. Here too, we need to recognize that both the meaning and the forms this takes differ significantly with the particular practices employed, and the historical periods within which they are enacted. As the historian of religion Mircea Eliade (1989/1949) explains, myth and ritual, for example, are primary means to arrest time. In their performance the original deed or decree is enacted in the present and the meaning recreated and preserved in its original form. Through its performance the enfolded past is activated and revealed, ab origine, that is, true to the beginning. Another way of making time stand still relates to the externalization of knowledge through representation, which holds in unchanging form what is moving, changing and interconnected. Thus, for example, art externalizes and fixes beliefs, experiences, expectations, fears and hopes in a form that can be shared (as well as variably interpreted) by many people across generations. Once objectified and therefore stabilized, the artistic creation not only becomes a source for reflection and understanding, but also a way of passing on culture without the need for either the co-presence or even the existence of those who did the communicating. It is a way of accumulating wisdom outside the temporal, finite body and beyond the knowledge of individual persons. Written language shares with art the principal temporal relations of fixing and stabilizing what is transient and ephemeral through the externalization, disembodiment and decontextualization of knowledge.

Not only myth, ritual and art, but also some of the earliest forms of monumental architecture can be viewed as expressions of the human endeavour to create stability and permanence on the one hand and as a quest for the meaning of existence, origin and destiny on the other. Like its temporal counterparts, monumental architecture defines the world from the human centre, provides a place for human beings in the scheme of nature, and offers security and continuity for communal life. We can conjecture that megaliths, for example, enabled Neolithic peoples to maintain contact with that which transcended their own being, that the circular form of these buildings directed attention to a metaphysical source of being. According to the architect Keith Critchlow (1979: 151), the circular structure of megalithic temples is of symbolic significance as the circle is widely recognized as the most sacred representation.

The full circle expresses undifferentiated space and a totality of time. Accordingly, the completed circle has to be seen as a chosen tactic to unify the one with the whole and to gather up, in the now, the whole of time.

The time of the circle, therefore, signifies not the eternal round of seasonal activity, as some social scientists maintain who differentiate between traditional cyclical and modern historical societies. Rather, it constitutes an active creation of eternity in the present. In this enfolding of the origin, we may surmise, lies the power of the temporally extended collective and the source of all future possibilities. Archaic practices that made time stand still thus need to be recognized as creative acts of time transcendence, as collective means to overcome the threat of non-existence, finitude and transience. Equally, other cultural practices, ranging from ancient myths and rituals to modern religions and institutions, are means to transcend the times of earthly existence. Ancient myths from across the known world tell about humanity’s efforts to impose meaning on the transience and finitude of existence, commenting on the role of humans in the wider scheme of things, explaining origin and destiny. As such they provide a window on the world beyond embodied existence, the netherworld from which individuals were thought to emerge and to which they would return after death. They open up a world of gods where fate and fortune are decided. They posit a golden time before the time of earthly toil, a paradise lost due to misfortune or misconduct. Thus, in their quest to transcend finitude, humans have created a world of immortality and permanence, which locates them in a wider scheme of nature, the cosmos and the spirit world of gods.

## Tracking Time and the Quest for Know-how

Alongside efforts to transcend earthly time there developed a multitude of means to track time, to get to know it in its cyclical repetitions on the one hand and its directional processes on the other. This tracking of time involved the vast time scales of gods and the cosmos, the life-span of beings and things, seasonal patterns, even subdivisions of the day and very short time spans such as the beat of a human heart. To give an example, the traditional calendar system of India had subdivisions in the 24-hour system, equivalent to clock-time units of 48 and 24 minutes, 48 and 24 seconds, right down to fractions of seconds. On the other end of the temporal scale, it operated with huge amounts of astronomical time that related to the life of Brahma: one hour in the life of Brahma equals 8.76 million human years (Lippincott et al., 1999: 42–8). In such time-tracking systems the year is just one small unit in the wider scheme of divine intent, cosmic rhythms and cultural efforts to name, count and number temporal and rhythmic processes.

To know and name that which transcends human being was to get closer to the divine, to achieve a measure of predictability in the face of the unknown, and to gain a sense of power over that which functions outside human control. Often, the tracking of time has been rooted in the capacity to identify patterns associated with difference: light and dark, day and night, summer and winter, hot and cold, dry and wet, periods of drought and flooding, fertility and dormancy, or cycles of growth and decay, life and death, presence and absence. The ability to count, name, number and quantify change processes and repetitions facilitates predictability of the seemingly unpredictable. It allows for anticipation and planning. Thus, time reckoning, the getting to know temporal processes and rhythmic patterns, is also knowledge for practical use. It is know-how knowledge for the structuring, ordering, synchronizing and regulating of social life. Moreover, it is knowledge that engenders a sense of ownership and control. As such, time tracking produces not only knowledge that locates humans in the wider scheme of things but also results in useful know-how, that is, in-order-to knowledge for the maintenance and enhancement of power, be this a sovereign’s, the church’s or an employer’s power.

Not surprisingly, therefore, calendars, as the most complex of time-tracking systems, were first developed at the behest of sovereigns and religious leaders. As the historian David Landes explains with reference to ancient China, knowledge of temporal patterns and the establishment of calendar systems was the exclusive prerogative of the sovereign.

Knowledge of the right time and season was power, for it was this knowledge that governed both the acts of everyday life and decisions of state. Each emperor inaugurated his reign with the promulgation of his calendar, often different from the one that had preceded it. His court astronomers were the only persons who were permitted in principle to use time keeping and astronomical instruments or to engage in astronomical study. His time was China’s time. (Landes, 1983: 33)

Calendar systems date back to ancient times and have taken many different forms. Some of the earliest known systems prioritized lunar patterns over solar ones, while others, like the Mayan calendar (and that of its Mesoamerican predecessors), integrated not just the incompatible movements of moon, sun and Venus but combined these with ritual cycles – each important in their own right and in their relation to all the other cycles (Adam, 2004: 108–10; Aveni, 1980; Thompson, 1974). This hugely complex system allowed the keepers of time to determine festival periods, auspicious and unlucky days as well as right and wrong times for specified activities. It enabled them to forecast eclipses, conceived as periods of great danger, and it legitimated them as keepers of a collective memory. In this calendar system, which operated routinely with dates and numbers extending to five digits and more, deities and heavenly bodies, religion and history, daily practice and mythical past were brought into a coherent whole. Here, the sacred was implicated in the profane and vice versa. The explicated always included that which was not the explicit focus of attention. Physical phenomena were suffused with the spirit world of deities and demons. Ritual practice was implicated in bureaucratic regulation. Administrative practices were in tune with ritual prerequisites. In their mutual implication, all the components of this multiplex time-reckoning system constituted the historically and contextually unique cultural system.

Multiplex time-tracking systems, such as the ones mentioned above, are not easily encompassed by contemporary social science approaches to social time and calendar systems, such as Eviator Zerubavel’s Hidden Rhythms and The Seven-day Cycle. Much of this contemporary work is rooted in Émile Durkheim’s The Elementary Forms of Religious Life. In that treatise Durkheim (1971/1912: 23) suggested that: ‘A calendar expresses the rhythm of the collective activities, while at the same time its function is to assure regularity.’ Clearly, from the examples above we can see that social coordination, synchronization and temporal regulation need to be located in a temporal framework that transcends the specific society, in something bigger than the society that is employing temporal know-how to organize its life in time and space. Neither the similarities nor the differences in calendar systems, past and present, across the world, we can safely insist, are reducible to representations of difference in social organization and social function. The sociologist Norbert Elias took an approach that deviated from the functionalist perspectives on time reckoning systems when he focused on the capacity to integrate incompatible elements.

The calendar’s unrepeatable succession of numbered years symbolically represents the unrepeatable succession of social and natural events. It thus serves as a means of orientation in the great continuum of change which is at once the natural and the social world. (Elias, 1992: 6)

Elias’s work directs us to the importance of the synthesizing process, which he suggests is a precondition to any kind of time reckoning.

In summary to this brief sketch of time tracking we can say that affordances, power and performance rather than function; complexity and multiplicity rather than antinomy; implication and integration rather than cultural evolution, sequence and hierarchy would be some of the more appropriate key concepts to understand the tracking of time and its associated know-how that affords owners of this knowledge power and a certain measure of control over the uncontrollable temporality of existence. In addition, we need to recognize that any given social organization is always embedded in a wider universe of meaning that fundamentally transcends the system of its creation. And, finally, it is important to note that a key achievement of time-tracking systems was the coming to terms with variability and the capacity to integrate incompatible elements of cosmos, nature, culture and spirit world. This integrating function has been largely dropped in the clockbased time-reckoning system. With clock-time the tie with temporality, contextuality and variation has been severed and contingent rhythmicity replaced with a decontextualized, invariable machine-time. It is this shaping of time to human design that we turn to next.

## Transforming Time

Clock-time, which was developed in Europe during the 14th century, no longer tracks and synthesizes time of the natural and social environment but produces instead a time that is independent from those processes: clock-time is applicable anywhere, any time. Context no longer plays a role. Variable hours, which changed with the seasons – in the northern hemisphere, short hours in winter and long ones in the summer; vice versa in the southern hemisphere – are replaced by invariable hours. The clock tells the same hour irrespective whether it is night or day, summer or winter, in the southern or northern hemisphere. Invariability, rather than the integration of fundamental variance is the goal: variance means the clock is going wrong. Standardization, quantification and universalization are its singular achievements. Clock-time is ready for service anywhere on earth and beyond, ready to measure time and structure the day, whatever the field of application. The ease with which clock-time can be applied anywhere has huge advantages compared to time-reckoning systems that were weathersensitive, such as the water clock that froze up in cold weather, time-tracking technologies that were dependent on daylight such as sun dials, or time-measuring devices that required (constant and/or consistent) maintenance and attendance, such as hour-glasses and candles. With the clock, time keeping ceased to be a chore or problem and became instead a modern, taken-for-granted convenience.

The fact that this machine-time no longer resembles any of the temporalities of existence, that is, change process, cycles of repetition with variance and rhythmicity, initially posed only minor problems. When the invariable time of the clock is superimposed on living systems, it tends to be the living systems that are required to adapt to the machine-time rather than the other way around. In other words, systems marked by variability and imprecision are asked to orient to decontextualized, invariable precision. Thus, for example, people no longer work during the hours of daylight but their working day (with slight historical and contextual variations) extends over a predetermined, mostly fixed, number of hours. Schools start at the same time throughout the year. Cows are milked to a clock-based schedule. To increase their productivity, chickens have their daylight artificially extended to fit the standard day. To enable all-night harvesting, combine harvesters are equipped with floodlights and their drivers paid ‘overtime’ for the time that exceeds their standard working day. The cumulative effects of these impositions, however, have begun to register on the health of people and the sustainability of their environments.

There is considerable agreement among time scholars about the institutional root of this particular rationalization of time. Among others, the historian Jacques Le Goff (1980), the philosopher Lewis Mumford (1955/1934), the geographer Nigel Thrift (1988) and sociologists Max Weber (1989/1904–5) and Eviatar Zerubavel (1981, 1985) have detailed the slow development of the clock from its early application in the Christian monasteries, where the time discipline was employed to better serve God, to today where it has become an unquestioned, naturalized system of social organization that has been exported across the world as the standard against which all other systems are measured and found wanting. The creation of rationalized time, some of these scholars argue, goes some way to explain the shift in global power from East to West and South to North.

## Trading Time

It is particularly in its association with money that clock-time has become the precondition for industrialization and capitalist development, which today constitutes both promise and curse for non-industrialized cultures as well as societies structured and organized on the basis of different temporal principles. In industrialized societies, time and money are mentioned in the same breath: time is money. Yet this has not always been the case; the relation has not always been, and is not everywhere understood, like this.

Time used to (and in many societies still does) belong to the gods and God/Allah. As such it could not be traded because trade in goods that do not belong to you is theft – ‘usury’ in the words of the Bible. In his seminal The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism Max Weber details the shift in understanding of time from God’s gift to commodity, a change in perception and practice that was anything but direct or intended: far from it. Initially directed to the service of God, the rationalization of time in the monasteries was adapted for the ascetic use of Protestants; it was to ensure the salvation of their souls. By the time the religious fervour had begun to fade, making room for pure capitalist accumulation to flourish, the idea that time was money had been set and adopted as norm, the associated practices entrenched, and other temporal orientations and structures de-legitimized. The new knowledge practice had been naturalized, other knowledge practices forgotten, displaced and negated.

When time is money you pay and get paid interest for loans. Efficiency and profitability are linked to achieving maximum output in the minimum time expended. And, as Karl Marx theorized in Capital (1976/1867), the fastest throughput and shortest possible capital outlay are part and parcel of that commodification of time. Hence, when time is money faster is better. Speed is valorized as an unquestioned and unquestionable goal. Naturalized as common sense, it overshadows other considerations. It does this not just in the globalized world of work but in all other spheres of social interaction that have been penetrated by this ethos.

With information and communications technologies (ICT) time compression has reached its zenith: succession and duration have been replaced by seeming instantaneity and simultaneity. Duration has been compressed to zero, elevating human capacity to that of extraterrestrial beings, that is, to be everywhere at once and nowhere in particular. With that move the present is extended spatially to encircle the earth. For those with access to ICT, and those implicated in its effects, the present has been globalized and, as Virilio (1995) points out, intensity has taken over from ‘extensity’, bringing with it the possibility of concerted action in ‘real time’. From an economic perspective, therefore, communication at the speed of light is the pinnacle of efficiency.

The economic time values, associated with the trade in time and inescapably tied to the creation of clock-time, have been exported across the world and imposed as globally standardized norm irrespective of their suitability to specific contexts, local conditions and traditions. Cultural resistance to this norm is equated with backwardness. Associated inequities are silenced, their effects rendered invisible. While clock-time dominates the world of work and the global economy, the great majority of the world’s people function in the shadows of the time economy of money. Children and the elderly, the unemployed, carers the world over and subsistence farmers of the majority world inhabit the shadowlands of un- and undervalued time. Women dwell there in unequal numbers. Their time does not register on the radar of commodified time. Their work is not accorded value in the capitalist scheme of things. Rather, it is rendered invisible. As ‘unproductive’ work it is relegated to the shadow of capitalist production, beyond reach and concern (Adam, 2002, 2004: 123–48).

The quest to control time is central to understanding some of these historical changes and developments in temporal relations. As I have suggested above, efforts in the transcendence, tracking and trading of time have smoothed some of the edges of the terror of non-existence. These strategies have provided a semblance of individual and collective control: continuity in the face of finitude, permanence in the face of transience and ephemerality, certainty and security in the face of indeterminacy. The utilization of clock-time for economic purposes, however, provided the ultimate tool for social control. The clock-time-based shift from quality to quantity and from temporality to space (that is, time as measurable length) in particular, has enhanced control not just over processes of production and the organization of work but also over social life more generally. This control is intimately tied to the standardization and rationalization of time into a linear process along whose axis causal events can be plotted on the one hand and to the transformation of time from God’s gift to economic, tradable resource on the other.

However, as every aspect of temporal existence has come to be redefined from the industrial time perspective and restructured accordingly, so the increasingly dramatic effects of that ‘mastery’ have evaded control. Thus, for example, with the development of networked electronic information technologies that operate at near the speed of light the pre-conditions for temporal control have been eliminated. Cause, sequence, linearity and predictability have been swept away in the quest for the ultimate compression of time: the combination of instantaneity and simultaneity or, to put it differently, information transfer that is instantaneously dispersed across space has been achieved at the expense of hundreds of years of advancements in efforts to control the uncontrollable and predict the unpredictable. In the potential instantaneity and simultaneity of information transfer, therefore, new frontiers of control needed to be opened up for exploitation. One of these new frontiers is the future.

## Traversing Futures

Of course this new frontier is not really new. The future has been exploited since the Middle Ages when merchants, and especially global traders, needed to calculate their profits and losses for extended periods. With trade ships at sea for months and even years at a time, merchants begun to trade not just goods but the promise of goods; and from that period onwards the trade in futures became part and parcel of the western, capitalist economic system. The trade in futures buys and sells futures for the benefit of the present, for profit in the here and now.

A similar position is taken in another key feature of the economic system, the discounting of the future. Since all profit is established on the basis of its relevance to the present, future events decrease in value proportional to the temporal distances involved. They are discounted to establish their value in, for and to the present. While the system of discounting can be justified for the trade of goods, it becomes highly problematic for the trade in ‘bads’, to use Ulrich Beck’s (1999) term, when it is applied, for example, to environmental problems such as pollution. In this case the standardized economic practice of discounting the future means that a problem that can be calculated to constitute £1 million of trouble in 100 years time can be rendered harmless by this process: discounted, it is no problem worth talking about for us now, in the present.

It is worth noting that future generations, and all other recipients of the eventual effects of that exploitation, do not feature in economic relations to the future such as the trade in and discounting of futures. Just as the work of the majority of the world’s people is air-brushed out of the globalized capitalist system of exchange, so the impact on future generations and fellow species is rendered invisible and irrelevant by the temporal strategies that form an integral part of the modern capitalist way of doing business and playing the global market. From the above we can glean that in industrial societies today the present is transcended and the future as last frontier colonized with enduring things, belief systems and institutions, with cultural and technological products, with insurance and economic practices. As such, the future is pursued, prospected, produced, polluted. It is thus traversed in the dual sense of being ‘travelled’ and negated.

If we now return to the temporal relations we had discussed in the earlier parts of the article, a number of issues come to the fore. Thus, for example, we note that the boundedness of human existence is today transcended as never before. Chemical pollution has reached not just every species in every place on earth but cumulates in fatty tissue and increases with every generation. The impact of nuclear power extends for millennia hence, while genetic engineering taps into the beginning of time to produce effects for an open-ended future, the temporal equivalent of forever. Furthermore, unlike the time transcendence of ancient forebears, the industrial extension into the future is characterized by parasitical borrowing from the future, by prospecting and plundering it for use and benefit in the present without regard to time-space distantiated effects, that is, globalized impacts now and in the future. By depending on science as primary knowledge base and economics as ultimate legitimator of action,

## 126 Theory, Culture & Society 23(2–3)

finally, our predecessors’ enormous gains in time transcendence and time tracking know-how have been sacrificed for a radical present orientation and the associated abdication of all responsibility for latent, time-space distantiated impacts that will arise as symptoms somewhere and/or some time in the future. Much in our knowledge base and dominant socioeconomic practices needs to be changed, therefore, before some of that ground can be regained and new openings can be identified for temporal relations that are both appropriate to the contemporary condition and mindful of others’ futures.

