# The Possibility of Translation / I / II / III

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# The Possibility of Translation

Saranindranath Tagore

Keywords Benjamin, Frege, Kant, Lyotard, Tagore, translation

## I

I wish to retrieve the sense of Kant’s (1997) use of the notion of possibility in order to construct in form a Kantian argument in the service of responding to the question of how translation is possible. Kant’s transcendental program can be seen as a vast philosophical gesture of securing the foundations of three terrains of knowledge: mathematics, natural science and metaphysics. Kant’s brilliant strategy, as is well known, resting on the logic of transcendental arguments, enfolded these disciplines within a phenomenology of respect, and paying heed to Hume’s critique, attempted to secure a clearing in which to ground the theoretical triad. The three issues in turn were economized in the single general question of how synthetic a priori propositions are possible. Kant’s sense of possibility tuned to a program of transcendental justification did not assume skepticism at the outset; he worked backwards in order to articulate the kind of philosophical space necessary to justify the system of knowledge, in the face of the skeptical attack. It is this sense of possibility that I invoke in my remarks.

I ask a question textured by the Kantian nuance: how is translation possible? Accordingly, I will take up two tasks. First, I will retrieve two positions (one modern and one postmodern) that attack the ontology of translation. Second, following a Kantian strategy, beginning from a phenomenology of respect, I will articulate the conditions that would justify the respect, which will also act as interventions in modern and postmodern discourses.

The skeptical attack on the possibility of translation may be formulated in this way: the implications of modernity and postmodernity limn a deep skepticism toward the possibility of translation. Let me take up the two positions in turn. For the sake of convenience, I consider Lyotard and Rorty, the latter though not a member of the postmodern collective nonetheless has Lyotardian sympathies. Lyotard attacks the commensurating drive of enlightenment (modern) narratives on the grounds that universalizing discourses silence phrases that cannot be uttered in the vocabulary of the metalanguage. This Lyotardian (1988) position can be extracted from his seemingly descriptive report in The Postmodern Condition (1984) and also from the more normatively driven analysis of the differend. The eliding of metalanguage has resonance for the problem of translation when it is seen in tandem with postcolonial discussion of translational violence. As Spivak (2000: 399–400) has pointed out, metalinguistic transfer creates a leveling process where ‘the literature by a woman in Palestine begins to resemble, in the level of its prose, something by a man in Taiwan’. Returning to the postmodernism of Lyotard, the privileging of the fragment with its Kuhnian resonance, though laudable in its implied critique of translational hegemony, unfortunately and perhaps ironically assumes a skeptical posture toward the possibility of translation. The Rortian (1989) position concerning translation, bearing resemblance to Lyotard’s unhappiness with metaconstructs, is implied in his discussion of comparative philosophy. For Rorty, the act of comparing philosophical traditions across cultures privileges a conceptual framework and attempts to interpret philosophical traditions from the privileged perspective. Such a move, for Rorty, would violate the intrinsic shape of philosophical alterity. If acts of comparison are parasitic on acts of translation – in this case primarily philosophical frameworks and nominally language – one can see that for Rorty, like Lyotard, translation can overcome its own problem only through the gestures of violence, thus violating its task.

Postmodernity emerges as a witnessing and a critiquing moment in the movement of modernity. It wishes to salvage the plural from what it takes to be the reductive posture of modernity. The critique of modernity implies the powerful point that the reductive drive for commensuration cannot found the ontology of translation. Thus emerges the disturbing conclusion that neither the narrative of commensuration nor the distillation of fragments can provide the awning under which the truth of translation can rest. In other words, the modern and the postmodern conditions provide precisely the skepticism that can motivate a transcendental argument on behalf of the possibility of translation.

## II

Rabindranath Tagore’s novel Noukadubi was translated into English by J.G. Drummond and was published as The Wreck by Macmillan in 1921. A year earlier Tagore wrote a letter to Drummond where he made the following observation:

I do not believe in a literal translation, especially when the languages of the original and that of the translation are essentially different. The words of the one language may have their synonyms in the other carrying the same meanings, but their associations are in most cases different. And the suggestions and flavour contained in these associations are more important in literature than mere meanings.

I offer two other inscriptions that articulate the difference between two levels of translatability. First, Walter Benjamin (1968: 78):

Fidelity in the translation of individual words can almost never fully reproduce the meaning they have in the original. For sense in its poetic significance is limited to meaning, but derives from the connotations conveyed by the word chosen to express it.

Second, Frege (1980: 61):

We can . . . recognize three levels of difference between words, expressions, or whole sentences. The differences may concern at most ideas, or the sense but not the reference, or finally, the reference as well. With respect to the first level, it is to be noted that, on account, of the uncertain connection of ideas with words, a difference may hold for one person, which another does not find. The difference between a translation and the original text should properly not overstep the first level. To the possible differences here belong also the colouring and shading which poetic eloquence seeks to give to the sense. Such colouring and shading are not objective, and must be evoked by each hearer and reader according to the hints of the poet or the speaker.

I consider one example to substantiate the dual layer of translatability being evoked by Tagore, Benjamin and Frege. Tagore writes these lines: ‘setha¯ singhada¯re ba¯je din-abasa¯ner raginı¯/ja¯r murchona¯i mesha¯ e janmer ja¯ kichu sundar.’ Paraphrasing the idea, we can offer the following literal approximation: in the spiraling notes of the raga of day-end is mixed everything that is beautiful of this birth. The conception of a raga is culturally bound just as the meaning of, say, contrapuntal development can resonate only in the context of European art music. Given the chrono-sensitive nature of ragas, for the initiated the name of the oft-performed Marwa immediately arises when thinking of music for the moments when the day is coming to an end. A whole universe of associations, musical and extra-musical, is contained in that name: Marwa.

The phrase ‘din-abasa¯ner raginı¯’ rubs against the limits of translatability. Translational symmetry cannot be obtained at the surface level precisely because such symmetry cannot be found at the level of Tagore’s ‘associations’, Benjamin’s ‘connotations and Frege’s ‘colourings and shadings’, or what can be called the cultural depths of language. Postmodern approaches to the question of translation valorize this limit, whereas modernity we can recognize, thanks to postmodern interventions, effaces the limit. The effacement of the limit, through the mediation of a metalanguage, in postcolonial terms, is constitutive of translational violence.

## III

How, then, is translation possible?

Cultural meaning that at least some of the time is culturally bound constitutes the deeper layer of the translational doublet. The sense of Marwa is a localized meaning in that it resists universalization through an act of translation. From a Lyotardian– Rortian perspective, the intensity of the local is such that any act of translation would cause violence to the word, the sentence, the text. In Spivak’s reckoning, as noted earlier, the uncritical universalization through the hegemonic deployment of a metalanguage implicit in many acts of translation, especially from postcolonial languages to metropolitan languages, produces a leveling effect. The postcolonial corrective to what I am dubbing the Lyotardian view concerning the impossibility of translation calls for (at least in Spivak) an intimate access to the cultural codes embedded in the original text. Thus we may add the postcolonial posture to the earlier voices calling for a double-decked ontology of the text. Why access culture if the surface is sufficient? Translation of textual surfaces through the sieve of a legitimating metalanguage (or narrative) leads precisely to the symptom of constituting false identities across textual regions.

The possibility of translation hinges on the condition that translation of culture is causally anterior to translation of language. Just as linguistic translation ranges over words, cultural translation summons translational objects where ‘object’ stands in for any variable that gathers its meaning from its embedded cultural use in the deeper sense of a Heideggerian zuhanden. Heidegger (1971) perceived with great force that an ontology founded on phenomenological description cannot see objects merely as things but must call into presence the expanding circle of cultural and existential significance. Thus the peasant shoes painted by Van Gogh emerge as existential intensities and not merely as material things (vorhanden). Cultural translation is effected when these intensities develop in zones of cultural alterities. Returning to the earlier musical example, the translatability of Marwa hinges upon the cultivation of its existential intensity in the cultural base of the target language. The limits of translation cannot be obliterated but surely can be pushed backwards in the cross-cultural fertilization of translational objects.

Foucault once characterized modernity in terms of an attitude, a mode of a cultural self-representation originating in the enlightenment; similarly, Lyotard’s postmodern incredulity can only be deciphered as an attitude defining a culture’s self-representation (Rabinow, 1984). The normative and strategic directions of both these cultural attitudes make translation impossible. The possibility of translation receives care within a cultural attitude that resists alterity from being reified in a final closure. Such an attitude constructs a mode of cultural being that continuously seeks to narrow the gap between the two layers of the translational doublet. It must be noted that the seeking of unity in translational terms does not amount to the making of hybrid forms (fusion music is an example) but wants to preserve difference and as difference disturb the reified identities of modernity. However, again in translational terms, disturbance through the welcoming of difference, unlike postmodern rupture, in making for the possibility of translation serves the cause of unity without using the services of a metalinguistic hegemon. The gap between language and culture can perhaps never be closed in the folds of a utopia making translation completely transparent. The translational attitude, perched between the modern and the postmodern, can, nonetheless, answer the Kantian question, as my account has sketched, of how translation is possible. Kant’s respect for the epistemic triad and his transcendental justification of that respect concern the edifice of theoretical reason. The critique of translation, considering its limit and scope, implicates the normative reaches of culture. Thus, understandably, the translational attitude forms the rudiments of a critique of culture and addresses what I (2002) have elsewhere called an ethics of translation. Indeed, the translational attitude can de developed as an ethical trope of globalization, but that is the matter for another moment of reflection.

