# Discipline / Dimensions of Discipline / Bodies of Knowledge / The State and the Curriculum / Globalization / Conclusion: The University of Postdisciplinarity

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Discipline

Bryan S. Turner

Abstract There are broadly five interconnected meanings of the noun ‘discipline’. Disciplina were instructions to disciples, and hence a branch of instruction or department of knowledge. This religious context provided the modern educational notion of a ‘body of knowledge’, or a discipline such as sociology or economics. We can define discipline as a body of knowledge and knowledge for the body, because the training of the mind has inevitably involved a training of the body. Second, it signified a method of training or instruction in a body of knowledge. Discipline had an important military connection involving drill, practice in the use of weapons. Third, there is an ecclesiastical meaning referring to a system of rules by which order is maintained in a church. It included the use of penal methods to achieve obedience. To discipline is to chastise. Fourth, to discipline is to bring about obedience through various forms of punishment; it is a means of correction. Finally there is a rare use of the term to describe a medical regimen in which ‘doctor’s orders’ brings about a discipline of the patient. In contemporary society, there is, following the work of Michel Foucault, the notion of increasing personal regulation resulting in a ‘disciplinary society’ or a society based upon carceral institutions.

Keywords carceral, disciplinarity, postdisciplinarity, postmodernity

## Dimensions of Discipline

The social importance of discipline was emphasized by Max Weber in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1930/2002). In his studies of asceticism he noted the significance of discipline for the production of personalities and life orders that have an affinity with the discipline of the labour force in capitalism. However, it was Michel Foucault (1977) who demonstrated how discipline was connected to the detailed regulation of the body in various forms of governmentality. The discipline of the body is a necessary condition for the achievement of a technology of the self, and the cultivation of the self is the precondition of education. Within a traditional curriculum, a discipline may be defined as an organized perspective on phenomena that is sustained by academic training or the disciplining of mind. Like the related notions of cultivation and culture, an academic discipline requires regulatory practices, and a rhetoric of competence, if a specific mentality is to be sustained over time among a community of scholars. Disciplines of mind and body within a monastic context were technologies of the soul. In some cultures, such as Buddhism, these intellectual or spiritual disciplines more explicitly involve the disciplining of bodies.

## Bodies of Knowledge

In terms of a body of knowledge, the university curriculum was organized around a number of foundational disciplines. In medieval systems of learning, the trivium formed the basic structure of the curriculum as a plan of study. Conflicts within the curriculum have reflected wider battles in society as a whole. Kant’s analysis of the relationship between theology and philosophy in his The Conflict of the Faculties (1992) reflected the struggle between the Enlightenment and the Church over the authority of reason and revelation.

Disciplinary boundaries in modern systems of knowledge and information are changing rapidly under the impact of new information technologies, the postmodernization of culture, and above all the changing relationship between the university, the national culture and the nation-state. These social and technological changes are in turn features of the emergence of a global economy and the globalization of culture. We are moving into an environment of postdisciplinarity that corresponds to postmodernity. In this educational context, the authority of disciplines is breaking down and there is a fragmentation of knowledge. The erosion of disciplinary authority has its direct professional consequence in the decline of professorial power in university departments. Notions of overarching paradigms and binding epistemology are now out of fashion.

J.-F. Lyotard’s The Postmodern Condition (1984), Marshall McLuhan’s Understanding Media (1964) and Daniel Bell’s The Coming of Post-industrial Society (1974) were reports on the state of knowledge in the context of new media of communication. Lyotard’s study, which was commissioned by the Conseil des Universités of the government of Quebec, was influential as a marker of the arrival of postmodern knowledge as a consequence of computerization. McLuhan’s educational publication on the impact of the new media on pedagogy, which was developed for the National Association of Education Broadcasters and US Office of Education 1959–1960, was equally revolutionary. The digital cultures of the post-industrial world no longer have the same level of meaningful stability as print cultures. McLuhan’s research suggested that different technologies of communication required different forms of education and training, producing different technologies of the self. The creation of e-knowledge requires flexibility rather than hierarchy and discipline.

## The State and the Curriculum

The rise and fall of disciplines have often been produced by changes in the national culture. The cultivation of folk studies, ethnography and literature was an effect of nation-state consolidation, when political elites sought legitimacy in tradition, or more precisely in the ‘invention of tradition’. At various stages in the rise of nationalism, the development of certain disciplines has been a necessary foundation for the articulation of a national Geist. Writing of culture as the best that can be thought in a society in 1867, Mathew Arnold was in Culture and Anarchy (1969) able to assume the moral authority of English high culture and the role of the intellectual as its spokesman and defender. High culture existed to discipline the nation. The Arnoldian vision of English education assumed that a strong national culture required a powerful state to impose its hegemonic force at home and abroad. In a similar fashion, Lord Macaulay’s educational Minute of 1835 expressed perfectly the self-confidence of an imperial system. Macaulay asserted that one shelf of any European library was worth the entire native literature of India and Arabia. His Minute intitially dismissed Sanskrit from the public domain.

Dictionaries are important in establishing a national project. In the Netherlands, van Dale’s Groot Woordenboek der Nederlandse Taal of 1864, and subsequent editions, was important in defining national boundaries. However, the fragmentation of modern cultures and the growing hybridity of national traditions have reinforced the feeling among public intellectuals not only that there are no final vocabularies, but that all perspectives are partial. The university has become partially disconnected from any national project; it merely serves the economy. The rise of multiculturalism has provoked a significant detachment or decentring from an inherited national culture. Modern university academics may well experience more connection with the lifestyle and taste of youth movements and popular culture than with an establishment. The very idea of a national disciplinary unity is now questioned. The intellectual context of English culture in relation to the rest of the world has changed radically since Arnold’s day, and these changes impact significantly on a cluster of interrelated roles and institutions, in particular the state, the university, the intellectual and disciplines.

Disciplines are artificial constructs; they are not naturally occurring intellectual divisions that might refer to divisions of the mind. They are socially constructed perspectives constituting a particular slice of reality and as such they can always be transformed, relocated or destroyed. With the erosion of religious faith and the decline of training for the priesthood, Christian theology has been partly converted into religious studies, which itself is often seen to be a version of cultural studies. Disciplines can also be merged or integrated with related fields to construct, for example, interdisciplinary studies. While Soviet Studies has largely disappeared from the university system, European Studies is a growing area of teaching and research. Women’s Studies, while often claimed by radical feminists to be a discipline, is in fact a multidisciplinary area of studies rather like the social sciences. Terrorism Studies has emerged since the 9/11 terrorist attacks in New York.

## Globalization

The debate about postmodern methods has indicated a significant context of postmodernization, namely the tensions between the process of the globalization of culture and local resistance to both Westernization and globalization. The postmodern debate in methods and theory can be seen as a consequence of a set of broad changes in world culture that has been described in terms of globalism. At one level, the process of globalization simply means that the world is more systematically connected together by contemporary processes of electronic transformation and communication of information, the development of a world economy, the emergence of world systems of military communication and defence, the growth of global legal arrangements such as the human rights movement, the development of a world system of tourism, and the elaboration of intellectual communication between universities brought together within a system of global education.

The paradox of globalization is that it is closely and inevitably connected with consciousness of localism and localization. That is, the globalization of culture threatens the very existence of local practice and belief, which become engulfed in a unifying process of cultural integration. The need to defend localism is a response to the impact of cultural globalism, particularly through such processes as tourism and multinational investment. The attempt to protect local knowledge, local culture and local practice is thus associated with anthropological postmodernist and hermeneutic emphasis on textuality, locality and indigenous meaning. It immediately establishes cultural relevance and appears to demonstrate in compelling ways what is at stake in the politics of cultural domination and resistance. Indeed, the process of globalization within religious and intellectual systems has given rise to a strong nationalist local and indigenous response. For example, the Islamization of knowledge can be seen as a response to globalization and the integration of Islam into the world system. The reaction to globalization which many believe would produce a unified integrated and universalistic culture is associated with the postmodern emphasis on textuality, localism and indigenous meanings, but it has also become associated with the process of decolonization and the critique of the dominance of Western forms of modernist rationalism.

The processes of decolonization have produced a variety of critical responses to imperial culture and authority. For example, there has been within the Indian subcontinent a profound reaction against the dominance of (English) literary studies, which has imposed a Western canon of literature on Indian culture. The decolonization of literature has involved a critique of this canon, an emphasis on the value of local literary traditions, and the evolution of alternative forms of literary expression. This decolonization of literature was associated with a broader rejection of Western claims to universalism in the work of Edward Said (1978), specifically in his critique of Orientalism, and with subaltern studies. These critical movements in cultural theory are closely related to the debate about postmodernism because they share one basic characteristic in common: a critical rejection of the idea that Western forms of representation and reasoning could be construed as a global or universalistic discourse embracing human culture as a whole. Just as postmodernism has rejected the idea of the legitimacy of the ‘grand narrative’, decolonizing protests have rejected the legitimacy of the Western grand narrative to determine cultural hierarchies and cultural authenticity. The critical literature of decolonization claims that the local tradition has the same stature and value as the imperial tradition, which assumes global significance because imperial power has been able to impose its autonomy.

## Conclusion: The University of Postdisciplinarity

The historic alliance between scientific knowledge and the state of the late 17th century has been partially eroded by globalization and the fragmentation of knowledge, with the result that universities can no longer articulate universalistic values. There is some justification therefore for believing that the postmodernization of knowledge has taken place, thereby intensifying traditional debates about the problem of the relativization of knowledge with the growth of multiculturalism. While this argument is convincing, we need to keep in mind the fact that the university has been, since its medieval foundations, fractured around a contradiction between nationalistic particularity and a commitment to more universalistic standards, and that this tension has if anything increased with globalization. It is unlikely that disciplinary coherence can be maintained in these new circumstances.

