# The Human Sciences Sam Whimster / I / II

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# The Human Sciences Sam Whimster

Keywords dualism, La Mettrie, materialism, Simmel

A <sup>persistent</sup> <sup>theme</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>human</sup> <sup>sciences</sup>is the reduction of socio-psychological is the reduction of socio-psychological human life to the study of the material basis of the human organism. One of the best examples of this was La Mettrie, who was the first person in the modern era to give expression to the idea of man as no more than a machine. He did not, however, employ the term ‘a science of the human’. This concept owes much to the English translation of Geisteswissenschaft which, in its German form in the late 19th century, contained a large ambiguity. It could either mean a ‘science of the spirit/human’ and lead towards materialism and monism, or it could mean more generally the humanities. The humanities, which are a celebration and expressive elucidation of the human condition as non-reducible to any materialist base, have been in retreat since the late 19th century with the emergence of Darwinism as the valid scientific account of the origin of all species of life. So, a science of the human would seem either to have the capacity to be inhuman or, alternatively, to be humanistic but hardly scientific. In all of the many and various attempts to construct a ‘human science’ these two possibilities represent polar opposites and they are reflected in the two readings below.

## I

Julien Offray de La Mettrie (1709–1751), a French physician, was the first philosopher to state that not only body but also mind and soul were determined by physiological constitution. His L’homme machine is taken as the starting point of a materialist science of life. In a religious age he attracted notoriety for stating that the soul was not immortal. Today he can be seen as a precursor of attempts to reduce human consciousness and behaviour to biochemical states and inherited traits.

I reduce to two the systems of philosophy which deal with man’s soul. The first and older system is materialism; the second is spiritualism.

The human body is a machine which winds its own springs. It is the living image of perpetual movement. Nourishment keeps up the movement which fever excites. Without food, the soul pines away, goes mad, and dies exhausted. The soul is a taper whose light flares up the moment before it goes out. But nourish the body, pour into its veins life-giving juices and strong liquors, and then the soul grows strong like them, as if arming itself with a proud courage, and the soldier whom water would have made to flee, grows bold and runs joyously to death to the sound of drums.

Words, languages, laws, sciences, and the fine arts have come, and by them finally the rough diamond of our mind has been polished. Man has been trained in the same way as animals. He has become an author, as they have become beasts of burden. A geometrician has learned to perform the most difficult demonstrations and calculations, as a monkey has learned to take his little hat off and on, and to mount his tame dog. All has been accomplished through signs, every species has learned what it could understand, and in this way men have acquired symbolic knowledge, still so called by our German philosophers.

Nothing, as any one can see, is so simple as the mechanism of our education. Everything may be reduced to sounds or words that pass from the mouth of one through the ears of another into his brain. At the same moment, he perceives through his eyes the shape of the bodies of which these words are the arbitrary signs.

I always use the word ‘imagine,’ because I think that everything is the work of imagination, and that all the faculties of the soul can be correctly reduced to pure imagination in which they all consist. Thus judgement, reason, and memory are not absolute parts of the soul, but merely modifications of this kind of medullary screen upon which images of the objects painted in the eye are projected as by a magic lantern.

Let us now go into some detail concerning these springs of the human machine. All the vital, animal, natural, and automatic motions are carried on by their action. Is it not in a purely mechanical way that the body shrinks back when it is struck with terror at the sight of an unforeseen precipice, that the eyelids are lowered at the menace of a blow, as some have remarked, and that the pupil contracts in broad daylight to save the retina, and dilates to see objects in darkness?

I shall not go into any more detail concerning all these little subordinate forces, well known to all. But there is another more subtle and marvellous force, which animates them all; it is the source of all our feelings, of all our pleasures, of all our passions, and of all our thoughts: for the brain has its muscles for thinking, as the legs have muscles for walking. I wish to speak of this impetuous principle that Hippocrates calls enormon (soul). This principle exists and has its seat in the brain at the origin of the nerves, by which it exercises its control over all the rest of the body. By this fact is explained all that can be explained, even to the surprising effect of maladies of the imagination.

To be a machine, to feel, to think, to know how to distinguish good from bad, as well as blue from yellow, in a word, to be born with an intelligence and a sure moral instinct, and to be but an animal, are therefore characters which are no more contradictory, than to be an ape or a parrot and to be able to give oneself pleasure.

Such is the uniformity of nature, which we are beginning to realize; and the analogy of the animal with the vegetable kingdom, of man with the plant. (Offray de la Mettrie, 1960)

## II

In this next passage Georg Simmel concedes that there is a material and objective determination of the human individual, including our cognitive capacities, but that our being and our values belong to a separate plane or dimension of existence. The concept of human sciences may be said to be held in a perpetual oscillation between the materialism of La Mettrie and the dualism of Simmel. Do we think of the human species as existing solely within the plane of the material, or do we think of it as existing at the intersection of the planes of the material and the experiential?

The order in which things are placed as natural entities is based on the proposition that the whole variety of their qualities rests upon a uniform law of existence. Their equality before the law of nature, the constant sum of matter and energy, the convertibility of the most diverse phenomena into one another, transform the differences that are apparent at first sight into a general affinity, a universal equality. Yet on a closer view this means only that the products of the natural order are beyond any question of a law. Their absolute determinateness does not allow any emphasis that might provide confirmation or doubt of their particular quality of being. But we are not satisfied with this indifferent necessity that natural science assigns to objects. Instead, disregarding their place in that series we arrange them in another order – an order of value – in which equality is completely eliminated, in which the highest level of one point is adjacent to the lowest level of another; in this series the fundamental quality is not uniformity but difference.

We may be aware of the same life experience as both real and valuable, but the experience has quite a different meaning in the two cases. The series of natural phenomena could be described in their entirety without mentioning the value of things; and our scale of valuation remains meaningful whether or not any of its objects appear frequently or at all in reality. Value is an addition to the completely determined objective being, like light and shade, which are not inherent in it but come from a different source. However, we should avoid one misinterpretation; namely that the formation of value concepts, as a psychological fact, is quite distinct from the natural process.

The meaning of value concepts is denied to nature as a mechanical causal system, while at the same time the psychic experiences that make values a part of our consciousness themselves belong to the natural world. Valuation as a real psychological occurrence is part of the natural world; but what we mean by valuation, its conceptual meaning, is something independent of this world.

We are rarely aware of the fact that our whole life, from the point of view of consciousness, consists in experiencing and judging values, and that it acquires meaning and significance only from the fact that the mechanically unfolding elements of reality possess an infinite variety of values beyond their objective substance. At any moment when our mind is not simply a passive mirror or reality . . . we live in a world of values which arranges the contents of reality in an autonomous order. (Simmel, 1978: 59–60)

The polarity between La Mettrie and Simmel’s position is a philosophical one, of monism versus dualism. While it is perfectly correct to ascribe a humanistic approach to many of Simmel’s writings, the first part of his Philosophy of Money goes a long way towards establishing a theory of value in terms of desire which in its terms is defined as the expenditure of energy against resistance. In other words Simmel’s view of the individual is one of a living organism which, like all organisms, expends effort in pursuit of psychic needs. Simmel in talking about life and the human organism is quite prepared to advance naturalistic arguments, but ultimately the sphere of values remain beyond determination. Both Simmel and Max Weber were intellectually open to materialist accounts of psychological behaviour and human attributes, but only up to a point (Whimster, 1995). Simmel drew a philosophical line (which is traceable back to Spinoza), as in the above excerpt. Weber was forced to struggle with the issue, having written The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1904–5) which raised a series of awkward questions about the causal status of Geist: was it psychologically determined, or theologically and socially formed, and was it a causal determinant in its own right? Weber’s solution to these problems was to devise an interpretative science of social reality (which he called sociology) (Weber, 2004). Whatever the extent of the materialist science of the individual and peoples – and he did not exclude cognitive and neurological psychology, social actors interpreted their world (with all its materialist determinations) through values that they constructed and sustained. Today the La Mettrie approach is in the ascendancy. The attempt to reduce consciousness to bio-chemical states is analogous to Mettrie’s dismissal of the soul. Cognitive psychology, evolutionary psychology, behavioural ecology and evolutionary game theory follow the same path that individuals and social outcomes are shaped by material causes beyond our immediate direct control. Hence, it might be worth insisting on a Weberian distinction: there are human sciences and there is also an interpretative science of social reality.

