# Rhetoric Roy Sellars

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Rhetoric Roy Sellars

Keywords argument, Aristotle, catachresis, context, dialectic, enthymeme, invention, knowledge, persuasion, power, syllogism, universalism

It is posed and it is posed.

But in nature it merely grows.

– Wallace Stevens, ‘Add This to Rhetoric

begin this entry by posing that rhetoric teaches one how to begin, even or precisely when beginning seems impossible. Modern study of rhetoric in western tradition begins inevitably with Aristotle’s Rhetoric (and in English, George Kennedy’s edition is indispensable). Given the vastness of the tradition and the brevity of this entry, readers should also turn, for other places to begin, to the anthology of primary texts well assembled by Patricia Bizzell and Bruce Herzberg, The Rhetorical Tradition, and to an introductory textbook such as Renato Barilli’s Rhetoric. Aristotle begins, in the form of an enthymeme (a rhetorical syllogism dispensing with the need for logical certainty), by empowering the reader: ‘Rhetoric is an antistrophos [“counterpart”, “correlative” or “converse”] to dialectic; for both are concerned with such things as are, to a certain extent, within the knowledge of all people and belong to no separately defined science’ (1.1.1; 1354a). Dialectic, he writes, is about testing and maintaining an argument, while rhetoric is at the same time about defence and attack – everyone knows how to defend and attack, ‘to a certain extent’, but everyone can also learn how to practise them better. Rhetoric should be available to all, then, and its remit is ‘such things as . . . belong to no separately defined science’. Both points – concerning empowerment, on the one hand, and non-identity, on the other – make it easy to see why rhetoric should have been viewed with such suspicion and hostility from its very beginnings; the history of rhetoric is, indeed, inseparable from the history of anti-rhetoric.

Aristotle’s opening sentence, with its ‘all people’, might be taken to imply an ethnocentric universalism, but at the beginning of the next chapter he gives a justly famous definition of rhetoric that qualifies any such implication: ‘Let rhetoric be [defined as] an ability, in each [particular] case, to see the available means of persuasion (1.2.1, emphasis mine; 1355b). Context is paramount; there is no rhetoric without context. Part of the value of Aristotle’s definition is thus that it tells us the definition cannot be located ‘in’ Aristotle but must be referred elsewhere: to that context in which one already is. The ‘available means’ – which, let it be added, may prove incommensurate with the intention to persuade – cannot be specified or programmed in advance. Most rhetorical terms (including of course ‘rhetoric’) are derived from Greek, and since no ancient Greek context can be experienced by a modern reader, their use is in each particular case and to a certain extent an inevitable catachresis (i.e., a misuse). It is not so much a question of finding the right words (though that, invention, is also part of rhetoric) as of realizing that there is nothing outside context, a realization that can be upsetting or liberating, depending on one’s point of view (another part of rhetoric).

In the context of an encyclopaedia, the position of rhetoric is an awkward one. In other times and places, it has been possible to conceive an encyclopaedia without or even against rhetoric, or more precisely to conceive an encyclopaedia as a body of transmissible knowledge in which ‘rhetoric’ would figure merely as an entry. In the work of Peter Ramus (1515–72), for example, rhetoric is a mere ornament or supplement to the body (knowledge) thus ornamented or supplemented. It would be premature to claim that this binary model has been left behind, but also futile to attempt to defend the integrity of rhetoric, since it has none. Rhetoric blurs boundaries, including its own, and can never be fully separated from sophistry. Today, rhetoric is mostly taught in instrumentalized and commodified form; the counterpart to the urgent critique of instrumentality (how to do things with words) and commodification (how to make money with things), though, is the equally urgent resistance to pseudo-literacy, illiteracy, and language death around the world. Rhetoric is always already struggle, and the stakes are high even when that struggle appears internal to readers unfamiliar with its history.

