# References / References

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

## References

Baudrillard, J. (1994) ‘The Precession of Simulacra’, in Simulacrum and Simulation, trans. Sheila Faria Glaser. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Benjamin, W. (1996) ‘One-Way Street’, trans. Edmund Jephcott, Selected Writings, vol. 1: 1913–1926. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of the Harvard University Press.

Derrida, J. (1986) Glas, trans. J.P. Leavey Jr and R. Rand. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

Hegel, G.W.F. (1977) The Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A.V. Miller. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Kafka, F. (1999) The Complete Stories, ed. N.M. Glatzer. New York: Vintage.

Marx, K. (1972) ‘Theses on Feuerbach’, The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. R.C. Tucker. New York: Norton.

Ponge, F. (1965) Oeuvres, Vol. 1, trans. J. Phillips. Paris: Gallimard.

Ryan Bishop teaches at the National University of Singapore in the Department of English and has published on urbanism, military technology, critical theory, avant-garde aesthetics and international sex tourism.

John Phillips is Associate Professor in the Department of English Language and Literature at the National University of Singapore. He is the author of Contested Knowledge: A Guide to Critical Theory (Zed Books, 2000) and has published articles on linguistics, psychoanalysis, deconstruction, philosophy, literature, urbanism, postmodernism, critical theory, aesthetics and military technology.

regimes of truth, associated with the names of Foucault and Latour. Furthermore, different conceptual frameworks for theorizing the interrelation of the natural and the social, matter and form, have appeared that continue in a new language the venerable desire to find an overall or implicate order or coherence in the world. In the social sciences, the work of writers like Prigogine and Stengers, anchored in the soil of scientific practice, and that of Deleuze and Guattari, located in philosophical interrogations, represent different avenues that many have found useful in the attempt to understand the process of production of knowledge by reference to wider issues relating to the relation of being to world. A challenging and complex approach reworks the notion of techne, drawing from Heidegger’s work, to try and theorize what lies underneath the Foucauldian standpoint of the positivity of knowledge, linking the questioning of science and technology to philosophical issues that go to the heart of the theory of being. Techne of course needs to be located within the Heideggerian form of questioning, particularly relating to the ideas of bringing-forth or of revealing what lies concealed, and to the presencing of truth or aletheia. Techne thus is understood not on the terrain of technology but on that of poiesis. These concepts construct an episteme that regards science and technology as the enframing of ways of challenging ‘nature’ in order to unlock, transform, store, distribute, switch about which are all ways of revealing (Heidegger, 1977). In the background to the standpoint of techne one finds the questions about what endures and about the danger inherent in all knowing and inventing that alerts us to the fundamental stakes about existence that directs one’s questioning concerning knowledge.

At about the same time as Heidegger was elaborating his philosophy, in France Bachelard, and then Canguilhem, opened up a way of interrogating the process of producing knowledge that has had a profound, if mainly unrecognized, effect on the later discourse, via the work of their students, Althusser and Foucault. They both start out with the conviction that in order to speak about the sciences one has to situate oneself inside their practice, thus marking a break with the conventional ‘history of ideas’ approach that does not include within its purview the point of view of the science’s own questions. Their work is consciously set against the parasitical ‘epistemology of philosophers’ and against the (then) academic establishment, for example, Bergson and Brunschvicq, and against naive objectivism, which assumes that modern science investigates a reality which is already given or ‘natural’, out there. Instead Bachelard asserts that science breaks with common sense, and must do so in order to better interrogate a reality that its own enquiry specifies, discussing as example the concept of mass which in everyday language connotes the massive and size, whereas in physics it is consistent with the notion of the tiny, the particle, and even of negative mass (Dirac). Mass in physics is understood by reference to an apparatus of concepts and a practice – of force and acceleration in the Newtonian system, of time and speed and energy in relativity theory, of the mathematical understanding of propagation, spin, threshold, multiplicity in Dirac’s problematic of the particle – that constitute it, each time differently, as a concept of physics. Negative mass is a concept beyond 19thcentury philosophies. Bachelard uses the idea of epistemological break to refer to the incommensurability between the conceptual frameworks that constitute concepts in different problematics, ideas that Althusser disseminated in his analysis of science and Marxist theory. As one can surmise, a problematic in Bachelard refers not only to the conceptual framework and the practice of producing concepts and theoretical objects – or indeed of inventing them, since the scientific imagination ‘dreams’ – but refers also to the specific mode of questioning and the technical apparatus, operating in the ‘technical city’, that enables questions to be posed and investigated in their ‘positivity’; a problematic, then, circumscribes how concepts are ‘technically normed’ (see Bachelard, 1940, 1951; Venn, 1982).

This is not the place to undertake a critique of Bachelard, but some elements indirectly appear when one turns to Canguilhem, who developed his thoughts in part because the displacements that the former had operated had freed a space for his own research, and in part as a polemic against some of his ideas. For instance he wanted to restore to error a productive function in the emergence of knowledge, rather than its consignment in Bachelard’s thought to the outdated history of what has been overtaken by the progressive history of scientific rationality (which he distinguishes from the rationality of the philosophers). Other important differences include the focus in Canguilhem’s work on the sciences of life, and on a micro-history of the concept, in contrast to the broad canvas of Bachelard’s historical epistemology.

What emerges from the careful epistemological history of Canguilhem is the provisional and tentative character of scientific findings and work; he establishes that attention to the domain of investigation in which a particular concept emerges, that is, its problematic, reveals the specificity of the discursive rules that regulate its use, and the productivity of errors, for it is only retrospectively that a history of emergence can name error. In the Normal and the Pathological he shows that the normal is the result of a whole series of interventions that ground in precise techniques the norms of normality, as in medicine. His studies show that the normal and the normative, error and the pathological, are the two indissoluble and irreducible sides of a whole apparatus of normalization. Crucially, it is by reference to the idea of an order that both error and pathology can be correlated. For example the concept of the organ, and its metonymies such as organism, organization, organic – appearing from around 1650 to suggest systematic relations between structure and function and between a whole and its parts – operated as relay concept for the emerging problematic of order in the 18th and 19th centuries in which the new, organismic, and vitalist, concept of life is enframed (Canguilhem, 1966 [1943], 1977; Venn, 1982).

This notion of order is important not only for establishing that error is normal, but equally from the point of view of the analysis of scientific knowledge by reference to the domain of the social and cultural generally, and thus to the wider location of the intelligibility of scientific concepts. From the point of view of a history or genealogy of the concept of norm, it would not have been possible to reconstruct the discursive and technical conditions of its emergence without the recognition of the productive effects of elements outside the scientific paradigm of organism, relating to an ontology of order, supporting a particular idea of economy and techniques of specifying and producing the norm. Canguilhem’s historical work establishes the constitutive role of culture for science at the level of a genealogy of concepts; it opens up science to its outside and to historicity, something that Bachelard does not do. Additionally for him, the standpoint of norm and of order distinguishes the sciences of life from physics, a point worth pursuing now that a new ontology of order founded in the idea of information is reorganizing the whole field of knowledge. A different economy and a different episteme is at work here that critique needs to bring to light.

A question remains about the problem of truth. Neither Bachelard nor Canguilhem are relativist, although they problematize the Baconian, the empiricist and the positivist conceptualizations of truth. Canguilhem (1975) argued that scientists can often be ‘on the side of truth’ although they may not be ‘telling the truth’, as in the case of Galileo’s work. For Bachelard it was a matter of the ‘workers of the truth’ who produce it as an effect of technics and concepts combining to produce theoretically normed objects, for instance the positron. So, it is a matter of ‘regimes of truth in Foucault’s terminology, but also of techniques of producing truth – for instance in relation to IQ tests for measuring something called ‘intelligence

– and an economy of truth that opens onto the wider question of an order, that is, of differently imagined coherence to the world, thus onto philosophical reflection. Their interrogation of scientific practice brings one to the point where the political issues about knowledge with regard to norms, normalization, pathology, discipline meet the questions about being and about life and the living that open up ontology and epistemology to the standpoint of a new problematic of being/ world.

## References

Bachelard, Gaston (1940) La philosophie du non. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

Bachelard, Gaston (1951) L’activité rationaliste de la physique contemporaine. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

Canguilhem, Georges (1966 [1943]) Le normal et le pathologique. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

Canguilhem, Georges (1975) Etude d’histoire et de philosophie des sciences. Paris: Vrin.

Canguilhem, Georges (1977) Idéologie et rationalité. Paris: Vrin.

Heidegger, Martin (1977) The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays, trans. William Lovitt. New York: Harper Torchbooks.

Venn, Couze (1982) Beyond the Science-Ideology Relation. Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Essex.

Couze Venn is Professor of Cultural Theory, Nottingham Trent University.

