# Modernity / The Postmodern

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Modernity

Couze Venn and Mike Featherstone

Abstract Whilst presenting a number of features that have been put forward to characterize modernity as a way of life and a social system, this entry suggests a dissident genealogy that reveals a hidden history of continuities and alternatives. It thereby problematizes the norms about periodization and the assumptions about the elaboration of a logos that underlie the concept of the modern. This approach to modernity as a complex of processes, institutions, subjectivities, and technologies challenges the more familiar history of linear temporalities and progressive transformations. The fruitfulness of seeing modernity, as much as other historical periods, as hybrid assemblages in a state of flux is that it draws attention to the heterogeneity and processual nature of cultures and feeds into the possibility of the critique of the present.

Keywords capitalism, dissident genealogy, modernism, public sphere, religion, technocratic reason, tradition

atour’s (1993) claim that we have never been modern is particularly provocative for those who are comforted by the progressive value attached to modernity, and for those who take it for granted that we know what modernity is. His intervention came after a period of often irate polemics around the loose concept of the postmodern that had started to appear from the 1960s, especially with regard to the changing relation of the arts to the project of the ‘emancipation of humanity’, and in relation to the perception of a crisis of legitimation, forcefully signalled in the work of Habermas and Lyotard from the late 1970s. His emphasis on modernity as a hybrid assemblage – constituted in, and constitutive of, ‘social needs and natural reality, meanings and mechanisms, signs and things’ (1993: 35) – that a certain discourse of modernity disassociates and makes invisible, calls up the contrasting problematization initiated by Foucault in The Order of Things. That pivotal work in the contemporary understanding of modernity identified a new, if enigmatic, object of knowledge, ‘Man’, as the central figure constituted through the dynamic but unstable intersection of three new fields of enquiry and domains of practice, namely, language, life, labour. Whilst Latour argued against the purification of an episteme as a discursive strategy in the constitution of modernity as different from preceding epochs, Foucault claims that modernity is announced in the shift from the system of representation that pertains to the classical age towards the new logos, centered on the epistemic subject, inscribed in the human sciences. It should be noted, however, that Foucault is careful to temper the claim of epistemic break with the proviso of conditions of possibility and thus the possibility that ‘man’ may well be erased ‘like a face drawn in sand at the edge of the sea’ (1966: 398). The point of highlighting the problematic status of modernity is to put into context the new form of purification at work today which is seeking to bring about through a renewed modernization the age of the market and of the economic subject as its calculating agent. Much is at stake, therefore, concerning a critique of the present, in one’s interpretation of modernity as a period.

Though explicitly or implicitly present in a great deal of the literature in the arts and philosophy from the 19th century, the concept of modernity has not always enjoyed the current prominence in the conceptual landscape of the social sciences. In the postwar era, up until the mid 1970s in sociology, it was capitalism which was the dominant term. The influential Introduction to the History of Sociology (Barnes, 1966) has no place for modernity in the index, although it had a large number of references to capitalism. Anthony Giddens’ (1973) key early work Capitalism and Modern Social Theory clearly indicates the emphasis by foregrounding capitalism, which is prominent in the index, whereas there is no place for modern or modernity. Yet by the early 1990s the focus for Giddens was more directly on spelling out the contours of modernity in books with titles such as The Consequences of Modernity and Modernity and Identity. In cultural studies, it may well be possible to chart a similar shift with Stuart Hall and his associates producing the influential Open University volume Formation of Modernity in 1992. When terminology shifts it is possible to see this renaming process as a strategic move in the field of academic and intellectual cultural production (Bourdieu). Our task is to examine what is at stake in such shifts.

Our approach is to bring into view a longer and more diffracted history of the modern, so that the break with classical antiquity from the 16th century and the quarrel of the ancients and the moderns in the 17th century appear as part of the landscape. A literature has emerged that regards developments in the European Renaissance as announcing an early modernity, and here one could refer to Dante, da Vinci, Luther, Cervantes, Augustine’s reflections on time, memory and the self, Arabic science and medicine, the Copernican revolution, the emergence of the New World as significant markers of the shifts in the imagination and the gaze that prepare the ground for the later reorganization of knowledge that one associates with modernity. Foucault strikingly began his study of these shifts with Velasquez’s painting ‘Las Meninas’ (1656) to bring to light the re-centring and de-centring of the gaze that fractures the ideal of classical representation, and betrays the lack at the heart of its episteme. The more familiar meaning of the term began to appear from the 18th century when the verb ‘to modernize’ first appears in the English language, introduced to denote alterations to buildings, language and fashions. From the mid-19th century in Europe the modern acquires the connotation of improvement and efficiency that persists in the common usage, a meaning that has acquired the force of dogma in the current largely neoliberal strategy of an injunction to ‘modernize or disappear.

A different line of interrogation of modernity, and a different periodization, is indicated by Todorov (1992[1982]), who identifies 1492 as the birthmark of modernity, arguing that the linking of knowledge with dispossession and subjugation triggered by the colonization of the Americas must be seen as a central feature of modern reason. Serres (1982) similarly noted the association of reason with subjugating power that follows when the reason/reasoning of the mightiest comes to be always identified with the ‘best reason’. Thus, from the beginning, the tensions in the modern reorganization of knowledge are bound up, on the one hand, with the effects of power and with the form of economy and governmentality emerging at the time; on the other hand, they attest to the alternative visions and trajectories side-lined when modernity acquires the force of a project of worlding a world according to a singular vision and temporalization of history.

Alongside these developments one finds certain themes that echo with the ambivalences and paradoxes signalled in Latour’s claim and in the debates about the postmodern, specifically, regarding the claim that the modern effects a break with tradition or community, as in Tonnies’ dichotomy of Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft, the notion of disenchantment that Weber detects in the privilege of instrumental rationality, and the idea of alienation and evanescence expressed in Marx, and explored in different registers from Baudelaire to Benjamin and Marshall Berman (1983). They are themes that surface in different forms in the history of modernity, expressing the enigmatic quality that, following Buci-Glucksmann (1994), one could refer to as ‘baroque reason’, that is, a reason that opens up the heterogeneous and inassimilable zone where the affinity between thought and affect and ‘the infinite materiality of bodies and images’ (1994: 139) are played out in visions of the uncanny, the horrifying, the ‘strange beauty’ and ‘swift joys’ explored in the modern aesthetics (Venn, 2000). At the worst of times, such as in the wake of Fascism, the violence latent in these themes has been embodied in the destructive figure of the ‘angel of progress’ as depicted in Benjamin’s vision of modernity as the ceaseless production of the new on the ruins of the old. It is important to note that in the post-Enlightenment period these ambivalences and misgivings about the modern have been amply elaborated or refigured in dissident works and thoughts in movements like Romanticism (see Bowie, 1990) and in conceptualizations of life and the living – in Leibnizian science as well as in early vitalist discourse – at odds with Mechanism and Newtonian natural philosophy that were becoming hegemonic from the 18th century. Of course works like Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein and Goethe’s Faust were themselves exemplarily modern. One should add to this problematization the effects of oppositional politics in Europe and the colonies that drew on the emancipatory and critical elements within Enlightenment discourse in support of resistance to the advances of capitalism and emergent imperial governmentality. They reveal a genealogy of counter and alternative modernities, of ‘the insurrection of subjugated knowledges’ (Foucault, 1984: 42) that we shall address below, focusing on a number of features that have come to be thought central to modernity.

A persistent feature of the discourse of modernity is the fact that in its emergence it has instigated a dichotomy between modern and traditional societies, that is, between processes of legitimation and the inscription of meaning based in rational calculations and institutions, in legal contract and individual volition as opposed to custom, religion and communal forms of wealth. Whilst clearly modernity has seen the emergence of state and non-state institutions that have not existed before, and whilst one can understand the logic of difference at work in this discursive constitution of modernity, analyses of modern culture too often forget the reality of the vestiges and mutations of older values, beliefs and ways of being, for instance regarding feudalism, monarchism, and ‘traditional’ forms of sovereignty and power that coexist with secular state institutions. For example, for a long time in Europe and in many colonized states, family law remained the prerogative of the church or religion and ‘tradition’. In any case, the values that secular law inscribes often have a foundation in religious and traditional belief systems. Indeed a dissident genealogy of modernity would restore, amongst other things, the central place that non-conformist beliefs like Unitarianism and Deism continued to have in shaping the transformations in society that have made the world as modern – in education, in legislation, in the opposition to slavery, in the history of socialism and even the development of the Enlightenment. In its making of difference, the discourse of modernity has reconstructed a view of preceding periods and a sense of its own coherence that simply does not accord with the historical reality. The operation of this systemic discursive distortion has been equally at work in the understanding of concepts of civilization, of nation, of the Orient and the ‘Other’, and of science itself.

Conventionally, in the social sciences, a series of terms like secularism, democracy, technology, the nation-state, citizenship, industrialization, urbanization comes to mind to qualify what one means by modernity. One may even add to that list ideas of the epistemological superiority of science, the autonomy of reason and the law, the existence of a public sphere, human rights, a number of fundamental freedoms, individual ownership of property and individualism. But as soon as one starts to make such a check-list of the characteristics or the criteria that one would use to distinguish a modern society from a non-modern one, or to categorize modernity as a period, one begins to encounter difficulties. Not only is it the case that many states that take their modernity for granted do not display many of the key features that social theory ascribes to modernity; the point is that all these terms are open to problematization. In fact if one were to imagine the ideal-type of modern state, almost no existing state qualifies. For instance the political institutions of the USA may in principle be secular, but religion, although technically a separate sphere from the state, continues to occupy a central place both symbolically and at the level of legitimation. Indeed, appeal to a transcendent domain in the institution of modernity and in the authorization of everyday practices in conditions of modernity is deeply ingrained. The effect of the neglect of belief systems in the history of modernity is yet to be properly established; it will completely alter our view of modern cultures. Similarly, arguments that point to the emergence of a ‘society of control’ and ‘Empire’ undermine faith in the existence of democracy even in the so-called ‘advanced’ states. Latour’s claim in a sense draws attention to counter-discourses that open the way for a questioning not only of modernity as a period, but of the system of classification and periodization that have been taken as paradigmatic for a considerable time.

The notion of a break with ‘tradition’ and with the old, central to the modern imaginary, has its exemplary instantiation in Descartes’ gesture of tabula rasa, that is, of brushing aside from the table of knowledge the authority of ancient texts; it is the gesture whereby the clean slate of reason and evidence is made to replace appeal to an ultimately transcendent authority. Older knowledges may be readmitted but subject to the critical and sceptical judgement of a rational method, uncluttered by faith and dogmas. This gesture also installs the epistemic subject in the place of the logos or principle guaranteeing rational thought, and so inaugurates a privilege of cognitivism, and the ‘forgetting’ of metaphysics that remain symptomatic well into so-called postmodern times. One encounters it today in the models of artificial intelligence that assume a unitary, autonomous, rational, self-sufficient mind or brain. This assumption about a singular author of truth runs counter to the collaborative and inter-subjective reality of the process of production and validation of knowledge, then and now, as the social studies of science have established; it is to be hoped that new information technologies like the Internet and digitalization will undermine such assumptions, though they too will have to change, for the hold of logocentrism runs deep in the conceptual and technical apparatus of modernity and postmodernity.

Another instance of a construction by the social sciences that casts into invisibility features central to the institution of modern societies concerns the question of the emergence of a public sphere which, since the early studies by Habermas (1983 [1980]), has been thought intrinsic to modernity. The argument is that in democratic societies new public spaces have emerged for the formation of public opinion about matters concerning the good order of the state; they facilitate the free exchange of information and rational debate, and thus help to constitute an informed public capable of making rational choices about issues relating to group and national interests. Yet the dichotomous framing of modernity has meant that liberal as well as many radical accounts of this element of the democratic polity have tended to neglect the role both of traditional sites – the marketplace, the church – and dissident forums located in local or communal settings. The history of resistance demonstrates the extent to which mechanisms were invented that served the goals of dissident publics in the modern period. This includes a large number of societies and associations, such as syndicalist organizations or ‘combinations’, mutual help associations, salons and societies like the Lunar Society, as well as non-conformist sects, such as the Quakers, or the Unitarian Church. Such new elements of the public spheres emerging in response to bourgeois institutions and spaces, and thus themselves belonging to modernity, nevertheless relied on values and socialities that reconstituted older social relations and ways of being or constituted new publics that one should describe as hybrid.

Thus, Linebaugh and Rediker (2000) show the extent to which sailors, slaves, and commoners constituted a kind of ‘many-headed hydra’ forging new alliances and fomenting rebellion. This process is even clearer when one considers the history of slave and colonial resistance. For instance, Genovese (1974) shows the importance of ambulant preachers and religious gatherings, the role of the Book alongside mutations in music and songs and ways of storytelling in forming opinion and coordinating action that sustained rebellion (something Toni Morrison has dramatized and analysed in her writings). Similarly, the Subaltern Studies Group has shown the extent to which new emergent forms of organization and knowledges and older ‘traditional’ institutions and sites combined to determine the form and modalities of resistance to subjugation in India, for instance about the Santal, Basarat, and Sepoy uprisings, or jute workers organization (studies by Guha, Pandey, and Chakrabarty in Guha and Spivak, 1988). Whilst print technology was important in these activities, the interesting issue is both the emergence of non-bourgeois publics and spheres and the process of circulation of ideas through the network of dissident groups that has tended to remain mostly invisible in accounts of modernity. Whilst it can be argued that these forms of resistance are modern, it is also the case that continuities existed, say about religious sites and the role of religious ideas, which the conventional account of modernity neglects because of the dichotomies inscribed in its systems of classification.

In opposition to the neat break which conventional social science descriptions assume, our interrogation underlines the hybrid, cosmopolitan, heterogeneous or creolized character of the institutions, organizations and subjectivities that construct the modern period in Europe and elsewhere. For example, Viswanathan’s (1989) study of the introduction of English in India in the 19th century to constitute a cadre of functionaries for the machinery of imperial governmentality shows the importance of the discussions about the constitution of an appropriate literary canon and the place of religion in the curriculum that had effects for the modernization process in both the colonies and in England. A more pertinent case for the reconstruction of knowledge today is that of the formation of a cosmopolitan corps of intellectuals and artists spread across the continents who were involved in exchanges and networks and collaborations that increasingly determined the content and destiny of movements like modernism and socialism. For instance, the ‘1922 Generation’ of D’Andrate and others in Brazil, the Harlem Renaissance movement in the USA involving poets, novelists, musicians, activists, modernism in India, China, Japan from the 1920s were not only central in the transformation of the culture and landscape outside Europe, but had effects on artists and intellectuals in the ‘metropolitan’ centres of empire, in terms of subject matter and influence – indicatively: jazz, African art and cubism, a novel like Forster’s A Passage to India. The history of modernism would have been utterly different without these diasporic fusions, which have since become commonplace, if ignored in conventional accounts of modernity. At the level of politics, one can note the emergence, from the late 19th century but particularly after the First World War, of political parties and movements for decolonizations and vernacular alternative modernities in China, India, Latin America, Africa, Japan, Turkey that have altered the landscape of modernity worldwide.

This standpoint about the hybrid or composite character of much of what one recognizes as modern is in keeping with the recognition of several conjoined processes: the slow and uneven pace of change of social institutions as understood within the framework of the longue durée; the heterogeneous character of all cultures, resulting from the borrowings, admixtures, grafts, cross-cultural exchanges of all kinds that work in pragmatic ways rather than according to the rationalist re-descriptions generated by the discourse of modern governance; the relative stability of the mechanisms, values, beliefs and sensibilities that participate in the formation of subjectivities and of inter-subjective worlds. Such worlds, constitutive of socialities, operate alongside as well as outside institutions subject to more direct state regulatory and disciplinary devices; indeed the latter often rely on the existence of the former for their own mechanisms of control to have a purchase. The point is to draw attention to the multiplicity, specificity and mobility of the assemblages that sustain real communities and ways of life, put into place or emerging as part of the practices of everyday life, and thus ubiquitous even if more visible in communities associated with small-scale farming or mining. Equally, they provide spaces and resources for alternative socialities and for resistance to hegemonic forces (Escobar and Alvarez, 1992). Interestingly, neo-liberal interventions in the domain of the social threaten to homogenize such mechanisms in their effort to make them amenable to economic calculations and governance, and thus open to the forces of domestication.

So, underneath the paradoxes of modernity lies a history that a dominant view of modernity, promoted or encouraged by the social sciences, has managed to make invisible. Critiques developed from the standpoint of feminist and postcolonial theory, and interrogations pursued in the social studies of the technosciences or instigated in the light of deconstruction, have challenged the ‘history of the victors’ as well as the authorized framing of knowledge within the occidentalist purview of modernity. And here one needs to bear in mind, as Foucault has argued, that critique itself and its apparatus, especially in the sense of ‘the permanent critique of our era’ that ‘simultaneously problematizes man’s relation to the present, man’s historical mode of being, and the constitution of the self as an autonomous subject’, is part of the ‘philosophical ethos’ of modernity (1984: 42). The co-articulation of capitalism, the European form of colonialism and technocratic and phallogocentric reason in the elaboration of modernity has over-determined the privilege of instrumental rationality and the narrative of progress-as-domination and increasing efficiency; it has encouraged the counter-emancipatory tendencies latent in the discourse of modernity and hastened the postmodern ‘end of history and its fundamentalist dangers.

## The Postmodern

The prefix ‘post’ points to something after the modern, albeit with a certain hesitancy and sense of semantic inadequacy, suggesting something emergent and derivative, yet to be clearly delineated and formulated as a positive term in its own right. The postmodern, like its affiliate terms postmodernism, postmodernity and postmodernization, takes its impetus from modernity. The modern can be seen as the generic term which generates the set. Adding the term ‘post’ to the modern suggests some failure of the modern. This ‘postmodern condition’ means the loss of confidence in metanarratives, the ‘big stories’ of progress, science, human rights and citizenship which came out of the Western Enlightenment of the 18th century and posited both a linear direction to history and an expanding horizon of possibilities (Lyotard, 1984). The modern, as we noted, identifies itself with its differentiation from its own past: to be modern is to continually anticipate or produce the new and different. The postmodern challenged this modern capacity and suggested the end of the new and of originality: the end of art, the end of the subject, the end of history.

The family of terms deriving from the postmodern gained its impetus from the popularity of the term ‘postmodernism’ in the 1960s, seen as a reaction to artistic modernism. In the United States in particular, young writers, artists and critics such as Burroughs, Barthelme, Rauschenberg, Cage, Fiedler, Hassan and Sontag portrayed modernism as exhausted, as institutionalized into high culture in the museum and academy. Postmodernism pointed to the collapse of the hierarchical distinction between high and mass culture, the mixing of codes and stylistic eclecticism, the loss of the distinction between art and everyday life and the end of the originality of the artist, for instance in the debates about Warhol and Pop Art. This entailed a positive attitude towards everyday consumer culture and a rejection of the central (high) cultural values of modernity. It was this challenging critical aspect, with its suspicion of totalizing reason and value hierarchies, which proved attractive to some intellectuals and academics. In the 1970s and 1980s a number of high profile debates ensued, as the term was batted back and forth between Europe and the United States and a range of major figures were involved or invoked such as Bell, Baudrillard, Deleuze, Derrida, Foucault, Habermas, Jameson, Lyotard and Vattimo. As the term postmodern was seized upon by critics and commentators and used in a variety of imprecise ways, the more dramatic epochal associations came to the fore, linked to French poststructuralist theorists such as Deleuze and Foucault (later Baudrillard), despite regular denials. The dramatic contrast was made between Foucault’s provocative remark at the end of The Order of Things about the possible disappearance of ‘man’ and Habermas’s assertion that modernity was an unfinished project.

Other themes are opened up here, particularly in relation to temporality/historicality, as for example in Jameson’s work, and to a critique of technics. Jameson’s (1991) intervention in the debate arises from the widespread concern about the effects of developments that were beginning to become definite: the ‘legitimation crisis’ to which Habermas and others had drawn attention, the emergence of the ‘society of the spectacle’ (Debord, 1977), shifts in the relation of culture and the economy that were thought in terms of consumer culture (Featherstone, 1991); the transformations in science and technology, not just in the wake of cybernetics, but in relation to an uncoupling of science from critique and from a certain mode of questioning that had nourished the Enlightenment idea of modernity as a project. It is implicated for example in his reference to the erosion of the distinction between high and mass culture and the radicalizing role that the avant-garde was supposed to have. He targets problems of pastiche, of the fragmentation of experience and subjectivity, the flattening of time and the erasure of history, and the self-referentiality of mass culture. These have become familiar issues in the debate about postmodernism. However, his analytical apparatus relies on his ideas of a political unconscious and the logic of consumer capitalism, ideas that are fraught with assumptions and misunderstandings about so-called ‘post-structuralist’ critiques, though they provide a purchase for the analysis of the culture of modernity.

It is important to contrast the stakes in this debate with the vibrant and hopeful output of modernist work coming out of postcolonizing countries after the Second World War. It would require several books to redress this balance, for artists, writers, architects in the ‘Third World’ were busy producing works that engaged with the project of decolonization and the experience of colonialism, and that forged the imagination of hybrid, diasporic worlds. Because of their subject matter, their attachments to vernacular cultural forms and their political commitments, they do not easily fit into the categories of ‘avant-garde’ though technically they belong to modernism; besides, the critiques levelled at the culture industry or the dichotomy of high versus popular culture do not apply to the same extent. An indicative list of this output would note, for example, The Progressive Artists Group in India, writers and artists like Achebe, Soyinka, Empahlele, wa’Thiongo, Okeke in Africa, Brazilia as icon of modernity in Latin America, alongside artists and writers like Wilfredo Lam, Neruda, Marquez, Allende, Kahlo. This output, whilst being modern and contributing to the culture and history of modernity, is not burdened by the obsessions of modish Euro-American postmodernism. Today the contrast in meaning and concern is exemplified in the difference between the work of, say, Damien Hirst and a Palestinian artist like Khaled Hourani; it is repeated in the kind of corpus of work represented in the Documenta series of exhibitions (Enwesor et al., 2003) and artistic activities discussed in many journals, e.g. Small Axe. Other elements of a ‘minoritarian (post)modernity come into view here; they are an integral aspect of the dissident genealogy of modernity that we are outlining.

Curiously, one starting point for theorizing this alternative account is Lyotard’s (1984[1979]) much cited and misunderstood analysis of the postmodern condition. Although the impact of this text has focused on the question of the postmodern, the underlying issue, as the subtitle, ‘Report on Knowledge’, indicates, is about foundation, namely of truth, of the good society or the ethical community, of living well, of their inter-relationships and their grounding. It is also about the impossibility of foundation, its slippery character, and its secret or veiled existence. Truth, the good society, ethics refer to a transcendent domain; they operate according to the logic of the promise, a ‘to-come’ that asks that one trust in a virtual or ungrounded ground. Premodern societies took this world for granted, in which the virtual and the actual interpenetrated in a magical or miraculous domain, inhabited by spirits and intangibles entities. The grand narratives circumscribing the spatio-temporal field of this imaginary in which the ‘to-come’ and the ‘having-been’ encompass ‘the totality of life within the same unity of time’ (Lyotard, 1988) work according to the mythical organization of time, whereby the beginning and the end refer to each other. Modernity invents linearity, and thus inscribes the repetitive erasure of preceding moments. This gesture of tabula rasa must be ceaselessly re-enacted, and its costs worked through. For Lyotard, it recalls the repetition-compulsion that drives the search for the lost object of desire. A forgetting of foundation ensues, and thus its dissimulation into an absent-present metaphysics – the trace of which Nietzsche, Heidegger and Derrida have deconstructed in their different ways. There is also the temptation to refigure the desire for an emancipation into a technique or an art of bringing forth, a techne. Lyotard (1988) discusses this avenue in order to make visible the relation to an ethics and an aesthetics, as well as to argue for the work of anamnesis that needs to be part of the process of (a problematic and interminable) emancipation. It is in that context that he says:

Postmodernity is not a new age, it is the rewriting of some features to which modernity has laid claim, and to begin with, of its claim to found its legitimacy on a project of the emancipation of the whole of humanity by means of science and technics. But this rewriting, as I said, has been at work for a long time already within modernity itself. (Lyotard, 1988: 202)

The implication about the work of memory that is called for to avoid compulsionrepetition is also for Lyotard a way of resisting the erasing of duration immanent in the overwriting and overcoding of modernity in the self-referential imaginary of new communication technologies. It is important to point out that this analysis of foundation is consistent with the arguments about the elimination of the emancipatory goals of the Enlightenment, inscribed in the idea of modernity as a project, brought about by the prioritizing of the criteria of technical efficiency and of productivity. This shift, as we noted earlier, is consistent with the privilege of ‘purposive-rational’ (Habermas) or technocratic rationality over ethical and aesthetic considerations that thinkers of the Frankfurt School as well as Habermas have underlined in their critique of post-Enlightenment reason and capitalism.

The thrust of the entry has been to problematize modernity as a period. A number of final reflections will enable us to point towards more fruitful grounds for the critique of founding principles and the context of globalization and its problems. They relate to the need to rethink the relation between life/the living, technology, socialities and projects of becoming that pursue the emancipatory ideals that had motivated the radical side of Enlightenment and modernity. Stiegler (1998), in his analysis of the relation of technics to time in the history of being, points to the arguments about the separation of tekhne and episteme that appeared in the history of Western philosophy. This distinction was not made in Homeric times, and we should add, in philosophies from South Asia and Egypt that fed into ancient Greek thought. This separation, he argues, arose as part of the instrumentalization of logos that readied it as an instrument of power, through rhetoric; it led to the renunciation of knowledge. Technics thereby became the unthought in the theorization of being, a forgetting with profound consequences if one thinks of the history of being as ‘nothing but its inscription in technicity’ (Stiegler, 1998: 4). Stiegler’s exploration notes the complex genealogy of this splitting of knowledge, passing through Lamarck’s distinction between organic and inorganic life and the effects of industrialization in the technicization of science, the instrumentalizing effects of which Habermas highlighted, as we saw. For Stiegler, the overthrowing of the order of knowledge and of social organization as a consequence of 19th-century industrialization meant that,

. . . philosophical reflection was now faced with such a widespread technical expansion that all forms of knowledge were mobilized by, and brought closer to, the field of instrumentality, to which science, with its ends determined by the imperatives of the economy and war, and its epistemic status shifting accordingly, became more and more subject. (Stiegler, 1998: 2)

We have noted the extent to which capitalism and the European form of colonialism were determining in this shift; their critique remains central. But Stiegler highlights an aspect of the privilege of instrumental rationality and goals that open up an additional avenue for a critique of modernity as a period, namely, the argument that ‘the technicization of science constitutes its eidetic blinding [and] the ensuing displacement of meaning leads to an elaboration of method that is metaphysical’ (1998: 3). Furthermore, technicization, Stiegler tells us, produces loss of memory whilst calculation comes to determine the essence of modernity. The process of technicization through calculation,

. . . drives Western knowledge down a path that leads to a forgetting of its origin, which is also a forgetting of its truth. This is the ‘crisis of the European sciences’. Without a refoundation of rational philosophy, science . . . leads, it is argued, to the technicization of the world. (Stiegler, 1998: 3)

This interrogation of modernity, focusing on the questioning of technics and technical being, is part of the longer genealogy that we have tried to signal by returning to a number of moments in the mutations and departures that have renewed the critique of the present and still today provide resources for the struggle against ‘the return of the worst’ that Derrida (Derrida and Stiegler, 2002) argued was motivation for his commitment to the liberatory and critical ideals of the Enlightenment. It puts on the agenda the problem of rethinking the history of being in terms of the diverse histories, in different cultures and periods, of the constitutive interrelationship between foundational narratives, technology, and the goals of society, that is, the interrelationships of metaphysics and religion, ethics, and projects of emancipation such as modernity. The analysis of this complex history of modernity encompasses spatialities and temporalities that stretch well beyond the European and Western purview of the becoming of being. The context of ‘global knowledge’ and its dangers is the backdrop against which we argue for dissident genealogies of this history.

