# Tacit Knowledge

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》\auto\Theory Culture：《and Society 23 2 3 Problematizing Global Knowledge，2006》.md

# Tacit Knowledge

Rod Watson

Keywords ethnomethodology, knowledge, phenomenology

A knowledge originates in the work of Edmund Husserl (1962). In writing of ‘the natural standpoint’, i.e. the inter-subjective, constitutive sphere we inhabit, Husserl subjected to examination the mundane frame of reference within which ordinary persons routinely apperceive our phenomenal world. Within this frame of reference, which is experientially paramount, we take it for granted that we encounter things ‘as they are’, as self-given. In ordinary circumstances, any doubt about this is routinely suspended.

This taken-for-grantedness involves ‘active apperception, e.g. in facing the front of a house we tacitly assume, from our perspectival standpoint, that the house has side and rear elevations too, even though we cannot actually see them: we simply ‘know’ what houses are like – they have figured in our past experience, and so on.

Husserl devised what he termed ‘phenomenological reductions’ whereby the essential features of such taken-for-grantedness might temporarily be subjected to explicitation. Through such operations, we could turn our apprehension of the house into an explicit object of enquiry, i.e. how – through what intersubjective, experiential procedures – the house figures in the temporal course of my experience. The reductions strip away the tacit nature of our apprehensions in the natural standpoint (or attitude).

Alfred Schütz (1967) applied and extended Husserl’s approach, both to the social world and to social-scientific theorizations of that world. He conceived of society members as apprehending and acting in their lived world as a phenomenal domain constituted through an intersubjectively held framework of ordinary commonsense knowledge as built into lay members’ practical actions. Such knowledge included a set of typifications of persons, actions and settings, and of predicates such as motives. This framework is taken-forgranted and its constituents were incorporated into the production of sensible actions in an unstated, unquestioned way. This corpus of mundane knowledge also comprised tacit provisions for its own deployment, e.g. ego’s taking it for granted that were alter to occupy her position, then her apperception of a given object would be just the same. Similarly, it is tacitly accepted both by ego and alter that they apperceive the same object in the same way irrespective of each actor’s biographical experience; for a series of views on how such phenomenology bears on sociology, see Hinkle et al. (1977).

This taken-for-grantedness is, typically, morally compelling though not invariably so. Special circumstances may emerge where it may be – strictly temporarily – suspended, and what is normally understood and presupposed by members is subjected by them to explicit attention. This fact helps distinguish the notion of the ‘tacit’, the ‘unstated’ or the ‘taken-for-granted’ from psychologistic conceptions such as the ‘subconscious’ where explicitations might well not be amenable to such contextual explicitation. Instead, the tacit might better be conceived in terms of an ‘agreement’ akin to Durkheim’s ‘noncontractual elements of the contract’, whereby the formal terms of a contract might only be deemed feasible if there exists a ‘background scheme’ of understood moral agreements concerning proper adherence and the like.

An example of such a background scheme may be drawn from D.L. Wieder’s (1974) ethnomethodological (EM) study of inmates agreed ‘convict code’ in a parole institution. The maxims of the code – ‘don’t co-operate with staff ’, etc. – were seldom if ever explicitly stated, and certainly not as a ‘complete’ set, but they still routinely informed people’s actions in the institution. Thus, when an inmate said to staff, ‘You know I can’t organize a baseball team’, this is heard as indexing the code of non-cooperation, as a ‘telling’ of the code. The tacitly known-incommon code thereby furnishes a set of ‘hearing rules’ for particular tellings, and Wieder specifies the laic experiential procedures whereby hearers tie a telling to the code – procedures he glosses as ‘the documentary method of interpretation’ (DMI – a concept now rescinded by EM). The DMI involves the back-and-forth determination and redetermination of apprehended particulars and gestalt-like pattern. These reflexive procedures are transformed by Wieder into a topic for analysis in their own right, whereas for the institution’s personnel, they are left tacit, as, essentially, of no practical interest. Consequently, it was not just the set of maxims that was left unstated but also the procedures for their practical relevancing in particular instances. This is a classic case of (tacit) knowledge-in-action.

The DMI brings us to a crucial distinction concerning any corpus of knowledge – propositional/’substantive’ as opposed to procedural/ methodic knowledge. The distinction is one made by Gilbert Ryle, between ‘knowing that (something is the case)’ and ‘knowing how’, i.e. how to make sense of a given situation and how therefore to act competently within it. It is most typically procedural knowledge that is tacit. Even when some item of substantive knowledge is explicitly avowed or ascribed by members, the procedural vehicle for its competent avowal or ascription is deployed in a tacit way. The significance of this is encapsulated by Garfinkel’s observation that the sense of what is said depends on how it is said. Such knowledgeable ‘production procedures’ or ‘laic techniques’ are typically left unremarked – ‘seen but unnoticed’, as Garfinkel puts it – both by members and (therefore) by normative or mainstream sociologists themselves. The technique and skill that ‘go into’ mundane practices normally remain unstated and unexplicated.

However, propositional knowledge can, of course, also be tacitly assumed or presupposed, not only by lay society members but also by professional sociologists of the ‘mainstream varieties. As Rose (1960) and Garfinkel (1984, 2002) have amply demonstrated, these sociologies are built upon a tacit, unexplicated commonsensebased ‘natural sociology’. They are reliant upon a primordial natural language describability that involves both ‘knowledge that’ and ‘knowledge how’. The aim of EM and other phenomenologically based sociologies is to transform these tacit resources into topics to be explicated in their own right. In this view, the notion of tacit knowledge takes us to the heart of mainstream sociologies and reveals their most debilitating vulnerability, namely their deep confusion of explicit topic and unexplicated resource.

For those sociologies such as EM that wish to avoid such incoherence, the question remains: ‘how does one analytically explicate such a tacit knowledge-base?’ Those mainstream sociologies which are methodologically ironic (i.e. which set themselves up in competition with lay members knowledge) characteristically employ some variant of what Kenneth Burke termed a ‘perspective by incongruity’: that is, they use a variety of redescriptive tropes such as metonymy to ‘force tacit knowledge into visibility’, to ‘raise it into the foreground’ and ‘afford it a fresh view’. However, in effectuating such redescriptions such a project risks falsifying the intrinsic phenomenal integrity of the very knowledge it seeks to reveal. It must also be said that many professional sociologies simply do not notice the stratum of tacit knowledge in the first place.

Instead, phenomenologically based approaches such as EM have sought to exhibit the tacit in nonironic ways somewhat akin to phenomenological reduction. This was, in part, brought about by the taking of a praxiological turn, to treating of knowledge-in-action. However, since the knowledgebased production procedures for particular actions are themselves highly likely to be tacit, both buried from view and disattended (though nonetheless, of course, utterly relied upon), devices are still required to bring them to the explicit attention of the analyst. Such devices included Garfinkel’s well-known, though rapidly rescinded ‘breach’ interventions (Garfinkel, 1963), and the study of naturally occurring practices such as ‘explicative transactions’ and of interactions with those conceived as ‘mentally ill (Pollner, 1987), or the study of naturally occurring ‘anomalies’ in the attitude of everyday life such as the case of an intersexed person (Garfinkel, 1967): this last study had a profoundly methodological intent.

The tacit is often conceived according to a spatial metaphor: ‘background’ versus ‘foreground’. This metaphor derives from gestalt approaches and locates the tacit in a kind of ecology of mind. This metaphor has its pitfalls, however, and more recent studies have attempted to recast the conception of the tacit, e.g. Jalbert’s exemplary study of the procedural work of tacit presupposition, elision, passivisation and agentdeletion in televized US news reports on the Israeli invasion of Lebanon: again, such praxiological approaches can show us the active work that the unstated can do.

