# Notes on the Editor and Contributors PAUL GREENHALGH is a member of the Department of Research at the Victoria and Albert Museum and a tutor on the V&A/RCA design course. He also teaches students of ceramics, glass, metalwork and jewellery at the Royal College of Art. He has written for many journals and magazines. His first book Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions and World's Fairs, 1851-1939 was published in 1988. CLIVE WAINwRIGHT is a member of the curatorial staff of the Victoria and Albert Museum, with special responsibilities for its nineteenth-century collections. He has written extensively for journals, magazines and catalogues and recently published The Romantic Interior: The British Collector at Home, 175o– 1850 (1989). TIM BENTON is Professor in the History of Art at the Open University. Since the Open University course History of Architecture and Design', with its series of publications (1975), he has specialised on Le Corbusier. His books include The Villas of Le Corbusier (1987) and he contributed to the Arts Council's exhibition catalogue, Le Corbusier: Architect of the Century (1987). MARTIN GAUGHAN is a senior lecturer in the History and Theory of Art and Design, and course co-ordinator for Theoretical Studies on the MA Fine Arts course at the Faculty of Art and Design, South Glamorgan Institute of Higher Education, Cardiff. wENDY KAPLAN has worked as a museum consultant. From 1979 to 1987 she was research associate at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, where she organised the exhibition ‘The Art that is Life: The Arts and Crafts Movement in America, 1875-192o', and was principal author of the accompanying exhibition catalogue. JULIAN HOLDER is an architectural historian. A former member of the Design History Society, he is associate lecturer in Design History at Loughborough College of Art and Design. He is a regular contributor to design magazines, particularly Building Design. He contributed to the Arts Council's W. R. Lethaby exhibition at the Central School of Art and Design (1984) and to the National Theatre exhibition, The Melodramatic Imagination', which coincided with the National Film Theatre's season, Hollywood as Melodrama'. He is currently writing a book on British design in the 197os. MIMI wILMs works as a design historian at SHIVKV, Genk, in Belgium. She has been involved in the promotion of design history and education on an international level, and has lectured on Belgian design throughout Europe. GILLIAN NAYLOR is a senior lecturer at the Royal College of Art, and course leader of the V& A/R CA course in the History of Design. She has written many articles on nineteenth- and twentieth-century design, and her books include The Bauhaus (1968), The Arts and Crafts Movement, The Bauhaus Reassessed (1987), William Morris, By Himself (1989) and Bloomsbury: Artists, Designers, Writers, By Themselves (199o). She is currently working on aspects of design in relation to nationalism and Eastern Europe. PENNY SPARKE is a senior lecturer at the Royal College of Art. A former lecturer at Brighton Polytechnic, she was in part responsible for the establishment there of a BA course in the history of design, one of the first of such courses anywhere. She has written very widely on twentieth-century design, and is author of the following books: Sottsass (1981), An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century and Furniture (both 1986), Japanese Design (1987) and Italian Design (1989). GUY JULIER is a freelance design consultant. He studied the history of art at Manchester University and the history of design at the V&A/RCA. His book, New Spanish Design, will be published in 1991.