## References ## Introduction 1 The emphasis on style in the book is one of the earliest and clearest indications of the shift in thinking. Original title, The International Style: Architecture since 1922 (New York, 1932); reprint entitled The International Style (New York, 1966). 2 See Chapter 8. 3 There was, of course, a very reactionary contingency present as well, provided by the French and other exhibiting nations. See Paul Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas: Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions and World's Fairs, 1851-1939 (Manchester, 1988). 4 This was more than partly due to the more advanced condition of architectural training. In the early years of this century architecture became a more singularly identifiable profession, enabling an intellectual forum to evolve and to forge links with other disciplines. Moreover, architects not infrequently became furniture and product designers. Throughout most of this text, then, the use of the term design implies architecture as well as other forms. 5 Recommended reading: see Select Bibliography. 6 Recommended reading: see Select Bibliography. 7 Recommended reading: see Select Bibliography. 8 Purism is normally used to refer specifically to the painters in the circle of Le Corbusier and Amedée Ozenfant; I use it here in a broader sense to include their whole range of activity. 9 Recommended reading: see Select Bibliography. 10 I believe I first used this term after seeing it in an essay by Irwin Panofsky, in which he attributes the flowering of cultural activity during the Renaissance to a process of decompartmentalisation. I apologise to the reader for my inability to find this reference. The idea of decompartmentalisation in the present context is exemplified in Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilization (New York, 1963) and Jürgen Habermas, 'Modernity – An Incomplete Project' (198o) in Hal Foster (ed.), Post-modern Culture (London, 1985). II Berthold Lubetkin, quoted from a letter written to Dr Monica Felton in 1947, reproduced in Peter Coe and Malcolm Reading, Lubetkin and Tecton: Architecture and Social Commitment (Bristol, 1981). 12 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto (1872; English trans. 1888, this edn. Harmondworth, 1967, with introduction by A. J. P. Taylor). 13 Karl Marx, 'Alienated Labour', from Economic-Philosophical Manuscripts (1844). Quoted from Alaistair Clayre (ed.), Industrialization and Culture (Milton Keynes, 1977), PP. 245-50. 14 Ibid. 1 5 Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture, trans. Frederick Etchells (London, 1927). p. 17. 16 Walter Gropius, The New Architecture and the Bauhaus (London, 1935), p. 20. 17 The term emerged with Wagner, who believed the opera capable of using every art towards a single end. It then became part of the common parlance of Art Nouveau designers, before filtering through into Modern Movement thinking. 18 Serge Chermayeff, ‘The Architect and the World Today' (1935) in Design and the Public Good, ed. S. Chermayeff and R. Plunz (Cambridge, Mass., 1982), p. 1 17. 19 Walter Gropius, Principles of Bauhaus Production (Dessau, 1926), quoted from Ulrich Conrads (ed.), Programmes and Manifestoes on Twentieth Century Architecture (London, 1970). 20 Kurt Ewald, 'The Beauty of Machines' (1925-6), quoted from Charlotte Benton, Tim Benton and Aaron Scarf, Form and Function (Milton Keynes, 1975). 21 Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture. 22 See Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man (London, 1871); Raymond Williams, ‘Social Darwinism', in his Problems in Materialism and Culture (London, 198o); John MacKenzie, Propaganda and Empire: The Manipulation of British Public Opinion 1880-1914 (Manchester, 1984); Paul Greenhalgh, Human Showcases', in Ephemeral Vistas: Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions and World's Fairs, 1851-1939. 23 Adolf Loos, 'Ornament and Crime', 19o8, quoted from Nuenz and Pevsner, Adolf Loos (London, 1966). 24 P. Johnson and H.-R. Hitchcock, The International Style (New York, 1966), p. 19. 25 There is a vast literature on this period of European painting. Recommended reading: Werner Haftmann, Painting in the Twentieth Century (London, 1965), 2 vols.; John Golding, Cubism: A History and an Analysis 1907-14 (London, 1968); Alfred H. Barr, Cubism and Abstract Art (New York, 1936); Virginia Spate, Orphism: The Evolution of Non-figurative Art in Paris 1910–1914 (Oxford, 1979); Tate Gallery, Towards a New Art: Essays on the Background to Abstract Art 1910-192o (London, 1980). 26 Theo Van Doesburg, ‘Thought Vision Creation', De Stijl Magazine, December 1918, pp. 23-4, quoted from Joost Baljeu, Theo Van Doesburg (New York, 1974). 27 De Stijl, 'Manifesto III, Towards a Newly Shaped World', De Stijl Magazine, August 1921, pp. 125–6, quoted from Baljeu, Theo Van Doesburg. 28 See W. Ray Crozier and Antony J. Chapman, ‘The Perception of Art: The Cognitive Approach and Its Context', in Crozier and Chapman (eds.), Cognitive Processes in the Perception of Art (Oxford, 1984). 29 A good introductory discussion of this topic can be found in Eric Hobsbawm, 'Waving Flags: Nations and Nationalism', in his The Age of Empire, 1870–1914 (London, 1987). 30 Museum of Modern Art, New York, 'Machine Art', exhibition held 6 March - 30 April 1934, organised in part by Philip Johnson. Catalogue reprinted by Arno Press (New York, 1966). 31 See, for example, Mary Warnock (ed.), Utilitarianism by John Stuart Mill (London, 1962). The logic of the argument was that the ‘greatest number' would decide the greatest good' if they were in a position to choose properly. This meant that they had to have prior access to knowledge before they decided. In other words, they had to be shown what the greatest good' was, in appropriate conditions, before they could be allowed to choose for themselves. Thus populism became paternalism. 32 Gropius, New Architecture and the Bauhaus. 33 Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture. 34 Numbers of the Dadas were also involved in the Modern Movement in design, most notably Van Doesburg, under the pseudonym I. K. Bonset. In the main, however, both the Dadas and later the Surrealists were aggressively against what they perceived to be an oppressive rationalism within the Modern Movement. André Breton could never have preferred Plato to Heraclitus; the nearest he came to a sustained appreciation of design can be found in his continual championing of Art Nouveau. There is a text which constructs the history of Western architecture around the tension between Rationalism and Romanticism. See Wojciech G. Lesnikowski, Rationalism and Romanticism in Architecture (New York, 1982). 6 It is unlikely that all Pioneer Modernists favoured a left-wing revolution. The majority appear to have been Revisionists, committed to change without violence. Nevertheless, most of them recognised the possibility of revolution, and would have embraced it, as indeed the Russian constructivists did, to pursue their dreams. In terms of overt proclamations, Modernists were forced, as the r9zos wore on, to be pragmatic in their affiliations. Gillian Naylor's Bauhaus Reassessed (London, 1985) deals most thoroughly, for example, with the diplomatic games Walter Gropius had to play at the Bauhaus in order to prevent its investigation and even closure by the authorities. Some writers have seen the formation of moral consciousness of the Modern Movement, from nineteenth-century thinkers like Pugin onwards, as being essentially socialist and/ or revolutionary. See, e.g., David Watkin, Morality and Architecture (Oxford, 1977). 37 Antonio Gramsci, 'A Single Language and Esperanto', in Selections from Cultural Writings (London, 1985). 38 Good introductory texts for this area are Terence Hawkes, Structuralism and Semiotics (London, 1977); Christopher Norris, Deconstruction: Theory and Practice (London, 1982); Terence Eagleton, An Introduction to Literary Theory (Oxford, 1983). 39See, for example, Jean Baudrillard, 'The System of Objects' (Paris, 1968), reprinted in Mark Poster (ed.), Jean Baudrillard: Selected Writings (Stanford, Conn., 1988). 40 For the most sophisticated development of the concept of the division of idea from essence, T. Adorno and E. Horkheimer, The Dialectic of Enlightenment (New York, 1944; this edn. trans. John Cumming, London, 1979); Martin Jay, ‘The Fractured Totality: Society and the Psyche', in Martin Gay, Adorno (London, 1984); Herbert Marcuse, The Aesthetic Dimension (London, 1978) and One-Dimensional Man (London, 1964; new edn. London, 1986); Jürgen Habermas, 'Modernity – An Incomplete Project', in Poster (ed.), Jean Baudrillard. 41 See Jean Baudrillard, The Masses: The Implosion of the Social in the Media', in Poster (ed.), Jean Baudrillard. 42 Roland Barthes, The Death of the Author', in Image-Music-Text (Paris 1968; this edn., Glasgow, 1977); see also Janet Wolfe, ‘The Death of the Author', in her Social Production of Art (London, 1981). 43 See, for example, Dick Hebdige, Hiding in the Light (London, 1988); Bennet, Mercer and Woollacott (eds.), Popular Culture and Social Relations (Milton Keynes, 1986). 44 The analysis and condemnation of consumption has been a common feature of twentieth-century social studies, especially on the left. ## 1 Clive Wainwright: The Legacy of the Nineteenth Century 1 John Ruskin, Modern Painters ıI1 (London, 1856), p. 263. 2 E. Viollet-le-Duc, Lectures on Architecture, I (London, 1877), p. 446. 3 Ibid., p. 451. 4 George Martin Huss, Rational Building being a translation of the article 'Construction' in the Dictionnaire Raisonné de l’Architecture Française (London and New York, 1895), p. 318. 5 Ibid., P. 318. 6 J. Mordaunt Crook, William Burges and the High Victorian Dream (London, 1981), p. 120. 7 Clive Wainwright, The Romantic Interior: The British Collector at Home 1750–1850 (New Haven and London, 1989). Plates 85 and 107 illustrate these. 8 A. W. N. Pugin, The True Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture (London, 1841), P. 56. 9 Ibid., p. I. 10 John Ruskin, The Stones of Venice 1 (London, 1851), p. 370. I1 'Sources of Expression in Architecture', The Edinburgh Review, October 1851, p. 371. 12 John Ruskin, The Seven Lamps of Architecture (London, 1849), p. 161. 1 3 Pugin, True Principles, p. 45. 14 C. F. A. Voysey, Individuality (London, 1915), p. 89. 1 5 Hermann Muthesius, Das Englische Haus (Berlin, 1 904), new English edn. trans. Janet Seligman (London, 1979), p. 1 56. 16 Le Corbusier, L’art decoratif d’aujourd'hui (Paris, 1925), new English edn. trans. J. I. Dunnett (London, 1987), p. 132. 17 William Wordsworth, A Complete Guide to the Lakes (London, 1843), p. 1 59. 18 Ibid., p. 162. 19 Kata Phusin [John Ruskin], 'The Poetry of Architecture', The Architectural Magazine, v (1838), p. 98. 20 W. R. Lethaby (ed.), Ernest Gimson: His Life and Work (London, 1924), P. 37. 21 Ibid., p. 30. 22 Ruskin, Seven Lamps, p. 33. 23 A. J. B. Beresford Hope, Public Offices and Metropolitan Improvements (London, 1857), p. 22. 24 A. J. B. Beresford Hope, The Common Sense of Art. A Lecture Delivered in Behalf of the Architectural Museum At The South Kensington Museum, December 8, 1858 (London, 1858), p. 15. 25 Huss, Rational Building, pp. 194-5. 26 Viollet-le-Duc, Lectures, p. 87. 27 Ibid., pp. 80–1. 28 Robert William Billings, The Power of Form Applied to Geometric Tracery: One Hundred Designs and their Foundations Resulting from One Diagram (London, 1851), p. v. 29 Ibid., p. 9. 30 A. W. N. Pugin, Floriated Ornament (London, 1849), p. 3. 31 Ruskin, Stones of Venice I (London, 1853), p. 181. 32 Le Corbusier, L’Art decoratif d’aujourd'hui, p. 194. 33 Sir Reginald Blomfield, Modernismus (London, 1934), pp. 165–6. ## 2 Tim Benton: The Myth of Function 1 In addition to providing a workable quantity of material, this method, I believe, insures (sic) the material's consistently reputable quality': Larry L. Ligo, The Concept of Function in Twentieth-Century Architectural Criticism, (New York, 1984), p. 4. 2 This must in part be due to the vagaries of the Art Index. Ligo asserts that there was a real dearth of architectural criticism during the first three or four decades of this century' (p. 1 6). But this simply reflects the Anglo-Saxon bias and ignores the wealth of material in journals such as Das neue Frankfurt, Wasmuths Monatshefte, Architecture d’Aujourd'hui, Wendingen, de 8 en opbouw and many others. 3 Louis Sullivan, Carson Pirie Scott; Frank Lloyd Wright, Robie house; Gerrit Rietveld, Schröder house; Walter Gropius, Bauhaus, Dessau; Mies van der Rohe, German Pavilion, Barcelona; Le Corbusier, Villa Savoye; Frank Lloyd Wright, Falling Water'; Alvar Aalto, Baker house dormitory; Frank Lloyd Wright, Guggenheim Museum; Mies van der Rohe, Farnsworth house; Le Corbusier, Ronchamp; Louis Kahn, Richards Medical Research building; Paul Rudolph, Yale School of Art and Architecture. 4 Many of the articles were written after 194o about buildings already two or more decades old, and after the first main wave of monographic publications on the history of the Modern Movement (Platz, Giedion, Pevsner, Mumford, etc.). 5 Ligo says that this . . . refers to the "feelings" which buildings stir in their viewers, users and critics, including vertigo, claustrophobia, directional confusion, psychic comfort, or less specific feelings and emotions'. Clearly the borderline with aesthetic experience is a blurred one. Ligo, Concept of Function in Twentieth-Century Architectural Criticism, p. 5. 6 Defined as 'the concretization of social institutions and values characteristic of particular cultures or eras'. Ibid. 7 'Cultural-existential function' refers to the concretization of universal values or subconscious structures of spatial and psychological orientation which are related to man's essential humanity rather than to his life in a specific time and place. Ibid. 8 Ibid., p. 12. 9 Vitruvius' famous formula of firmitas, utilitas, and venustas was taken out of context; his more complex formula for the Fundamental Principles of Architecture' in Bk I, Ch. 2, was more formalistic: ‘Architecture depends on Order (in Greek taxis), Arrangement (in Greek diathesis), Eurythmy, Symmetry, Propriety, and Economy (in Greek oiconomia)' (in Morgan's translation, Dover edn., New York, 196o, p. 13). Since many of these terms seemed obscure, and Vitruvius' further explanations deliberately mystifying, later theorists latched on to the simpler triad. 1o Roger Scruton goes to some trouble to assert that the theory of functionalism ‘as an account of the nature of building, is simply vacuous’. But he gives no example of such a theory, and indeed has some sensible things to say about the interdependence of functionalism and aesthetic criteria. R. Scruton, The Aesthetics of Architecture, (London, 1979), pp. 38–43. I I Even Wells Coates, who flirted with functionalist rhetoric, was specific: As architects we know that there are a great many different solutions of the purely technical and economical problems of efficiency and organisation, and of assembling and construction: from all these we take those solutions which dispose of such problems and give also the qualities of form and space, fine scale and proportion, cleanliness and service and comfort and convenience, which we call architecture.' Wells Coates, 'Modern Dwellings or Modern Needs', a radio debate between Geoffrey Boumphrey and Wells Coates, printed in The Listener, 24 May 1933, Pp. 819–22. A commonplace in England was to reiterate Wotton's version of the Vitruvian triad Commodity, Firmness and Delight'; this was used as the structuring principle for the MARs exhibition in the New Burlington Galleries, January 1938. 12 David Watkin at times appears to believe that architecture can be appreciated intuitively and autonomously, with a knowledge of architectural style and traditions but without regard to the rest of the real world. See his description of architecture involving taste, imagination and scholarship', in Morality and Architecture (Oxford, 1977), p. 12. 13 John Gloag, a fierce critic of Le Corbusier, noted that ‘It is significant that few discussions about modern architecture take place, either in the press or in books, or at the meetings of societies that devote their time to aesthetic analysis, without the name of M. Le Corbusier being mentioned, either with acrimony or approval’. John Gloag, Men and Buildings (London, 1931), p. 200. 14 Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture, ed. Frederick Etchells (London, 1927), p. 29. Note the comparable assertion by Geoffrey Scott, Architecture, simply and immediately perceived, is a combination, revealed through light and shade, of spaces, of masses, and of lines', The Architecture of Humanism, (London, 1914), p. 21o. 15 Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture, p. 203. 16 Ibid., p. 10–11. 17 Watkin, Morality and Architecture, p. 40. 18 For example, The Listener published the results of a 'symposium' based on a questionnaire sent round to a number of British architects on 26 July 1933. This listed as its second question: Has functionalism in building gone too far?’ Although most of the responding architects tried to qualify the term, it is clear from the debate that the Modern Movement was commonly accused of 'functionalism'. Reginald Blomfield assumed that the new architects were selling the fort of architecture to the engineers, and he called this abnegation of aesthetic responsibility, combined with a denial of tradition, functionalism. 19 The expression was used by Sigfried Giedion to describe the bombast of Percier and Fontaine's designs for Napoleon. S. Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command (London and New York, 1949). 20 F. R. S. Yorke, The Modern House in England (London, 1937). 21 Sir Reginald Blomfield, response to the questionnaire Is Modern architecture on the right track?', The Listener, 26 July 1933. 22 Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture, p. x. 23 Ibid., p. xv. A comparable image did appear in Ozenfant and Le Corbusier's article, La Formation de l'Optique Moderne', L’Esprit Nouveau, but not in Vers une architecture. 24 See Trystan Edwards, Good and Bad Manners in Architecture (London, 1924). 25 Howard Robertson, Architecture Explained (London, 1927), pp. 165-6. 26 Bruno Taut, Modern Architecture (London, 1929), p. 9, cited in Watkin, Morality and Architecture, p. 40. 27 Gloag, Men and Buildings, p. 205. 28 Lewis Mumford, 'Machinery and the Modern Style', New Republic, xxvIı, 3 August 1921; 'Architecture and the Machine', American Mercury, II1 (September 1924), Pp. 77–8o; and ‘The social background of Frank Lloyd Wright', Wendingen, Vıı, no. 5 (1925), pp. 65-7 (cited in Ligo, Concept of Function in Twentieth-Century Architectural Criticism, p. 1 5). 29 Ligo, Concept of Function in Twentieth-Century Architectural Criticism, p. 1 6, citing Theory and Design, p. 321. 30 See the interview with Colin Penn quoted in Charlotte and Tim Benton, Thirties British Art and Design Before the War (London, 198o), p. 61. 31 Where Highpoint I had incorporated a large common vestibule and tea-room as an expression of the theory of the 'social condensor' (based on Russian theoretical principles), Highpoint II has a minimal lobby and direct access by lift to each apartment. Lubetkin's own penthouse suite here, with its exposed brickwork, vaulted ceiling, rough wooden chairs with cow-skin covers, colour and Chelsea dogs, marks a strong contrast with earlier work. 32 See F. R. S. Yorke's introduction to The Modern House in England, where he outlines a number of such conflicts. 33 Berthold Lubetkin, 'Modern Architecture in England', in American Architect and Architecture, February 1937, cited in Charlotte Benton (ed.), Documents (Milton Keynes, 1975). 34 Wells Coates, 'Response to Tradition', Architectural Review, November 1932, pp. 16 5-8. Part of a polemic with Edwin Lutyens, whose article entitled Tradition Speaks was also published in this issue. 3 5Herbert Read, To hell with culture', The Politics of the Unpolitical (London, 1943), p. 55; cited in Robin Kinross, Herbert Read's Art and Industry: a history', Journal of Design History, vol. 1, no. 1 (1988), pp. 35-50. 36 Architectural Review, May 1935, p. 192. 37 H. T. Pledge, 'Beauty in Machinery', Architectural Review, March 1932, pp. 85-7. 38See Charlotte and Tim Benton, Architecture: contrasts of a decade', in Thirties British Art and Design Before the War. 39 This is especially true of the series of radio talks put on between 1933 and 1934 (reprinted in The Listener), which, for example, pitted Wells Coates against Reginald Blomfield (see Charlotte Benton, Documents, for reprinted extracts of a number of these talks). ## 3. Paul Greenhalgh: The Struggles within French Furniture 1900-1930 1 See Paul Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas: Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions and World's Fairs, 1851-1939 (Manchester, 1988). 2 Reports of the American Commission on the Paris Universal Exposition 1889, vol. 2 (of 5) (Washington, 1890). 3 Diplomatic and Consular Report 1906-1907, French Imports from the UK. Foreign Office unpublished document. 4 I took it from an article of that name by Jeffrey Daniels. 5 Emile Bayard, Le Style Moderne (Paris, 1919). 6 Quote from 'Ruhlmann'. 7 This illustration came from the Art et Décoration of that year, p. 88. 8 Quoted from Olmer Pierre, Le Mobilier Français d’Aujourd'hui (Paris, 1926). 9 Taken from Rapport Général, Exposition Anglo-Latine, Section Française (Paris, 1913). 10 Louis de Fourcaud, 'Le Bois', from L'Art à l'Exposition Universelle de 19oo (Paris, 1900). 11 Ibid. 12 Bayard, Le Style Moderne. 13 Emile Sedeyn, Le Mobilier (Paris, 1921). 14 Ibid. 1 5 Bayard, L.e Style Moderne. 16 Ibid. 17 'International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Art, Paris, 1925', Department of Overseas Trade translation of Regulations and Classification of Exhibits (London, 1924). 18 Pierre, Le Mobilier Français d’Aujourd'hui. 19 See Select Bibliography for further reading. 2o The Groult illustration is taken from the special issue of Art et Décoration. 21 Edited by Maurice Dufréne. 22 See Tim Benton (ed.), Le Corbusier: Architect of the Century (London, 1987), especially Charlotte Benton on Furniture Design', and the Open University Course authored by them, History of Architecture and Design 1890-1939, Units 15-16, 'Design 192os' (Milton Keynes, 1975). 23 Quoted from Charlotte Benton, Furniture Design' (see n. 22). In 1925 Le Corbusier and his associates had not fully developed their own designs for furniture, but by 1929 they were able to present a full suite in the recently completed gallery of the Maison La Roche (illustrated on p. 2r). We can thus assume that, had they been able to, the designers of the Pavillon de l'Esprit Nouveau would have furnished their building more like this. ## 4. Martin Gaughan: The Cultural Politics of the German Modernist Interior I Bauhaus, no. 1, Jg. 3 (1928), p. 10. All translations from the German are my own unless otherwise stated. Makart was the late nineteenth-century Viennese painter, popular with a certain section of the bourgeoisie. The eclectic clutter of his studio and house, including furniture and fittings from earlier European periods and exotic sources, was a model for his bourgeois patrons. 2 Jeffrey Herf's important study Reactionary Modernism: Technology, Culture and Politics in Weimar and the Third Reich (Cambridge, 1986) examines the way in which technological modernisation and modernising tendencies were assimilated into conservative and right-wing cultural ideology. In this essay I am using Walter Benjamin's theorising of the nature of commodity fetishism and its relationship to the phantasmagoric (see below). Marx had described the commodity as a very queer thing indeed, full of metaphysical subtleties and theological whimsies' (Capital, ch. 1, s. 4): commodity fetishism is a social process, masking the relations of production, displacing the social relationship from the producers and investing it in the product. Benjamin theorised commodity fetishism as producing hallucinations of identity out of which appear the phantasmagoria of men and commodities as weird, personified types'. Gillian Rose, The Melancholy Science (London, 1978) p. 42. The phantasmagoric arises from the denial of this relationship between the commodity and culture: it is the image that it (society) produces of itself and which it generally inscribes as its culture . . . when it distracts from the fact that it is producing commodities' (ibid.). 3 V. N. Volosinov, Marxism and the Philosophy of Language (New York, 1973), p. 23. (First published in Russian, 1927.) 4 This term ‘sociological impressionism’ is used, for instance, by David Frisby in his book Fragments of Modernity (Cambridge, 1988). 5 Quoted in Domus, 1988, p. 695. 6 London, 1983. Quotes below are from pp. 15 and 16. I am supplementing Berman's characterisation of the experience of modernity with Perry Anderson's commentary on it, Modernity and Revolution', New Left Review, no. 144. I have found Anderson's structure, the triangulation of forces', most useful to thinking through a politics of Modernism. 7 Jugendstil is the German form of Art Nouveau. The Werkbund was an association of industrialists, artists and designers, established in 1907 to address the rôle of German design in the context of the ‘ever expanding, drastically fluctuating, capitalist world markets', as described by Berman above. 8 W. Benjamin, Understanding Brecht (London, 1973). The Brecht-Lukács argument may be found in E. Bloch et al., Aesthetics and Politics (London, 198o), Afterword by Frederic Jameson. 9 Marshall Berman, All that is Solid Melts into Air (London, 1983). 10 L. Burckhardt (ed.), The Werkbund: Studies in the History and Ideology of the Deutscher Werkbund 1907-1933 (London, 1980), p. 22. 11 Ibid., p. 10. 12 M. Bradbury and J. McFarlane, Modernism (Harmondsworth, 1976), p. 26. 13 W. Benjamin, Charles Baudelaire: a Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism (London, 1983), p. 167. This passage is included in the fragments: ‘Paris – the Capital of the Nineteenth Century'. 14 New Left Review, no. 164. pp. 27–33. 15 Benjamin, Baudelaire, p. 168. 16 R. Hamann and J. Hermand, Epochen deutscher Kultur von 187o bis zur Gegenwart, vol. 4: Stilkunst um 1900 (Munich, 1973). 17 Ibid., p. 252. 18 Ibid., p. 274. 19 Ibid., p. 273. 20 Gert Selle, Die Geschichte des Design in Deutschland von 187o bis heute: Entwicklung der industriellen Produktkultur, Du Mont Dokument (Cologne, 1981). Selle contains some reproductions of 'declassed' Jugendstil. 21 Bernd Meurer and Hartmund Vinçon, Industrielle Âsthetik: zu Geschichte und Theorie der Gestaltung, Werkbund Archiv, vol. 9 (Berlin, 1973). 22 Hamann and Hermand, Epochen deutscher Kultur, p. 253. 23 Zwischen Kunst and Industrie: Der Deutsche Werkbund, Die Neue Sammlung (Munich, 1975), p. 38, 'Die Phantasie der Lebenseinrichtung erhebt sich zum Spezialberuf'. The Muthesius passage that follows is from p. 39. 24Hamann and Hermand, Epochen deutscher Kultur, p. 442, um dieser parvenuhaften Prätention eine bürgerliche Sachkultur entgegenzustellen'. 25 Zwischen Kunst and Industrie, p. 38 (see n. 23). 26 Hamann and Hermand, Epochen deutscher Kultur, p. 452. These latter qualities, known as Biedermeier, were associated with the early nineteenth-century bourgeois interior, signifying simplicity, honesty, uprightness. 27 Meurer and Vinçon, Industrielle Asthetik, p. 1 1o. 28 W. Rathenau, Von Kommenden Dinge (Berlin, 1917), quoted in Hamann and Hermand, Epochen deutscher Kultur, p. 452. 29 The Dawes Plan (1924) was an American-backed financial arrangement to stabilise the German economy after the 1923 runaway inflation and massive social disruption. It paved the way for industrial rationalisation and mass-production methods, both of which would affect building programmes, as at Frankfurt or the Dessau Bauhaus. 30 H. Olbrich, 'Die “Neue Sachlichkeit" in Widerstreit der Ideologien und Theorien zur Kunstgeschichte des 20 Jahrhunderts', Weimarer Beitrage, Sonderdruck, H. 12 (1980), p. 74. 31 Bauhausbauten Dessau, vol. 12, Bauhaus Books, quoted in Hans M. Wingler, Bauhaus (Cambridge, Mass., 1986), p. 410. 32 Selle, Die Geschichte des Design in Deutschland, p. 128. 33 Ibid. A sociological study from the period by Lisbeth Franzen-Hellersberg, The Young Female Worker: Her Work Life and Life-style, suggests that young working-class women had a greater sense of reality, lacked the overheated illusions – which make the petty bourgeois teenagers prone to mistake novels and film dramas for reality’. There was stronger resistance to the representation of mass culture because of their participation in their own socialist culture. I am indebted to a recent article by Günther Berghaus for this information: 'Girlkultur', Journal of Design History. nos. 3-4, 1988. 34 Selle, Die Geschichte des Design in Deutschland, p. 129. 35'SPD – Frauenwelt', H. 6, S. 1 3i, 1932, quoted in the catalogue 'Vorwärts – und nicht vergessen': Arbeiterkultur in Hamburg um 1930 (Hamburg, 1981), p. 76. 36 Published in Die Frau, vol. 28 (1920–1), and by M. Thomae, vol. 29 (1922). Details from Nicholas Bullock, Journal of Design History, nos. 3-4 (1988). 37 London, 1988. 38 Hamburg catalogue, p. 77 (see n. 35). 39 The Taut brothers, Gropius and Moholy-Nagy, amongst others, represent this cultural politics. May was urban planner at Frankfurt, Wagner in Berlin. Hannes Meyer was Bauhaus director between 1928–30. 40 Design After Modernism: Beyond the Object (London, 1988), p. 22. 41 Charles S. Maier, Recasting Bourgeois Europe: Stabilisation in France, Germany and Italy in the Decade after World War 1 (Princeton, NJ., 1975). 42 The illustrations in a sense construct a narrative for the last five years of Weimar. The Frankfurt Kitchen', the type which Kallai may have had in mind, and the more generally reformist Wohnkultur interior stand in contrast to the socio-economic reality governing design Modernism and the larger constituency it attempted to address. Chancellor Brüning reduced wages and welfare payments in a period of rapidly rising unemployment. 43 David Harvey, The Condition of Postmodernity (Oxford, 1989), p. vii ## 5. Wendy Kaplan: Building Utopia: Pioneer Modernism on the American West Coast Many people went out of their way to help with research for this essay, generously sharing their expertise, photographs and access to private houses. I am especially grateful to Jim Benjamin, Bob Winter, Jeffrey Chusid, Virginia Kazor, Bruce Kamerling and Julius Shulman. 1 For an illuminating discussion of this issue, see David Gebhard's essay, ‘The Moderne 1920–1941', in David Gebhard and Harriette Von Breton, Kem Weber: The Moderne in Southern California, 1920–1941 (Santa Barbara, Ca., 1976). See also Thomas S. Hines, 'Los Angeles Architecture: The issue of Tradition in a Twentieth-Century City', in David G. De Long, Helen Searing, and Robert A. M. Stern (eds.), American Architecture: Innovation and Tradition (New York, 1986), pp. 112–29. 2 Harwell Hamilton Harris, Regionalism and Nationalism', Student Publication of the School of Design, North Carolina State College of the University of North Carolina at Raleigh, vol. 14, no. 5 (1958), p. 28. 3 Reyner Banham, Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (London, 196o), p. 329. 4For more on Los Angeles in the early part of the century, see David Gebhard, Schindler (New York, 1972), pp. 45-51, and Kevin Starr's two books, Americans and the California Dream, 1850-1915 (New York, 1973) and Inventing the Dream (New York, 1984). 5 Irving J. Gill, ‘The Home of the Future: The New Architecture of the West: Small Homes for a Great Country', Craftsman 30 (May 1916), p. 151. 6 Space does not permit the illustration of all Gill houses discussed in this essay. Those not included here can be found either in Esther McCoy's chapter on Gill in Five California Architects (New York, 196o), pp. 59–101, or in Bruce Kamerling, 'Irving Gill – The Artist as Architect', Journal of San Diego History 25 (Spring 1979), pp. I § 1-2oo. The article is available in booklet form at the San Diego Historical Society. 7 Much of the information concerning Irving Gill was derived from conversations with Bruce Kamerling, Curator at the San Diego Historical Society. I am grateful to him for sharing his years of research with me. 8 Gill, The Home of the Future’, pp. 141–2. Gill had various partners over the years; Frank Mead shared his office at the time of the Allen house's construction. From 1897 to 19o6 he was in partnership with William S. Hebbard, and for a few years, starting in 1914, with his nephew Louis. Hebbard preferred English Revival styles and Louis Gill was more of an office manager than creative participant. Gill's one-year partnership with Mead, however, was more important to his developing style. Mead had travelled to study the vernacular architecture of North Africa and the Mediterranean. The white, stripped-down architecture of these regions is similar to the mission architecture Gill admired, and Mead's exposure to it influenced Gill. 9 Richard Neutra, Henry-Russell Hitchcock, and Reyner Banham are three of the many architects and historians who have observed this. See Henry-Russell Hitchcock, Architecture, Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries (Baltimore, Md., 1963), pp. 334-5; Reyner Banham, Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four Ecologies (New York, 1971), p. 61; Neutra's comparison between Gill and Loos is discussed in Hines, Los Angeles Architecture', p. 118. 10 Gill, 'The Home of the Future’, p. 147. 11 Ibid. 12 Ibid. 13 McCoy, Five California Architects, p. 75. 14 Helen M. Ferris, Irving John Gill: San Diego Architect', The Journal of San Diego History 17 (Fall 1971), p. 13. For a period description of Lewis Courts, see Eloise M. Roorbach, 'The Garden Apartments of California – Irving J. Gill - Architect', Architectural Record 34 (December 1913), Pp. 518–30. 15 McCoy, Five California Architects, p. 85. 16 Ibid., p. 71. 17 Banham, Los Angeles, p. 64. 18 Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson, The International Style (New York, 1966 edn.), pp. 25, 26, 27. 19 For an entertaining diatribe against the indignities foisted upon clients by International Style architects, see Tom Wolfe, From Bauhaus to Our House (New York, 198r), passim. 20 Frank Lloyd Wright, An Autobiography (London, 1945), p. 1 51. 21 For example, Thomas S. Hines thinks the Barnsdall house is 'one of Wright's masterworks'. See Robert Judson Clark and Thomas S. Hines, Los Angles Transfer: Architecture in Southern California, 1880-1980 (Los Angeles, 1983), p. 64. Brendan Gill is one of the house's detractors. See Brendan Gill, Many Masks: A Life of Frank Lloyd Wright (New York, 1987), p. 252. 22 Wright, Autobiography, p. 151. 23 Gill, Many Masks, p. 252. 24 Quoted in Clark and Hines, Los Angeles Transfer, p. 69. 25 Jeffrey Mark Chusid and Virginia Ernst Kazor, Frank Lloyd Wright in Los Angeles 1919-1926: An Architecture for the Southwest (Los Angeles, 1988), unpaged [p. 12]. 26 Clark and Hines, Los Angeles Transfer, p. 63. 27 The Ennis-Brown House (booklet published by the Board of Directors of the Ennis House, Los Angeles, 1988), p. 9. 28 Much of the information concerning the Freeman house and Wright's development of the textile-block system comes from conversations with Jeffrey Chusid, Administrator of the Freeman house. Chusid was most generous in sharing his research and insights with me. 29 Chusid and Kazor, Frank Lloyd Wright, unpaged [p. 12]. 30 R. M. Schindler, A Cooperative Dwelling', T-Square 2 (February 1932), pp. 20–21. This article is reprinted in the booklet R. M. Schindler House 1921-2z by Kathryn Smith, published by the Friends of the Schindler House (1987), pp. 23-4. It is also reprinted in August Sarnitz, R. M. Schindler, Architect (New York, 1988), p. 49. 31 Ibid. 32 Sarnitz, R. M. Schindler, Architect, p. 47. All seven articles that Schindler wrote for Lovell's column are reproduced in Sarnitz's book, as are many other of Schindler's articles, lectures, and letters. 33 Quoted in Esther McCoy, ‘Second Guessing Schindler', Progressive Architecture 4 (April 1989), p. 86. 34See Gebhard, Schindler, p. 8o; David Gebhard and Robert Winter, Architecture in Los Angeles (Layton, Utah, 1985), p. 2o; and Sally B. Woodbridge, California Architecture: Historic American Buildings Survey (San Francisco, 1988), p. 101. 35 Quoted in Gebhard, Schindler, p. 86. 36Sarnitz, R. M. Schindler, Architect, p. 209. The correspondence between Schindler and Johnson is reprinted in Sarnitz's book. 37 Hitchcock and Johnson, International Style, p. 40. 38 Quoted in Gebhard, Schindler, p. 86. 39 David Gebhard and Harriette Von Breton, Architecture in California: 1868–1968 (Santa Barbara, Ca., 1968), p. 22. 40 Henry-Russell Hitchcock, Preface to Gebhard, Schindler, p. 8. 41 Interview with Philip Lovell in Esther McCoy, Vienna to Los Angeles: Two Journeys (Santa Monica, Ca., 1979), p. 68. 42 Harwell Hamilton Harris, Foreword to McCoy, Vienna to Los Angeles, Pp. 12 and 8. 43 Quoted in Thomas S. Hines, Richard Neutra and the Search for Modern Architecture (New York, 1982), pp. 78–9. 44 Hines, Richard Neutra, p. 84. 45 Henry-Russell Hitchcock, Modern Architecture: Romanticism and Regeneration (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1929), p. 158. 46 For example, see Barr's Prefaces to both the exhibition catalogues, The International Style (first published in 1932) and Machine Art (first published in 1934). 47 Alfred H. Barr, Preface to Hitchcock and Johnson, International Style, p. 14. 48 Interview with Philip Lovell in McCoy, Vienna to Los Angeles, pp. 67–8. ## 6. Julian Holder: 'Design in Everyday Things': Promoting Modernism in Britain, 1912-1944 Work related to parts of this essay was previously done as a member of the Melodrama group who organised and researched a four-month film season, 'Hollywood as Melodrama’, at the National Film Theatre, London, January-April 1988. Associated with this was an exhibition at the National Theatre entitled The Melodramatic Imagination', which included a section on ‘Consumer Aesthetics'. An abridged form of this exhibition suitable for travelling is available from the British Film Institute. Apart from this group, thanks for help with this article are extended to the Manchester Central Reference Library, Christine Gledhill, Helen Long, the National Art Library, and most importantly Alison MacKenzie. 1 Lethaby to Harry Peach, March 1929. Correspondence held in the Peach Papers at the British Architectural Library, London. 2 'Style-mongering' was another of Lethaby's phrases to show his contempt for architecture and design interpreted as style. For the establishment of Modernist architecture in Britain, see Anthony Jackson, The Politics of Architecture: A History of Modern Architecture in Britain (London, 197o), and Jeremy Gould, Modern Houses in Britain 1919–1939 (London, 1977). 3 Ian Davis's essay, ‘One of the greatest evils: Dunroamin and the Modern Movement’, in Dunroamin: The Surburban Semi and Its Enemies, ed. Paul Oliver, Ian Davis, and lan Bentley (London, 198r) is one of the few accounts of the history of twentiethcentury architecture to pay it much attention to date. Though often mentioned, as above, the programmes have rarely been described. 4 Anthony Bertram, The Listener, 6 October 1937, p. 71o. J. M. Richards, in An Introduction to Modern Architecture (Harmondsworth, 194o), claimed that. . . even the best modern architecture has at present only a limited amount of positive appeal to our eyes'. 5 W. R. Lethaby, Form in Civilisation: Collected Papers on Art and Labour (London, 1922). 6Nikolaus Pevsner, Pioneers of the Modern Movement (London, 1936). This work was largely the result of research undertaken from 1930-32 whilst Pevsner was still teaching in Germany. For an account of the less polemic, and teleological, work undertaken early in Pevsner's residence in Britain, see Pauline Madge, An enquiry into Pevsner's "Enquiry"', Journal of Design History, vol, 1. no. 2. 7 Most of these important figures of the Modernist period still await serious study with the exception of Herbert Read. For Read, see specifically the recent article on his widely influential Art and Industry by Robin Kinross in Journal of Design History, vol. 1, no. 1. J. M. Richards has written his autobiography, Memoirs of an Unjust Fella. Carrington also did, in so far as his involvement with design went, in Industrial Design in Britain (London, 1976). Bertram and the prodigious Gloag have received little attention to date. 8 As John Thakara noted in the Preface to Design after Modernism: Beyond the Object (London, 1988), p. 7, 'Where theoretical work does take place, it is usually based in history departments – often in disguise.' 9 E.g., John Gloag (ed.), Design in Everyday Life and Things: the Yearbook of the DIA 1926–7 (London, 1927); 'Everyday Things' exhibition at the R1BA, 1936; N. Pevsner, Visual Pleasures from Everyday Things (London, 1946); 'Design in Everyday Life' exhibition by the British Institute of Adult Education, 1942; Design in everyday things by a man in the street' in Design for Today, April 1936; Noel Carrington, The Shape of Things: An Introduction to Design in Everyday Life (London, 1939); Anthony Bertram, Design in Daily Life (London, 1937); Anthony Bertram, Design in Everyday Things (London, 1937); Winifred M. Gill, Broadcasting and Everyday Life (London, 1939). 10 See J. M. Richards, 'The condition of architecture and the principle of anonymity', in Circle: International Survey of Constructive Art edited by J. L. Martin, Ben Nicholson, and N. Gabo (London, 1937). 11 See, however, Jonathan Woodham, 'Design and the Empire: British design in the 192os', in Art History, vol. 3, no. 2 (June 198o). 12 See Mark Swenarton, Homes Fit for Heroes: the Politics and Architecture of Early State Housing in Britain (London, 1981). 1 3 For the impact of standardisation and rationalisation generally, see Judith Merkle, Management and Ideology: the Legacy of the International Scientific Movement (Berkeley, Ca., 198o) and more specifically Mary McLeod, 'Architecture or Revolution: Taylorism, Technocracy, and Social Change', in Art Journal, Summer 1983. On housing, see J. P. Dunleavy, The Politics of Mass-housing (London, 1981) and John Burnett, A Social History of Housing 1815-1985 (London, 1986). 14 See Simon Pepper and Mark Swenarton, Home front: garden suburbs for munition workers, 1915-1918', Architectural Review, no. 976 (June 1978), pp. 364-75. I 5 As Ernst May was to record after Unwin's death, the style of architecture may have changed . . . the basic outlook . . . has not changed but has actually developed further in the direction Raymond initiated - that the welfare of men should be the only measure of our endeavours'. 16See Brian Finnimore, Houses from the Factory: System Building and the Welfare State 1942-74 (London, 1989). 17 For studies of the Garden City Movement, see Walter L. Creese, The Search for Environment: the Garden City Before and After (New Haven, Conn., 1966); Anthony Sutcliffe, The Rise of Modern Urban Planning, 1888–1914 (London, 1980); and Swenarton, Homes Fit for Heroes. 18 Le Corbusier's Vers une architecture of 1923 was translated into English in 1927 by Frederick Etchells and Gropius' work was first published in English in 1935. 19 See Manfredo Tafuri and Francesco Dal Co, Architettura contemporanea (Milan, 1976). For a general account of the towns of industrial philanthropy, see Gillian Darley, Villages of Vision (London, 1975). 20 Country Life, May 1919, p. 599. 21 For the DIA, see Nikolaus Pevsner's essay 'Patient Progress' in Studies in Art, Architecture, and Design, vol. 2 (London, 1968); Raymond Plummer, Nothing Need Be Ugly: the First Seventy Years of the Design and Industries Association (London, 1985); and generally Jonathan Woodham, The Industrial Designer and the Public (London, 1983). 22 Quoted in RIBA Journal, vol. 64 (April 1957), p. 222. 23 Lethaby, Form in Civilisation. 24 Ibid. It was the opinion of many who attended the founding of the D1A that Lethaby went out of his way to never mention the word ‘art' for fear of scaring the industrialists; see, for example, Noel Carrington's Industrial Design in Britain. 25 See Brian Cook Batsford, The Britain of Brian Cook: a Batsford Heritage (London, 1987). 26 John Gloag, Artifex: or the Future of Craftsmanship (London, 1926), p. 38. 27 Gloag (ed.), Design in Everyday Life and Things, p. xi. 29 Carrington, Industrial Design in Britain, p. 98. 30 According to the BBC Yearbook for 1931 the earlier series led to considerable interest and induced two of the speakers to meet later a large group of listeners in order to pursue the subject of modern architectural developments'. Architecture was discussed again in November 1934 in a debate between Sir Reginald Blomfield and A. D. Connell. 31 Quoted in Plummer, Nothing Need Be Ugly, p. 35. See also Bruce Holdsworth, Art education between the wars', in Journal of Art and Design Education, vol. 3, no. 2 (1984). 32 On the BBC, see Serving the nation: public service broadcasting before the war' by Paddy Scannell and David Cardiff, in Popular Culture: Past and Present, ed. B. Waites, T. Bennett, and G. Martin (London, 1982). On its struggle with popular entertainment, see Simon Frith, ‘The pleasures of the hearth: the making of BBc light entertainment', in Formations of Pleasure (London, 1983). On the work of the Talks Department, see David Cardiff, The serious and the popular: aspects of the evolution of style in the radio talk, 19z8–1939', in Media, Culture, and Society, vol. 2, no. 1 (1980). 33 The Listener, 22 August 1934, p. 341. 34See the magazine Shelf Appeal for coverage of the impact the commercial stations were having in the advertising industry at this time. 35 Maxwell Fry, 'How modern architecture came to England', Pidgeon Audio-Visual, PAV 3/8oo, n.d. Fry went on to argue how the intellectuals were caught via the MARs group exhibitions at the Burlington Galleries, and that this way of promoting Modern architecture was the right way. 36 J. M. Barton, Modern Art (London, 1932). 37 The Listener, 19 April 1933, p. 608. 38 Ibid., 22 August 1934, p. 341. 39 See John Cornforth, 'Christopher Hussey and Modern Architecture', Country Life, 22 October 1981, pp. 1366–8, and 29 October 1981, pp. 1468–70. This argument also tries surfacing at several points in John Cornforth, The Search for a Style: Country Life and Architecture 1897-1935 (London, 1988). 40 In 1927 Hussey had published The Picturesque: Studies in a Point of View, where Hill is the only twentieth-century architect mentioned. For a typical example of the application of the Picturesque model, see The Morecambe Hotel: the LMS as Maecenas', Country Life, 18 November 1933, pp. 539–44. Richards, Introduction to Modern Architecture also has interesting points to make about this building and the failings of the architect and its construction. A constant preoccupation of many writers of the period was to claim a formal, if not moral, relationship between Modernism and eighteenth-century British architecture, primarily the Georgian town house. 41 Architectural Review, vol. 76 (September 1934), p. 97. 42 These broadcasts also seem to have provided a model for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation who produced their own series of nine programmes entitled Design in Everyday Things between 17 March and 12 May 1941. I have only recently been alerted to this aspect in Tony Fry, Design History Australia: A Source Text in Methods and Resources (Sidney, 1988). 43 The Listener, 8 September 1937, p. 490. 44 Ibid., 6 October 1937, p. 711. 45 Ibid., 6 October 1937, p. 71 1. 46 Ibid., 13 October 1937, p. 780. 47 Ibid., 20 October 1937, p. 860. 48 Ibid., 27 October 1937, p. 918. 49 Ibid., 13 October 1937, p. 801. 5o Ibid., 3 November 1937, p. 975. 51 Ibid., 7 November 1937, p. 1069. 52 See Stirling Everard, The History of the Gas, Light, and Coke Company 1812–1949 (London, 1949), and Flats: Municipal and Private Enterprise by Ascot Gas Water Heaters Ltd. (London, 1938). 53 For the work of Fry, see S. Hitchens (ed.), Fry, Drew, Knight and Creamer: Architecture (London, 1978), and his Autobiographical Sketches (London, n.d.) 54 Fry, Autobiographical Sketches. 55 The Listener, 10 November 1937, p. 1009. 56 Fry, Autobiographical Sketches. 57 The Listener, 6 October 1937, p. 710. 58 Richards, Introduction to Modern Architecture, p. 81. For Penguin book design, see Jeremy Aynsley in Fifty Penguin Years (Harmondsworth, 1985). 59 Homes for All: The British Broadcasting Corporation Looks at the Problem (Worcester, 1945), p. 1 1. 60 Ibid., p. 27. 61 Ibid., p. 43. 62 Ibid., p. 65. As with Percy Good's evidence, both prefabrication and standardisation were shown to be no more advanced than in the case of the Crittall Unit house of 1919 (see n. 20). 63 For the history of the factory-made house in this country, see Finnimore, Houses from the Factory, and his The AIROí house: industrial diversification and state building policy', in Construction History Journal, vol. 2 (1985). 64 See 'Radio listening habits: London and Home Counties', Crossley Incorporated, 1939. 65 Carrington, The Shape of Things, p. xiii. As we shall see, this was to be a rare demonstration of confidence in the film industry, arguably a naïve one in the circumstances. 66 For Mass Observation's 'Worktown' project in relation to the cinema, see Jeffrey Richards and Dorothy Sheridan (eds.), Mass-observation at the Movies (London, 1987). For a discussion of the new methods of tying-in merchandise to the movies as developed in post-Depression America, see Charles Eckert, The Carole Lombard in Macy's window', in Quarterly Review of Film Studies, Winter 1978. For a particular example, see Maria LaPlace, Producing and consuming the women's film; discursive struggle in "Now, Voyager"', in Christine Gledhill (ed.), Home Is Where the Heart Is: Studies in Melodrama and the Women's Film (London, 1987). The case of product tieins and showcasing of new products in British films is the subject of further research I am currently pursuing. 67Documentary News Letter, August 1942, p. 112. 68 Anthony Bertram, The House: a Survey of the Art and Science of Domestic Architecture (London, 1945), pp. 109–111. ## 8. Gillian Naylor: Swedish Grace . . . or the Acceptable Face of Modernism? I J. M. Richards, Memoirs of an Unjust Fella (London, 198o). 2 Charles Holme (ed.), Peasant Art in Sweden, Lapland and Iceland (London, 191o). 3 Quoted from Eric Zahle (ed.), Scandinavian Domestic Design (Copenhagen, 196x), p. 56. H. Muthesius, Stilarchitektur und Baukunst (Berlin, 1903), quoted from J. Posener, Anfange des Funktionalismus, von Arts and Crafts zum Deutscher Werkbund (Berlin, Frankfurt am Main, Vienna, 1964). 5 Quoted from Ulrich Conrads (ed.), Programmes and Manifestoes on Twentieth-Century Architecture (London 1970), pp. 28-31. 6 G. Paulsson, Vackrare Vardagsvara (Stockholm, 1919), p. 42. 7 Ibid., p. 12. 8 Ibid., p. 24. 9 Nils G. Wollin, Modern Swedish Decorative Art (London, 1931), p. xı. 10 lbid., p. xı–xIII. 1 1 Hakon Ahlberg, Swedish Architecture of the Twentieth Century, with Preface by F. R. Yerbury (London, 1925). F. R. Yerbury was also associated with the Architectural Association, and with the Architectural Press. 12 Quoted from ‘Stockholm 1930' by Kenneth Frampton, in Asplund (Stockholm, 1985), p. 37. 13 For a fuller account of Asplund's ideas at this time, see Swedish Design Exhibitions, 1 917-3 I; unpublished MA thesis by Denise Hagströmer, Royal College of Art, 199o. 14 J. M. Richards describes P. Morton Shand (he was always and in full P. Morton Shand') as ‘a meticulously accurate journalist, but a difficult man, with a habit of taking irrational dislikes to people and a tendency to xenophobia, and especially to anti-semitism, strange in someone who led a very cosmopolitan life. His anti-semitism . . . being expressed for the most part in the form of jocular, schoolboyish quips – repugnant nevertheless . . .' Richards, Memoirs of an Unjust Fella, p. 123. 1 5 J. M. Richards, An Introduction to Modern Architecture (Harmondsworth, 194o), pp. 91–2. 16 For further details of the Dorland Hall exhibition, and British reactions to it, see Denise Hagströmer, Swedish Design Exhibitions. ## 9. Penny Sparke: A Home for Everybody?' Design, Ideology and the Culture of the Home in Italy, 1945-1972 The publisher wishes to thank Macmillan Press Ltd. for permission to include this essay, which also appears in Culture and Conflict in Postwar Italy, edited by Z. Baranski and R. Lumley (1990). 1 M. Clark, Modern Italy, 1871–1982 (London, 1984), p. 165. 2 Ibid., p. 317. 3 E. Rogers, Editorial', Domus, January 1946, p. 3. 4 Rogers, Domus, May 1946, p. 5. 5 P. Bottoni, 'The 8th Triennale', Domus, January 1947, p. 42. 6 L. Schreiber, ‘Contrasts in Current Italian Design', Design, July 1949, p. 9. 7 Rogers, Domus, April 1946, p. 14. 8 Rogers, Domus, January 1947, p. 4. 9 Clark, Modern Italy, p. 354. 10 J. Haycraft, The Italian Labyrinth (Harmondsworth, 1985), p. 222. 11 A. Branzi, Il design italiano degli anni'50 (Milan, 1981), p. 29. 12 V. Gregotti, 'Italian Design, 1945-71', in E. Ambasz (ed.), Italy: The New Domestic Landscape (New York, 1973), p. 323. 10. Guy Julier: Radical Modernism in Contemporary Spanish design 1 For a brief portrait of the Gauche Divine of Boccaccio, see Manuel Vázquez Montalbán, 'La Belle et la Bête, ou les Années Trompeuses', in Barcelone: Baroque et Moderne: l'Exuberance Catalane (Paris, 1986), p. 22. 2 Charles W. Anderson, The Political Economy of Modern Spain: Policy-Making in an Authoritarian System (Madison, WI, 1970), p. 86. 3 Raymond Carr and Juan Pablo Fusi, Spain: Dictatorship to Democracy (London, 1981), ch. 6. 4 Quoted by Antonio Bonet Correa, Espacios arquitectónicos para un nuevo orden', in Correa (ed.), Arte del Franquismo (Madrid, 1981), p. 31. 5 Bohigas himself wrote a long essay in response to Els altres Catalans; see Oriol Bohigas, 'Problemas Urbanisticos de la Inmigración' of 1964, in Contra Una Arquitectura Adjetivada (Barcelona, 1969). 6 Oriol Bohigas, in Josep Lluís Sert o la preocupació urbanistica’, in Serra d’Or, Any IX, num. 6, juny 1967, pp. 52 and 53. 7 Ibid., p. 55. 8 Oriol Bohigas, Equivocos “progresistas" en la Arquitectura Moderna’, in Contra Una Arquitectura Adjetivada, p. 5. 9 Ibid., p. 6. 10 Ernesto Giménez Caballero in Arte y Estado (1935), quoted in Alexandre Cirici, La estética del franquismo (Barcelona, 1977); Cirici argues that Giménez Caballero, through Arte y Estado, provided the blueprint for early Francoist cultural policy. See also Lluís Domènech, Arquitectura de Siempre (Barcelona, 1978) and Correa (ed.), Arte del franquismo. 11 See Correa, Espacios arquitectónicos para un nuevo orden', in Arte del Franquismo, p. 31. 12 See Lluís Domènech, Arquitectura de Siempre. 13 Alexandre Cirici, 'L’art de la saviesa', in Ariel, Any 1, 1946, p. 32. 14 Bohigas, 'Equivocos “progresistas" en la Arquitectura Moderna', p. 163. Indeed, any representation of Spanish architecture abroad had swung distinctly in the favour of Madrid; see, for instance, review of exhibition of Spanish architecture at the Building Centre, London, in Architectural Review, vol. 11 5, no. 686 (February, 1954). 1 5 Bohigas, Equivocos “Progresistas" en la Arquitectura Moderna', p. 12. 16 Oriol Bohigas, 'el Venturi d’en Tusquets: 2, un disseny per al consumidor', in Serra d'Or, Any XIV, num. 149, febrer 1972, p. 18. 17 Ibid. 18 Oriol Bohigas, 'Diseñar Para un Publico o Contra un Publico', in Contra Una Arquitectura Adjetivada, p. 71. 19 See Lluís Clotet, 'Els Estudiants d’Arquitectura’, in Serra d’Or, Any IX, juliol 1967, p. 33, and Josep Ma Colomer, Els Estudiants de Barcelona Sôta el Franquisme (Barcelona, 1982), pp. 206 and 238. 20 Quoted in Eina, escola de disseny i art 1967-1987: Vint anys d'avantguardia (Barcelona, 1987), Document A. 21 Alexandre Cirici, 'Dialegs d’Eina, el Grup 63 i l’avantguardia', in Serra d’Or, Any IX, num. 3, abril 1967, p. 67. 22 These positions were first articulated by Rafael Moneo in La llamada “Escuela de Barcelona"', Arquitectura, no. 121, 1969, and Oriol Bohigas, 'Una Posible "Escuela de Barcelona"', in Contra Una Arquitectura Adjetivada. 23 Bohigas, ‘Una Posible “Escuela de Barcelona" ’, p. 164. 24 See, for instance, Helio Piñón, Actitudes Teóricas en la Reciente Arquitectura de Barcelona', in Arquitectura Bis, nos. 13 and 14, mayo-junio 1976, pp. 27–32, and more recently Oriol Bohigas and Oscar Tusquets, 'L’Escola de Barcelona com a Tendència Estilística’, transcription Xavier Febrés, in Diàlegs a Barcelona 16 (Barcelona, 1986), Pp. 70–6. 25 Charles Jencks, in an assessment of the Escuela de Barcelona in Architectural Review, no. 961, March 1977, intelligently dissects the various quotations made in their architecture. 26 Alexandre ‘Comunicació a l'Hospitalet' in Serra d’Or, Any XV, num. 161, febrer 1973, Pp. 39 and 41. 27 See Ajuntament de Barcelona, exhibition catalogue, Homenatge a Alexandre Cirici' 1984, pp. 16-24; Albert Ràfols Casamada, ‘Cirici i l’ensenyament del disseny', in Serra d'Or, Any XXV, num. 285, abril 1983, Pp. 223-4; Alicia Suarez and Mercè Vidal, Alexandre Cirici, Professor', in Serra d'Or, Any XXV, num. 285, abril 1983, pp. 30–1; monthly articles by Alexandre Cirici in Serra d’Or, 1968–74. 28 Indeed, it provided the scenario for More, a contemporary film of drugs and intrigue with music by Pink Floyd. 29 André Ricard in conversation with the author, 7 June 1988. Ricard was chairman of the conference organising committee. 30 Jordi Mañà in La Vanguardia Española, 31 October 1971, reproduced in Temas de Diseño, no. 1, marzo/abril 1972, press section, pp. 1–2. 31 Jordi Mañà in conversation with the author, 25 May 1988. 32 Joan Antoni Blanc, 'La Participación de FAD en Hogarotel', in Hogares Modernos, no. 65, enero 1972, pp. 53–5, and confirmed by Joan Antoni Blanc in conversation with the author, 12 July 1988; Blanc was co-ordinator of the stand's design team, the Grupo Abierto Urquinaona. 33 Ibid. 34 Mai Felip in conversation with the author, 7 July 1988.