## Select Bibliography Anscombe, Isabelle, A Woman's Touch: Women in Design from 186o to the Present Day, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1985. Arts Council, Art in Revolution: Soviet Art and Design Since 1917, London, 1971. , Le Corbusier, Architect of the Century, London, 1987. Attfield, Judy and Kirkham, Pat (eds.), A View from the Interior: Feminism, Women and Design, London: Women's Press, 1989. Baljeu, Joost, Theo Van Doesburg, New York: Macmillan, 1974. Barr, A. H., 'Notes on Russian Architecture', The Arts, 15 February 1925. Benton, C., Benton, T., and Scarf, A., The History of Architecture and Design, Milton Keynes: Open University Press, 1975. Benton, Tim, The Villas of Le Corbusier, 1920-1930, London: Yale University Press, 1987. Berman, Marshall, All that is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity, London: Verso, 1983. Branzi, Andrea, The Hot House: Italian New Wave Design, London: Thames & Hudson, 1984. Brussels, Palais des Beaux Arts, Henry Van de Velde 1863-1957, Brussels, 1963. Burckhardt, Lucius (ed.), The Werkbund: Studies in the History and Ideology of the Deutscher Werkbund, 1907–1933, London: Design Council, 1980. Campbell, Joan, The German Werkbund, Princeton University Press, 1978. Chermayeff, Serge and Plunz, R. (eds.), Design and the Public Good, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1982. Cockx, A. and Lemmens, J., Les Expositions Universelles et Internationales en Belgique de 1885–1958, Brussels, 1958. Condit, Carl, The Chicago School, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Culot, M. and Terlinden, F., Antoine Pompe et l’Effort Moderne en Belgique, Brussels: Musée Ixelles, 1969. De Stijl Magazine, The: reprinted in full, Amsterdam: Atheneum, 1968. Drexler, A. and Hines, T. S., The Architecture of Richard Neutra, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1982. Frampton, Kenneth, Modern Architecture: A Critical Survey, London: Thames and Hudson, 198o. Franciscono, Marcel, Walter Gropius and the Creation of the Bauhaus, Illinois University Press, 1971. Friedman, Mildred (ed.), De Stijl: 1917-1931, Visions of Utopia, Oxford: Phaidon, 1982. Futagawa, Yukio and Pfeiffer, B. R., Frank Lloyd Wright, vols. 1-12, Tokyo: APA, 1984-8. Gebhard, David, Schindler, New York: Viking, 1972. G. Gibian and H. W. Tjalsma (eds), Russian Modernism: Culture and the Avant-garde, 1900-1930, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1976. Giedion, Sigfried, Space, Time and Architecture, Oxford University Press, 1941. Gloag, John, The English Tradition in Design, Harmondsworth: Pelican, 1947. Golding, J. and Green, C., Léger and Purist Paris, London: Tate Gallery. Greenhalgh, Paul, Ephemeral Vistas: Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions and World's Fairs, 1851–1939, Manchester University Press, 1988. Gropius, Walter, The New Architecture and the Bauhaus, London: Faber, 1935. Guggenheim Museum, Solomon R., Piet Mondrian, 1872-1944, Centennial Exhibition, New York, 1971. Harvey, David, The Condition of Post-Modernity, Oxford, 1989. Herf, Jeffrey, Reactionary Modernism: Technology, Culture and Politics in Weimar and the Third Reich, Cambridge University Press, 1986. Heskett, John, Industrial Design, London: Thames and Hudson, 1982. Hitchcock, H.-R., In the Nature of Materials: 1887-1941, the Buildings of Frank Lloyd Wright, New York: DSP, 1942. , Architecture Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries, Harmondsworth: Pelican, 1958. Hitchcock, H.-R. and Johnson Philip, The International Style, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1932. Itten, Johannes, Design and Form: the Basic Course at the Bauhaus, rev. ed., London: Thames & Hudson, 1975. Jaffe, H. L. C., De Stijl, London: Tiranti, 1956. Jencks, Charles, Le Corbusier and the Tragic View of Architecture, London: Allen Lane, 1973. Johnson, Philip, The Machine Age, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1934. Kamerling, Bruce, Irving Gill: The Artist as Architect, San Diego, 1979. Lane, Barbara-Miller, Architecture and Politics in Germany, 1918-1945, Harvard University Press, 1968. Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture, trans. Frederick Etchells, London: Rodker, 1927. , The City of Tomorrow, trans. Frederick Etchells, London: Rodker, 1927. —, The Decorative Art of Today, trans. J. Dunnett, London: Architectural Association, 1987. Lloyd Wright, Frank, An Autobiography, London: Faber, 1945. Lodder, Christina, Russian Constructivism, London: Yale University Press, 1985. McQuiston, Liz, Women in Design: A Contemporary View, London: Trefoil, 1988. Mumford, Lewis, Technics and Civilization, London: Routledge, 1934. Mumford, Lewis (ed.), The Roots of Contemporary American Architecture, New York: Dover, 1972. Naylor, Gillian, The Bauhaus, London: Studio Vista, 1968. Naylor, Gillian, The Bauhaus Reassessed: Sources and Design Theory, London: Herbert Press, 1985. Pevsner, Nikolaus, The Pioneers of the Modern Movement, London: Faber, 1936. Radice, Barbara, Memphis: Research, Experiences, Results, Failures and Successes of the New Design, London: Thames & Hudson, 1985. Read, Herbert, Art and Industry, London: Faber, 1934. Reyner Banham, Peter, Theory and Design in the First Machine Age, London: Architectural Press, 1960. —, Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four Ecologies, New York: Penguin, 1971. Richards, J. M., An Introduction to Modern Architecture, London: Pelican, 194o. Royal Academy of Arts, Fifty Years Bauhaus, London, 1968. Sembach, Klaus-Jurgen, Henri Van de Velde, London: Thames & Hudson, 1989. Sert, J. L., Can our Cities Survive?, Oxford University Press, 1942. Smith, Kathryn, R. M. Schindler House, 1921–2, Los Angeles: Friends of Schindler House, 1987. Sparke, Penny, An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century, London: Allen & Unwin, 1986. —, Italian Design, London: Thames & Hudson, 1988. Swedish Institute, Design in Sweden, Malmo: ABT, 1977. Sweeney, Robert, Frank Lloyd Wright, an Annotated Bibliography, Los Angeles: Hennessey & Ingalls, 1978. Thackera, John, Design after Modernism, London: Thames & Hudson, 1988. Troy, Nancy, J., The De Stijl Environment, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1983. Watkin, David, Morality and Architecture, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977. Willett, John, The New Sobriety: Art and Politics in the Weimar Period, 1917-1933, London: Thames & Hudson, 1978. Whitford, Frank, The Bauhaus, London: Thames & Hudson, 1984. Whitney Museum, High Styles: Twentieth-Century American Design, New York: Summit Books, 1985.