# NK4165 0V3 1991 MAV 14 1991 First published in the United States in 1991 by George Braziller, Inc., New York © 1991 The Trustees of the British Museum All rights reserved First edition For information address the publisher: George Braziller, Inc. 60 Madison Avenue New York, New York 1oo1o Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data: Vainker, S. J. Chinese pottery and porcelain / S. J. Vainker. p. cm. Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 0-8076-1260-X 1. Pottery, Chinese. 2. Porcelain, Chinese. I. Title. NK4165.V3 1991 90-24330 738′.0951--dc20 CIP Designed by Behram Kapadia Sct in Bembo by Rowland Phototypesetting Ltd, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk Printed in Italy by New Interlitho SpA, Milan FRONTisPIECE: Vase, Yue ware, with soft green glaze (see fig. 52). Early 1oth century. HT 33cm. OA 1924.6–16.1 ## CONTENTS Acknowledgements Introduction 9 CERAMICS IN THE NEOLITHIC AND THE BRONZE AGE 12 FUNERARY ART AND FUNCTIONAL VESSELS 38 The Han and Six Dynasties FOREIGN INFLUENCES AND CHINESE TRADITIONS 60 The Tang Dynasty 4 THE CLASSICAL PERIOD 88 The Song Dynasty THE WORLDWIDE EXPORT OF PORCELAIN 134 The Yuan, Ming and Qing Dynasties LATER ARCHITECTURAL AND POPULAR CERAMICS 160 1500 Onwards IMPERIAL PORCELAINS FROM JINGDEZHEN 176 The Yuan, Ming and Qing Dynasties Map 217 Appendix I: Clays 218 Appendix II: Glazes 220 Appendix III: Kilns and Firing 222 Glossary 224 Chronology 226 Bibliography and Site Reports 228 List of Illustrations 233 Index 236 Dedicated to William Watson