# ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS My foremost debt is to William Watson, who laid the foundation of my understanding of Chinese art and archaeology and whose work continues to inspire many scholars. My own approach to the subject has benefited from many stimulating discussions with Jessica Rawson, Keeper of Oriental Antiquities at the British Museum, and to her I am also deeply grateful. In China, much important work has been carried out in recent decades by Li Jiazhi and other ceramic specialists, and I should like to thank particularly Zhang Fukang for his advice on technology and Wang Qingzheng and Liu Xinyuan for their opinions on objects in the British Museum's collection. Rose Kerr, Rosemary Scott and Nigel Wood all undertook to read the manuscript and I am grateful for their comments and advice. For further comments on the text I should like to thank John Rawson, Paul Dean and Philip Vainker. Colin Mackenzie read Chapter 1 and Michael Rogers and Venetia Porter read Chapter 5 and directed me to source material; Neil Stratford, Stephen Green and Dorothy McPherson all provided information on particular export porcelains. Iurek Freundlich, Carol Michaelson and William Wong kindly assisted with the translation of certain quotations and inscriptions. Ian Freestone of the British Museum Research Laboratory checked the appendices and answered technological queries. I am grateful to David Gowers of the British Museum Photographic Service for providing fine illustrations at great speed, and to Ann Searight for the maps and line drawings. The Asian Art Museum of San Francisco, Ashmolean Museum, Burrell Collection, MCC Museum and the Percival David Foundation of Chinese Art all kindly permitted reproduction of items in their collections. Within the Department of Oriental Antiquities, I should like to thank Anne Farrer for help in the final stages of the book's production, and my colleagues Richard Blurton, Jane Portal and Rachel Ward for their continued support and encouragement. I am indebted to Lay Goh, who typed the entire manuscript, and to Claire Randell for her generous assistance. Finally, I should like to express my special thanks to Philip and François Vainker for their affectionate tolerance throughout the writing of Chinese Pottery and Porcelain, and to Nina Shandloff, my editor at British Museum Press, without whose unfailing energy, enthusiasm and good nature the book would never have been produced on time.