# INTRODUCTION China's long and successful ceramic history is rooted in the high quality and wide distribution of an impressive range of raw materials. The skill of Chinese potters in exploiting those raw materials, and the high degree of organisation which prevailed in manufacturing industries from the earliest periods onwards, have ensured China's constant position as the world's foremost producer of ceramic artefacts. The function and status of the resulting earthenwares, stonewares and porcelains varied from dynasty to dynasty, so that they may be utilitarian, burial, trade, collectors'or even ritual objects, according to their quality and their era. Amidst this wealth of regional and physical types, three broad traditions may be discerned: stonewares, porcelains and religious sculpture. Stonewares have the longest and most complex history, beginning in the fifteenth century BC and concluding, effectively, in the Song dynasty some two and a half thousand years later when porcelain was first produced in quantity. The stoneware tradition is dominated by greenwares, and the earliest were made in east China in the present-day provinces of Zhejiang and Jiangsu. During the Six Dynasties period kilns in north China also began producing high-fired ceramics of good quality, and the various major wares such as Yaozhou, Ru, Jun and Cizhou, which date from the succeeding Tang and Song dynasties, are all northern products. Within the stoneware sphere, seventh- to tenth-century white wares from Hebei and Henan provinces are of such pure kaolinitic clay that they may be regarded as porcelains, but they nonetheless lie outside the mainstream of porcelain manufacture. Porcelains proper are the product of south China's abundant porcelain stone deposits. These were first exploited in the tenth century AD, and although porcelain wares were made in increasing quantity throughout the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth centuries, it appears that the material was not greatly appreciated within China, other than as an export commodity, until the fourteenth century. The Song dynasty (AD 96o–1279), long regarded as the high point in China's ceramic history, thus owes some of its richness to the overlapping of two major traditions. The tradition of religious sculpture pervades most historical periods but is less neatly identified in physical terms than the other two types, for it embraces the old custom of earthenware burial ceramics together with later stonewares in the form of Buddhist images and architectural ornaments. In this category belong lead-glazed tomb models of the Han dynasty, three-colour lead-glazed vessels and figures of the Tang dynasty, and Ming three-colour and fahua type temple ornaments, as well as the many burial ceramics produced in imitation of vessels in materials of higher intrinsic value. The first ceramics, produced around ten or eleven thousand years ago, were without doubt utilitarian wares, and this early role has never diminished. Ceramic vessels are widely used in everyday life now, just as they must have been in the Neolithic period, and the same low-fired red earthenware type is still produced in some rural areas of China. Before the Bronze Age, thin-walled, polished earthenwares of intricate shape were used as ritual vessels, particularly in the eastern seaboard cultures of Dawenkou and Longshan, yet once the crafting of bronze, lacquer and precious metals had been mastered, the status of ceramic artefacts declined. Only rarely in China's imperial history do stonewares or porcelains assume a ritual role. Notable exceptions are the Yue greenwares of the Tang dynasty and certain monochrome porcelains of the Ming and Qing periods. Ceramic shapes imitated those of metal almost as soon as the latter appeared and some early earthenwares are clearly cheaper versions of precious objects. For less obvious reasons many later wares, beginning principally with Song dynasty Ding porcelain, were influenced by silver in particular, and the question of the relationship between ceramic and metalwork in terms of shapes and decoration is far-reaching and highly complex. To a lesser degree, ceramics were influenced by lacquer in shape, by jade in surface texture and by silk and most other precious media in their ornament. It is perhaps this very versatility which has led some scholars to place ceramics at the head of China's traditions in the applied arts. From the Song dynasty onwards, porcelain was collected by emperors, men of learning and the well-to-do, and as a result much was written on the subject during the Ming and Qing dynasties. It was also during the Song dynasty that ceramics were established as a major commodity, and since then porcelain has almost constantly been one of China's most important exports. Within the country, silk alone could be said to match the long history, physical quality, craftsmanship and the multifarious roles of ceramics; internationally, the influence of Chinese porcelain on the material cultures of other nations is unrivalled. ## The British Museum collection The British Museum houses more than eight thousand Chinese ceramics. The collection includes Neolithic earthenwares and all the major types from that period until the present day: Shang and Zhou dynasty imitations ofbronze vessel forms, Han dynasty burial ceramics and high-fired wares, funerary sculpture of the Han to Tang dynasties, green, white, black and blue glazed stonewares of the third to thirteenth centuries, and innumerable painted and enamelled porcelains of the Ming and Qing dynasties. Modern ceramics, ancient folk wares and glazed architectural and religious ceramics fill out the sequence, and it is probably true to say that with each new advance in the understanding of China's ceramic history, at least one old mystery is solved among the reserve collections. A collection of such breadth can only be built over a long period, and with the expertise and generosity of generations of curators and collectors. Sir Augustus Wollaston Franks, Keeper of the Department of British and Medieval Antiquities from 1866 until 1896, collected Asian material on such a scale as to make viable the eventual establishment of a separate department for oriental antiquities. Together his acquisitions for the Museum and the gift of his personal collection in 1876 include almost a thousand Chinese ceramics. The Franks pieces comprise a collection extraordinary for its time, for Franks sought to represent the length of China's ceramic history, and this he achieved as far as was possible at a time when the early wares were scarce outside China. During the first three decades of the twentieth century, several comprehensive ceramic collections were formed in Britain, and these included quantities of early pieces and former imperial wares. R. L. Hobson was the foremost specialist in the subject and he assumed responsibility for the Museum's Asian ceramics in 1921, the year in which the Oriental Ceramic Society was founded. His great expertise and his friendship with leading members of the Society resulted in the acquisition of many fine ceramics for the Museum, including the donation of entire collections, or parts thereof, from his contemporaries. One of the most important of these was the collection of George Eumorfopoulos, who in the 193os was not in a position to donate it, but offered many hundreds of items to the British Museum at a very advantageous price. This established the Museum's collection at a stroke as the broadest in London, for Eumorfopoulos had chosen pre-Ming porcelain and burial ceramics with particular success. Five years later, in 1941, a group of early Ming wares came to the Museum as the bequest of A. D. Brankston, who had acquired his small but choice collection of imperial porcelain while visiting Jingdezhen in south China. In 1947, a bequest of several hundred items dating from all periods was received from Harry Oppenheim, and subsequently the gifts of Mrs Brenda Seligman, Sir Harry Garner, Alfred Clark and Mrs Walter Sedgwick have greatly enriched the Museum's holdings of Song and Ming wares. The most recent major gift is that of Sir John Addis, former Ambassador to China and Trustee of the British Museum, whose collection included twenty-two Yuan and early Ming wares from the imperial factories at Jingdezhen chosen expressly for the Museum, making the collection the strongest outside China for this period. His work on ancient Chinese porcelain, and his organisation in 1982 of the first of what was to become a series of international conferences on Chinese ceramics, make Sir John Addis a pioneer in the field. Without the wealth of interaction with Chinese scholars which he generated, the subject today would be much the poorer. The scientific analysis which dominated the 1982 conference is today carried out in Britain at the research laboratories of both the British Museum and Oxford University, and the dissemination of the results to a wide audience owes much to the potter and ceramic technologist Nigel Wood. The present book seeks to incorporate this technological work in addition to the archaeological and textual evidence, and to provide an accompaniment to the exhibition of two hundred of the Museum's major pieces which coincides with its publication.