# APPENDIX II ## Glazes A glaze is a glassy coating applied to the exterior or interior surface of a ceramic. Glazes render ceramics non-porous and enhance their appearance. The major glaze types and constituents are outlined below. ## Silica Silica is the main constituent of any glaze. Pure silica provides the hardest possible material in the ceramic spectrum and fuses to glass at about 1700°C. Common forms of silica are quartz and sandstone. ## Flux Flux is the term for any material added to silica (see above) to lower its melting temperature. The flux dictates the character of a glaze; lead oxide and calcium oxide are the major luxes used in Chinese ceramics. ## Alumina Alumina (aluminium oxide) occurs widely in clays together with silica (see above). It is the third major ingredient of most Chinese glazes. ## Lead glazes Glazes fluxed (see above) with lead have a high refractive index and a very smooth, glossy surface texture. Raw lead, or lead sulphide in its natural form (galena), can be applied directly to a clay body to create a glaze on reaction with the silica content (see above) of the clay. Lead glazes first occur in China in the third century BC and became widely used during the course of the Han dynasty (206 BC-AD 221). In the Northern Qi dynasty (386-581) a superior lead glaze was used, comprising so-60 per cent lead oxide together with silica and alumina (see above), and fired at 700-8o0°C. Lead glazes respond well to colouring oxides and are relatively viscous. Tang sancai burial wares are decorated with lead glazes, coloured with copper oxide to give green and with iron oxide to give yellow. ## High-temperature glazes High-temperature glazes are those which use calcium oxide as a flux (see above). Calcium oxide occurs widely as chalk and woodash and is therefore both cheaper and safer to use than lead, but it requires a higher firing temperature of around 1170°C. The earliest Chinese glazes, those of the Shang dynasty (c. 1700-1027 BC), are composed of woodash, and numerous high-fired glazes of the Shang, Zhou and Han dynasties appear to be the result of ash sifted on to the shoulder of a vessel. When the ash is very thick, an opalescent blue occurs due to the presence of concentrated phosphorus. This phenomenon may also be seen on certain greenwares of the Sui dynasty (AD 589-618). Porcelain glazes are composed of porcelain stone (see Appendix I) and burnt limestone (calcium carbonate). ## Alkaline glazes Alkaline glazes are those fluxed (see above) with potassium and/or sodium oxide. Such glazes are central to Near and Middle Eastern ceramic technology but are less common within the Chinese tradition. Their earliest occurrence in China is in the Tang dynasty (AD 618-906), at the Qionglai kilns in Sichuan and the Changsha kilns in Hunan. The most prominent use of alkaline glazes in China, however, occurs in the Ming dynasty (1368-1644), on temple ceramics and fahua wares made principally in Shaanxi province in north China. The most easily recognised alkaline glaze is the brilliant turquoise blue which can be seen on both of these types. ## Oxidation Oxidation occurs when the firing atmosphere inside a kiln is rich in oxygen and the air is clean and bright. Earthenware clays fired in an oxidising atmosphere are red in colour, like those of the Yangshao Neolithic phase, for example; those fired in a reducing atmosphere (see below) are grey. Oxidised firings produce warm-looking glaze colours. ## Reduction The term reduction refers to the exclusion of oxygen from a kiln atmosphere, rendering it dark and smoky. Such firings reduce the quantity of oxygen atoms in iron or copper oxides present in clays and glazes, and this can change their colour. Firing temperature can also influence colour. All greenware glazes are the result of iron fired in reduction. Earthenware fired in reduction is grey, and much tougher than the red body produced by an oxidised firing (see above). Reduction firings produce cool-toned glaze colours.