# GLOSSARY bai tunzi Literally, 'little white bricks', previously known as petuntse. The term refers to kaolin and porcelain stone, which were transported to Jingdezhen from other regions of Jiangxi province in the form of small bricks. bianhu Literally, flattened flask', the name for vessels of round form but narrow profile, better known as pilgrim flasks. cong Neolithic jade object of square outer and circular inner section, with carved ornament which also appears on certain Neolithic ceramics. CRACkLE Appears in glazes as fine lines, and is a deliberate effect. ding Tripod vessel which occurs in earthenware during the Neolithic period and in bronze during the Shang dynasty. dou Vessel in the shape of a bowl on a high stem foot. Known in earthenware during the Neolithic period, particularly from the eastern culture of Dawenkou, and later, in the Eastern Zhou, in both bronze and earthenware. doucai Literally, ‘fitted colours', a reference to decoration outlined in blue under the glaze, and coloured in over the glaze with enamel colours. Doucai wares are associated with the Chenghua period (1465-87) of the Ming dynasty, and are typically small, thin-walled porcelains. ENAMELLED PORCELAIN Decorated over the glaze with enamel glaze colours. First occurs at Jingdezhen in the fifteenth century but best known in the form of famille verte and famille rose wares of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries which were exported to Europe in large quantities. fahua Literally, 'bounded designs', in which the motifs are outlined in a raised trail of slip. Fahuta wares were made from the fourteenth to the sixteenth century, principally in Shanxi province. gu Tall narrow beaker-shaped vessel. Known in eastern Neolithic pottery but most closely associated with Shang bronze vessels, and reproduced in archaistic porcelain of the Song, Ming and Qing dynasties. guan A form of wide-shouldered jar, usually large. gui Ritual bronze food vessel form of the Shang and Zhou dynasties. Reappears amongst archaistic porcelain vessels of the Song, Ming and Qing dynasties, when it generally served as an incense burner. he Spouted vessel, made in both pottery and bronze in the late Neolithic/early dynastic period. hu Vessel resembling a vase in shape. Made primarily in bronze but also in pottery, particularly in the Warring States and Han periods. huashi Literally, 'slippery stone', a fine white powder added to porcelain stone in the eighteenth century to provide a body of exceptional smoothness and whiteness. Huashi wares are also known as Chinese soft-paste' porcelain. Imari The name of a port in southern Japan, from which porcelain from the Arita kilns was exported on a large scale in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The word is used to refer to a type of porcelain usually decorated with underglaze blue and a predominantly red overglaze enamel palette with gilding, exported in large quantity from that city. jia One of the earliest bronze vessel forms, with a cup-shaped body supported on three blade-like legs. Occasionally produced in pottery during the Shang dynasty. jue Wine vessel on three legs. One of the earliest bronze shapes, together with he and jia. It appears in pottery during the Shang dynasty, and later in the archaistic porcelain of the Song, Ming and Qing dynasties. LEATHERHARD Term used to describe the state of ceramic which has been modelled and has dried out, but not yet entered the kiln. li Neolithic pottery vessel on three bag-shaped legs. lokapāla Sanskrit term for the guardians of the four quarters, called tianwang in Chinese. Best known in the form of Tang dynasty earthenware tomb figures with sancai lead glazes. LUTING Method ofjoining the components of an unfired vessel or sculpture using a dilute slip. meiping Literally, plum blossom vase', a tall vase with a wide shoulder and small mouth. The shape was first made in the Song dynasty and became a standard form in the Ming. OVERGLAZE PAINTING Executed on top of a glaze which has already been fired. Once painted, the vessel would be given a second firing, usually at a lower temperature. pou Vessel of large, wide proportions, resembling a basin or flattened jar in shape. First made in bronze during the Shang dynasty, it occurs in ceramic amongst the high-fired wares of the Han dynasty. qingbai Literally, blue-white'. The term is used for southern porcelains produced between the tenth and fourteenth centuries, on which the transparent glaze has a blue tinge as the result of titanium impurity. The term yingqing (shadowblue) is sometimes used to denote the same type. REsisT Substance applied to the surface of any material in order to prevent the action of a colouring agent. On Chinese ceramics, resists were used principally to execute ornament on Tang sancai ware, but also constituted a process in certain types of Ming dynasty enamelled wares. sAGGAR Earthenware or stoneware box for encasing ceramics in the kiln, to prevent any dirt in a kiln atmosphere from blemishing the ceramics and to ensure even temperature during firing. sancai Literally, three colours'. This term refers to the green, amber and cream glazes used on burial pottery of the Tang dynasty, and is the name by which such wares are known. sGRAFFITO Technique of decoration used on Cizhou wares, consisting of incising a top layer of slip to create a design in the exposed underlying slip layer. shufu Literally, privy council', the term denotes a class of white ware on which these two characters are moulded. A further distinguishing feature is the opacity of the thick glaze. sLiP Dilute clay mixture applied to the surface of a pot before glazing, to enhance the smoothness and disguise an unsuitable clay body colour. Slip was not much used in this way after the Song dynasty, but during the Song and in the Ming it was used for producing painted decoration. sOFT PAsTE Term used to denote huashi wares of the eighteenth century, but otherwise not applicable to Chinese ceramics. Hard-paste porcelain is a European product which matches the hardness and translucency of Chinese porcelain, while soft paste generally refers to unsuccessful attempts to produce the same result. UNDERGLAZE PAINTING Decoration applied to the body of an unfired ceramic before it is glazed. Underglaze painting may also be applied to a piece which has been covered with slip but not yet glazed. wucai Literally, five colours', a reference to the late Ming palette of underglaze blue and overglaze enamels. ## yingqing see qingbai zisha Literally, purple sand', a reference to the brown stonewares produced at Yixing in Jiangsu province. zun Bronze vessel of vase form, usually with a wide flaring mouth. The shape belongs to the Shang dynasty bronze repertoire, but was produced in porcelain in the Song, Ming and Qing dynasties. ## CHRONOLOGY <table><tr><td colspan="2">NEOLITHIC CULTURES</td><td colspan="2">Three Kingdoms</td></tr><tr><td>Peiligang</td><td>c.6500-5000 BC</td><td>Shu (Han)</td><td>221-263</td></tr><tr><td>Cishan</td><td>c.6500-5500 BC</td><td>Wei</td><td>220-265</td></tr><tr><td>Central Yangshao</td><td>C. 5000-3000 BC</td><td>Wu</td><td>222-280</td></tr><tr><td>Gansu Yangshao</td><td>C.3000-1500 BC</td><td>Southern dynasties (Six Dynasties)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Dawenkou</td><td>C.5800-1500 BC</td><td>Western Jin</td><td>265-316</td></tr><tr><td>Hongshan</td><td>C.4000-2700 BC</td><td>Eastern Jin</td><td>317-420</td></tr><tr><td>Majiabang</td><td>C. 5500-3000 BC</td><td>Liu Song</td><td>420-479</td></tr><tr><td>Songze</td><td>C.3500-2500 BC</td><td>Southern Qi</td><td>479-502</td></tr><tr><td>Hemudu</td><td>C.5200-3000 BC</td><td>Liang</td><td>S02-SS7</td></tr><tr><td>Daxi</td><td>C.S500-3500 BC</td><td>Chen</td><td>SS7-589</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Longshan</td><td>C.3000-1700 BC</td><td>Northern dynasties</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Northern Wei</td><td>386-535</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">EARLY DYNASTIES Shang</td><td></td><td>Eastern Wei</td><td>S34-SSO</td></tr><tr><td>C.1700-1027 BC</td><td>Western Wei</td><td>S3S-S57</td></tr><tr><td>Western Zhou</td><td>1027-771 BC</td><td>Northern Qi</td><td>SSO-S77</td></tr><tr><td>Eastern Zhou</td><td></td><td>Northern Zhou</td><td>S57-581</td></tr><tr><td>Spring and Autumn period</td><td>771-481 BC</td><td>Sui</td><td>581-618</td></tr><tr><td>Warring States period</td><td>480-221 BC</td><td>Tang</td><td>618-906</td></tr><tr><td>IMPERIAL CHINA</td><td></td><td>Liao</td><td>907-1125</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Five Dynasties</td><td>907-960</td></tr><tr><td>Qin</td><td>221-207 BC</td><td>Song</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Han</td><td></td><td>Northern Song</td><td>960-1126</td></tr><tr><td>Western Han</td><td>206 BC-AD 9</td><td>Southern Song</td><td>1127-1279</td></tr><tr><td>Xin</td><td>AD 9-25</td><td>Jin</td><td>1115-1234</td></tr><tr><td>Eastern Han</td><td>AD 25-220</td><td>Yuan</td><td>1279-1368</td></tr><tr><td>Ming</td><td>1368-1644</td><td>Qing</td><td>1644-1911</td></tr><tr><td>EMPERORS</td><td></td><td>EMPERORS</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Hongwu</td><td>1368-98</td><td>Shunzhi</td><td>1644-61</td></tr><tr><td>Jianwen</td><td>1399-1402</td><td>Kangxi</td><td>1662-1722</td></tr><tr><td>Yongle</td><td>1403-25</td><td> $Y o n g z h e n g$ </td><td>1723-35</td></tr><tr><td>Xuande</td><td>1426-35</td><td> $Q i a n l o n g$ </td><td>1736-95</td></tr><tr><td>Zhengtong</td><td>1436-49</td><td> $J i a q i n g$ </td><td>1796-1820</td></tr><tr><td> $J i n g t a i$ </td><td>1450-57</td><td> $D a o g u a n g$ </td><td>1821-50</td></tr><tr><td>Tianshun</td><td>1457-64</td><td> $X i a n f e n g$ </td><td>1851-61</td></tr><tr><td> $C h e n g h u a$ </td><td>1465-87</td><td> $T o n g z h i$ </td><td>1862-74</td></tr><tr><td> $H o n g z h i$ </td><td>1488-1505</td><td> $G u a n g x u$ </td><td>1875-1908</td></tr><tr><td> $Z h e n g d e$ </td><td>1506-21</td><td>Xuantong</td><td>1909-11</td></tr><tr><td> $J i a j i n g$ </td><td>1522-66</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $L o n g q i n g$ </td><td>1567-72</td><td>REPUBLICAN CHINA</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Wanli</td><td>1573-1620</td><td>Republic</td><td>1912-49</td></tr><tr><td>Tianqi Chongzhen</td><td>1621-27 1628-44</td><td>People's Republic</td><td>1949-</td></tr></table> ## BIBLIOGRAPHY ## General AYERs, J. The Baur Collection (4 vols). Geneva, 1968 FENG XiANMiNG. Essays on Chinese Old Ceramics by Feng Xianming (in Čhinese). Hong Kong, 1987 HuGHES-STANTON, P. AND KERR, R. Kiln Sites of Ancient China. London, 1982 Li ZHIYAN AND CHENG WEN. Chinese Pottery and Porcelain. Beijing, 1984 MEDLEY, M. The Čhinese Potter: A Practical History of Chinese Ceramics. Oxford, 1976 SATo MasAíikO. Chinese Ceramics: A Short History. New York, 1981 ScoTT, R. E. Percival David Foundation of Chinese Art: A Guide to the Collection. London, 1989 Taoci Shihua, in series Zhongguo Keji Shihua Congshu. Shanghai, 1982 VALENSTEIN, S. G. A Handbook of Chinese Ceramics. New York and London, 1975 (2nd edn 1989) Wu RENJING AND XIN ANHU. Zhongguo taoci shi. China, 1936 YANG GEN ET AL. The Ceramics of China: The Yangshao Culture to the Song Dyuasty. Beijing and London, 1985 Ye ZHımıN. Zhongguo taoci shi wangyao. Beijing, 1989 Zhongguo gudai yaozhi diaocha fajue baogao ji. Beijing, 1984 ## Chapter 1 CHANG, K. C. The Archaeology of Ancient China. New Haven and London, (4th edn) 1986 CHANG, K. C. Shang Civilization. New Haven and London, 1980 CHENG TÊ-K'UN and SHEN WEI-CHÜN. A brief history of Chinese mortuary objects. Peiping, 1933 GAN BAo (4th century AD). Sou Shen ji. Hubei, 1875 RAwsoN, J. Ancient China: Art and Archacology. London, 1980 Songze: Xin shiqi shidai yizhi fajue baogao. Beijing, 1987 WATsON, W. Cultural Frontiers in Aucient East Asia. Edinburgh, 1971 YANG XIAōNENG. Sculpture of Prehistoric China. Hong Kong, n.d. ZHONGGUO SHEHUI KEXUEYUAN KAOGU YANJIUSUO (ed.). Xin Zhongguo de kaogu faxian he yanjiu. Beijing, 1984 Zuo zhuān (4th century BC). Chunqiu zuozhuan zhu (ed. Yang Bojun). Beijing, 1981 ## Chapter 2 CHENG TÊ-K'UN. Studies in Chinese Archaeology. Hong Kong, 1982 CHINESE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG, ART GALLERY. Archaeological Finds from the Jin to the Tang periods in Guangdong. Hong Kong, 1986 LIM, L. ET AL. Stories from China's Past: Han Dynasty Pictorial Tonib Reliefs and Archaeological Objects fron Sichuan Province, People's Republic of China. San Francisco, 1987 LoEwE, M. Chinese Ideas of Life and Death: Faith, myth and reason in the Han dynasty (202 BC-AD220). London, 1982 LOS ANGELES COUNTY MUSEUM OF ART. The Quest for Eternity. Los Angeles, 1987 MINO, Y. AND TsIANG, K. Ice and Green Clouds (exhibition catalogue). Indianapolis, 1986 TREGEAR, M. Catalogue of Chinese Greenware in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. Oxford, 1976 WATsoN, W. Pre-Tang Ceramics of China. London (forthcoming) ## Chapter 3 Lu Yu (Tang dynasty). Cha jing, in Wuchao xiaoshuo daguan. Shanghai, 1926 MEDLEY, M. Tang Pottery and Porcelain. London, 1981 MinO, Y. Pre-Sung Dynasty Chinese Stonewares in the Royal Ontario Museuin. Toronto, 1974 WAtsoN, W. Tang and Liao Ceramics. London, 1984 WECHsLER, H. J. Offerings of Jade aud Silk: Ritual and Symbol in the Legitiuiation of the Taug dynasty. New Haven, 1985 ## Chapter 4 CAI XıANG (Song dynasty). Cha Lu, in Wuchao Xiaoshuo daguan. Shanghai, 1926 HyMEs, R. P. Statesmen and Gentleuen: The elite of Fu-Chou, Chiaug-hsi, in Northern and Southern Song. Cambridge, 1986 Lu You (Song dynasty). Lao Xue an biji. Reprinted Beijing, 1979 Mino, Y. Freedom of Clay aud Brush through Seven Centuries in Northern China: Tz'u-chou type Wares 960–160o0 AD (exhibition catalogue). Indianapolis, 1980 Nanyao Biji (Qing dynasty), in Meishu cougshu siji yi qi. Shanghai, 1947 TAo ZonGYı (Yuan dynasty). Shushi huiyao. Reprinted Shanghai, 1979 SOUTHEAST ASIAN CERAMIC SOCIETY (West Malaysia Chapter). A Ceramic Legacy of Asia's Maritime Trade: Song dynasty Guangdong wares and other 11th-19th century Trade Ceramics. Kuala Lumpur, 1985 TREGEAR, M. Song Ceranics. Fribourg and London, 1982 WANG CuN (Song dynasty). Yuanfeng jiu cheng zhi. Reprinted Shanghai, 1935-7 WANG QINGZHeNG, FaN DONGQING AND ZHOU LILI. The Discovery of Ru kiln. Shanghai, 1987 WIRGIN, J. Sung Čeramic Designs. London, 1979 ZHAo YANwEI (Song dynasty). Yun lu nan chao. Reprinted Shanghai, 1935-7 Zhou Mı (Song dynasty). Wulin jiut shu. Reprinted Shanghai, 1956 ## Chapter 5 ABRU, HAFIZ: see MAITRA, K.M. CARswELL, J. Blue and White: Chinese porcelain and its impact on the Western World. Chicago, 1985 CoNNER, P. Oriental Architecture in the West. London, 1979 GRAY, B. 'The Export of Chinese porcelain to India', in Transactions of the Oriental Ceramic Society, vol. 36, 1964–6. London, 1967 HoWARD, D. S. AND AYERS, J. China for the West (2 vols). London and New York, 1978 HowARD, D. S. Chinese Armorial Porcelain. London, 1974 JörG, C. J. A. The Geldermalsen: History and Porcelain. Groningen, 1986 JöRG, C. J. A. Porcelain and the Dutch China Trade. The Hague, 1982 KRAHL, R. Chinese Ceramics in the Topkapi Saray Museum, Istanbul (3 vols). London, 1986 LANE, A. Later Islamic Pottery. London, 1957 MAITRA, K. M. (trans.). A Persian Embassy to China: An extract from Zubdatu't Tawarikh of Hafiz Abru. New York, 197o (first published Lahore, 1934) PIJL-KETEL, C. L. VAN DER (ed.). The Ceramnic Load of the 'Witte Leeuw' (1613). Amsterdam, 1982 PopE, J. A. Chinese Porcelains from the Ardebil Shrine. Washington, 1956 RAwsoN, J. Chinese Ornament: The Lotus and the Dragon. London, 1984 (2nd edn 1990) RINALDI, M. Kraak Porcelain: A Moment in the History of Trade. London, 1989 SCHEURLEER, D. F. L. Chinese Export Porcelain: Chine de Commande. London, 1974 SHEAF, C. AND KILBURN, R. The Hatcher Porcelain Cargoes: The Complete Record. Oxford, 1988 SOUTHEAST ASIAN CERAMIC SOCIETY (Singapore). Chinese Celadons and other related wares in Southeast Asia. Singapore, 1979 WiLsoN, T. Ceraniic Art of the Italian Renaissance. London, 1987 Chapter 6 DoNNELLY, P. S. Blanc de Chine: The Porcelain of Têhuta in Fukien. London, 1969 Exhibition \_of Shiwan Wares (exhibition catalogue). Hong Kong, 1979 FLAGSTAFF HOUSE MUSEUM OF TEA WARE. The Art of the Yixing Potter. Hong Kong, 1990 LIANG SICHENG (ed.). Qingshi yinğzao zelie. Beijing, 1981 (first published 1934) PALUDAN, A. The Iniperial Ming Tombs. London, 1981 PoRTAL, J. A Tang dynasty tile in the British Museum', in Orientations, March 1990 Wu QIAN (Qing dynasty). Yangxian ming taolu, in Meishu congshu (1st collection). Shanghai, 1947 ZHOU GAOQı (Ming dynasty). Yangxiañ ming hu xi 1695 ## Chapter 7 ADDIs, J. M. Chinese Ceramics from Datable Tombs and Sore Other Dated Material. London and New York, 1978 ADDIs, J. M. Chinese Porcelain from the Addis Collection: Twenty-two pieces of Chingtechen Porcelain presented to the British Museum. London, 1979 CHEN Lu. Tao Ya (Pottery Refinements). 1910. Reprinted (trans. G. R. Sayer) London, 1959 CHINESE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG. Imperial Porcelain of Later Qing. Hong Kong, 1983. CLuNAs, C. The Cost of Ceramics and the Cost of Collecting Ceramics in the Ming period', in Transactions of the Oriental Ceramic Society of Hong Kong (forthcoming) DAvID, SIR PERCIvAL. Chinese Connoisseurship: The Ko Ku Yao Lun, The Essential Criteria of Antiquities. London, 1971 HoNG KoNG MuSEUM OF ART. Brush and Clay: Chinese Porcelain of the Early 2oth century. Hong Kong, 1990 Imperial Taste: Chinese Ceramics from the Percival David Foundation. Los Angeles and London, 1989 JENYNs, R. S. Ming Pottery and Porcelain. London, 1953 JENYNs, R. S. Later Chinese Porcelain. London, 1965 (4th edn 1971) KERR, R. Chinese Ceramics: Porcelain of the Qing Dynasty 1644-1911. London, 1986 LAn Pu. Jingdezhen Taolu (The Potteries of Jingdezhen) (ed. Zheng Tinggui). 1815. Reprinted (Ching-te-chen t'ao lu, trans. G. R. Sayer) London, 1951 LION-GoLDsCHMIDT, D. Ming Porcelain. London, 1978 LITTLE, S. Chinese Ceramics of the Transitional Period: 1620-1683. New York, 1983 LIU XINYUAN. Imperial Porcelain of the Yongle and Xuande Periods Excavated from the Site of the Ming Imperial Factory at Jingdezhen (exhibition catalogue). Hong Kong, 1989. MEDLEY, M. Yuan Porcelain and Stoneware. London, 1974 ORIENTAL CERAMIC SOCIETY OF HONG KONG. Jingdezhen Wares: The Yuan Evolution. Hong Kong, 1984 ORIENTAL CERAMIC SOCIETY OF HONG KONG. Transitional Wares and their Forerunners. Hong Kong, 1981. Qing Porcelain of Kangxi, Yongzheng and Qianlong periods from the Palace Museum Collection. Hong Kong, 1989 ScoTT, R. E. 18th Century Overglaze Enamels: The influence of technological development on painting style', in Style in the East Asian Tradition (eds. R. Scott, and Ġ. Hutt). London, 1987, pp. 149-68 SHANGHAI RENMIN MEISHU CHUBANSHE (ed.). Taoci 1949-1959. Shanghai, 1961 TiCHANE, R. Ching-te-chen: Views of a Porcelain City. New York, 1983 VAN OoRT, H. A. Chinese Porcelain of the 19th and 2oth Centuries. Lochem, 1977 VAN OoRT, H. A. The Porcelain of Hung-hsien. Lochem, 1970. ## Technology KINGERY, W. D. AND VANDIVER, P. B. Ceramic Masterpieces: Art, Structure, Technology. New York, 1986 LI JIAZHI AND CHEN XIANQIU. Proceedings of the 1989 International Symposium on Ancient Ceramics. Shanghai, 1989 Lı JIAZíI ET AL. Zhongguo gudai taoci kexue jishu chengjiu. Shanghai, 1985 ORIENTAL CERAMIC SOCIETY (LONDON). Iron in the Fire. London, 1988 SHANGHAI INSTITUTE OF CERAMICS, ACADEMIA SıNICA (ed.). Scientific and technological insights on ancient Chinese pottery and porcelain: Proceedings of the International conference on Ancient Chinese Pottery and Porcelain held in Shanghai, November 1-5, 1982. Beijing, 1986 TicHANe, R. Ash Ġlazes. New York, 1987 TiCHANE, R. Reds, Reds, Copper Reds. London, 1985 TicHANE, R. Those Celadon Bhues. New York, 1978 Wood, N. Oriental Glazes. London, 1978 WooD, N. Recent Researches into the Technology of Chinese Ceramics, in the proceedings of a symposium on the ceramic art of China held at Los Angeles County Museum in September 1989 (forthcoming) Early Works on Chinese Ceramics An Illustrated Catalogue of Chinese Porcelain and Pottery Forming the Collection of Mr Alfred Trapnell. Bristol, 1901 BLACkER, J. F. Chats on Oriental China. London, 1908 BRANKSTON, A. D. Early Ming Wares from Ching-te-chen. Peking, 1938 (reprinted 1970) BRITISí MusEUM. A Guide to the Pottery and Porcelain of the Far East in the Department of Ceramics and Ethnography. London, 1924 BusHELL, S. W. Description of Chinese Pottery and Porcelain: Being a translation of the T’ao Shuo. Oxford, 1910 BusHELL, S. W. Oriental Ceramic Art. London, 1896 (reprinted 1981) GRANDIDIER, E. La Céramique Chinoise. Paris, 1894 HENTZE, C. Chinese Tomb Figures. London, 1928 HeTHERINGTON, A. L. Chinese Ceramic Glazes. Cambridge, 1937 HETHERINGTON, A. L. The Early Ceramic Wares of China. London, 1922 HoBsoN, R. L. A Catalogue of Chinese Pottery and Porcelain in the Collection of Sir Percival David, Bt. London, 1934 HoBso, R. L. Chinese Pottery and Porcelain (2 vols). London, 1915 HoBsoN, R. L. The Later Ceramic Wares of China. London, 1925 HoBsoN, R. L. The Wares of the Ming Dynasty. London, 1923 HOBSON, R. L. AND HETHERINGTON, A. L. The Art of the Chinese Potter. London, 1923 HoNEY, W. B. The Ceramic Art of China. London, 1945 LAuFER, B. Chinese Clay Figures (2 vols). Chicago, 1914 LAUFER, B. Chinese Pottery of the Han Dynasty. Leiden, 1909 DU SARTEL, O. La Porcelaine de Chine. Paris, 1881