# Preface to the original edition One of the most formative realizations of my academic career was noticing how my design students were always ahead of the game. They always seemed to know instinctively what the latest trends in academic thought were, without necessarily being able to articulate their ideas very clearly. It was as if fashion had some sort of advance warning system to suss out the next hot topic in cultural theory. Their intense interest in identity, and in particular individuality, went with an aggressive assertiveness that clashed with any attempt to contextualize the impetus for self-expression as a social symptom. The only aspect of cultural studies which sparked any interest in them were transgressions of the order imposed by sociological analysis. They were impatient and dismissive with interpretations that explained the way certain styles arose at specific historical moments; they just wanted to do it – to be innovators. In retrospect, I partly put their insight down to their professional design training, which requires the development of a good ‘nose’ for fashion trends. The necessary survival kit for any designer who wants to succeed in the face of a very competitive market must include an arrogant self-regard for their own originality, a liking for risk taking, together with sufficient narcissism and technical expertise to publicize themselves. The art school ethos encourages a strong sense of self-identity and requires students to make presentations and defend their creations in ‘crits’ where they are open to criticism from their tutors and peers. Design students’ almost instinctive awareness of the issues of the moment only made the fashion phenomenon more intriguing to me. Except for the supremacy of innovation and originality, all the lessons of modernism with reference to ‘fitness for purpose’ and ‘form follows function’ and so on were lost on the generation of design students who I was addressing. Ever since I started lecturing in design history after a first career as a designer, I had noticed with increasing unease that students were bored by the fundamental principles of ‘good design’ derived from the moralizing values of nineteenth-century idealists. History was for plundering any good ideas that they could recover and make their own. Style was what excited them. They were also interested in ethical issues such as recycling, ‘green’, fair trade and ‘environmentally friendly’ design, but seemed completely unmoved by the virtues of ‘good design’ which in many ways had similar aims for the betterment of society, but via universal solutions to suit a notional ‘majority’, subsuming both the designer and the user into an anonymous mass where individuality could not find a home. But how to formulate the ‘individuality’ phenomenon beyond the narcissistic indulgence, for which it could so easily be mistaken, took a while longer to crystallize into a convincing area of enquiry. At first, legitimization posed one of the main problems, since it required a certain amount of courage to fly in the face of the totally ‘politically incorrect’ notion of individuality which apart from psychoanalysis is not allowed to exist in any serious field of enquiry except as a social construct related to the issue of identity within a cultural context. The second problem was how to research ‘individuality’ when the whole notion completely defies categorization. But what intrigued me was how to find a way of overcoming what increasingly appeared to be a prejudice against the necessary ‘attitude’ that ultimately sustains most creative acts, and not just confining the definition to the realm of design, but what must be one of the most fundamental of all the life-enhancing acts – that of creativity. The evasion that it was too narcissistic a topic to contemplate no longer seemed to hold since for the last twenty-five years postmodernists like Jonathan Raban in Soft City (1974) and sociologists like Anthony Giddens had been theorizing personal identity as conditional and malleable. I found that a material culture approach offered an alternative that dealt with the designing process and its products. In avoiding the duality between art and design, it took on issues of materiality and experience, and drew them away from the circular discussions that otherwise always revolve around the high/low culture debate. My project has been to attempt to understand individuality in order to be able to explain why it is such a central feature of the contemporary modern mentality and consequently so wrapped up in the material culture of everyday life. The way people objectify that desire in the making, unmaking and remaking of their material worlds is a pervasive activity in people’s lives one way or another, but which designers are more consciously involved in than most. I therefore make no apology for concentrating on the ‘particular’ and the ‘specific’, both words that I know are overused in the text. But there are only so many ways one can express in language that quality of versatility which is so much more aptly demonstrated in the vast array of things that testify to the importance of the sense of unique difference and individuality which activate people’s sense of agency. At the same time I have exploited theory for what it has to offer in opening up material culture, a field that has turned out to be particularly unamenable to discourse. The only way to tackle this combination of the everyday and abstract theory has been to adopt a style of tacking back and forth between rhetorical questions, theoretical devices, items taken from the personal minutia of everyday life and illustrative case studies. My style is inconsistent – from theoretical and detached to meditative. On many occasions my own research seemed to foreshadow news items while at other times they sparked off a line of thought I hadn’t planned. My attention to individuality like my interest in fashion should not be misunderstood as a superficial interest in style. Whether academics admit it or not we are all susceptible to the dynamics of fashion as a cultural engagement with the new. And it is in an attempt to discover the fundamental impulses that drive it as a means of objectifying the desire for innovation and social change that a large part of this work is dedicated. Nor should my interest in the deeply felt reality of the search for, and the belief in a true self be seen as somehow undermining feminist political strategies to question the so-called ‘natural’ definitions of sex and gender or indeed the decentring critique of power dynamics that challenges the very category of identity itself. It is the mismatch between theory and practice which brings such fundamental questions into the real world of lived experience, the only place where change can actually be effected. The endeavour of this study has been to examine at close quarters the sense of identity gained both as an individual and as a member of a group, through the process of designing and making the material world, not only among professional designers and makers but that more amorphous vast public who also participate in its design and construction. This project has therefore been to consider the designer’s, the maker’s and the user’s perspectives in the context of the same conceptual playing field in order to recontextualize design within the more general location of the material culture of everyday life. A number of inspirational authors to whom I draw attention in the text provided the final incentive which I needed to take this on as a project. The impetus in this study has therefore been to address the question of identity with particular reference to individuality within a cultural context that can take account of the subtle specificity of its imponderability. This book is the result of many years of reflection as well as research into a varied and, at first glance what might appear to be, incongruous disparate range of sources, fields, disciplines and case studies. The questions I am asking of design arise from defining it as a common activity and only could have sprung from locating it as a practice of modernity, rather than from the disciplinary parameters that otherwise restrict it to a narrow exclusive professional practice. This is not to denigrate the work of designers, but on the contrary to contextualize it within an expanded cultural field of study that enhances the practice and enlivens the significance of the world of things. I see this volume as a first step in establishing a theoretical starting point which I hope can contribute to a larger project in the investigation of the material culture of everyday life. It is not a project that I can or want to claim as my own because, as my secondary sources show, it is one engaged upon by many academics in a wide range of different fields in the arts and sciences. Although material culture does not conform to one definition, the varied and broad constituency of academics pursuing studies related to the field testifies to its dynamism and health at this moment when it appears to provide a useful frame of reference from which to address questions of contemporary interest. In many ways I have set myself an impossible task rather like ‘the hitchhiker’s guide to the galaxy’ – to try to understand the material universe and every ‘thing’. But my task has not been to construct a definitive theory for the study of the material culture of everyday life because I have yet to be convinced that it is possible to totalize the subject in a theoretical manner. Nor is this an anti-theory work. The theories recruited in this endeavour have provided essential interpretative tools in the understanding of abstract concepts which form an intrinsic aspect of the study of the social meaning of things. My main intention has been to open up some ways of thinking about the meaningfulness of things in the context of everyday life, the location that sociologists call ‘on the ground’ and consumption scholars call ‘in the street’. As I complete the book it still feels like an open-ended, unfinished project that I have only just started to explore. Apart from providing me with a platform for future projects, my aspiration for this volume is that it may encourage others to contribute to the search for an understanding of design as an aspect of the material world as a social place. There is so much to learn not only from the things we value but from the rubbish, detritus and discarded things. Most of all I hope that readers will find references and avenues to explore for themselves as well as much to argue with and discuss. There are a number of colleagues, family, friends and students to whom I owe a debt of gratitude for different kinds of help at various stages along the way, especially Jeremy Aynsley, Barbara Burman, Cora and Maurice Clarke (dec.), Dinah Eastop, Michael Evans, Roberto Feo, Lu Firth, Tag Gronberg, Rosario Hurtado, Pat Kirkham, Keith Leaman, Eva Londos, Alex McCowan (dec.), Daniel Miller, Lesley Miller, Francisco Santos, Penny Sparke, Brandon Taylor, Julian Thomas, Joanne Turney, Lynne Walker, Suzette Worden, and my students on the MA Oral History project and the Material Culture of Everyday Life unit. I would like to thank those copyright holders of pictures used to illustrate this book who have given permission for reproduction, as well as those who, in spite of all my efforts, I did not manage to trace. I am also very grateful for the sabbatical leave granted by the History of Art and Design Division of Winchester School of Art, Faculty of Arts, University of Southampton, and the helpful cooperation of my colleagues and the staff in the division which enabled me to complete the writing of this book. I would like to acknowledge the help and cooperation of all my interviewees, the staff of various archives and libraries consulted in the course of research, in particular Serena Kelly at the Archive of Art and Design, Victoria and Albert (V&A) Museum and the library staff at Winchester School of Art, and the two anonymous referees for their helpful suggestions. Very special thanks to Kathryn Earle of Berg Publishers for her enthusiasm for the project, her encouragement, patience and understanding, and to Ray Attfield for his constant interest, difficult and challenging questions, and the many helpful discussions that helped me throughout this project. —Judy Attfield, 2000