# Introduction: The material culture of everyday life This is a contradictory project, because although its main focus is on the material object it is not really about things in themselves, but about how people make sense of the world through physical objects, what psychoanalytic theory calls ‘object relations’ in the explanation of identity formation, what sociology invokes as the physical manifestation of culture and what anthropology refers to as the objectification of social relations.<sup>1</sup> Thus this study is situated at the dynamic point of interplay between animate and inanimate worlds in order to look beyond the material world of mere things in themselves and reconsider their complex role in the relationship between objects and subjects. This is also an unashamedly hybrid book. In academic terms it uses a postdisciplinary approach to the study of design and its history as an aspect of material culture in order to extend it beyond the framework which has largely confined design studies to the work of professional designers. The project here is to discuss the interactive role of physical manufactured objects in the making of the modern world into a human place. It is post-disciplinary, in as much as that although it deliberately starts from the sub-disciplinary base of studies in the history of design, it then goes on to breach the conventional borders of the specialism to draw from a range of fields – from social history, anthropology and archaeology to sociology, geography, psychoanalysis and general cultural studies. There was the time when such eclecticism would have been frowned upon as diluting and undisciplined, when to borrow was seen as a form of stealing, and the purity of the subject area was something to be defended. When, too, apologies would have had to be made to justify looking at objects, making sure to expunge any discussion that might be accused of fetishism, and (in more senses than one) that assumed such an association to be negative. However, times have changed and in looking retrospectively at the progress of design history, it is possible to explain both the narrowness and the unboundedness from which it has both suffered and from which it has developed and continues to grow. It is already apparent that what started as a small offshoot is developing into a healthy growth from which new lines of research will hopefully develop and flourish. The definition of design history has also changed over time. It can now generally be agreed that the discipline came into being by default because the limitations of art history methods could not deal adequately with products of industrial mass manufacture. Therefore any project which sets out to use design history as a baseline for the study of the material culture of everyday things needs to take its historiography into account in order to understand its conventional parameters and how they have expanded to encompass a more diffuse range of goods and a broader time band<sup>2</sup> to those with which it initially started out. Then, neither ‘crafts’ nor anything which might be mistaken for ‘art’ would have been considered a legitimate area of study under the aegis of design history. But what is of greater interest than attempting an exact definition which is bound to be partial is to suggest an explanation for the changes it has undergone and what direction its impending shift might take in the light of new thinking on the subject. As the title suggests, design is just one aspect of the material culture of everyday life. The object of the exercise is to push the boundaries and explore the context to which design belongs. Having broadened the accepted range of artefacts that can be addressed by design, however, what now needs serious attention is how to theorize such an endeavour to encompass a wider band of ‘things’. And in spite of the more comprehensive parameters or maybe because of their tendency to blur the nature of the object, design critics and historians have become aware of the pressing need to challenge the constraints imposed by the discipline. To thus problematize the issue of interpretation, which is what I mean by ‘theory’ in this context, is not to favour any particular formulaic methodology, but rather to insist on the prioritization of the importance of the questions that motivate research and enquiry into the cultural significance of things. Though young, material culture is already a well-established field of study<sup>3</sup> that has continued to talk across the boundaries between cognate disciplines within the humanities and social sciences. In association with design history it offers a more obvious place for the type of analysis that follows design products beyond the point of sale to examine how modern artefacts are appropriated by consumers and transformed from manufactured products to become the stuff of everyday life that have a direct involvement with matters, both literally and figuratively, of identity. So what I have called here ‘the material culture of everyday life’ acknowledges the physical object in all its materiality and encompasses the work of design, making, distributing, consuming, using, discarding, recycling and so on. But above all it focuses on how things have gone through all those stages as part of the mediation process between people and the physical world at different stages in their biographies. Even though material culture does provide a most appropriate arena for the discussion of the social characteristics of design, nevertheless the starting point for this account commences within the field of design history; because it is from there that the project of this journey can best fulfil its purpose – to challenge visuality and aesthetics (good design) as a prime factor in the study of designed objects. Design history made a definite move away from its parent discipline – art history – some time ago. For in spite of the all-embracing attempts to integrate ‘commercial art’ and industrially mass-produced products in the ‘new art history’ of the 1980s,<sup>4</sup> its subsequent re-categorization as visual culture failed to consider its materiality and the most distinctive qualities which make design different from art in its relationship to the everyday, the ordinary and the banal. And significantly it is this relationship with the generic that has been the focus of exhibitions such as Material Culture<sup>5</sup> at the Hayward Gallery in London in 1997 in which the curators sought to bring together the work of artists with a common interest in ‘the object in itself, as raw material, found or functional thing and in relation to wider scuptural and artistic concerns’.<sup>6</sup> Similarly the increasing standing of the crafts in the expressive arts can in part be explained by the way they call attention to the skill and beauty of handmade processes. While at the same time we find design practitioners, critics and historians currently showing an interest in ugliness and ‘undesign’ as seen in the recent Stealing Beauty exhibition held at the Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA) in London in 1999.<sup>7</sup> Strictly speaking design is both the product and the process that conceptualizes an aesthetic and functional solution to industrially produced goods – from garments to potato peelers and from cars to buildings. But that is not the end of the story. If it were, there would be little point in clearing a space to discuss design as producing a different type of object to that of art. In some contexts it could even be said to serve the same kind of expressive functions. It is more a matter of context. For engineers, design has nothing to do with aesthetics, it is strictly operational. Design has tried, unsuccessfully to straddle aesthetics and engineering, resulting in an equivalent to two cultures, analogous to the art/science divide, with two very different definitions of design and a division of labour between the stylist who is in charge of the envelope for the works supplied by the engineer. This was made apparent in the Design History Society Conference<sup>8</sup> held at the School of Design at Huddersfield University where the aim was to stimulate more contact between different types of practitioners, historians and theoreticians. In order to further that dialogue here, design is posited as the counterpart to art in order to challenge that divide. Whereas art enchants the ordinary object and makes it special, design disenchants it. Making design a ‘thing’ returns it from the display shelf, the collection, the museum or art gallery to the factory floor, the warehouse shelf or the forgotten corner at the back of a cupboard where it forms part of the physical effects belonging to an individual, a household, a nation, a culture, the world of goods. In the same way the once highly valued paintings by a painter who has gone out of fashion can be deposed from a position of honour in the academy to become a thing hidden away in the museum store room. The spotlight of academic or critical interest appears mainly to focus on the object as celebrity and spectacle, when it is ‘new’, popular, highly acclaimed, sensational and above all visible; or at the moment of its downfall from grace when, for example, it is exposed as inauthentic. But what doesn’t seem to attract much attention is that larger part of the designed object’s biography when it is no longer sacred, when it forms part of the disordered everyday clutter of the mundane, and joined the disarray of wild things that don’t quite fit anywhere – the undisciplined. While the ‘new’ art and design histories, represented by journals such as Block,<sup>9</sup> have revised and problematized ‘historical facts’ by subjecting them to critical scrutiny allowing a contemporary gloss to be added so that it was no longer possible for historians to assert the authority of a heroic account of modern classics, the problem of continuing to see design as a visual medium remained unchallenged. Thus the tendency to study design as if it were the same as fine art, requiring an educated eye to appreciate its formal qualities, remained and remains embedded within the discipline. That is not to say that representation, and all that the practice of interpreting meaning from visual images entails, is discounted as a method of valuing design either functionally, aesthetically or purely as a conduit of meaning. The impact of foregrounding the language-like characteristics of the visual has contributed so greatly to its understanding that this study could not have been envisaged without the platform that those studies have provided. At the crudest level, the model of design history rooted in Ruskinian principles of the arts and crafts movement, which has insisted that its duty lay mainly in considering ‘good design’, has not just omitted vast swathes of artefacts, increasing incrementally with the rising prosperity and economic ambitions of nation states, but disregards the social life of things that unfolds beyond the initial commodity stage. Recently sociology has taken on the investigation of consumption as a social activity using the study of products such as the Sony Walkman<sup>10</sup> to provide concrete examples of the physical embodiment of culture in the form of manufactured goods. But there are still relatively few examples that reveal the impact of economic and educational institutions in the creation of products for the market that chart the complete biography of the object, following it as it passes through the retail checkout into everyday life. The aim of this study is to present some critical perspectives and suggest some ways of theorizing design to include the less well-ordered things that inhabit the material world, beyond interpretations that confine it to a catalogue of pristine aesthetic objects. To locate design within a social context as a meaningful part of peoples’ lives means integrating objects and practices within a culture of everyday life where things don’t always do as they are told nor go according to plan. Although the historical dimension is an important aspect of the project, this work does not purport to provide ‘a history’ nor a fully formulated theory. Its main intention is to offer a toolbox with some tentative definitions (Part I), themes (Part II) and contexts (Part III) with which to get started in thinking about how to make sense of the clutter of things that humans make, exchange and surround themselves with on this crowded planet at the beginning of the third millennium. Part I explores questions around the definitions of ‘design’ and ‘things’ in order to distinguish them from each other as different kinds of things, while also considering how they both form part of the same material world. Chapter 1 defines design as ‘things with attitude’ where the designer’s intention is made apparent through a strong visual statement. The institutional conventions that have defined the principles of good design within the modern movement have tended to dominate the discourse of design drowning out the more ‘everyday’ type of things which form the greater part of the material world. Current changes that include a more ‘material culture’ approach can accommodate the type of things defined in Chapter 2 – ‘design in the lower case’. Ordinary things do not depend quite so much on meaning thrust upon them for marketing purposes. Once they enter the realm of the ordinary, they evade notice and become absorbed into peoples’ lives where they are no longer ‘a taste thing’, but become part of an individual’s personal possessions that go towards forming a sense of individuality within a group that share the same values. The rediscovery of ‘things’ by design theoreticians confirms the turn away from the immateriality encouraged by theories of representation that reduce all meaning to language. The last chapter in Part I discusses the dynamic character of artefacts used to negotiate change at a social and individual level positing design as a dynamic process. Authenticity, the subject of Chapter 4, is discussed through a case study of reproduction furniture, a type of artefact well suited to demonstrate the way in which it only becomes an issue with modern design theory that insists on originality, a concept entirely foreign to trade practices where the design process was integral to the production process and depended on repetition. The importance given to historical specificity as a means of referring to authenticity and maintaining a link with the past, embedded in certain types of material artefacts like furniture, becomes particularly pertinent in a period characterized by rapid change. In contrast to the sense of continuity objectified in reproduction furniture, one of the types of artefact best suited to embody ephemerality providing a material means of keeping in touch with the present is textiles and fashion – the subject of Chapter 5. ‘Containment’, the theme addressed in Chapter 6, looks at the way personal possessions form a conglomerate arrangement sometimes referred to as ‘clutter’. It allows the study of things gone wild into an unruly accumulation as well as an orderly arrangement of things as a form of ecology of personal possessions, using as a case study the role of domestic things in materializing the construction of self-identity. Moving from the particular case studies of the middle section of the book, Part III opens up three fundamental contexts, exploring the materiality of the everyday in terms of space, time and the body. Context is abstract insofar as it is used to locate or position a subject; nevertheless, it is discussed here as a physical entity. Although each is treated in a separate chapter, there is a close interrelationship between them. Chapter 7, ‘Space’, takes on a number of popular phenomena such as ‘spec builders’ vernacular’ in order to apply various different perspectives in the investigation of space as a social artefact. Chapter 8 concerns ‘time’ and the way in which people use things to establish a relationship to it to form their subjectivity. The book ends with a consideration of the changing relationship between things and the body, suggesting a transition with the passing of time from embodiment to disembodiment.