Holly came from Miami, FLA Hitch-hiked her way across the USA Plucked her eyebrows on the way Shaved her legs and then he was a she She says, Hey babe Take a walk on the wild side She said, Hey honey Take a walk on the wild side Lou Reed’s song ‘A Walk on the Wild Side’, recorded in 1972,<sup>1</sup> encapsulates the narcissistic use of appearance transformation to achieve self-emancipation through the transcendence of biological destiny. It can also be seen as representative of the kind of manifestations that formed part of a transgressive underground movement alongside the wave of critical theory that emerged from the period now characterized as the cultural revolution and exemplified in texts like Guy Debord’s Society of the Spectacle.<sup>2</sup> The wilder side of experimental identity creation that breached gender codes and the etiquette of good taste in looks and behaviour infiltrated the mainstream via popular culture disseminated through the media. The characters in the song are based on people associated with Andy Warhol, one of the best-known artists of the New York pop art scene, who recognized the exploitative evanescent instant power of the mass media. Susan Sontag’s ‘Notes on Camp’<sup>3</sup> of 1964 traced the esoteric underground aestheticism of camp as a metaphor of life as theatre and foreshadowed the changes of sensibility which were to be defined as the postmodern condition. Camp, according to Sontag, was ‘the glorification of “character” as a state of continual incandescence, a person being one very intense thing’, beyond the ‘good-bad axis of ordinary aesthetic judgement’, treating life as art so that ‘another kind of truth about the human situation, another experience of what it is to be human – is being revealed’.<sup>4</sup> The emergence of camp from the underground marked the popularization of one of the counter-cultural symptoms representative of the awareness of multiple possibilities typified in the new-found confidence through ‘reinventing’ the self as a conscious act of pure agency. ‘Too much’ was the term used to characterize camp, referring to the exaggerated forms of dress and demeanour used to express the extraordinariness of ‘being special, glamorous’. Such acts of exaggerated individuality as those mentioned earlier require a high degree of narcissism and self-conscious assertion. They explain the social changes wrought by modernity which have enabled individuals to experience a sense of self much more acutely than in the ‘everyday’ where the process of individuation takes place but remains unnoticed. The intentionality of the visual transgressive statement is as dramatically evident as design made to hit the eye – the ‘thing with attitude’ while it still retains the sparkle of newness, before it loses its fashionability. Yet although the everyday is by its very nature not a spectacular place, and pervasive media infiltration stokes the desire to encounter the authentic ‘wild side’ of life, its wider availability only makes it more vicarious. Yet the everyday is where life is lived both vicariously and concretely, and ultimately where individuality is realized, albeit unseen. The making and unmaking of different life stages of identity are manifested through social relations, enacted and embodied through a material world and designed in the form of things and practices in the context of personal and public space, experienced through the dimension of time and sensorially through the body. Social theory has responded to the modern concept of individuality – ‘the free subject’ – in terms of materiality, citing ‘the body as a means of expression’.<sup>5</sup> But the material world also has effects on people, it stores memories and interrupts the flow of time to restore a sense of continuity as well as to reflect change and contain complex and apparently irreconcilable differences.