# Afterword Jo Turney Exemplifying the best of academic texts that aimed to articulate an interdisciplinary approach to the arts and humanities emerging at the end of the twentieth century, Wild Things aimed to challenge the modernist, and concomitant moralizing, doctrine that informed design history and objects deemed suitable for study. Influenced by object-based texts emerging from social anthropology and material culture studies at the end of the 1990s, new methodological approaches in dress history and theory, crafts criticism, museum studies and oral history, as well as wider sociocultural and political contexts, the book aimed to revalue and reposition the ways in which objects were studied, discussed and valued. This chapter considers some of the key contributions Wild Things has made specifically to design history, while considering its impact and influences within and across other fields too.<sup>1</sup> From its inception, design history privileged the industrial, the technological and ‘rational’ objects that communicated the ways in which design (noun, verb and adjective) offered solutions to social problems, and/or demonstrated a linear progression that marked what it was to be ‘modern’. Such a focus clearly prioritized a modernist trajectory, of functional design constructed by mass and machine or technologically driven production, which simultaneously established a canon of objects that facilitated the elevation of examples considered the ‘best’. By taking such a hierarchical position, design history distanced and differentiated itself from its parent discipline, art history, but in the process established a sliding scale of best–worst objects, which negated, even shunned, objects that typified an earlier understanding of design – the applied arts – even though these objects constituted the majority of objects housed in ‘design’ museum collections. Design was informed by a designer, and even when this was presented as a discussion of a design ’world’, it remained somewhat limited.<sup>2</sup> For Attfield, this was always problematic. As a design historian, Attfield’s writing habitually focused on questioning the canon. From her early work that outlined feminist approaches to design history,<sup>3</sup> she endlessly sought to democratize – to liberate voices, objects and subjects otherwise hidden, forgotten, misunderstood or made mute. Her study of design and skill<sup>4</sup> demonstrated the meaning of design to both designers and consumers, while those who lived with design were never far from her critical eye.<sup>5</sup> Such astute social commentary as articulated through everyday objects made design and its objects relevant to new audiences, researchers and students. She really, as her reader suggests brought ‘design home’.<sup>6</sup> From this perspective, it is not difficult to see how objects considered ‘applied arts’, and particularly those deemed ‘domestic’, were fundamentally excluded from design histories appealed to Attfield<sup>7</sup>. These became the Wild Things: the objects that existed inside and outside of design history. They were ‘design’ in the ‘upper’ or ‘lower’ case, ubiquitous and unconsidered, yet dynamic props in everyday life. Such a position, which Guy Julier calls ‘attitudinal’,<sup>8</sup> offers a clear move away from classist considerations of taste<sup>9</sup> and modernist emphasis on function, moving the focus towards the object without prejudice. In doing this, Attfield acknowledged that the stuff of everyday life was indeed ‘wild’, existing beyond the neat boxes of fixed meaning, often as ‘clutter’, a term which socially and culturally remains fraught with an anxiety to restore order, as many television shows and self-help books bear witness to. We might consider such social anxiety about things indicative of an understanding of the ideals of the modernist design project – streamlining, clean surfaces, the rational house – but equally acknowledge that this is also its failure or impossibility; people don’t live rational lives, and their things matter, individually and en masse. Nor, as Attfield herself noted, does it account for the rise in consumerism, the explosion in the luxury goods market or the seeming democratization of desire for these products.<sup>10</sup> In saying this, Wild Things also offered a clear response to the end-ofthe-century concerns surrounding the over-consumption of goods, lifestyle marketing and the general commodification of daily life. Consumer studies, which had often informed and driven design history research into objects of popular culture at this time,<sup>11</sup> seemed to echo the moralizing of earlier modernist critics, deeming consumerism ‘bad’ or ‘corrupt’, or exemplifying shopping and the exchange of goods as barometers of desire.<sup>12</sup> Similarly, by this time, studies of design had been subsumed into visual culture, which seemed to replace the object with the image. Neither of these approaches really addressed why people consumed things, why some things endured while others were quickly condemned to either the bargain basement or the dustbin, or asked pertinent questions which might address the social issues design was seemingly trying to solve. By aligning much of the research with the testimony of individuals about their things, from use to attached value, Attfield was able to articulate the role and significance of objects in daily life that had the potential to inform, if not guide, the development of consumer goods. Such studies transcend focus groups and lifestyle targeted product development, because they gain insight not from objects themselves but from the ways in which objects used by consumers as connective life markers that link the past with the present and the future, are indicators of memory, identity and aspiration, and inanimate companions that help to navigate daily life. Wild Things is about life with objects and the important relationships that are negotiated through living with things. Indeed, nearly twenty years after the publication of this book, the problems of mass manufacture and design in daily life is well documented and remains central to current design discourse. We can now witness the ironic ubiquity of a consumer culture that promotes ‘bespoke’ products and services, ‘personalisation’ and ‘customisation’, to counteract the perception of a monolithic and impersonal mass market, considered undesirable, unsustainable and associated with shoddy goods and wastefulness. Likewise, we might also consider the contribution of Wild Things in pre-empting and celebrating the recent craft revival and stimulating interest in everyday creativity, as a means of offering an alternative to mass production and mass consumption, as well as becoming established as part of subcultural trends (hipsters), indicative of a rise in small, creative independent businesses (from yarn shops, to cafes and craft breweries) and as a means of empowerment through political protest. The most significant example of this is the adoption of craftivism,<sup>13</sup> which offers political mobilization through everyday creative and crafts practices.<sup>14</sup> The rise of crafts criticism during the 1990s<sup>15</sup> aimed to redefine and revalue crafts practice and bring making to the fore of academic discourse. A process of re-evaluation aimed to define craft by appropriating the terminology that had previously marginalized it from both art and design history. So, discussions of skill, repetition and hand work were valourized not as alternatives to the contemporary world (as had previously been the case<sup>16</sup>) but as sites of innovation, difference<sup>17</sup> and dissent.<sup>18</sup> For example, the centrality of the maker’s hand to this new discourse highlighted the human relationship that was deliberately articulated and encountered in the making process and through the associated act of consumption.<sup>19</sup> This emphasizes a holistic and series of interpersonal-object relationships that are forged, albeit not always recognized, valued or appreciated,<sup>20</sup> that connect peoples with things.<sup>21</sup> These acts of inbuilt connectivity and indeed potential disconnect can be understood as democratic, privileging the craftsperson and the consumer equally. This school of thought added context and underpinned the levelling of the playing field intended in the narrative that runs throughout Wild Things. The democracy of objects was extended to a democracy of subjects, and Wild Things clearly contributed to increasing the use of oral history and recognizing its value in design studies. By capturing the spoken word, marginalized voices were able to communicate opinions about their lives and homes as lived through their things, words previously unsolicited, unrecorded and unheard. Informed and influenced by new approaches to the presentation of museum collections and the onus to make collections more accessible and relevant to visitors, and sparked by a postmodern climate in which new and previously considered marginal voices moved to the mainstream of academic scrutiny/ study, objects previously excluded from study were uncovered. Indeed, notions of everyday objects and creative practices, outlined by Attfeld, were central to major exhibition projects in the UK that aimed at inclusivity and providing a platform from which to articulate hidden and marginal histories, that is, Black British Style, V&A Museum, London, 2004.<sup>22</sup> These conditions offered the potential to democratize design, to widen its remits, but to also consider its value as both object and idea, from production to consumption and beyond. Design, under these conditions, becomes part of a wider world of objects – material culture or ‘design in the lower-case’ as Attfield asserted, which could facilitate wider and more inclusive discussions.<sup>23</sup> When Wild Things was published in 2000, it encapsulated a current crossdisciplinary discourse surrounding the meaning of objects in everyday life.<sup>24</sup> This was not merely a means of seeking new material or holding up examples to challenge the canon or to conform to contemporary trends; the purpose of these discussions and Wild Things per se was to consider how and why design and its objects were so central both to understanding the world and the ways in which it was understood through consumption, use and disuse, and as a fundamental tool for negotiating that world. The emphasis was, therefore, on the users or consumers of design, the choices they made, but more importantly on how they lived with design, and how, through memory, circumstance, desire and a myriad of other conditions both personal and cultural, and in relation to taste or function, design was utilized in these ways. This emphasis on how people made sense of themselves and the world through the objects that they owned and how these narratives were presented through their possessions. This might be through the clothes they wore or the furniture and furnishings, collections and general bric-a-brac that they had and displayed within their homes. Objects, or the material world, became a platform on which objects could understood as ‘making life liveable’ if not ‘making life better’. Indeed, Attfield’s valorization of the relationship between authenticity and reproduction<sup>25</sup> has influenced many studies directly and indirectly that consider the value of the past in the present and particularly trends towards retro, revivalism and vintage styles across varying genres of popular culture.<sup>26</sup> The materiality of culture and the ways in which objects interacted with and informed daily life was the driving force of Wild Things. Situated in a complex methodological position that straddled an unsatisfactory design history discourse about everyday objects and set against a cultural climate that demanded inclusivity, the book sought to make connections and address these uncomfortable ‘fits’. Material Culture studies, particularly those undertaken by Daniel Miller and colleagues in the Department of Anthropology at University College, London, offered a critical axis on which many of the unresolved questions found balance. Miller’s approach, which used material culture to discuss mass consumption,<sup>27</sup> offered the potential for the discussion of design, production and consumption, which perceives consumption as a social process<sup>28</sup> and considers consumers as agents within it. This was extended to consider the ways in which people lived with things and how they used them to negotiate the world both inside and outside their homes.<sup>29</sup> The emphasis on the agency of the consumer, combined with Attfield’s assertion that design was an everyday series of practices, allowed academics to consider the seemingly banal daily activities of homemaking, decorating, making, cooking and getting dressed as significant exercises in creativity.<sup>30</sup> Likewise, for those working within the field of material culture, Wild Things emphasized the significance of the materiality of objects and the contribution design made in relation to the consumption of objects. By the 2010 publication of Kjetil Fallan’s Design History: Understanding Theory and Method (Berg) the methods and approaches used by Attfield in Wild Things had become very much part of the established techniques of the design historian. Attfield’s championing of material culture, and particularly that emanating from social anthropology, Fallon notes,<sup>31</sup> was a means of expanding the field (a la Rosalind Krauss)<sup>32</sup> of the objects of ‘design’, while opening the potential for their study in more holistic and inclusive ways.<sup>33</sup> This, of course, was not foolproof, nor did it offer a simple, all-encompassing or deterministic method for the study of all objects. And while Fallon criticizes the lack of emphasis on pre-production, Attfield herself was well aware of the problems of disparity to be encountered in the study of such a mass of things, and an inability of some studies to address materiality per se (ibid). Fallon’s intimation that Wild Things was less interested in design and the design process than the interrelationships between people and their things is both fair and flawed. First, the text discusses design and its histories in an unsurpassed manner hitherto its publication, while offering case studies of the design process and the imprint of the designer within the first chapters. References to traditional furniture makers (Clarkes of High Wycombe) through to knit designer Kaffe Fassett offer insights into twentieth-century design and design practice that, at the time of writing, would have been considered ‘unfashionable’ or of marginal interest. The focus on essentially ‘craft’ production as ‘design’ in these examples highlighted the ways in which design history could be expanded to include a variety of objects and makers outside of its remit, indicating that its language would be enriched and even underpinned. For example, by considering notions of authenticity, the reproduction and even non-design, Attfield emphasized the ways in which ‘good design’ could be considered as having a wider and longer-lasting impact on the visual and material, or indeed designed world, than had previously be imagined. Design was not just about the world or word of designers, nor was it merely a lofty commentary on ‘taste’. Likewise, in a brave attempt to make connections between production and consumption (beyond point of sale) Attfield considers the consumers, owners and users, and even those who recycle, hide, waste and throw away of objects (as Appadurai had),<sup>34</sup> as makers, not merely of meaning, as this would be too reductive, but as agents navigating a life through living with things. There is no doubt that this consideration offered a new depth to studies of design that was exciting, and boundless, that aimed to add more voices to the discussion of what objects ‘mean’ and how they are ‘used’. This was a move towards democratization, in which the designer, the object and the consumer were considered contributors to the significance of things in everyday life. Studies in popular culture and particularly fashion studies had started to address these issues in the 1970s, with discussions of subcultural consumption and the relationship between objects and the construction of both group and personal identity. Contextually, as identity and lifestyle became buzzwords in relation to the positioning, marketing and selling commodities in the post-war period, consumers were given a sense of agency through a flexible, non-reductive combination of personal choice and lifestyle marketing, which promoted bespoke systems of personalization through processes of bricolage and display tactics, which might be considered examples of everyday creativity. Attfield noted: ‘The way people objectify that desire in the making, unmaking and remaking of their material world is pervasive activity in people’s lives one way or another,’<sup>35</sup> emphasizing the ways in which design informed daily life in varied ways. Wild Things is a book that connects; it joins the dots between disciplines linking modes of thought and discussion in new and innovative ways. By connecting design history with everyday objects and the field of material culture, the book connects people to things in a way that re-evaluates the significance of objects in daily life. By privileging design, but only as one category within the field of material culture (things with attitude), and by valorizing these objects through processes that include knowledge, skill and application, design discourse here widens to include previously marginalized design practices such as craft. In doing this, she also considers what constitutes a designer, ranging from the most visible and professional examples through to unclassified acts of design, such as getting dressed or home decorating, the success of which demonstrate skills greatly admired by peers. Likewise, objects hitherto considered non-design, reproductions, novelty or ‘poor taste’ are brought into the discussion as examples of cultural critiques of the democratization of design or players in object–person relationships. It challenges the notions of hierarchy, in terms of discipline and system of objects that span concepts of taste through to those associated with net worth and the moral judgements that accompany such a system, in order to reclassify, reorder and reassess the meaning of things. This, of course, was not a reductive exercise to establish a language of things; it was a starting point for the discussion of the interplay between people and their things, and the ways in which these relationships helped to negotiate daily life in a variety of ways. Attfield wrote: ‘This study is situated at the dynamic point of interplay between animate and inanimate worlds in order to look beyond the material world of mere things in themselves and reconsider their complex role in the relationship between objects and subjects’.<sup>36</sup> Wild Things was never intended to be the definitive word on design as material culture, but a starting point in which the canon could be questioned and expanded to meet the needs of a new century of objects, and one that included, if not privileged, object–person relationships. The value of Wild Things is multifarious; from expanding a field, to crossing disciplines, from challenging the canon through to empowering mute objects and voices to speak, the book offers a clear contextual survey of thinking and writing about objects at a particular time, while challenging convention through (sometimes heartfelt) testimony accompanied with specific examples. It offered an introduction to how to address, if not contain disorder; disobedient objects and messy lives clutter and chatter, with their inextricable entanglements, in order to demystify the stuff of everyday life and to prove there was no singly way of understanding the world and the things within it. —Jo Turney, Winchester School of Art, University of Southampton