Agius, P. 1978. British Furniture 1880-1915. London: Antique Collectors Club. Alderson, S. 1962. Britain in the Sixties: Housing. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Allan, G. and Crow, G. (eds) 1989. Home and Family: Creating the Domestic Sphere. Basingstoke: Macmillan. Amery, C. 1991. A Celebration of Art and Architecture. London: The National Gallery. Ames, K.L. 1992. Death in the Dining Room and Other Tales of Victorian Culture. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. Anderson, B.S. and Zinsser, J.P. 1988. A History of their Own: Women in Europe from Prehistory to the Present (2 vols.). London: Penguin Books. Andrews, M. 1997. The Acceptable Face of Feminism: The Women’s Institute Movement. London: Lawrence and Wishart. Appadurai, A. (ed.) 1986. The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Apter, E. and Pietz, W. (eds) 1993. Fetishism as Cultural Discourse. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Arendt, H. (ed.) 1968. Illuminations: Walter Benjamin Essays and Reflections. New York: Schocken. Ash, J. and Wilson, E. 1992. Chic Thrills: A Fashion Reader. London: Pandora. Ashwin, C. ‘Craft makes a comeback’, Times Higher Education Supplement, 1 May 1987. Ashwin, C., Chanon, A. and Darracott, J. 1988. Education Crafts: A Study of the Education and Training of Craftspeople in England and Wales. London: Crafts Council. Attfield, J. 1984. ‘A tale of two cultures’ and ‘Design for learning’, p. 13. The Times Higher Education Supplement, 10 August 1984. Attfield, J. 1985. ‘Feminist Designs on Design History’ in Feminist Art News Vol. 2, No.3: pp. 21–3. Attfield, J. 1989. ‘A foot note with some point to it’, p. 6. In The Weekend Guardian, Saturday-Sunday 8-9 April. Attfield, J. 1990. ‘“Then we were making furniture, and not money”: A case study of J. Clarke, Wycombe Furniture Makers’, pp. 54–7. In Oral History, Vol. 18, No. 2. Attfield, J. 1992. ‘The role of design in the relationship between furniture manufacture and its retailing 1939-1965 with initial reference to the furniture firm of J. Clarke’ (unpublished doctoral thesis) Brighton: University of Brighton. Attfield J. 1995. ‘Women Designing: Redefining Design in Britain between the Wars’ (review) in journal of Design History, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 64–7. Attfield, J. 1996.’ “Give ‘em something dark and heavy”: The Role of Design in the Material Culture of Popular British Furniture 1939-1965’, pp. 185–201. journal of Design History, Vol. 9, No. 3. Attfield, J. 1997. ‘A case for the study of the coffee table: Design as a practice of modernity’ pp. 267–89. Journal of Material Culture, Vol. 2, No. 3, November. Attfield, J. (ed.) 1999. Utility Reassessed: The role of ethics in the practice of design. Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press. Attfield, J. 1999. ‘Beyond the Pale: Reviewing the relationship between Material Culture and Design History’ in journal of Design History, Vol. 12, No. 4, pp. 373–80. Attfield J. 2003. ‘The Real Thing: Tufted Carpet’s Entry Into the Vernacular’ in Schoeser, M. and Boydell, C. (eds) Disentangling Textiles. Middlesex: Middlesex University Press. Attfield, J. and Kirkham, P. (eds) 1995. A View From the Interior. Women and Design. London: The Women’s Press. Auslander, L. 1996. Taste and Power: Furnishing Modem France. Berkeley: University of California Press. Bachelard, G. 1969. The Poetics of Space. Trans. Donald Nicholson-Smith. Oxford: Blackwell. Baker, S. 1995a. ‘“To go about noisily”: Clutter, writing and design’ in Emigre, No. 35. Baker, S. 1995b. ‘Thinking things differently’, pp. 70–7. In Things, No. 3. Baker, S. 1996. ‘Clutter, disorder and excess: The obstinacy of objects’. Unpublished paper circulated to delegates of the Clutter symposium. Banham, J. (ed.) 1997. Encyclopedia of Interior Design. London and Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn. Bann. S. (ed.) 1990. The Inventions of History. Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press. Barnett, P. et al. 1985. Craft Matters: 3 attitudes to contemporary crafts. Southampton: John Hansard Gallery. Barthes, R. [1957] 1981. Mythologies. London: Paladin. Barthes, R. 1984. The Fashion System. New York: Hill & Wang. Baudrillard, J. 1981. For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign. St Louis, Mo: Telos. Baudrillard, J. 1996. The System of Objects. London: Verso. Baxandall, M. 1988. Patterns of Intention: On the Historical Explanation of Pictures. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. Baynes, K. (ed.) 1969. Attitudes in Design Education. London: Lund Humphries. Benjamin, A. (ed.) 1992. The Problems of Modernity: Adorno and Benjamin. London: Routledge. Benson, J. 1994. The Rise of Consumer Society in Britain 1880-1980. Harlow: Longman. Benton, T. & C. with Sharp, D. 1975. Form and Function: A Source Book for the History of Architecture and Design 1890-1939. London: Granada. Berg, M. 1985. The Age of Manufactures. London: Fontana Press. Berman, M. 1983. All That Is Solid Melts Into Air: The Experience of Modernity. London: Verso. Bird, J., Curtis, B., Putnam, T., Robertson, G. and Tickner, L. (eds) 1993. Mapping the Futures: Local cultures, global change. London and New York: Routledge. Birdwell-Pheasant, D. and Lawrence-Zúñiga, D. (eds) 1999. House Life: Space, Place and Family in Europe. Oxford and New York: Berg. Bittker, S. 1989. ‘Report of a Survey of Recent Crafts and Design Graduates of Scottish Art Colleges’, pp. 219–28. In Journal of Design History, Vol. 2, Nos. 2 & 3. Boumphrey, G. 1940. Town and Country Tomorrow. London: Thomas Nelson and Son. Bourdieu, P. [1972] 1982. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Bourdieu, P. 1984. Distinction: A social critique of the judgement of taste. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Bourdieu, P. 1993. The Field of Cultural Production. Cambridge: Polity. Boyne, R. and Rattansi, A. (eds) 1990. Postmodernism and Society. London: Macmillan. Brettle, J. and Rice, S. Public Bodies - Private States. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Breward, C. 1995. The Culture of Fashion: A New History of Fashionable Dress. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Breward, C. 1999. The Hidden Consumer: Masculinities, fashion and city life 1860- 1914. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Brewer, J. and Porter, R. (eds) 1993. Consumption and the World of Goods. London and New York: Routledge. Briggs, M.S. 1934. Middlesex Old and New. London: Allen and Unwin. Britton, A. and Margetts, M. 1993. The Raw and the Cooked. London: Crafts Council. Bronner, S. J. (ed.) 1989, Consuming Visions: Accumulation and display of Goods in America 1880-1920, London & New York: W. W. Norton & Co. Broude. N. and Garrard, M.D. 1982. Feminism and Art History. New York: Harper & Row. Bryden, I. & Floyd, J. (eds) 1999. Domestic Space: Reading the nineteenth century interior. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Brydon, A. and Niessen, S. (eds) 1998. Consuming Fashion: Adorning the Transnational Body. Oxford and New York: Berg. Buchanan, R. 1998. (Review of) Woodham, J.M. 1997. Twentieth Century Design. Oxford University Press, pp. 259–63. In Journal of Design History, 11 (3). Buck, L. and Dodd, P. 1991. Relative Values: or What’s Art Worth? London: BBC Books. Buckley, C. 1986. ‘Made in Patriarchy: Towards a feminist analysis of women and design’. Design Issues Vol. 3, No. 2 (Fall 1986), pp. 3–14. Bullock, A., Stallybrass, O. and Trombley, S. (eds) The Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought. London: Fontana. Burchill, J. ‘Material Boys’ p. 3. The Guardian Weekend. 3 October, 1998. Burman, B. (ed.) 1999. The Culture of Sewing: Gender, Consumption and Home Dressmaking. Oxford and New York: Berg. Burman, S. (ed.) 1979. Fit Work For Women. London: Croom Helm. Burnett, J. 1978. A Social History of Housing 1815-1970. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Butler, J. 1990. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. London and New York: Routledge. Campbell, C. 1996. ‘The Meaning of Objects and the Meaning of Action’, pp. 93–106. In Journal of Material Culture. Vol. 1, No. 1. Campbell, K. 1976. Home Sweet Home: Housing designed by the London County Council and Greater London Council Authority 1888-1975. London: Academy. Carrier, J.G. 1995. Gifts and Commodities: Exchange and Western Capitalism since 1700. London: Routledge. Cescinsky, H. 1925. ‘America: Glimpses into Furniture Factories’, pp. 386–7. In Cabinet Maker, May 23,1925. Cescinsky, H. [1931] 1967. The Gentle Art of Faking Furniture. London: Chapman & Hall. Chambers, Ian. 1986. Popular Culture: The Metropolitan Experience. London and New York: Routledge. Cieraad, I. (ed.) 1999. At Home: An Anthropology of Domestic Space. New York: Syracuse University Press. Clarke, A.J. 1999. Tupperware: the promise of plastic in 1950s America. Washington D.C. and London: Smithsonian Institution Press. Clayre, A. 1977. Nature and Industrialisation. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Clifford, J. [1988] 1994. The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Clifford, J. [1988] 1994. The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Ethnography, Literature, and Art. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. Cocks, A.S. 1980. The Victoria and Albert Museum: The Making of the Collection. Leicester: Windward. Coleman, A. and the Design Disadvantaged Team of Land Use Research, 1985. Utopia on Trial: Vision and Reality in Planned Housing. London: Kings College London. Coleman, R. 1988. The Art of Work: An Epitaph to Skill. London: Pluto. Coleridge, N. 1989. The Fashion Conspiracy. London: Heinemann. Conway, H. Design History: A Students’ Handbook. London: George Allen & Unwin Colomina, B. 1992. Sexuality and Space. Princeton: Princeton Architectural Press. Colomina, B. 1994. Privacy and Publicity: Modem Architecture as Mass Media. Cambridge, Massachusetts and London: MIT Press. Coombes, A.E. 1988. ‘Museums and the Formation of National and Cultural Identities’, pp. 57–68. In The Oxford Art Journal, Vol. 11, No. 2. Cowley, J. 1979. Housing for People or for Profit? London: Stage 1. Craik, J. 1994. The Face of Fashion: Cultural Studies in Fashion. London: Routledge. Cranz, G. 1989. The Politics of Park Design: A History of Urban Parks in America. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT. Csikszentmihalyi, M. and Rochberg-Halton. E. 1981. The Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols and the Self. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Cummings, N. (ed.) 1993. Reading Things. London: Chance Books. Dant, T. 1999. Material Culture in the Social World. Buckingham and Philadelphia: Open University Press. Davidoff, L. and Hall, C. 1987. Family Fortunes: Men and Women of the English Middle Class 1780-1850. London: Hutchinson. Debord, G. 1967. La Société du Spectacle, Paris: Buchet-Chastel. de Certeau, M. 1988. The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Steven Rendall. Berkeley: University of California Press. Deetz, J. 1996. In Small Things Forgotten: The Archaeology of Early American Life. New York: Doubleday. de Grazia, V. (ed.) 1996. The Sex of Things: Gender and Consumption in Historical Perspective. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. Descombes, V. 1986. Objects of All Sorts: A Philosophical Grammar. Oxford: Blackwell. Dilnot, C. 1984. ‘The State of Design History - Part I: Mapping the Field’, pp. 4–23. In Design Issues. Vol 1, No. 1, Spring. Dittmar, H. 1992. The Social Psychology of Material Possessions: To Have Is To Be. Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire: Harvester Wheatsheaf. Doordan, D.P. 1995. Design History: An Anthology. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. Dormer, P. 1990. The Meanings of Modem Design: towards the Twenty first Century. London: Thames and Hudson. Dormer, P. (ed.) 1997. The Culture of Craft: Status and Future. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Douglas, M. 1966. Purity and Danger: An analysis of concepts of pollution and taboo. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Douglas, M. and Isherwood, B. 1978. The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of Consumption. London: Allen Lane. Droog Design 1991-1996, Utrecht: Utrecht Centraal Museum. du Gay, P., Hall, S. et al. 1997. Doing Cultural Studies: The Story of the Sony Walkman. London: Sage. Eatwell, J., Milgate, M and Newman, P. (eds) 1989. The New Palgrave: The Invisible Hand. London and New York: W.W.Norton. Edwards, C.D. 1993. Victorian Furniture: Technology and Design. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Edwards, C.D. 1994. Twentieth Century Furniture: Materials, Manufacture and Markets. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Elias, N. 1978. The Civilising Process: The History of Manners. Oxford: Blackwell. Elinor, G. et al. 1987. Women and Craft, London: Virago. Eliot, T.S. 1963. Collected Poems 1909-1962. London: Faber and Faber. Factors in Industrial and Commercial Efficiency, HMSO, 1927. Falk, P. 1994. The Consuming Body. London and Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. Falk, P. and Campbell, C. (eds) 1997. The Shopping Experience. London and Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. Fastnedge, R. 1955. English Furniture Styles From 1500-1830. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin. Featherstone, M. 1991. Consumer Culture and Postmodernism. London and Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. Featherstone, M., Hepworth, M. and Turner, B.S. 1995. The Body: Social Process and Cultural Theory. London and Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. Fine, B. and Leopold, E. 1993. The World of Consumption. London: Routledge. Forty, A. 1986. Objects of Desire: Design and Society 1750-1980. London: Thames and Hudson. Forty, A. and Kuchler, S. (eds) 1999. The Art of Forgetting. Oxford and New York: Berg. Foucault, M. 1984. The History of Sexuality Volume I: An Introduction. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin. Foucault, M. 1985. The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences. London: Tavistock. Frampton, K. 1980. Modern Architecture: A critical history. London: Thames & Hudson. Friedman, A.T. 1998. Woman and the Making of the Modern House: A Social and Architectural History. New York: Harry N. Abrams. Fry, T. ‘A Geography of Power: Design History and Marginality’, pp. 204–18. In Design Issues, Vol. 6, No. 1, Fall 1989. Furniture Working Party Report, HMSO, 1947. Garber, M. 1993. Vested Interests: Cross Dressing and Cultural Anxiety. London: Thames and Hudson. Gardner, C. and Sheppard, J. 1989. Consuming Passion: The Rise of Retail Culture. London: Unwin Hyman. Garland, M. 1962. fashion. Harmondsworth: Penguin. Geertz, C. [1973] 1993. The Interpretation of Cultures. London: Fontana. Geertz, C. 1983. Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology. New York: Basic Books. Gell, A. 1998. Art and Agency. London: Clarendon Press. Giddens, A. 1991. Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modem Age. Cambridge: Polity. Giddens, A. 1992. The Transformation of Intimacy. Cambridge: Polity. Giedion, S. 1948. Mechanization Takes Command. New York: Oxford University Press. Gloag, J. 1934. English Furniture. London: Adam & Charles Black. Gloag, J. 1944. The Missing Technician in Industrial Production. London: George Allen and Unwin. Gloag, J. 1945. Plastics and Industrial Design. London: George Allen and Unwin. Gloag, J. 1947a. Self Training for Industrial Designers. London: George Allen and Unwin. Gloag, J. 1947b, The English Tradition in Design. Harmondsworth: Penguin. Gloag, J. 1966. A social history of furniture design from B.C.1300 to A.D. 1960. New York: Bonanza Books. Glynn, P. 1978. In Fashion: Dress in the twentieth century. London: George Allen & Unwin Goffman, E. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Garden City, New York: Doubleday. Gordon, B. 1996. ‘Woman’s Domestic Body: The Conceptual Conflation of Women and Interiors in the Industrial Age’, pp. 281–301. In Winterthur Portfolio, Vol. 31, No. 4, Winter. Gorz, A. 1982. Farewell to the Working Class: An Essay on Post-Industrial Socialism. London: Pluto. Graves, J. 1998. ‘Clutter’. In Issues in Art, Architecture and Design, Vol. 5, No. 2. Graves, J. 1999. “‘When Things Go Wrong ... Inside the Inside”; A Psychoanalytical History of a Jug’. In Journal of Design History, Vol. 12, No. 4, pp. 357–67. Greenberg, J.R. and Mitchell, S.A. 1984. Object Relations in Psychoanalytic Theory. Cambridge, Massachusetts and London: Harvard University Press. Gronberg, T. 1997. (Review of) Reed, C. (ed.) 1996. Not At Home: The Suppression of Domesticity in Modem Art and Architecture. In Journal of Design History, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 97–9. Gronberg, T. 1998. Designs on Modernity: Exhibiting the City in 1920s Paris. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Habermas, J. 1987. The Philosophical Discourses of Modernity: Twelve Lectures. Cambridge: Polity Press. Habermas, J. 1989. The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere. Cambridge: Polity Press. Hall, S. (ed.) 1997. Representation: Cultural Representations and Signifying Practices. London and Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. Halle, D. 1993. Inside Culture: Art and Class in the American Home. Chicago: Chicago University Press. Hamilton, N. (ed.) From Spitfire to Microchip: Studies in the History of Design from 1945. London: The Design Council. Haraway, D.J. 1991. Simians, Cyborgs and Women - The Reinvention of Nature. London: Free Association Books. Hardyment, C. 1995. Slice of Life: The British Way of Eating Since 1945. London: BBC Books. Harling, R. 1973. Dictionary of Design and Decoration. London and Glasgow: Collins. Harris, S. and Berke, D. (eds) 1997. Architecture of the Everyday. New York: Princeton Architectural Press. Harrod, T. 1997. Obscure Objects of Desire. London: Craft Council. Harrod, T. 1999. The Crafts in Britain in the Twentieth Century. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. Harvey, C. and Press, J. 1991. William Morris: Design and Enterprise in Victorian Britain. Manchester University Press. Harvey, D. 1989. The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of Cultural Change. Oxford: Blackwell. Haug,W.F. [1971] 1986. Critique of Commodity Aesthetics: Appearance, Sexuality and Advertising in Capitalist Society. Oxford: Polity. Haynes, M.T. 1998. Dressing Up Debutantes: Pageantry and Glitz in Texas. Oxford and New York: Berg. Hebdige, D. 1979. Subculture: the Meaning of Style. London and New York: Methuen. Hebdige, D. 1987. ‘The Impossible Object: Towards a sociology of the sublime’, pp. 47–76. In New Formations, Vol. 1, No. 1. Hebdige, D. 1989. ‘Designs for Living’. In Marxism Today, October 1989, pp. 24–7. Heidegger, M. [1927] 1998. Being and Time. Oxford: Blackwell. Heskett, J. 1980. Industrial Design. London: Thames and Hudson. Hewison, R. 1987. The Heritage Industry. London: Methuen. Hill, R. ‘How the country craftsmen became contemporary applied artists’. Guardian, 15 January 1987. Hitchcock, H-R. and Johnson, P. 1966 [1932] The International Style. New York and London: Norton and Co. Hobsbawm, E. 1994. Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century 1914-1991. London: Michael Joseph. Hobsbawm, E. and Ranger, T. (eds) [1983] 1992. The Invention of Tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hodder, 1.1986. Reading the Past: Current Approaches to Interpretation in Archaeology. New York: Cambridge University Press. Hoggart, R. 1957. The Uses of Literacy, Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin. Howson, H.F. 1979. London’s Underground. London: Ian Allan. Hunte, E.V. 1997. Eternally Yours: visions of product endurance. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers. Jackson, A. 1973. Semi-Detached London. London: Allen and Unwin. Jackson, S. and Moores, S. (eds) 1995. The Politics of Domestic Consumption: Critical Readings. London and New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf. Jameson, F. 1984. ‘Postmodernism, or the cultural logic of late capitalism’, pp. 53–92. In New Left Review, No.146, July/August. Jencks, C. 1977. The language of post-modern architecture. London: Academy. Jenkins, K. 1991. Re-thinking History. London and New York: Routledge. Jobling, P. 1999. Fashion Spreads: Word and Image in Fashion Photography Since 1980. Oxford and New York: Berg. Jones, M. (ed.) 1990. Fake? The Art of Deception. London: British Museum. Kaufmann, J-C. 1998. Dirty Linen: couples and their laundry. London: Middlesex University Press. Keat, R. and Abercrombie, N. (eds) Enterprise Culture. London and New York: Routledge. Kenny, A. [1973] 1993. Wittgenstein. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin. Kingery, W.D. (ed.) 1996. Learning From things: Method and theory of Material Culture Studies. Washington and London: Smithsonian Institution. Kingston, S. 1999. ‘The Essential Attitude’ pp. 338–51. In Journal of Material Culture. Vol. 4, No. 3. Kirkham, P. (ed.) 1996. The Gendered Object. Manchester University Press. Kirkham, P., Porter, J. and Mace, R. 1987. Furnishing the World: The East London Furniture Trade 1830-1980. London: Journeyman. Kwint, M., Breward, C. and Aynsley, J. (eds) 1999. Material Memories: Design and Evocation. Oxford and New York: Berg. Latour, B. 1991. We have never been modern. New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf. Lee, M.J. 1993. Consumer Culture Reborn: The cultural politics of consumption. London: Routledge. Lefebvre, H. 1987. ‘The Everyday and Everydayness’ pp. 7–11. In Yale French Studies. Vol. 73, Fall. Lefebvre, H. 1996. The Production of Space. Trans. Donald Nicholson- Smith. Oxford: Blackwell. Leslie, E. 1996. ‘The exotic of the everyday: Critical theory in the parlour’, pp. 83–101. In Things, No. 4. Lethaby, W.R. 1923. Home and Country Arts. London: Home and County. Lewis, R. and Maude, A. 1949. The English Middle Classes. London: Phoenix House. Lipovetsky, G. 1994. The Empire of Fashion: Dressing Modem Democracy. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Lowenthal, D. 1985. The Past Is Another Country. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lubar, S. and Kingerly, W.D. (eds) 1993. History from Things: Essays on Material Culture. Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press. Lucie-Smith, E. 1975. World of the Makers: Today’s master craftsmen and craftswomen. New York: Two Continents Publishing Group. Ludtke, A. (ed.) 1995. The History of Everyday Life: Reconstructing Historical Experiences and Ways of Life. New Jersey: Princeton University Press. Lumley, R. (ed.) 1990. The Museum Time Machine. London and New York: Comedia. Lunt, P.K. and Livingstone, S.M. 1992. Mass Consumption and Personal Identity: Everyday Economic Experience. Buckingham and Philadelphia: Open University Press. Lupton, D. 1996. Food, the Body and the Self. London and Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. Lyotard, J.F. 1984. The Post-Modem Condition, Manchester: Manchester University Press. Lyotard, J.F. 1985. Les Immatériaux (exhibition catalogue) Paris. MacCarthy, F. 1972. All Things Bright and Beautiful. London: George Allen & Unwin. MacCarthy, F. 1979. A History of British Design 1890-1970. London: George Allen & Unwin. Macdonald, S. 1970. The History and Philosophy of Art Education. London: University of London Press. Mackay, H. (ed.) 1997. Consumption and Everyday Life, London and Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. Mackenzie, M. 1991. Androgynous Objects. Melbourne: Harwood. Macquarrie, J. 1980. Existentialism. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin. Macquoid, P. 1904–1908. History of Furniture in 4 Volumes: The Age of Oak, The Age of Walnut, The Age of Mahogany and The Age of Satinwood. London: Lawrence & Bullen. Margolin, V. 1989. Design Discourse: History, Theory, Criticism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Margolin, V. and Buchanan, R. (eds) 1995. The Idea of Design: A Design Issues Reader. London: MIT Press. Marling, K. A. (ed.) 1997. Designing Disney’s Theme Parks. Paris and New York: Flammarion. Marx, K. [1867] 1990, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume I. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin. Mauss, M. [1950] 1990. The Gift. London: Routledge. Mayes, J.L. 1960. History of Chairmaking in High Wycombe. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. McCracken, G. 1988. Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. McGuigan, J. 1992. Cultural Populism. London: Routledge. McGuiree, R.H. and Paynter, R. (eds) 1991. The Archaeology of Inequality. Oxford: Blackwell. McRobbie, A. (ed.) 1989. Zoot Suits and Second-Hand Dresses. Basingstoke, Hampshire: Macmillan. McRobbie, A. (ed.) 1997. Back to Reality? Social Experience and Cultural Studies. Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press. McRobbie, A. 1998. British Fashion Design: Rag Trade or Image Industry? London; Routledge. Maguire, P.J. and Woodham, J.M. (eds) 1997. Design and Cultural Politics in Postwar Britain. London: Leicester University Press. Mayes, J.L. 1960. History of Chairmaking in High Wycombe. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Miller, D. 1987. Material Culture and Mass Consumption. Oxford: Blackwell. Miller, D. 1994. Modernity: An Ethnographic Approach. Oxford: Berg. Miller, D. (ed.) 1995. Acknowledging Consumption. London: Routledge. Miller, D. 1997. Capitalism: An Ethnographic Approach. Oxford and New York: Berg. Miller, D. (ed.) 1998a. Material cultures: Why some things matter. London: UCL Press. Miller D. 1998b. A Theory of Shopping. Oxford: Polity. Miller, D. 1998c. ‘Groans from a bookshelf: New books in Material Culture and Consumption’. Journal of Material Culture Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 379–88. Miller, T. and McHoul, A. Popular Culture and Everyday Life. London and Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. Moles, A.A. 1988. ‘Design and Immateriality: What of It in a Post Industrial Society?’, pp. 25–32. In Design Issues, Vol. 4, No. 1-2 (Special Issue 1988). Moody, E. 1966. Modem Furniture. London: Studio Vista. Morris, B. 1991. Western Conceptions of the Individual. Oxford and New York: Berg. Mukerji, C. 1983. From Graven Images: Patterns of Modem Materialism. New York: Columbia University Press. Muthesius, S. 1988. ‘Why do we buy old furniture? Aspects of the authentic antique in Britain 1870-1910’, pp. 231–54. In Art History, Vol. 11, No. 2, June. Newman, O.1973. Defensible Space: People and Design in the Violent City. London: Architectural Press. Neustatter, A. 1999. ‘Happy ever after’ pp. 4–5. The Guardian, 22 October. Norman, D.A. 1998. The Design of Everyday Things. London: MIT Press. Oliver, P., Davis, I. and Bentley, 1. 1981. Dunroamin: The Suburban Semi and Its Enemies. London: Barrie & Jenkins. Orvell, M. 1989. The Real Thing: Imitation and authenticity in American culture 1880-1930. Chapel Hill, University of South Carolina Press. Pahl, R.E. 1984. Divisions of Labour. Oxford: Blackwell. Palmer, A. 1997. ‘New Directions: Fashion History Studies and Research in North America and England’. Fashion Theory, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 301–2. Parker, R. 1984. The Subversive Stitch: Embroidery and the making of the feminine. London: The Women’s Press. Parker, R. and Pollock, G. 1981. Old Mistresses: Women, Art and Ideology, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Pearce, S.M. (ed.) 1994. Interpreting Objects and Collections. London and New York: Routledge: Percy, C. and Triggs, T. 1990. ‘The Crafts and Non-verbal Learning’, pp. 37–9. In Oral History. Vol. 18, No. 2, autumn. Pesce, G. 1995. ‘18 questions on architecture today’. In Domus, No. 768, February. Pevsner, N. 1940. Academies of Art. London: Cambridge University Press. Pevsner, N. 1956. The Englishness of English Art. London: Architectural Press. Phillips, A. 1988. Winnicott. London: Fontana Press. Phillips, D. 1997. Exhibiting Authenticity. Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press. Physick, J. 1982. The Victoria and Albert Museum: The History of Its Buildings. London: Phaidon. Piper, D.W. (ed.) 1973. Readings in Art and Design Education, 2 volumes: 1. After Hornsey, 2. After Coldstream. London: Davis Poynter. Poe, E.A. 1986. ‘The Purloined Letter’. In The Fall of the House of Usher and other writings. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin, p. 331. Pointon, M. 1986. History of Art: A Students’ Handbook. London: Unwin Hyman. Polhemus, T. 1994. Street Style: from sidewalk to catwalk. London: Thames and Hudson. Polhemus, T. and Proctor, L. 1978. Fashion and Anti-Fashion. London: Thames and Hudson. Prown, J.D. 1982. ‘Mind in Matter: An Introduction to Material Culture Theory and Method’. Winterthur Portfolio, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 1–9. Putnam, T. 1990. ‘The Crafts in Museum: Consolation or Creation’, pp. 40–3. In Oral History, Vol. 18, No. 2. Putnam, T. and Newton, C. (eds) 1990. Household Choices. London: Futures. Pye, D. 1968. The Nature and Art of Workmanship. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Quimby, I.M.G. (ed.) 1978. Material Culture and the Study of American Life. New York: W.W.Norton. Quiney, Anthony, 1986. House and Home: A History of the Small English House. London: BBC. Raban, J. 1974. Soft City. London: H. Hamilton. Rabinow, P. (ed.) 1984. The Foucault Reader. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin. Race, E. 1953. ‘Design in Modern Furniture’, pp. 62–5. In Lake, F. (ed.) Daily Mail Ideal Home Book 1952-53. London: Daily Mail Ideal Home. Ramaker, R. and Bakker, G. 1998. Droog Design: Spirit of the Nineties. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers. Ranson, B. 1989. ‘Craftwork, Ideology and the Craft Life Cycle’, pp. 77–92. In Journal of Design History, Vol. 2, Nos. 2 & 3. Rapoport, A. 1969. House, Form and Culture. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. Rapoport, A. 1977. Human Aspects of Urban form: Towards a Man- Environment Approach to Urban Form and Design. Oxford and New York: Pergamon Press. Ravetz, A. 1986. The Government of Space: Town Planning in Modem Society, London and Boston: Faber and Faber. Rawsthorn, A. ‘Lutyens, Starck and the barrow boys: design and the economy in a post-Thatcher world’, pp. 14–16. In Issue, Spring 1991. Reed, C. (ed.) 1996. Not At Home: The Suppression of Domesticity in Modem Art and Architecture. London: Thames and Hudson. Rees, A.L. and Borzello, F. 1986. The New Art History, London: Camden Press. Reynolds, H. 1997. Couture or Trade? Chichester, West Sussex: Philmore. Riccini, R. ‘History From Things: Notes on the History of Industrial Design’ in Design Issues, Vol. 14, No. 3, Autumn 1998, pp. 43–64. Richards, J.M. 1940. Modem Architecture. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin. Richards, J.M. [1946] 1973. The Castles On the Ground: The Anatomy of Suburbia. London: Architectural Press. Riggins, S.H. 1994 The Socialness of Things. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter. Rivers, T., Cruickshank, D., Darley, G. and Pawley, M. 1992. The Name of the Room. London: BBC. Roach, M.E. and Bubolz Eicher, J. 1965. Dress, Adornment, and the Social Order. New York: John Wiley. Roberts, R. 1971. The Classic Slum. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin. Rouse, E. 1989. Understanding Fashion. Oxford and London: BSP Professional Books. Roux, C. ‘You’re sitting on a work of art’. In The Guardian, 6 April, 1999, pp. 10–11. Rowbotham, S. 1973. Hidden From History. London: Pluto. Saisselin, R.G. 1985. Bricabracomania: The Bourgeos and the Bibelo. London: Thames and Hudson. Sampson, A. 1971. The New Anatomy of Britain. London: Hodder and Stoughton. Samuel, R. 1977. ‘Workshop of the World: Steam power and hand technology in mid-Victorian Britain’, pp. 6–72. In History Workshop, Vol. 3, Spring. Samuel, R. 1994 and 1998. Theatres of Memory, Vols I and II. London and New York: Verso. Scarry, E. 1985. The Body In Pain: The Making and Unmaking of the World. New York: Oxford University Press. Schlereth, T.J. (ed.) 1985. Material Culture: A Research Guide. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. Schlereth, T.J. 1992. Cultural History and Material Culture: Everyday Life, Landscapes and Museums. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia. Schwartz, H. 1996. The Culture of the Copy: Striking Likenesses, Unreasonable Facsimiles. New York: Zone. Searle, A. 1999. ‘Cheap tricks, bad jokes, black magic’, pp. 12–13. In the Guardian, 13 July. Sennett, R. 1977. The Fall of Public Man. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Severa, J. and Horswill, M. 1989. ‘Costume as Material Culture’. In Dress Vol. 15, p. 53. Sheridan, A. 1980. Michel Foucault: The Will to Truth. London and New York: Tavistock. Shields, R. (ed.) 1992. Lifestyle Shopping: The Subject of Consumption. London and New York: Routledge. Silverstone, R. (ed.) 1997. Visions of Suburbia. London: Routledge. Silverstone, R. and Hirsch, E. (eds) 1992. Consuming Technologies: Media and information in domestic spaces. London: Routledge. Simmel, G. [1902] 1957 ‘Fashion’. In The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 62, No. 6, pp. 541–8. Slater, D. 1997. Consumer Culture and Modernity. Cambridge: Polity. Smart Martin, Ann and Ritchie Garrison, J. (eds) 1997. American Material Culture: The Shape of the Field. Winterthur, Delaware: Henry du Pont Winterthur Museum. Smithson A. & P. 1970. Ordinariness and Light: Urban theories 1952-1960 and their application in a building project 1963-1970. London: Faber and Faber. Sontag, S. 1994. Against Interpretation. London: Vintage. Sparke, P. (ed.) 1981. Reyner Banham: Design By Choice. London: Academy Editions. Sparke, P. 1982. Ettore Sottsass Jr. London: Design Council. Sparke, P. 1983. Consultant Design: The history and practice of the designer in industry. London: Pembridge Press. Sparke, P. 1986. An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century. London: Allen & Unwin. Sparke, P. 1995. As Long As Its Pink: The Sexual Politics of Taste. London: Harper Collins. Sparke, P. 1998. A Century of Design: Design Pioneers of the 20th Century. London: Michael Beazley. Sparkes, I. 1973. The English Country Chair. Buckinghamshire: Spur. Spyer, P. (ed.) 1998. Border Fetishisms: Material Objects in Unstable Spaces. London: Routledge. Stallybrass, P. and White, A. 1986. The Politics and Poetics of Transgression. London: Methuen. Steedman, C. 1998. ‘What a Rag Rug Means’ in Journal of Material Culture. Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 259–82. Steele, V. 1985. Fashion and Eroticism. New York: Oxford University Press. Stewart, S. [1984] 1996. On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, the Collection. Durham and London: Dukes University Press. Storey, J. [1993] 1997. An Introduction to Cultural Theory and Popular Culture. London & New York: Prentice Hall Harvester Wheatsheaf. Strasser, Susan, 1989. Satisfaction Guaranteed: The Making of the American Mass Market. New York: Pantheon. Strinati, D. 1995. An Introduction to Theories of Popular Culture. Manchester University Press. Sullivan, L. 1896. ‘The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered’, p. 13. In Benton, T. & C. with Sharp, D. (eds) 1975. Form and Function. London: Granada. Sutton, G. 1967. Artisan or Artist? A History of the Teaching of Art and Crafts in English Schools. Oxford: Pergamon. Swales, V. 1996. ‘Clutter: disorder in the spaces of design, the text and the imagination (review) p. 5. In Design History Society NewsLetter, No. 70. Swengley, N. ‘Very Arty Crafty’ in the Observer, 5 July 1987, pp. 40–3; Craft Workshops in the English Countryside, 1978. Salisbury: CoSira. Thakara, J. (ed.) 1988. Design After Modernism: Beyond the Object. London: Thames and Hudson. Thomas, J. 1998. ‘Where are we now? Archaeology theory in the 1990s’ in Ucko, P.J. Theory in Archaeology: A world perspective. London and New York: Routledge. Thomas, N. 1991. Entangled Objects: Exchange, Material Culture, and Colonialism in the Pacific. Cambridge, Massachusets, and London: Harvard University Press. Thompson, E.P. 1963. The Making of the Working Class, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Thompson, M. 1979. Rubbish Theory: The Creation and Destruction of Value. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Thompson, P. 1988. The Voice of the Past: Oral History. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Tilley, C. (ed.) 1990. Reading Material Culture. Oxford: Blackwell. Tilley, C. 1999. Metaphor and Material Culture. Oxford: Blackwell. Tomlinson, A. (ed.) 1990. Consumption, Identity and Style: Marketing, meanings and the packaging of pleasure. London: Routledge. Tsëelon, E. 1995. The Masque of Femininity, London: Sage. Tunbridge, J.E. and Ashworth, G.J. 1996. Dissonant Heritage: The Management of the Past as a Resource in Conflict. Chichester and New York: Wiley. Turner, C. 1955. The Parker-Knoll Collection. Northampton: Vernon. Turner, M. (ed.) 1983. The Decoration of the Suburban Villa 1990-1940, Middlesex: Middlesex Polytechnic (exhibition catalogue). Turner, M and Hoskins, L. [1988] 1995. Silver Studio of Design: A Source Book for Home Decorating. London: Magna Books. Urban Task Force 1999. Towards an Urban Renaissance: Final Report of the Urban Task Force. London; Department of the Environment, Transport and Regions. Vaneigem, R. [1967] 1983. The Revolution of the Everyday. London: Left Bank Books and Rebel Press. Varnedoe, K. and Gopink, A. 1991. High and Low: Modem Art and Popular Culture. New York: The Museum of Modern Art. Veblen, T. [1899] 1934. The Theory of the Leisure Class. New York: The Modern Library. Venturi, R., Scott Brown, D. and Izenour, I. [1972] 1982. Learning from Las Vegas: The forgotten symbolism of architectural form. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT. Verbeek, P.P. and Kockelkoren, P. 1998. ‘The Things That Matter’. Design Issues, 14 (3): 28–42. Vergo, P. (ed.) 1989. The New Museology. London: Reaktion. Walker, J. A. 1989. Design History and the History of Design. London: Pluto. Walker, J.A. and Chaplin, S. 1997. Visual Culture: An Introduction. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Warwick, A. and Cavallaro, D. 1998. Fashioning the Frame: Boundaries, Dress and the Body. Oxford and New York: Berg. Weiner, A. 1992. ‘Inalienable Wealth’. American Ethnologist, Vol. 12, pp. 52–65. Weiner, A. 1992. Inalienable Possessions: the Paradox of Keeping While Giving. Berkeley: University of California Press. Weiner, A.B. and Schneider, J. (eds) 1988. Cloth and Human Experience. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press. White, J.N. 1989. ‘The First Craft Centre of Great Britain; Bargaining for a Time Bomb’, pp. 207–14. In Journal of Design History, Vol. 2, Nos. 2 & 3. Whiteley, N. 1993. Design for Society, London: Reaktion. Williams-Davies, J. 1989. ‘The Preservation and Interpretation of Traditional Rural Crafts at the Welsh Folk Museum’, pp. 215–18. In Journal of Design History, Vol. 2, Nos. 2 & 3. Williams-Ellis, C. 1929. England and the Octopus. London: Geoffrey Bles. Williams, R. 1973. The Country and the City. St Albans, Hertfordshire: Paladin. Williamson, J. 1978. Decoding Advertisements: Ideology and Meaning in Advertising. London and Boston: Marion Boyars. Williamson, J. 1985. ‘The Making of a Material Girl’, pp. 46–7. New Socialist, No. 31, October. Wills, G. 1974. Craftsmen and Cabinet-makers of Classic English Furniture. London: John Bartholomew Wills, G. and Midgley, D. (eds) 1973. Fashion Marketing: An anthology of viewpoints and perspectives. London: George Allen & Unwin. Willis, P. 1993. Common Culture. Milton Keynes: Open University Press. Wilson, E. 1985. Adorned in Dreams: Fashion and Modernity. London: Virago. Wilson, E. 1989. Hallucinations: Life in the Post-Modern City. London: Hutchinson Radius. Wilson, E. 1991. The Sphinx in the City: Urban Life, the Control of Disorder and Women. London: Virago. Wilson, E. and Taylor, L. 1989. Through the Looking Glass: A History of Dress from 1860 to the Present Day. London: BBC Books. Winnicott, D. 1971. Playing and Reality. London: Tavistock. Winnicott, D. 1987. Home Is Where We Start From: Essays by a Psychoanalyst. Harmondswoth, Middlesex: Penguin. Wittgenstein, L. [1953] 1968. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell. Wolff, J. 1981. The Social Production of Art. London: MacMillan. Woodham, J. 1996. ‘Managing British Design Reform I: Fresh Perspectives on the Early Years of the Council of Industrial Design’ pp. 5565. In Journal of Design History, Vol. 9, No. 1. Woodham, J.M. 1997. Twentieth Century Design. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. Worden, S. 1980. ‘Furniture for the Living Room’ [unpublished PhD thesis] Brighton: University of Brighton. Worden, S. 1989. ‘The Development of the Fireside Chair 1928-1940’ pp. 5–9. In Antique Collecting, Vol. 24, No. 2. Wright, P. 1985. On Living in an Old Country. London and New York: Verso. Wright, P. and Putnam, T. ‘Sneering at the Theme Parks’, pp. 48–55. In Block 15, Spring 1989. Wykes-Joyce, M. 1961. Cosmetics and Adornment. London: Peter Owen. York, P. 1985. Modem Times. London: Futura. Young, M. and Willmott, P. 1957. Family and Kinship in East London. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Zeldin, T. 1994. An Intimate History of Humanity. London: Sinclair Stevenson.