# Unesco House After Galileo, the next most subversive thought of Western Man was Walter Gropius's proposal that Unesco headquarters should not be in Paris. But it was only a tactic to call town-planning authorities to heel, the basic unimaginative decision remained. This choice of location was a masterstroke of mental inertia on the part of the Men of Goodwill and Cold Feet, and they have got the building that they deserved. The half-dozenor-so best architects in the world (Gropius included) they had safely tied up in an advisory committee so they couldn't design, only delegate responsibility to a second team to lay out the building—a second team that shows evidence of massive lobbying in the choice of members. The disparate talents of Marcel Breuer (U.S.A.), Bernard Zehrfuss (France) and Pierluigi Nervi, the romantic Italian engineer, were expected to collaborate as equals among themselves, with interior designers, painters, sculptors and gardeners. The diplomatic talents of Breuer, in particular, saved this dated dream of Gesamtkunstwerk from utter failure, but there is visible evidence of hard horse-trading behind the scenes. There was an initial sell-out to the Beaux-Arts planning prejudices of the local authority, resulting in the main façade becoming a bent plane that only pretends to honour the quadrant of the other half of the Place de Fontenoy. Behind the central curve of this face, a third leg runs back, giving the main, seven-storey mass a lazy-Y sort of plan, and trapped under the end of this leg is the pas-perdus leading to the congress block, which stands clear of the main structure, as does the annexe known as the Bâtiment Saxe on the other side. Apart from the congress block, and the portes-cochères of the main building, there is no external evidence of Nervi's contribution; these showpieces appear to have been given him as conscience-savers by the two architects, who elsewhere had to mess up his contribution pretty effectively. There is little to detain the visitor inside the big Y, an overcrowded office-warren. The modish splayed legs of the ground-floor structure (which make you feel like an incredible shrinking man under a House and Garden sideboard) only begin to register towards the back end of the back leg of this block, and, in general, the main interest of the scheme is all at this end. The pas-perdus goes off to the right, and brings you to much the best interior space, the foyer of the congress halls. This occupies the space under the central low point of the pleated concrete butterfly roof, where it rests on a row of columns, and the halls lie on either side of it. Salle I occupies the whole of the right-hand half of the block, and the inner faces of the concrete pleats give it a stark Caligari quality that can, unfortunately, be killed by over-lighting. The foyer is simply the space left over between the dead-wall of Salle I, with its storeyhigh overhangs, and a miscellany of walls and spaces, including another dead-wall, a balcony, a bar and a documentation centre on the other side, with slab-concrete balustrades to the stairs leading up to the balcony, and to a bridge that edges nervously across to the upper part of Salle I. Neither square nor anything else in plan or section, this foyer promises to become a first-class mess. It doesn't, because of three things. First, the effective dominance in every direction of coarse, bush-hammered concrete surfaces, on which the eye rests thankfully. Second, the columns, huge solids of linear transformation, circular at the base, rectangular at the roof, marching in a relentless file through the bustle and crowds on the floor, asserting structural order and heroic scale. Third, the Picasso mural. Having no professional stake in Picasso's reputation, I can record my relief that this was not another piece of his political rhetoric, and my admiration for the magnificent way in which it functions on the end wall of the main space of the foyer. Picasso picked this site himself, the best in the building, and worked from a model of the interior, including the much-maligned bridge. The colours pick up, or set off, those of the surrounding surfaces, the forms are big enough to dominate the crowds and echo the scale of the columns, and—almost as a consequence of this—the iconography is sufficiently vacuous not to demand of the crowds an attention they aren't going to give it anyway. The bridge is put to work, as a mask that reveals successive layers of the composition as one approaches from the pas-perdus, and as a vantage point for high level views of the busier areas of the iconography. This added art-work at least is visually and functionally related to the building—one cannot say as much for Miro's boring Guggenheim Prize ceramic murals, Moore's eroded dowager or Calder's droopy mobile on a base big enough to launch missiles. The only other place where added art-work has made a significant contribution is in Isamu Noguchi's ‘Zen' garden on the other side of the back leg of the Y, under the shadow of the Bâtiment Saxe. This is in two parts, a sunken garden, and an upper terrace dotted with stone objects, some geometrically fine-hewn, others in a state of highly sophisticated nature, the abstract artefacts of the Thirties informed with a meaning that no Hepworth or Nicholson ever gave them. The garden proper, surrounded by strip windows lighting basement work-rooms, is a heaving terrain-sculpture of mounds and pools, moss, grass, raked marble chips, ground-ivy, stepping stones, small conifers and stone 'lanterns'. How far this is really Zen, Japanese or only the fashionable ingenuity that has always marked Noguchi's work is hard to decipher—it is not even an absolute novelty in Paris, for there is, or was, a decidedly exquisite Zen garden at the side of the Japanese hostel in the Cité Universitaire. It is also overcrowded, but it strikes a note of freshness that isn't much to be found elsewhere, it unites the two buildings in a satisfactory and visually rewarding scene, and it plays up the superficial inter-cultural relevance of Zen in a witty manner—for instance, a double-curved surface in the centre of the garden has its pavingsetts arranged in a pattern that recalls the abscissae of mathematical models. Picasso, old, and Noguchi, unfamiliar, have managed to contribute something to the whole that the middle-aged and overfamiliar have failed to produce, in spite of the overall conception being phrased in their terms. The two artists who have had to pay greatest regard to functional and planning limitations have succeeded far better than those who were able to luxuriate in the phoney freedom of open sites and isolated plinths. There seems to be a lesson here that one could read back through the whole building to find that it was known before work began—give a good man a definite job, a watertight briefing, and let him get on with it. Had this principle been honoured from the start, Unesco might yet have had one of the best post-war buildings in the world, instead of one of the best post-war buildings in Paris.