# Kent and Capability When I was a cub critic on that fine old Liberal paper, the Eastern Daily Press, I once went on record that the topographical watercolour was the only significant original British contribution to world art. By the next post came a stiff letter from a hyphenated artloving lady pointing out that I had overlooked the greatest of all British contributions, the landscape park. For a few minutes I felt genuinely chastened—I dig the landscape scene more than most art-forms. In spite of the fact that the 18th century is ‘not my period,' I have actually read two of Repton's Red Books in the original handwriting, I know all the temples and pavilions at Stowe (even the Fane of Pastoral Poetry) and I could probably take a party on a convincing conducted tour of Chiswick Park. I make no claim to play in the same league as H. F. Clark, but I find some aspects of the landscape movement uncommonly sympathetic. And yet, in spite of the manifest influence of the Jardin Anglais or Parco Inglese abroad (knock on any Schloss and ask for the Englische Garten) I find myself in increasing disagreement with my landed correspondent. For one thing, there are not enough masterpieces to add up to a contribution of significance—in fact, there is only one total and authoritative masterwork surviving, and that is Stourhead. For the rest, there are large areas of middling inspiration (most of Capability Brown) or fragments of genius, such as the orchestration of the tree-colours in the Grecian Vale at Stowe, or Kent's work at Rousham—which in no way deserves the panning it gets in Derek Clifford's patchily brilliant new book.¹ But, as works of high art in the accepted European sense, all but a very few landscape parks are compromised by the factor of use. Sheep may profitably graze, and all that . . . the average landscape park is an uncertain superimposition of a 3-D diorama after Claude on an acreage of agriculture. In this factor of use, of course, landscaping was close cousin to architecture, which is one of the things that recommends it to me, but at the same time it was removed thereby from the categories of Fine Art whose products, as four generations of English aca demic aesthetes have insisted, are great because they are no bloody use. Young Humphry Repton seems to have grasped this point at the very beginning of his career as a landscape architect. In a passage from the introduction to the Holkham Red Book which Dorothy Stroud² unaccountably fails to quote so that my version is only memoryperfect—in this passage which deals with the wooded bank beyond the lake, Repton characterizes the effect of the smoke from the chimney of a proposed cottage among the trees as having the ‘air of industry with an affectation, rather than the reality, of penury.' The reader may reflect on the Marie-Antoinette overtones of this observation at his leisure: the point here and now is the recognition that landscapes, as well as ‘pompous buildings,' came within Alexander Pope's category of ‘things of use.' But not at Stourhead. There, a crafty choice for the position of the dam that holds back the waters for the lake, and the landform of the valley whose floor the lake covers, combine to give a landscape composition focused inwards on itself. It is not a prospect that is commanded from the house. Colen Campbell's routine-Palladian villa stands outside the design; so does the cluster of houses commanding the approach-road. Only the transplanted Gothic 'Bristol Cross' is shared with any view from that side of the lake. So, cupped in an irregular ring of hills, steered willy-nilly along a walk between the hanging woods and the shore, the visitor is conducted through a carefully composed sequence of views of trees, water and lakeside buildings. Each of these vignettes framed in green is, inevitably, nature refaite d'après Poussin, to invert the well-known Cézannism, only here it really is Poussin. In general, the movement's taste ran toward the soft options of Claude, rather than the tough architectonic disciplines of Poussin, and even where this was not the case, indifference and overgrowing have produced what the Knight of Glyn lately called such 'neglected and bebrambled vistas' that more precise designs are now lost in thickset obscurantism. But Stourhead's steep shores permit no fuzz of undergrowth, and the foreground is normally clear water, functioning visually with the clarity and precision of Poussin's broad and open forescenes, while the doubling reflections increase the impact of the simple architectural forms of such lakeside structures as the 'Pantheon.' The simplicity of the architectural incidents at Stourhead is almost as conspicuous as their lack of pseudo-poetic overtones. You don't have to read Thomson, Gay or Dyer, or even Pope, to get the full flavour from the Stourhead scene. The literary bit is concentrated in one single structure, the grotto, with its water-nymph and river-god presiding over the springs, and the necessary occasional quatrain by Pope is right there in front of you on the basin which the nymph damply supervises. Yet right behind you as you read the lines is Stourhead's most stunning purely visual effect—the wall of the grotto is broached by a sizeable opening full of jagged teeth of rock and framing a view across to the Bristol Cross, a view that is almost too beautiful to look at. The purely visual aesthetic of Stourhead, free of sentimentality and allusion, is what puts it in the class of European masterpieces, plus a controlling sensibility that combined toughness of conception with tenderness toward the 'genius of the place' (Pope again, of course) in a manner that escaped Capability Brown for most of his life. The only thing that is even remotely comparable in purity and quality is Kent's management of the main lawn at Rousham, where I suspect Derek Clifford has missed the point completely. Kent called the arcaded traverse with its massive rustication a ‘Praeneste'—thus inviting comparison with a unique antique scene, the heroic arches and ramps below the temple at Palestrina, architecture on the scale of landscape, architecture as equal partner with the landscape rather than as an incidental ornament on the face of the land. It may owe something to an earlier project by Bridgman, but this does not justify Mr Clifford in calling it ‘neither one thing nor the other.' It is 'the other,' the kind of landscaping Kent might have done more often if left to himself, without noble improvers breathing down his neck. Stourhead is equally ‘other,' outside the tradition of conventional aristocratic aspirations and titled patronage. Its creator, Henry Colt Hoare, a banker, called in no fashionable consultant, but did it himself over some three decades. For this very reason, the creator of the only true masterpiece of the art surviving is unlikely to get his due in the present state of 18th-century studies, for the whole field seems to be infected to a greater or less degree with Nicolson Blight, a virus pest (named after the main focus of infection on the book page of the Observer) which afflicts the historical imagination much as Bushy Stunt affects tomato plants. In the output of affected writers, preoccupation with rank proliferates at the expense of the study of creative talent till it becomes impossible to distinguish between the defence of our artistic heritage and mere toadying to traditional privilege. Few recent attacks have been as bad as the classic case of sickly aristophilia (a curiously pernicious French strain) exhibited by Cyril Connolly's introduction to Les Pavillons, ³ where the blight seems also to have spread to the 200 pages of illustrations of aristocratic rural retreats as well. In contrast to this, the prognosis for R. W. Ketton-Cremer is hopeful: the deep dynastic dreariness of his Felbrigg⁴ seems to be due to a temporary attack of inbreeding—it is about his own forebears—and there is a fair chance that his next book will be back on his Norfolk Worthies form. But the most alarming case is that of James Lees-Milne whose latest production rejoices in the splendidly snobbish and aptly anticlimactic title of Earls of Creation.⁵ This study of Belted Patronage (in J. M. Richards's happy phrase) is a sorry descent from his earlier works of highbrow popularization, designed to make the architecture of Rome, Spain, Adam or Inigo Jones acceptable to those unfortunates who have suffered an Oxbridge education. This time he has fallen into the Nicolson trap of believing that the noble patrons who launched the landscape movement were more interesting than the creative minds who dreamed it up-like Addison and Pope—or the executants who made it real—like Kent and Brown. In fact, his introduction shoots down the rest of the book: Kent, he says, ‘had all the imagination, fire and genius which . . . his noble patron lacked.' Why not a book about Kent, then? Admirably coarse personality, suitable for popularizing treatment, and Margaret Jourdain's book is now 14 years out of date. Why not? He was a commoner, that's why! I don't suppose a decent, right-thinking publisher today would handle the book. Or any other serious work on the origins of the landscape movement that produced its masterpiece at Stourhead, for the awful truth is that it was invented and staffed by middle-class professionals. From Pope to Repton there isn't a creative nobleman in the business, except Lord Burlington, and he was only three generations away from trade. It would obviously be an over-simplification to try and assimilate Hoare too closely to these nonnoble pros, and equally unsafe to try and see him as wholly unlike the lordly improvers, for he clearly had tastes and admirations in common with them. But as his own designer and without pretensions to rank, he successfully avoided the condescensions—or, worse, the awful self-conscious anticondescensions that were occasionally shewn towards Pope—and obsequiousnesses that contributed a strain of palsied intentions to so many lesser landscapes. At Stourhead there is an integration of conception and execution, a wholeness and vitality of one man's vision that puts the final product in an almost Michelangelesque class among landscapes. NOTES 1. A History of Garden Design, Faber, 1962. 2. "Humphry Repton," Country Life. 3. Hamish Hamilton, 1962. 4. Hart-Davis, 1962. 5. Hamish Hamilton, 1962. The Dymaxicrat Buckminster Fuller needs no introduction—at last! It comes as a real relief to us foundation members of the Dymaxion Fan Club, who first got the message from Mechanix Illustrated about 1930, that it is no longer necessary to begin an article such as this with: See the clever Inventor See the pretty Dome Color the dome geodesic The inventor's name is Buck-min-ster Ful-ler Try not to color him eccentric. It has been a long and thankless haul, the ultimate disproof of proverbs about better mousetraps—the world has now built a twelve-lane freeway through Fuller-land, but only after he has been in the magazines for thirty years. The curve of public acceptance did not finally intercept Bucky's orbit until about 1955; in the previous year the two paperboard domes at the Milan Triennale had forced world design-people to see him in the context of international architecture, and the famous photograph of a Marine Corps helicopter lifting another paperboard dome not only came to serve as a sort of certificate of proof of the objectivity of his ideas, but also became the most compulsive symbolic icon of far-out building technology the postwar world possessed. But the world had been catching up on Fuller in any number of ways. His 1927 drawing of the 4D air-ocean town plan, with aircraft winging between tall towers of supertechnology scattered over the globe, looked like Futurist revivalism at the time, but to anyone going Boeing between Hilton International hotels in 1963 it just looks like where we live. The pole-hung Dymaxion House project has been nearly put into production twice—once as the Wichita House by Beech Aircraft after the last war, and again by Bodiansky and the ATBAT design team to house a French antarctic expedition in IGY. Miniaturized editions, give or take very little, of the Dymaxion car project were built, twenty years later, by both Isetta and Heinkel (the latter still being produced in England), and in Bucky's recent forays into his synergetic universe of spherical closestpacking geometries, he has found himself face to face with protein biochemists who have got into the same territory from the other end and with quite other motives. But few things really mark the present stage of public acceptance as sharply as the language of John McHale's new book on Fuller.¹ The mere publication of the book is no great wonder—George Braziller's determination to capsule all the big names of current architecture into five-dollar packets was bound to overrun Fuller sooner or later, but McHale's use of language in it is an achievement (though whether that achievement is to be credited to McHale or the Zeitgeist is difficult to assess). Like the rest of us, McHale has been growing middle-aged in a world increasingly rich in Fulleriana, increasingly receptive to the Dymaxion creed; but unlike the rest of us, McHale has himself been producing more Fulleriana than anyone else, and his writings have had a lot to do with the increasing acceptance of these ideas, especially among architectural students outside the U.S. Now, writing about Bucky has its peculiar difficulties, of which the leading one is that it is almost impossible except in his own idiom. There is a very good reason for this— that his creative thinking does genuinely seem to be done in the grammar and syntax he uses when speaking. Problems are simultaneously bulldozed frontally, undermined termitically and outflanked by way of relative clauses lasting up to six weeks. All this is fine while Bucky is telling the tale himself, except possibly for people sitting at the back of large audiences who cannot follow his facial expressions or the subtleties of his hand-actions. Comprehensibility survives into print, if the text is Bucky's own, but if it is written by another hand . . . trouble! In Robert Mark's 1960 book on Bucky, the interference between his own manner of writing and Bucky's manner of thinking, produces a style that falls apart—ponderous and pedestrian on the maths, which it fails to illuminate, turgid when it turns to the narrative, which it fails to animate. McHale, disciplined by six years' hard writing since his first Fuller article for the Architectural Review, and his understanding deepened by a great deal of close working with the Dymaxicrat himself, seems to have gone a long way toward thrashing this linguistic problem. He has eliminated some of the more angular and scholastic Scotticisms from his own style and opened its structure to the point where it can absorb Fullerisms without coming apart at the joints. As a result, he has a narrative tool and descriptive apparatus that are related to Fuller's thought patterns without being swamped by them. Only once in this book does the Master's rhetoric trap him into an overcapitalized metaphor, but it's a real bomb when it drops—“the upsurge of geodesic domes and their outward global explosion ten years later." (It sounds like a slowmotion commercial for a cosmic soap-powder.) Fuller himself cannot lay a verbal egg like this, because he is himself the toughest critic of his own prose style. Talking to University College on his last visit to London, he involved himself in a twenty-minute relative clause about bird ecology, in the course of which he came up with “. . . and then the male birds fly off to sweep out areas of maximum anticipated metabolic advantage." At which point he paused just long enough to scrutinize what he had said and added “Worms," in a throwaway aside that got the biggest laugh of the afternoon. But in this, of course, he was also demonstrating his phenomenal ability to step from high-level abstraction to concrete example and back. It is like his famous bit where he observes that he has never known the Universe to let him down, and proves it by tossing up a coin and watching with justified satisfaction as it falls reliably back to earth instead of floating horizontally out of the window or turning into a winged serpent. It is this side of him as much as anything else that endears him to children (McHale's, and my own, are among his most frantic fans) and to architectural students, whose teachers often have nothing to offer but airy theories and practical rulesof-thumb that never seem to cohere into any convincing professional discipline. On the other hand, very sophisticated people, especially with conventional dead-language European educations, tend to shy away from him—hence the bitter attacks on him by some British critics, and the campaign of snide witticisms that followed his European tour in 1958. But the boys and girls don't suffer these cultural inhibitions. They respond freely to a world view that can be reduced to the tetrahedron and the sphere, and even more eagerly (in an age when a mathematical model is apt to be a mile of punched tape) when the view is demonstrated by constructions that can be held in the hand or are made of table-tennis balls or drinking straws. Their reward is to be treated, for instance, to Bucky's unique nonmathematical demonstration of the theory of the gyroscope—a performance (why has it not been video-taped?) that gives some idea of what it must have been like to sit in while Pythagoras drew in the sand. But in all this we should remember that his idiosyncratic and effective mathematical facility is a direct product of his preoccupation with human shelter and is fed back into the shelter situation as a structural discipline and a methodology of environmental control. His approach must be distinguished from that of the men with whom he is often compared, like Robert le Ricolais or Konrad Wachsmann. Neither begins with his impassioned estimate of the shelter-predicament, nor his radical concepts of its cure. Le Ricolais wings down from the heights of pure mathematics to propose structures which, he claims, can be made from a cubic meter of wood—but where can one buy wood by the cubic meter, square Maître?—while Wachsmann has done little more than pursue certain problems of structural jointing with the same fiendish narrow ingenuity that other typical German genii have applied to clockwork mice and magnetic mines. Fuller, by contrast, tends to make simple joints between pieces of available lumber. Although he has talked a lot about waiting for lagging building technology to catch up with new design possibilities, he operationally demonstrates a true hot-rodder's faith that when he wants a component or adapter, one will pop out of the cornucopia of U.S. technology. Conversely, when he has to deal with less-abundant technologies, he hotrods around for underexploited productive capacity—hence his protracted love-affair with the paper and printing industries, which seem to be present in countries where even Portland cement is not. In this he sets himself apart from the architects of his generation, who have hardly done a thing to extend their technical resources, meekly accepting a few handouts from the structural engineers. Typically, Le Corbusier's reaction to a threatened breakdown of technological abundance is to back down into primitivism, to mud walls and log roofs. Also, architects have tended to see the problem of shelter as one, simply, of creating more elegant spatial experiences, whereas Fuller has seen it as one of creating more and better-serviced volumes of habitation. That is why the Dymaxion House project of 1927 makes such a mockery of its architect-designed contemporaries, such as Mies van der Rohe's Lange House at Krefeld, Le Corbusier's Villa de Monzie at Garches, or Richard Neutra's Lowell House in Los Angeles. It was a design that could have delivered what the others promised but could not produce, a radically new environment for domestic living. As a technical proposition it proposed fully controlled and conditioned living space, and as an aesthetic proposition it offered what Corb alone (and five years later) was to promise and half-deliver—an idyllic prospect of the world from one story above the damp and dirt. In offering both, the Dymaxion House was— and still is—in a league where no one else is playing. McHale scores here too; he gets Fuller out of the vacuum in which he is usually discussed and shows him in the context of the architecture of his time—which may be the most valuable and embarrassing thing the book has done. If it were left to the architects, and to the critics, pundits and historians who share their professional attitudes, Fuller would never get discussed at all; there is a real current of architectural opinion which does not want to know about him. Of course, it was the architects who pioneered his public acceptance, because they were captivated by the pretty domes and his ability to outtalk even Le Corbusier and Frank Lloyd Wright. But when they saw that his work, even more than his words, criticized their attitudes so sharply that they were left without a pilotis to stand on, the atmosphere chilled. For the front-runners who make opinion (if not the middle-runners who make the money), Fuller has now become a square, a nut, a Philistine, even—bless their tiny professional minds——a member of the Establishment. Ultimately the laugh will be on them—and they probably know it. One reason why so many of them reject Fuller's root-and-branch rejection of the International Style and Bauhaus doctrine as they reached the U.S. after 1930, is that they have rejected them too, for different reasons, but don't want client-class to get wind of it. He damned both as superficial and tricky, cultural illusionism, and now, as “progressive" architects (not to mention Progressive Architecture) in the Eastern U.S. begin to head down the Gadarene slope toward a full-scale Beaux-Arts revival, it is clear that Gropius and his followers, in twenty years of teaching at Harvard and elsewhere, really did fail to put more than a veneer of functionalism and a lacquering of social responsibility over the academic and corrupt body of U.S. architecture—and in many cases it is Gropius's own students who are leading the downhill rush. Unlike them, Fuller has something to offer the world, the real world out there where the U.S. and Europe are about to be assayed by fire and sword, hunger and newly educated millions. Not believing, like so many New England and European architects seem to do, that every millionaire has a right to his monument (“You could call me the Levitt of the museum-building industry," said one) before every man has a right to somewhere to live, Fuller offers the world the kind of design-concepts it needs. And if architects cannot offer the kind of service that the world needs, then architects will go the same way as rain makers and witch doctors and other pseudo-technicians who were preserved by cultural inertia in spite of declining evidence of performance—but were preserved only for so long. In a world where survival is a prime consideration, Dymaxicrats like Fuller are more likely to survive than the kind of architects the schools are still producing. Apropos of something else, McHale once wrote to me, "Allah has the message— and Mohammed is his press agent." On present performance you could certainly put Fuller in the first half of the proposition and, on present promise, you should soon be able to put McHale in the second. This is not the definitive work on Fuller, nor will there be one yet, but when it comes McHale is the most likely man to write it. 1. R. Buckminster Fuller, by John McHale. (“Makers of Contemporary Architecture" Series.) George Braziller.