# The Style for the Job 'Toasting,'said James Stirling, ‘is a pretty primitive sort of conception. It just doesn't make sense in something rather smooth and elegant like the Braun toaster. I mean, you can burn bread all right in something crude and a bit old-fashioned like your Morphy Richards, but not in the Braun. It's just not right!' There spoke again that hypersensitivity about appropriate character in design that has always needled the Stirling and Gowan partnership. Gowan's manner of expressing it may be less picturesque, but the phrase 'the Style for the Job' is his contribution to a debate that has spread to include the work of Eero Saarinen, and with them, as with Saarinen, this approach has had its pitfalls. But it has paid off in Saarinen's airports, and it has paid off triumphantly for Stirling and Gowan in the new Engineering Building at Leicester University. It succeeds because job and style are inseparable. In some earlier works, such as the housing at Preston, they seem to have decided the appropriate character subjectively, on the basis of arbitrary sociological decisions. But at Leicester, the first job complex enough to extend their talents to the full, they had neither time, money nor ground-space for disembodied speculation about style: the character emerges with stunning force from the bones of the structure and the functions it shelters. It is almost unique in Britain in having no detail, however extraordinary, that is overwrought or underdesigned by the standards set by the structure as a whole. Its character is not only appropriate but consistent in every part. The building is in many ways as extraordinary as its details. t ground-floor level it confronts the visitor with a blank wall of hard-faced red brick, which is occasionally pierced with a rather private-looking doorway, except at the point where the glazed main-entrance lobby splits this defensive podium into two parts: one a rectangle enclosing the teaching labs, the other a moderately irregular polygon forming the base of two towers housing research and administrative offices. Over the heavy teaching labs there foams, like suds from some cubist detergent, a good head of angular north-light glazing, laid diagonally across the building. Down one side of the block, this pearly translucent glazing rises to four storeys, with the topmost floor of labs struttoed well out over a service road that cannot, for the present, be eliminated: the whole complex has had to be crammed onto a site which, by common-sense standards, ought to be about 25 per cent too small for it. On the opposite flank of the main rectangle rise the towers, but they do not rise in any obvious or tidy-minded manner, since each rests on a lecture-hall that cantilevers out beyond the limits of the podium below. The research tower rises only five storeys above the smaller auditorium, and is relatively conventional in appearance, except that it has one cormer snubbed off to clear a legal building line, and its bands of windows are in the form of inverted hoppers, the glass sloping out to shelter flat bands of ventilators underneath. The admin tower, which carries a water-tank on top to give the hydraulics labs at ground level sufficient head of water, has all four corners snubbed off when it finally reaches it typical plan-form, and then rises clear above the research tower. Between these two main towers rise three subsidiary shafts—a twinned pair for lifts and stairs rising the full height of the admin tower, a smaller one standing only high enough to serve the lower research tower. Where these five clustering towers do not touch—which is usually—the intervening spaces are filled by glazing that in only one case (between the twins) falls sheer and vertical to the ground. In the other gaps it descends in a sort of cascade, twisting to one side or the other, and angling forward to accommodate the ever larger landings that are needed in the lower and more populous parts of the building. This composition of towers and glass is a fantastic invention, the more so because it proceeds rigorously from structural and circulatory considerations without frills or artwork. The solid walls are either of the same brick as the podium, or of the red tiling that covers nearly every square foot of concrete, even floors and ceilings. The glazing (like the tiling) is rock-bottom cheap industrial stuff, just glass and aluminum extrusions. It has no pretty details, just nuts, bolts, bars cut to length on site, and raggedy flashings left ‘as found.' By taking a thoroughly relaxed attitude to technology and letting the glazing system follow its own unpretentious logic, the architects achieved less a kind of anti-detailing (as some critics seem to suggest) than some form of un-detailing that would border on plain dereliction of duty were it not so patently right in this context. But, over and above the rectitude of the detailing, the stair-tower complex offers such bewildering visual effects that words are apt to fail. Both by day and by night (when the stairs are lit by pairs of plain industrial lamps bracketed from the walls) the play of reflections in the variously angled glass surfaces can be as breathtaking as it is baffiling. It really looks as if the grand old myths of functionalism have come true for once, and that beauty, of a sort, has been given as a bonus for the honest service of need. I say beauty ‘of a sort' because the visual pleasures of this complex and rewarding building are neither those of classic regularity nor picturesque softness. Its aethestic satisfactions stem from a tough-minded, blunt-spoken expertise that convinces even laymen that everything is right, proper and just so. It is one of those buildings that establishes its own rules, convinces by the coherence of even markedly dissimilar parts, and stands upon no precedents. It rebuffs the attempts of art-historians to identify its sources (unlike some of the other modern buildings on the Leicester campus, which provide a real feast for art-historical nit-pickers), though it has, in some obtuse way of its own, regained a good deal of the bloody-minded élan and sheer zing of the pioneer modernism of the early Twenties. Largely, I think, this is because it really does seem to be a natural machine-age architecture of the sort that must have been in the minds of the Werkbund's founding fathers or Antonio Sant'Elia If its attitude to technology is relaxed, its general quality is of a take-it-or-leave-it nonchalance, and this has undoubtedly contributed to the profound and niggling offence it has given in some creepy architectural circles. It is a fair measure of the collapse of self-confidence among students at certain British architectural schools that one of them could write: This is a worrying building. Formally it is one of the most exciting modern buildings in the country. Yet its very success . . . calls into doubt the architects' motives and suggests that at times they were only concerned with human function in so far as it provided them with excuses for formal expression. There follow a couple of paragraphs almost suggesting a hidden hope that it will turn out that the building doesn't work, so that little worries ‘about the morality of it' (to quote two more frightened students) might turn out to be justified. The whole proposi tion here, that a formally exciting building cannot be functionally correct, shows the kind of slough into which functionalism deprived of ruthlessness can subside. Fortunately, Stirling and Gowan applied the kind of radical ruthlessness that conjures convincing form out of service of function, and receives as a bonus, not only the dizzy reflections in the stair-tower, but a nocturnal transformation scene when the building, glowing with its own internal and strictly functional illumination, assumes a mantle of light and mystery that is like no other architectural spectacle the world can offer. World—this is a world-class building, one of the very few that Britain has produced since the war, or ever. Its international fame does not rest on its being frightfully British, but on its being resolutely architectural, and in a manner that would justify itself in any company. The world is now beating a path to its door—where it is greeted by a badly lettered notice announcing that 'this building is not available to the public for visiting or photography.'Not to worry, effrontery or graft will get you in, and any trouble you provoke will help to hasten the day when the University authorities have to face their responsibilities and make proper arrangements for visitors. Architecture of this quality must be public property.