# Bricologues a la Lanterne Among the dottier myths that haunt the "world of discourse" in which I operate is that of the bricoleur. It comes—appropriately enough—from La Pensée Sauvage, but—equally appropriately—has already taken on mythographic aspects that Lévi-Strauss himself never intended: “The bricoleur is still someone who works with his hands and uses devious means compared to those of the craftsman. . . . The bricoleur [dictionary definition: odd job man or handyman] is adept at performing a large number of diverse tasks; but, unlike the engineer, he does not subordinate each of them to the availability of raw materials and tools conceived and procured for the purpose of the project. His universe of instruments is closed and the rules of his game are always to make do with 'whatever is at hand' . . . the engineer is always trying to make his way out of and go beyond the constraints imposed by a particular state of civilisation, while the bricoleur by inclination or necessity always remains within them." Those are the actual Lévi-Strauss words as quoted in the most consequential bricological text to date, Adhocism by Charles Jencks and Nathan Silver (1972), where the bricoleur is set up as the archetypical make-do-and-mend patcher and improviser and thus the patron saint for their "new" gospel of improvisatory design. However, the bricoleur has also come in patron-handy to ecomaniacs and alternative technologists, to architectural dissidents reacting against the sophisticated rigor mortis of "system building," to Popperian proponents of piecemeal planning as against comprehensive redevelopment . . . and haute-bricolage has been detected by some critics in the work of Marcel Duchamp and Robert Rauschenberg. This, however, is not the role for which Lévi-Strauss intended him. The passage from Jencks, quoted above, is a brilliant piece of selective editing from which the original meaning has been totally mislaid. If you go back to the text (around page 16 in most translations) you will find that the bricoleur is not part of any anthropological statement or argument, but more like an extended metaphor or parabolic gloss on one. Much as the parable of the Good Samaritan appears in the gospel less to claim virtue for Samaritans than to make a point about the nature of good neighbourliness, so the bricoleur is there less to claim virtue for do-it-yourself than to illuminate a point about the nature of mythologies—that they are cobbled up ad hoc out of folk tales and fables that are to hand, rather than purpose-designed to explain the Cosmos. Time, I think, has had one of its little revenges hereabouts. When La Pensée Sauvage was written, the polar opposition between Bricoleur and Engineer could have been understood as it was intended—as a cute expository device of almost mathematical elegance. But by the time the book was translated into English, it had reached the status of being almost the Third Testament, so every word in it had to be read as gospel. To judge from conversations around design schools (and much of Adhocism, too) the bricoleur is now established as a kind of third-world alternative to science and engineering, pottering around in his bidon in the barriada, improvising, as like as not, a wheelchair out of Coke cans and dismembered rollerskates—so that his neighbour, legless and blinded after the attentions of the local junta, can get to his begging pitch outside the Hilton Hotel. In the same mythography, the engineer (who confusingly includes the scientist according to Lévi-Strauss) is of course the black-tie-and-white-shirt figure in the airconditioned and fluorescently lit laboratory, feeding his computer with data that will require the rape of several thousand tonnes of rare earths from the ancestral lands of the last tribe of matrileneal, head-hunting, three-toed-sloth-worshipping, etcetera, etcetera. You know the picture. . . . But the point is that even if you subtract all that current eco-loving, Volvo-driving, culture worry, and get back to the bare bones of the original polar opposition, it still isn't true. Lévi-Strauss's engineer is an even more mythological figure than his bricoleur. Even if, as Jencks sagely observes, the difference between Bricoleur and Engineer is one of degree, then on any evenly graded scale from the one to the other, practically everybody, including the engineers, is going to be up the brico end, with hardly a soul at the other. The Lévi-Strauss engineer, conceiving and procuring everything specially for the project, may possibly exist in exam papers at the Ecole Polytechnique, but nowhere else in engineering as generally understood. The reason for this should be obvious enough. Engineering, as generally understood, is a true child of bourgeois capitalism. Its ultima ratio is still profit. There is normally far less profit in using specials and one-offs than in using whatever is at hand, on the shelf, in the stores, ex-catalogue. As Bruce Archer used to say to his industrialdesign students at the Central School: “Stop designing nuts and bolts. They're all in the book!" And this applies right up to the commanding heights of engineering technology, where money is supposed to be no object. Thus is it not true even that “you can't bricolate your way to the Moon." The Apollo excursions were engineered down to the last accountable fart and belch because they used that irreducible off-the-peg component, man himself, accepting the “constraints of a particular state of civilisation," instead of going beyond them and insisting on fully automated observation devices (as the Russians tried to do with Lunokhod). And as anyone who reads the ads in the colour supps will know, all sorts of standard kit like cameras and wristwatches went on the Apollo jaunts “as found," or nearly so. Again, until the 98 per cent purpose-designed Ferraris began to dominate Grand Prix racing last year, we had seen nearly a decade in which the commanding heights of automotive technology were occupied by Formula One racers that were bricolated together out of Ford motors, Hewland gearboxes, Girling brakes, and so forth. Even now Ferrari doesn't make his own spark plugs or brake pads, for goodness sake. Where you are most likely to encounter the purpose-conceived and purpose-procured product is at levels so modest they aren't normally thought of as engineering. The plastic comb in your pocket was the product of just the kind of monomaniac “universe of instruments" that Lévi-Strauss attributes to engineering: made in a machine specific to comb-moulding out of specially blended comb-plastic. Or take the current basis of the whole culture and technology of third-world economies (if what you see on the box is to be trusted), to wit: the yellow plastic bucket! That is the end-product of a process in which every component, procedure and material is specific to the production of plastic buckets. But just because the Lévi-Strauss engineer is a kind of one-dimensional polemical caricature (or can serve as one) and is a purely academic construct, unsullied by the kind of observation of real life that anthropologists used to be expected to be careful about, he is very handy for academics bricolating theories out of other people's books. He appeals fatally to the kind of mind that likes to work with cultural monads. That's why he literally suits the book of Jencks and Silver. Products of a period of architectural education that tended to reduce all its students to cultural monads by insisting that they re-design everything from scratch in one-to-one correspondence to its specific function, they discovered bricolage not for what it was—the way the world has always worked—but as a gospel of salvation. And since a gospel needs a Satan, the engineer had an immediate role in this new bricosmology. What's worrying, ultimately, is that an elegantly contrived but trifling metaphor should come to be regarded as a revelation about the nature of design. Worrying in that it is only a symptom of the general ignorance about engineering among those who profess to tell us what's wrong and what's right with western culture, and—above all— what's wrong with engineering as a part of that culture. I know one shouldn't tell tales out of school, but I remember that during the period that Adhocism was being written, one of the authors, challenged on a point of engineering ignorance, actually rang me up to ask if "there's a good book on technology I could read?" People who can believe that mass bricolage is a sovereign remedy for “forces and ideas that hinder the fulfilment of human purposes . . . large corporations . . . philosophies of behaviourism . . . modern architecture" because it is the opposite of the faceless "technostructure" of engineering, should think again, carefully. Modern bricolage, on the evidence of the illustrations in Adhocism (and the pix, at least, do observe the real world) works only with the offcuts and discards of engineering. Not a single unmanufactured piece of natural material, not an ass's jawbone nor a twig of willow appears in this conspectus. The bricoleur's universe of instruments proves—in this version—to be just another colonial dependency of the dreaded technostructure. Touchez pas au brico! It could be injurious to your health if you don't know what it's about. After all, and at the end of the day, the bricolage to end all bricologues is the use of a lamp post as a gallows!