# Summa Galactica Picture, if you will, a heroine dressed all in virginal white, who never gets raped or even kissed, in an exploitation movie that has already grossed so much at the box office that Jaws looks like a minnow and the Exorcist like a Wayside Pulpit. The mind boggles. But then Star Wars (which doesn't hit the UK till December but whose prepublicity is already all around us) is a boggling movie—especially if you fail to pick up the clues to its deceptive simplicities early enough. The last possible moment at which you can hope to get on, and hang on, is probably where the bar tender points through the throng of variously fur-covered, balloonheaded, pig-nosed, cyclopean, and even more extraordinary creatures yet . . . points, that is, through the normal crush at his murky, extra-galactic cantina at the fastidiously detailed (made in Britain!) gilt robot in the doorway and barks, "We don't serve their kind in here!" It's an old joke, as comfortingly familiar in science fiction as a mother-in-law joke would be in vaudeville. But it has a new twist now, because—obviously—Android Lib would see to it nowadays that the Equal Rights Amendment applied to automata, as well as to men, women, gays, goys, Jews, blacks, yellows, Hispanos, Amazing Hulks and things with five tentacles coming out from under each ear. The Biological Chauvinist Piggery of the whole episode pushes the frame of reference back before 1968 or so. Star Wars may well be the first historical costume drama of SF, and as thoroughly researched as Roots. Which makes it about the most complicated simple-minded movie ever made. This simplemindedness is the true reason for its stunning success, however. It's a straightforward interstellar western. It is a rattling good yarn with an entirely surprisefree scenario, unencumbered by characterisation or acting (apart from some Rommel impersonations by Peter Cushing), but driven at breakneck speed by real pacey-pacey cutting, and a soundtrack that rarely leaves you time to think. Not that there is much, at that level, to think about—except that, since Kubrick's 2001, the pundits have come to expect that any expensive SF movie has got to be a vehicle for pretentious cracker-mottoes about Man, God, Destiny and all that. So Alec Guinness's Star Wars valedictions, “The Force be with you," have been scrutinised up, down and sideways for evidence of a New Deism, or even worse, when all they are, in truth, are SF conventions. For, outside its rattling good yarn, Star Wars is about science fiction conventions— all of them, a kind of summa galatica of downright Thomist encyclopaedism and inclusiveness, subject only to the terminus ante quem implied by the datedness of the barroom sequence. This is SF before J. G. Ballard and his quality reduced it to the level of literature: SF of the period of John W. Campbell Jr's most authoritative editorial years at Astounding (later, Analog) magazine; the period, roughly, from Asimov's first robot stories to Frank Herbert's Dune. George Lucas (of American Graffiti), who wrote and directed, knows all that stuff. Too few of those who have wasted good newsprint trying to explain “the phenomenon of Star Wars," seem to know any of it at all. Most were thrown completely off-track by the statement (by whom?) that Lucas had originally intended to make a Flash Gordon movie. The more one looks at Star Wars, the less likely that appears. Literally “appears," because the movie's visual sources are nowhere in that area. Its imagery comes from the non-comic-strip pulps like Astounding and Galaxy in the fifties and sixties, from their great illustrators and cover artists like Chesley Bonestell and Kelly Freas, and above all from the written words themselves. This is an intensely, attentively, literary film. Which is what has made so depressing the failure of the literary critics, even in the Times Literary (you should pardon the expression) Supplement, to realise what it is all about. Regular cinema audiences don't seem to have this problem, and Lucas pays them the compliment of never supposing for a moment that they will. The narrative pauses neither to explain its references nor to underline its allusions. There's no time, and should be no need. Most of the first quarter of the story takes place on the arid planet of Tatooine, where the two robots have been deliberately marooned with their crucial strategic information, in the hope that someone who knows what it is all about will pick them up and send the info on to the rebels. In the event, they are picked up by the Jawas, diminutive figures in quasi-Capuchin hooded habits with curious loops and lengths of plastic tubing protruding here and there from their garb. Now, this was not just a fancy of the costume department. Practically all the audience within our earshot flashed on the fact that this was a reference to Frank Herbert's Dune ecology, where the desert folk, the Fremen, wear special gear that conserves and re-cycles all their body water. To my knowledge, none of the regular critics have picked up this reference, or the fact that it apparently extends and resolves the problem left behind at the end of the Dune trilogy. That problem was: can the Fremen preserve their ancient and noble warrior culture without a reversal of the ecological process that is turning their desert into irrigated farm land? The implication of Star Wars is, so to speak, “Neither!" The desert has returned, but the mighty Fremen have been reduced to tinker bands of midget secondhand-robot dealers, travelling in armoured vehicles whose silhouette against the sky looks deliberately reminiscent of old-fashioned gypsy caravans. An interesting and cynical concept, but surely a bit much to be riding on the baçk of a rattling good simpleminded yarn? No, this is the level at which Star Wars is complex and sustainedly erudite. For instance, I knew I had come across the Jedi knights somewhere before, and was only momentarily deflected by Alec Guinness's first appearance in pre-faded Zen strip. The Jedi Order's mixture of chivalric dedication and mod technology has got to come, not from Tolkien, as TLS correspondents aver, but from Ernst Juenger's On the Marble Cliffs. I don't suppose anybody much around the team that made the movie, or around us in the cinema, had ever read it, either in the original German or in translation, yet it's been soaking into SF since the early fifties. That concept has some uncomfortable overtones. It got Juenger into trouble in some quarters because it smacked of Nazi revanchism, postulating as it did an oathbound secret corps d’élite defending the inner secrets of western culture. That's a theme that runs through more than just SF of course. It's already there in most readings of the Arthurian legend. (Was it Clive James who pointed out what a creepy band of fascists the knights of the Round Table would appear today?) Anyhow, what seemed to reinforce the Juengarian connection was that the decor of the final sequence—and this is something every pundit and most of the audience picked up—unmistakably recalls Leni Riefenstahl's Triumph of the Will, banners and all! Shocking or not, this sits well with the chivalric theme that informs most of the movie, and nowhere gets in the way of the cowboy aspects of the yarn. But chivalry does do something funny to the ending, generally. Thus, after the final crucial action sequence which—for all it takes place in spacefighters over the topography of an artifi cial Death Star—is a classic Western gulch ride, with the hired gun, who was thought to have taken his bounty and split, coming back to ride shotgun on the hero and keep the baddies off his tail . . . after all that does boy get girl, or girl get boy? Neither and both. The princess Leia goes off with both Luke Skywalker, the hero, and Han Solo, the hired gun, arm-linked between them, just good buddies and as pure as the Coke commercial the tableau suspiciously resembles. And that's the nearest thing to sex in the whole movie, and a great tribute to Lucas as a science-fiction scholar. The princess, played by Carrie Fisher with all the emotional depth of an underdeveloped Polaroid, remains throughout an unsullied figure in her virginal white Roman nightie, and shatter-proof hair-do which seems to be something to do with early pictures of Eleanor Roosevelt. But when the action gets rough, she mucks in with gun and boot. A tomboy? No, the exact phrase is: “You're a real brick, Leia!" To put it any higher would make her sound too much a Joan of Arcturus, and she's not spooky enough for that. But she is certainly as remote and unreachable as any mistress of a medieval troubadour, even when she is slopping around in peril in the waste disposal system of the Death Star (in a glorious send-up of Wajda's Kanal: is nothing sacred?). In a movie which has been lavishly overpraised for its special effects, and grimly over-scrutinised for philosophical mystifications (and will occasionally rejoice British viewers by its resemblances to Dr Who), the pure white princess is the touchstone, not only of devotion to a chivalric ideal, (ie dumb but noble) but more than that, of true scholarship. She is not a nostalgically idealised girl-figure like those in George Lucas's previous, and equally excellent, American Graffiti. She is an accurate reading of the way heroines really were in the brave science-fiction days of old. Star Wars is not nostalgia; it is history. ## Pevsner's Progress David Watkin, Morality and Architecture: The Development of a Theme in Architectural History and Theory from the Gothic Revival to the Modern Movement (Clarendon Press: Oxford University Press) Apparently graven in stern Roman capitals on weathered masonry on the dust-jacket, the title of David Watkins's reworked lecture promises something more lapidary and more portentous than proves to be the case. The relationship between morality and architecture could be of considerable—even life and death—interest to the world at large, but what the book contains is a series of scholastic complaints about moralizing in architectural writing, from Pugin to Pevsner. The lecture, when originally delivered in Cambridge in 1968, was—quite properly— valued as a mind-cleansing squib. Reissued almost a decade later, ballasted with a full apparatus of footnotes, and weighed down with the assumed mantles of Popper, Butterfield and the supposed Peterhouse tradition of anti-Whiggery in historical writing, it now looks more like an attempted academic takeover of the current fashion for knocking Modern Architecture and all its works, and all its apologists—but especially Pevsner, whom Watkin attacks for the last third of the book with an animus that seems to go well beyond normal Cambridge passions for self-righteous rectification. Watkins clearly recognizes his own extremism: indeed, he exaggerates its extremity by going out of his way to ward off criticism (or invite admiration) for his temerity in attacking Sir Nikolaus. The effect is not convincing; it will not do for him to say that in criticizing one aspect of Pevsner (or Pugin, J. M. Richards, Viollet-le-Duc, and others who get the treatment) “it is with no wish to question the value of the whole", because all Pevsner's major works, most of his minor ones, and every different kind of Pevsnerian writing, get worked over—even obiter dicta about individual monuments in The Buildings of England. These last are accompanied by some further apologetics about not being “intended as an assessment of the general importance . . . of an amazing triumph of energy, productiveness and erudition unequalled . . ." and this is no more convincing than what went before, because what Watkin is offering is a totally different view of history, and the historian's work, from that pursued by Pevsner. Had Watkin the same powers, productivity, and erudition as Sir Nikolaus, he would have done it all differently. Or not at all, for the fundamental weakness of the book seems to be that he cannot see Pevsner whole, does not understand that what Sir Nikolaus hath wrought is not divisible into “energy, productiveness and erudition unequalled" on the one hand, and damnable Whig heresy on the other. In criticizing one aspect he does, in fact, attack the whole, because he has—with possibly mistaken accuracy—identified the core of Pevsner, his belief in something very like the currently discounted concept of Progress, or even the Christian idea of salvation as understood by Pugin. Now there is nothing inherently improper or repellent about Watkin's intention to censure Pevsner for Whiggish historicism in imputing direction and purpose to History, and importing morality into architectural judgment. Moralizing in architectural judgment was famously deprecated by that delicate aesthete Geoffrey Scott, in The Architecture of Humanism, before Pevsner was in his teens, and of recent years Pevsner-bashing has been an accepted academic field-sport, especially among those like Watkin and myself who have been his pupils. We have all had our difficulties in not tittering at his insistence that artists like Gauguin and the Douanier have a place in the progress of modern design “from William Morris to Walter Gropius", have found his emphasis on a coherent Zeitgeist in every significant period misleading, constricting and often glibly rhetorical, and been dismayed by his persistent blindness to the importance of some kinds of architecture and design. Yet that Zeitgeistical approach had, perhaps still has, and may have again, a special usefulness whose value Watkin appears incapable of comprehending, and whose point he misses, through a weird mixture of intellectual muddle, ignorance of his material, and rigidity—rather than rigour—of method. "Muddle", in accepting Pevsnerian valuations when he does not have to: for instance, he finds it ironic that William Morris “attacked the machine in his writings while using machines in his business", yet Morris the Luddite is almost entirely an invention of Pevsner's—younger left-revisionists (like lan Tod in his Durham MA dissertation) have shown that, by quotation no more selective than Pevsner's, Morris can be made to appear pro-Machine. "Ignorance," in (for a glaring example) his elaborate attempt to destroy Pevsner's view of the “worldliness" of Renaissance architecture (where the “religious meaning of a church is replaced by a human one") on methodological grounds, not to say forensic ones, as if he did not know that Rudolf Wittkower had devoted two telling pages and some heroic footnotes in Architectural Principles in the Age of Humanism to demonstrating Pevsner factually wrong—Renaissance church plans demonstrably did display religious symbolism. Such muddles may be due to no more than inattention, or failure to read what he has just written, but they can be classics of self-cancelling argumentation, as on page 28 of Morality and Architecture, where Watkin tackles one of the key topics in all historical assessments of modern architecture—the use of glass: Thus a persistent tradition in modern architecture, from the glazed staircases of Gropius's Werkbund building of 1914 to Stirling's glazed History Faculty buildings at Cambridge of 1964, has been the belief that glass has some special and unchallengeable role as the expression of the spirit of modernity. In fact its use is generally an aesthetic urge disguised as a technological necessity and in the History Faculty, for example, certainly cannot be justified by "convenience, construction or propriety". The use of “in fact" presumably registers a belief that these two sentences are somehow in opposition, but neither in logic nor in fact (a distinction not often enough made in Cambridge) are they mutually exclusive. Glass has satisfied that particular aesthetic urge precisely because it has that special role as an expression of modernity, at least since the publication of Paul Scheerbart's Glasarchitektur in the year of the Werkbund building. And while we are talking about muddle, is it not better practice to compare comparable data when comparing buildings, in which case the dates in the passage above should be “1912 .. . 1964" (commencements) or “1914 .. . 1968" (completions)? Furthermore, I have no recollection that the use of glass in either building was justified or excused by either architect except in terms of external necessity—in Gropius's case it was claimed to be an offer he couldn't refuse from a manufacturer, while in Stirling's it was claimed to be the only cladding material that was feasible within the penny-pinching budget imposed by the University Grants Committee. While you are getting your breath back after those two claims, you might like to work out how a “use" can be an “urge” disguised as a “necessity." "These, however, are minor blemishes", says a standard TLS reviewer's bromide, indicating that the nit-picking has come to an end, and grudging praise is about to begin, but in this case it cannot be so. The next stage is major blemishes; to wit, rigidity and what can only be described as chronic historical insensitivity. The rigidity is the saddest aspect of the book, because it purports to derive from Karl Popper, of whom I believe it to be travesty. Yet there can be no doubt that Popper has had as curious effects on art-historians as on the ClA; in both cases The Open Society seems to be held a pretext for the closed mind. I have heard an art-historian of great distinction rebut an objection with the phrase "That is a Hegelian idea, and Popper has disproved Hegel!" (Members of the audience sitting nearer the front claim that what he actually said was “and Popper disapproves of Hegel!" but there are limits to my credulity.) For Watkin, it seems, anything deemed by him to be historicism must be false because Popper (and to a lesser extent, Herbert Butterfield) would disapprove. Like an inquisitor of the House Un-American Affairs Committee, Watkin seems to demand “Are you, or have you been at any time . . ." and finds the case proven simply on the answer to that one question. Dragging in the ClA may seem like cheating, but Watkin (in the seclusion of a footnote) is prepared to compare Pevsner to Goebbels—which is not the worst example of his insensitivity to the historical situations in which his subject-matter found themselves, but not far off. Indeed, it seems that the rigid imposition of this one-valued view of historical writing can only be pursued in the absence of any real feeling for the periods under discussion, and fortified by other rigidities outside the argument—Watkin advances under the banner DOM (which has page v all to itself), and from time to time comes close to that kind of vindictiveness of which only Christians seem capable. This insensitivity spans a spectrum from the ridiculous to the tragic. At the ridiculous end must stand Watkin's half-page twitting Pevsner for trying to bring “even so slight a thing as a chocolate box" within his historical system, apparently not knowing that the design of chocolate boxes was a matter of wide (albeit joking) concern in the 1930s (cartoon of an aesthete pointing the finger of scorn at a sunset and shouting "Chocolate box-y, chocolate box-y!") and that Pevsner, as a living human being, could hardly fail to comment. At least part of that comment is valid still—"Neither a circus scene nor a still life of fruit has a natural and easily understândable relation to chocolate". The tragic extreme of his insensitivity is revealed in a phrase that has already given widespread offence: "as a Jew, Pevsner found it prudent to leave Germany". Now, this statement is true by the standards of Josef Goebbels, but Watkin, who is very scrupulous about the religious affiliations of certain composers he believes misrepresented by Pevsner, is quite unscrupulous about Pevsner's profession of Lutheranism (which might have given him pause at a number of points in his argument) and, as for the word “prudent" . . . well, it is prudent to run for the door when the house is on fire and collapsing about your ears. The man's life was in danger, for pity's sake, and he feared for his family. Watkin seems able to handle the realities of the 1930s only by comparing text with text, which of course gives him one of his better coups: Pevsner's use of the word “totalitarian" as a term of apparent approval in the concluding paragraphs of Pioneers of the Modern Movement. It is a usage that has been much commented on since, and not only among Pevsner-bashers like Charles Jencks, but most have been prepared to allow that in 1936 it might not have meant exactly what Allied wartime propaganda and Joe McCarthy had made it mean twenty years later. In Watkin's single-valued world, however, it seems that words can only have one meaning ever, and for this reason Pevsner's next worst crime after that “totalitarian" has to be his use of the word “historicism" in a sense different to that intended by Karl Popper. It has always been perfectly clear what Pevsner means by the word, and it is difficult to find a more convenient label to describe what he is discussing when he uses it, and it nowhere impinges on its other meanings, including those used in discussing historiographical techniques, but Watkin responds with the kind of epistemological seizure exhibited by Lévi-Straussians when someone uses the word “structural" to describe the way a building, not a mythology, is put together. For Watkin, it is quite simply “misuse". Furthermore, it seems neither true, nor very observant, to propose that this “misuse" leads to a “failure to recognize that he is himself a historicist in the sense defined by Popper." The matter, I suspect, is one of indifference to Pevsner; he might even be pleased to be a historicist in that sense. He has never, that I can remember, denied his intention to push certain views of history; conversationally at least he has acknowledged himself a propagandist for that kind of architecture which was pioneered from William Morris to Walter Gropius. The whole proposition is a bit like accusing him of allowing his mania for all things English to blind him to the fact of his fortyodd years' residence in Hampstead! Nevertheless, Pevsner's kind of historicism in its English context is part of everybody's Pevsner-problem, not just Watkin's. Butterfield's anti-Whig particularity is not the only aspect of English intellectual establishmentarianism that Pevsner has offended. There was a certain inevitability in Watkin's exhumation of Sir Edwin Lutyens as his ultimate weapon against Sir Nikolaus—indeed it is rather surprising that he holds back the architect of New Delhi until the last six pages of the book. Pevsner's not over-respectful attitude to the Classical tradition in British architecture has been resented ever since the Reith Lectures of 1955, and Lutyens is simply another slighted classicist to add to the long litany (Thorpe, Webb, Inigo Jones, Gibbs, Holland, Chambers, Adam . . .) of those whom—it is alleged—Pevsner hath despised and rejected. That was for being "Un-English" but the case is worse with Lutyens, whom Pevsner in a long, considered and appreciative review of Christopher Hussey's Life, treated as less than serious—“Building with Wit" was the title of the review. Watkin has either missed that article, or has set it on one side so as not to distract from his professed concern at the way Lutyens has been deliberately suppressed, and rendered an un-person, in the Outline of European Architecture. It might be that the reason for this is that Pevsner (like me) would find preposterous Watkin's claim that Lutyens was one of the “two or three most brilliant and successful architects England has ever produced", but it is equally likely that the real reason for Lutyers's non-appearance in Pevsner's European Architecture is that his style does not fit Pevsner's periods, that like Sir Walter Raleigh in 1066 and All That, he was eliminated for being "left over from a previous reign". There can be little doubt that Pevsner has been responsible for some major omissions, suppressions and diminutions of movements, men and reputations in order to keep his generalized pictures of styles and periods in manageable shape. There have also, equally certainly, been some over-valuations, notably of Walter Gropius and the Bauhaus. But, as Tom Wolfe said of Marshall McLuhan, what if he is right? Pevsner nailed his colours to the Bauhaus even earlier than Sigfried Giedion did. Some of their intellectual manoeuvres, both Pevsner's and Giedion's in the cause of demonstrating that the Bauhaus/International style must triumph, seem as doubtful to me as they do to Watkin. But it is evident that he picked a winner. Never mind whether that particular style is "legitimate" or "totalitarian": it remains an observable fact that increasingly, throughout the whole of the two middle quarters of the present century, it has become the visibly dominant style of “our times" and will continue so for some while, since there is no sign of an effective replacement for it yet. Watkin, like the present editors of the Architectural Review, Charles Jencks and the "Post-Modernists", Simon Jenkins of the Evening Standard, and a host of others, may not like this dominance, and few of us can care for what debased versions of the style have done for the downtowns of so many cities, but it must seem historically irresponsible to pretend that it has not encapsulated the architectural ambitions of our powersthat-be as surely as High Gothic, or Anglo-Palladian, or any other dominant style carried the equivalent ambitions of the bishops, earls, kings or princes of their times. Now, Pevsner's success as a stylistic talent-spotter could be due to a number of things: luck, undue influence on later events, or a true perception of how things happen in history. All three are indeed there; he was clearly fortunate to be set on course by Gropius almost before he knew that such a thing as a “Modern Movement" might exist; he certainly was influential in shaping the ideas of two if not three generations of architects, historians, and critics, so that all were inclined to make his prophecies come true. And at least one of the reasons he was so influential was that his historical generalizations looked true at the time, and in many cases still look good. Anyone who believes he can find direction and purpose in history must be capable of producing comprehensible pictures of the historical process and they will be comprehensible only in so far as they can cut through the glitter and confusions of “the Brownian movement of random events" to reveal patterns (true or false) that lie within. The discovery and delivery of such generalizing patterns is one of the services that historians render to the lay members of society. Indeed, the ability to generalize convincingly and usefully is one of the tests of a great historian, and is also one of the reasons historians' reputations are so perishable, since changing circumstances will undermine the conviction and utility of any generalization. But it also explains Pevsner's impact in the 1930s, 1940s and even 1950s, when architects and lay-folk alike needed help in understanding what was going on. Given such generalizations it is, admittedly, very easy to endow them with personalities, parts and passions, and it is—alas—not a very long step from such glib observations as “The Roman Baroque prefers elliptical floor-plans", to more sinister historicist rhetoric about "the architectonic mission of the German volk". Yet their utility persists, and Watkin avails himself of them as much as any historian: “the historicist and Zeitgeist-inspired historian will tend to regard modern collectivist ideas as right; he will be ever anxious to deal wholesale with humanity, to label individuals as types, to identify them in classes. . . ."—a sentence in which he himself labels individuals as types and identifies them in classes. The relative blackness of pots and kettles is not the point at issue here: Pevsner's performance is. He got it right. He got it more right than Giedion or Henry-Russell Hitchcock. It behooves any of us who disapprove of his methodology, or dislike his particular favourites and are concerned at his omission of our particular favourites, to recognize that he produced a picture of the architecture of his own time which was useful, applicable, and has had demonstrable predictive power. If it was Whiggish historicis, or the kind of moralizing that comes naturally to a self-made Lutheran, that made it possible to do that, then so much the worse for Butterfield and Popper. Indeed, a good Popperian, I feel, should salute rather than abuse Pevsner for having offered a falsifiable hypothesis about the main style of twentieth-century architecture in the Western industrialized world, and having seen that hypothesis resist falsification for forty years. It is, of course, only one of the many historical services he has rendered us, but its success should command respect, and give pause to those who would deprecate any of his methods. Taking It With You “It's not that caravans are bad housing . . . but that most housing isn't as good as caravans," or so said Alison Smithson (architect, novelist, spouse of architect and Edinbrugian philosophe of a prime Brodieish vintage). The remark was given the automated brush-off then, much as it would be today. "Everybody knows . . ." that caravans are portable slums and that caravan-sites are "ghettoes of poverty." Indeed it remains a fact that even the best-built caravan, if mounted on a brick foundation, not wheels, could be condemned by the district surveyor as a legally "dangerous structure" (so could a London bus!), but it is also still a fact that if you are buying basic habitability, a caravan gives you more for your money than anything on foundations the district surveyor could approve. Footloose intellectual freebooters like Buckminster Fuller may have no difficulty with this concept of mobile homes as high-value housing . . . but most of the rest of us, and especially architects, are not at home with the idea, particularly when we contemplate the seemingly permanent environmental mess that usually surrounds them. The learned Smithson herself has been pretty acid about most of the mobile homes that actually cross her field of vision. So what was she on about? Just being flip and alamode in the modish sixties, or is there some shining Platonic ideal of a mobile home that once blessed her eyes? You bet your re-cycled Mary Quant wellies there is! It shines forth upon the roads of America, but gleams quite frequently upon the highways of Europe, Africa and Asia as well. Three or four generations of modern architects have worshipped it, after their fashion and usually from afar, though ex-Bauhausler Marcel Breuer built one into his own house in the forties. It's called the Airstream; it's been around since the early thirties, when it was dreamed up by one Wally Byam, and its smoothly streamlined polished-metal form is accounted one of the classics of modern American design. Like all classics (or Platonic ideals) it is supposed to be “for ever," changeless. Like that other Platonic ideal on wheels, the VW Beetle, it has in fact undergone continual detailed changes while being praised by bat-eyed liberals for its avoidance of “annual face-lifts à la Detroit." The outline (if not the details) of the dream has changed little since it was first invented—not by Byam but by pioneer aviator Glenn Curtis. Like many another elegant snob in the late twenties, Curtis was appalled by the motley roadside hostelries he had to stay in while motorin' to Miami, and decided to take his own stateroom with him, in a streamlined capsule articulated to the back of his touring car. The Byam version was a regular towed trailer, not an artic, but was essentially the same proposition: a clean, efficient, highly-serviced, totally independent living-unit "wherever and whenever you choose to go or stay." Air travel (as much as yachting) and aircraft technology were the inspiration of these streamlined sleepers, which were near enough contemporary with the first transcontinental sleeper airliner, the Douglas DST, later to become that workhorse of the air, the Dakota or DC3. What's odd about the Byam-waggon, however, is that it has only lately come to actually look like its distinguished contemporaries such as the DC3 or Bucky Fuller's (equally aircraft-inspired) Dymaxion cars. Unlike the Volkswagen, which has gone on looking like the same made-in-Germany tin jelly-mould from its beginnings to its recent end, the Airstream has contrived to finish up looking like a Classic of Early-Thirties American Functional Styling, but only after 45 years of detail refinement. From its beginning until the middle sixties, the Airstream's metal panels did not join in smooth three-dimensional curves, but were faceted, like the planking of a boat, almost, and its windows were not round cornered and flush with its sides, but had bent metal guttering over the top. Even after the plank effect had been smoothed away, the windows still had awkward corners, and it is only in the seventies that the Airstream has really been stylistically fit to stand alongside, say, the gantry-cranes of the TVA dams as proud witness to the spirit of the New Deal! Not surprisingly, therefore, it bathes in the glow of nostalgia playing around “The streamlined decade," and its design-styles—the current Broadway smash, On the Twentieth Century, celebrates that great thirties train in sorry lyrics and tepid tunes, but the sets are a knockout; it's the first musical about industrial design! The Airstream fits that scene obviously, but what about ten years ago, or 20, or even 30 years ago when Breuer discovered it? The fascination, for architects and designers, lay in its nearness to a full realisation of Le Corbusier's dream (the whole profession's dream, therefore) of une machine à habiter fabriquée en série; a house engineered like an aircraft and manufactured like a car, Bucky Fuller's "Standard of Living Package." It was thus that the tragically late and lamented Ray Wilson celebrated the Airstream at Cambridge in the sixties; a snug weatherproof shell stuffed with capital-intensive technology, delivered to your address and replaced when it obsolesced. In spite of the vastly greater prestige of Apollo, Salyut, Soyuz and Skylab, and fighting off the earthbound challenges from the selfpropelled Clark Cortez camper in the sixties, and General Motors Motorhome in the seventies, the Airstream has visibly remained the beau ideal of capsule-fanciers like Archigram, who frequently collaged it directly into their Plug-in, clip-on cities—where you could "live in the same house at several different addresses or several different houses at the same address." The appeal of the Airstream, however, was always more visual than intellectual. It may be a very neat concept, but even in its facetted primitive forms it was an immensely appealing image. And it still is. Its polished aluminum exterior skin has the craftsmanly elegance of a Douglas aircraft; its miscellaneous doors and flaps and plug-points and ventilators have that aptness and tidy detailing which is supposed to derive from unaffected engineering practice, but which actually requires enormous self-effacing sophistication on the part of the designer. Overall, it sustains those neoclassical traditions that were built into the soul of western engineering around the time of James Watt, memorialised in aphorisms like: “Style is a word that has no plural." That's the outside; what about the interior? Go on, guess! Wrong, wrong, all of you! Except for the cynic in the corner who has been reading Martin Pawley's Private Future. At least one of the fascinations of the capsule-dream was always the supposed private fantasies that could be contained within those sealed shells. Imagine convoys of gleaming streamliners zipping along the interstates, passing boring farms and tedious state capitals and dull townships while those within conduct Japanese tea ceremonies, perform exquisite tortures with obscure Transylvanian leather objects or declaim Pindaric odes while dusky maidens anoint their heads with rare unguents. Imagine away . . . the facts of the case are that the interiors of Airstreams are of a studied, deep-carpeted, wood-grained, value-free neutrality hard to match outside a Holiday Inn, and leave (physically) no room for fantasy. This concentrated ordinariness has always been part of the deal, I suspect. Wally Byam's creed (oh, yes—it's a movement, practically a religion, being an Airstreamer) speaks of “bringing the world to your doorstep" but what he must have meant was “taking your doorstep to the world." Whether the view through the aircraft-style windows is Miami, Monument Valley or Mount Ararat, you are snug and secure in a piece of regular American suburbia. In some ways this is an even more sensational situation than if an Airstream should prove to contain a cinema-organ or a seraglio, and it is a cultural fact that Americans have been warily shaping up to of late. A recent cartoon showed a man unloading tables, chairs, a standard-lamp and a television from a trailer home in the middle of some wild forest glade, what time his wife says: "I thought we came here to get away from it all, but you've brought it all with you!" Within the Airstream's perfect technological shell lies the promise that, after all, you can take it with you. Hotel Deja-quoi? We need a new dead cliche to replace déjà-vu in certain media-related usages. Partly because the phrase has become so narrow in its meanings—when a TV critic says déjà-vu she means its re-run time again; when a theatre critic says déjà-vu it means he still can't tell Barbra Streisand from Millicent Martin; and when New Musical Express uses the phrase it's because that's what they probably think "Devo" is short for. But more than that we need a familiar phrase to label the ever-increasing frequency with which fact imitates illusion. What's not at stake here is any element of design or purpose: an architect's perspective or couturier's scribble is a thin illusion that is deliberately intended to fatten out into three-dimensional fact. And of course the moon landing looked exactly like the simulations; in that surprise-free scenario they could have done the whole thing in the studio, were it not for this Boston Irish maniac who had written the contract in such a way that they actually had to put Neil Armstrong's foot up there in physical fact. But both simulation and fact were boob-tube events as far as you and I were concerned, as well as being connected by a chain of planned causalities. It's a very different matter when three-dimensional concrete fact and two-dimensional media anticipation are separated by 40 years of non-causal disconnection. Yet here I was in this hotel lobby in Detroit thinking, “Vincent Korda Strikes Again!" Vincent Korda? That's right—one of the Hungarian Connection who did so much to make British films of the thirties barely distinguishable from American ones. He was the man who got the design credits for all those sets in the movie version of H. G. Wells's Things to Come, which the art-history books insist on crediting to the former Bauhausler Moholy-Nagy. Actually, if you watch Things to Come very closely you can pick out the two tiny sequences which are by Moholy, and that leaves Korda 99.8 per cent of the film. That doesn't necessarily mean that Korda actually designed it, of course; I used to know this man who was at the old Ealing Studios and he said. . . . Sorry, and yes—agreed——Things to Come was intended to be a seriously prophetic film, a work of extrapolation about what could really happen, rather than pure unbridled fantasy. On the short haul its prophet-and-loss account was pretty good; the anticipations of wartime chaos, and guerrilla aftermaths still hold up—especially the supermacho sheepskin liberty-bodice gear affected by the warlords in the movie, and by commandos in real life, during world war two. But Raymond Massey and his parachute übermensch never came to restore order and decency after the chaos was over—though I do sometimes wonder about the intentions of General Westmoreland and middle-period strategy in Vietnam. From somewhere about the fictive 1950 onwards, illusion and reality drift relentlessly apart. Until you get to the Hyatt superhotels, and especially those designed by John Portman, for they recreate in all-too-concrete fact the kind of gigantic interior space that most of us recall as the image of the latter sequences of Things to Come. The giant space in question is the central piazza of Wells's (Korda's?) city of the future, rising umpteen storeys high to a glazed roof—ditto John Portman's hotels. The huge space is ringed by pedestrian galleries and traversed by flying walkways—ditto (within limits) Portman's hotels. Vertical transportation in the Korda Piazza is by visible elevators in transparent ducts—and that kind of transportation has been the very trademark of Portman ever since the Peachtree Center in Atlanta over a decade ago. The clincher, however—and a very unsettling one for me—is the trees. High up in the entirely artificial man-made environment of Korda City, rows of ornamental trees grow—looking not unlike the rows of trees that have graced visionary (but not factual) architecture ever since romantic neo-classicists began to hypothesize reconstructions of the tomb of the Emperor Augustus, around 1780. Portman's trees don't come in rows, but in large oval or circular concrete planters, bracketing off the visible structure high up above your head when you enter at foyer level. The fact that they are different from Korda's in detail, but so alike in intention, is what makes them so convincing. Portman clearly is not imitating Wells's City of the Future; in America it would be inappropriate for him to take over the detailed symbolic forms of a projected society which is obviously both planned and European. In the world of commercial fun he must, obviously (since he believes in it), add fairground details to his elevators, for instance, and have them splash down—almost literally—in flodlit lily pools at reception level. Yet the overall effect is so like, that you are really brought up short and forced to ask what are the connections, however tenuous, between Portman and Wells. In a generalised sort of way, there is of course a connection between all modern architecture and Wells, via the Italian futurists before world war one. Their interest in Wells is known, their influence as the architecture of the twenties, and the sixties, is demonstrable and will probably prove to be infinitely revivable. Like the “great tunes that will not go away" (Mack the Knife, Maple Leaf Rag, Yesterday, and so on) the futur ist vision /version of the Wellsian city is one of the things the 20th century is made of. Where Portman most disturbingly connects back to Wells, however, is in the closure of his great spaces; the futurist's cities were open to the blue skies of Italy. Wells's cities were usually roofed over, as was the Korda version, as are Portman's gigantic lobbies. That wouldn't be all that odd if they were just lobbies in hotels, like the Ritz or the Waldorf or old mother Claridge. But Portman's lobbies aspire to be something vaster, and the vaster they get the nearer they draw to the Korda vision of a roofed multi-story piazza. Now, that Korda version is true to Wells; his cities tend to be enclosed systems (remember the squalid rooftop scenes in The Sleeper Wakes?) looking inward in a rather paranoid manner that is perpetuated in later science-fiction futures, such as Asimov's sealed cities that ordinary citizens dare not go outside. And a great Portman hotel is just that—Renaissance Center in Detroit is almost a complete city in itself, inwardturned and virtually sealed against the legendary squalor and violence of downtown Detroit. Indeed, it has what look like defensive outworks between its entrance areas and the city beyond. It's all uncomfortably like one of those self-contained cities planted on the face of an alien planet that were so common in SF, but it also summons up that persistent Wellsian dichotomy between the beautiful people in their beautifully controlled environment and the lesser breeds—violent or stupid—outside (or below) who toil to support them. And, hold it! Before your unquestioned liberal reflexes deprive you of understanding, let me report that all the really beautiful people inside the Renaissance Center that night were black, and that practically a third of the folks who were still strolling the terraces and bridges at 2 am, or sipping drinks among the ornamental plantings by the sparkling fountains, were also black. That's something that nearly all the regular intellectual future-fictionists (Huxley, quite as much as Wells) got wrong—supposing that privilege and racial stereotype will always be related to one another. But Wells—or possibly Portman—got the rest of it right. This is the city of beautiful paranoia to the life. To step into Renaissance Center is to step into the World of Wells. Perhaps the new cliche we are looking for needs the homophone pun on Puis/Puits, which works in French (whereas Then/Wells doesn't in English) and would give us Déjà Puis—Already then, or Wells Already. Valentino Simply Filed Away Real Los Angeles experts pride themselves on being able to walk you straight to the tomb of Rudolph Valentino without hesitation or false turns. (My own rating as an expert is given by the fact that I still make one wrong turn, the last one.) No doubt, nonexperts readily fantasise an image of the tomb, complete with an elderly veiled woman bending to place one red rose on the marble slab, amid all the rhetoric of Forest Lawn's funerary fantasmagoria. . . . Except that Valentino's tomb is not at Forest Lawn; in fact few of the Los Angeles tombs that matter are at Forest Lawn. No real, dyed in the wool (or died-in-theswimming-pool) Angeleno would be seen dead there, it's too touristy and too commonplace. After all there have been other Forest Lawns right across the states since the middle of the last century, and the accident of authorship that made this far-flung one the setting for Evelyn Waugh's Loved One, also made it an allegory of America, all America, as viewed through the shit-coloured spectacles of ingrained European prejudice. Forest Lawn is not L.A.—or rather it is no more L.A. than any typical bog-standard franchise outlet is, like McDonald's or Howard Johnson's. Quintessential L.A. lies buried elsewhere in Tinsel-town, and Valentino is—how shall I put it?—filed away in Hollywood cemetery, along with such other substantial relics from real life as the Chandlers and the Otises of the Los Angeles Times, and the 20 composing room workers who died when the anarchists bombed the paper in 1910. And Douglas Fairbanks—the Mary Pickford half of the tomb was still unoccupied, the last time I looked, but that lack of symmetry has presumably been remedied now. And General William Andrews Clark, who gave his library to the University of California, and other solid worthies. Now, General Clark's tomb is an exact replica of a small Roman temple, done in blinding white marble, reached by a bridge over a reflecting pool. It is a work of studied rectitude, of almost bourgeois conformity, and that really is the natural style of the Hollywood cemetery. The kind of cheapo whimsy you might so easily expect is hard to find there—almost the only example of note (noteworthy enough to appear in the publications of the semiotic fringe of architectural history) is the Bigsby monument, capped by its true-to-life model of an Apollo rocket, symbolising the vertical hopes of the defunct, and its two flanking inscriptions “Retired, by God" and "It was fun." That kind of yucko looks weirdly out of place in the Hollywood, where inscriptions tend to be as tersely proper as the architectural detailing of the monuments is correct. It is a field of regular urns and obelisks, temples and sarcophagi, under the palms and olive trees and—at our last visit—jacarandas at their fluorescently floribund crescendo. What, if anything, seems decadent about the Hollywood cemetery is a sense of a great style in incipient decay, and if you want to see that style at its full strength, untroubled by doubt or hesitations, then you must leave the Hollywood, go down Western Avenue to Washington Boulevard and turn up Mariposa, which delivers you straight into Rosedale Cemetery. And that is a stunner! Older than the Hollywood, it occupies a gently rising rectangle of land, and up through the middle of it winds a mighty avenue of palm trees. Never have I seen palms like these; the trunks as thick and close as the columns of a Doric temple, but a solemn matt black-brown in colour, crowned by heads of greenery that you hardly notice, so solid is the funeral pomp of the double rows of the trunks. They match the style of the tombs, which are tough-minded, uncompromising and proper. The names on the marble and granite are in raised letters that follow the styles of the great Victorian wood-letter type-books—Gothicks and Grotesques, lonics and Egyptians—their polished forms standing proud of the pick-tooled surface of the stone behind, and the imagination that shaped the tombs themselves gives form to the same defunct virtues of nobility, simplicity and primitivism. E. H. Jones, for instance, lies in a tidy little temple, but unlike General Clark's suavely precise Maison Carré, this one makes a point of appearing primitive. Its walls are of coarse, rock-faced rusticated stone, instead of smooth white-marble ashlaring, and its columns look curiously naked in their absence of details. But this is not ignorance or incompetence; every line and surface speaks of knowledge of that learned longing for a true, aboriginal architecture that runs back through the classical tradition through Sir John Soane and the Abbé Laugier to Serlio, Alberti and other theorists of the Renaissance. Just to emphasise the solid base of this memorial tradition, the Jones tomb is confronted, obliquely, by two monuments that would be gravely sensational anywhere. One is about 20 paces away, the other maybe five times that distance, and both are pyramids! The nearer, Shatto, is a properly primitive pyramid, again in rock-faced rusticated blocks of grey granite, sober, stable, self-contained. The other is black and highly polished with an “Egyptian" entrance and gilded papyrus capitals to its columns. The effect is almost shocking: here—O Isis and Osiris! among the dry sandy fields of southern California is what strikes the eye as an almost exact quotation from Karl Friederich Schinkel's famous Berlin Opera sets for The Magic Flute. I doubt it was accidental. Whether the iconography is meant to be Masonic, Mozartean or merely memorable, this cuts too close to the heart of one of the most profound and persistent burial traditions of the European intelligentsia. Never mind “everybody knows the pyramids"—including the one on every dollar bill—but not everybody knows about that ingrained preference for elementary geometrical solids (like the square pyramid or the cube) that grows out of German neoclassicism, and surfaces in strange places like the theories of Cézanne and the paintings of Paul Nash, and current nutcults about pyramids. Why we forget that tradition, I suppose, is that it is over-familiar; the pyramid and its skinny cousin, the obelisk, adorn so many European monuments that we can hardly see them anymore. We need to stumble on them in strange places; not necessarily in Rosedale Cemetery—Adolf Loos, the great, bent, Viennese architectural theorist of the turn of the century laid it down thus: when we find a mound in the forest, six feet by three, formed into a pyramid with the spade, we become serious and something inside us says, “Here lies. . . ." And that, said Loos, "ist architektur," and we had been sent to Rosedale to see an example of that dictum made real. But its impact—knowing, assured, impressive— was more than an illustration to a familiar quotation. It sat there, a thing in its own right, rich in allusion but self-sufficient in form, Whoever did it, did a classic. . . . Valentino? Well, he's actually in the Cathedral Mausoleum in Hollywood Cemetery; a decent, stiff but inoffensive classical building with an entrance in the middle of its long side. You go in the entrance, past about ten of the twelve stone Apostles, and turn down the second aisle on the left. The last transept but one on the right contains his mortal remains—box 1205. It's at about face level, right at the end next to the window. The bronze scutcheon bears only his name, Rodolfo Guglielmi Valentino, and his dates. The two standardised glass vases in the brackets on either side are pretty well crammed with roses, of which one is red, as legend requires. ## 233VALENTINO But the whole thing has that traditional European reticence (Peter Finch, gentleman, is at about knee-height on the other side of the transept) that has nothing to do with the “up front ersatz" fancies of Forest Lawn, but a whole lot to do with those two pensive pyramids at Rosedale. ## » The 1980s I N J A N U A R Y 1 9 8 0 , Banham transferred to California from the East— not to his old love, Los Angeles, but to a post in art and architectural history at the University of California at Santa Cruz. Up to then his teaching had been, almost exclusively, in architecture schools. He now relished the opportunity to look more closely at contemporary art as weli as architecture. And he was nearer to his new love, the American deserts, first discovered when he was researching the Los Angeles book. Now he could visit a different desert every weekend for his book Scenes in American Deserta, this time not curiously examining phenomena out in the great big world, but looking at the unexplained reasons for his own reactions to those hauntingly vast spaces. The extraordinary scenic beauty of Monterey Bay and the position of his house by the ocean were a constant nourishment, but he had been a big city person for many years, and when the invitation came to take up a professorship at the Institute of Fine Art at New York University he was surprised, delighted, and highly honoured. His tenure was tragically brief because of his swift terminal illness. His inaugural lecture was written in hospital and published posthumously in New York and London. It is included in this volume.—M.B. In 1988, the Design History Association founded the 'Annual Reyner Banham Memorial Lecture' at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. The lecture series is organized in cooperation with the Royal College of Art and the Victoria and Albert Museum. Banham was a founder member of the Design History Association, and one of the first to promote design history as an area of academic study. ## The Haunted Highway At Remsen Corners, Ohio, the electrical problem changed from chronic to acute (possibly terminal) and left us stranded with a flat battery and an almost dry tank outside a filling station that was neat, shiny, highly coloured, fully equipped—and shut! Public holidays in the States are often observed with a fanaticism that overrides even commercial zeal, and not only was the gas station locked up, but the classic white wooden American farmhouse next door was curtained and empty—they'd even taken the dog with them. Nothing but silence and a light dusting of hoar-frost over the spreading flat fields and a grey-white mist. In fact, help was but ten minutes' walk away, and we were repaired and awheel again by ten the next morning. But before we got into our stiff-upper-lip routine and set about salvaging our situation, we stood by the back bumper of the car and had a short psychological slump; and in that blank pause, the freezing silent desolation seemed to bite into our awareness of the whole continent. Far and fast as we drove, the mood stayed with us almost to the Pacific coast. America in a trance—or just unplugged at the mains. After Tulsa the mood acquired elegiac overtones, and sustained them for almost 1,500 miles to Barstow in California. For the whole of that distance, Interstate 40 is haunted, dogged, mocked almost, by the mouldering remains of one of the great highways of modern legend. Just what this was all about didn't fully strike me until our first meal-stop out of Tulsa. We ate at a laconic, plastic, biker-movie sort of lunchroom next to the frozen pool of one of the two fairly grotty motels in the middle of the place, which otherwise seemed to consist of two or three filling stations and a thin line of houses and behind them, the inevitable mist-bounded circle of flat, frosted fields. But just as we were pulling out of town, I saw this sign, "El Reno Correctional Center," and something went click. El Reno on Route 66! Yes, El Reno on that "legendary highway thru' the sick psyche of the hitch-hikin' nation." That legendary highway that will officially cease to exist next year, but has already died by obsolescence and replacement along most of its hallowed length. Legal extinction will never equal the traumas and emaciations of partial abandonment, however. Where Sixty-Six physically survives it is usually—as at El Reno—in short loops and parallels to Forty, like the oxbows of an old river, furnishing services to the new Interstate. When you see the “Gas, Food, Lodging" sign you pull off Forty, ,and there they all are on a bumpy stretch of historic Sixty-Six. The whole classic desert section from Seligman to Kingman in Arizona, taking in Valentine and Peach Springs, has now become a 90 mile oxbow of this kind. Even more affecting (if you have any Soul of the Road in you) are the short sharp stretches, mostly in the Texas Panhandle, where they haven't yet built the last links of Forty, and traffic is suddenly forced back onto the physical remains of Sixty-Six whether it needs food, fuel, or not. And there you are, unexpectedly tooling down the main drag of somewhere like Groom, Texas. The only enduring physical structures in Groom are the tall grain-elevators by the rail-tracks that parallel Forty/Sixty-Six for ever and ever. All other structures in Groom are low, crumbling, accidental, ephemeral—cement-block motels, streamline filling stations, Moderne cafes, all with large, but battered illuminated signs, their plastic as crazed and broken as the stucco on the buildings. Groom clearly wasn't built in a day—more likely, in the two hours before dawn on the day the legend of Sixty-Six was born. And it will die with that legend; not because the mystic number Sixty-Six has been taken away from it, but because fewer and fewer Americans in the future will be able to cram all their worldly goods in the back of the waggon, scratch “L.A. or bust!" in the dust in the back window, and drive, drive, drive into the golden sunset. Groom's doom prefigures in the gasoline-short USA that is to come, and its warning was repeated wherever old Sixty-Six got close to Forty, like a skull by the trail, or a tomb by the Appian Way. The last such memento mori was at Ludlow, in the Mojave Desert. That is the absolute end, the last grim stub of Sixty-Six before Forty itself is extinguished by Interstate 15 at Barstow. There was one coffee-shop in working order, but everything eise along that bitter end seemed to be abandoned gas-stations with wheelless cars in the forecourt, or vandalised cafes with not a sheet of glass in their windows, but the black-leatherette bar stools still in place along the counter, and even the napkindispensers still gleaming nickelled through the dust and debris. So the glory is departed—no more hitch-hiking Gls with their bed-rolls, no more grizzled philosophers with a big dog in the truck behind them, no more golden girls in MGs, no more migrating families with “their all in the U-Haul" hitched behind the Plymouth, no more Easy-riders with their tall "Ape-hanger" handlebars, no more Volkswagens with New Jersey licence plates and surfboards racked on the roof. . . . They are still around, in fact. We saw samples of practically every legendary denizen of the Interstates, but the sense that they may soon be gone was ever-present; that the whole Road-America culture was crumbling—as at Groom—or cocooned—as at Remsen Corners—waiting to be rediscovered by historians or archaeologists of a distant, or even near future. Very near future. They're at it already, as anyone will know who has come across a copy of David Macaulay's Motel of the Mysteries (Hutchinson). A Brit, now teaching at Providence, Rhode Island, and an architect by training, Macaulay has a useful list of semi-humorous books of busy, well-informed drawings behind him (Cathedral, Pyramid, City, and so on) that have become the staples of school architectural history courses. About three years ago, however, he came up with a book/exhibit called Great Moments in Architecture that revealed a fully developed satirical wit, a tendency to draw mock-Piranesis and a preoccupation with Pompeii-as-Las-Vegas. Motel of the Mysteries is the first full-scale display of this new Macaulay. Telescoping Pompeii, the Tutankhamen show and European contempt for motel culture (remember Lolita?), it does the standard fourth-form lavatorial jokes about archaeologists misconstructing ancient sites and artefacts. Some of it is very funny, much of the antiarchaeologist stuff is almost in the same league as Anglo-Saxon Attitudes (even the erudition is almost up to Angus Wilson standards), and the whole thing is uncomfortably like—if not Groom—then, say, Amarillo, Texas. It is just possible that the next, and last, motel to be built on Sixty-Six off Forty in Amarillo might be called the Toot'n' C'mon. (I told you the humour was fourth-form, didn't I?) However, Motel of the etc, represents the motel in its mature, developed form. What's weird about places like Groom is that much more primitive motels can be discerned there, abandoned or still in use. And not just Groom; on another trip and another highway, I have stayed in motels that were not so different from the one in the great first-ever motel movie, It Happened One Night. And at times like that, being a historian to the marrow, I have wished that some Pevsner of the Interstates had written a multi-volume The Motels of America, giving dates and attributions and off-the-cuff critigues: “Overwrought plastic window-trim on street front. Splendid sculptured shag rug in tones of orange in front office. Textured blue ceilings. Original 1956 ice-machine in back courtyard." In the meantime, Americans on the Road by Warren James Belasco (MIT Press) is another implicitly valedictory work, a first stab at that “decent book on the history of motels," that people keep asking after, though its subtitle, “From autocamp to motel, 1910–1945," reveals that it is really a pre-history of the building type, and stops just at the point where true motel-culture, and the legend of Sixty-Six, begins to emerge. The strength of the book, which has a guaranteed place in all American Studies libraries, is that it is a thorough-paced social history of Americans awheel and the civic and commercial installations created for their comfort and accommodation. It has a real treasure chest of a bibliography, and will be welcomed by academics. And that's what's wrong with it, too. It smells of the study and the lamp, not of those boring, sweaty, interminable miles of dust and sun glare between Denver and Topeka in high August, or that feeling that there is no escape from Nebraska, on which so many travellers comment. I get no sense that Belasco ever smelled the lure of sheer distance in some clammy pre-dawn parking lot in Terre Haute, Indiana, or felt that characteristic slumping of the muscles as you steer the car into its appointed parking space under the tall Days Inn, or Motel 6, sign after 700 miles of dark-todark driving. Instead there is a slightly toffee-nosed air of superior wisdom after the events: "Maybe motorists took the wrong path. Instead of escaping to the road, perhaps they should have looked for answers closer to home." And maybe Christopher Columbus should never have set sail; perhaps James Watt should have made tea with that boiling kettle, instead of inventing the steam engine. . . . Where this sense of ivoried unreality is most disturbing, however, is in Belasco's over-tidy expository diagram of his historical process, which goes: random camping, 1910–20, municipal camps, 1920–24, pay-camps, 1923–26, early motels, 1925– 45. These time slots are, of course, based on scrupulous documentation, but if you take especially the middle two out of the library and into the field where people are clearing sites, laying concrete, building brick toilets, adding cabin units, and stuff like that, then those three or four year intervals are too short to be credible. If there were recognisable motels by 1925, then there were probably primitive motel prototypes as early as 1920. Belasco himself records cabin-building as early as 1922, and it would take a finer-tuned legal mind than his to determine just where to draw the line between a “camp" with a few cabins, and a small “motel" with tent-sites. Motel practice clearly anticipated the motel concept, let alone the coining of the word, as early-twenties rural entrepreneurs grappled with the problems of ripping off the passing motorists for fun and profit. Belasco's historical apparatus is too pat, too neat an academic mechanism to look convincing outside the cloistered groves (actually the Library of Congress) where it was assembled. Somewhere on one of those service-loops of Sixty-Six, in the corner of the lunchroom of a crumbling stuccoed motel, there must be an old-timer in faded fatigues and a three-day stubble who can recall, in the B-movie phraseology that old-timers really do speak in the west, where and how it all began: "Just by the grade crossing outside of Williams (or Ash Fork, or Essex, or Winslow), mister, round about Twenny or Twenny-one, just a few Maw-and-Paw cabins, run by a couple name of Johnson, or Jackson . . . Jimson? Don't rightly remember, but anyways. . . ." They're real, I've met them, given them lifts. They're all like Walter Brennan, and they do the essential Boyhood of Raleigh numbers for travellers on the haunted highways, except that they describe a past that is here, not a future out there. Someone (i hope) is already taping their memoirs; certainly the recording of roadside artefacts and buildings has been going on ever since Ed Ruscha first published Twenty-Six Filling Stations, and that was 15 years ago. There is, too, a Society for Commercial Archaeology which seems to specialise in documenting stainless steel diners. So it's all happening, and perhaps this is what the U.S. will have instead of industrial archaeology, Coalbrookdale and the Iron Bridge. However, I don't intend to be around when they begin the Big Digs at Ludlow or Groom. Macaulay can record the patient sifting through smashed formica and rumpled chrome strip in search of sundae glasses and syrup dispensers, and Belasco can write it all up in a historical scenario that no one now living in those places could recognise. For myself, I would much rather be around when the archaeologists stumble on that perfect, sealed time-capsule at Remsen Corners, every nut, bolt, wrench, tyre, spark plug, oil can, shining in its appointed place, even the rescue truck, a-gleam with chromium, neatly slotted into the only piece of clear floor-space large enough to accommodate it, the locked pumps outside with their hoses coiled just so, like soldiers at ease on parade, rapt out of time in a pool of frosty white silence broken only by the very, very faint hum of the fluorescent security-lights inside. I know where the music died.