# Dead on the Fault To the memory of Maria Antonia Castro, says the small square slab at my feet, Wife of F. A. MacDougall, died 30 May 1855, aged twenty-five years. She was a niece of General José Castro, sometime Governor of the state, and commander of rebel cavalry who had defeated John Fremont and the legendary Kit Carson. . . . Put foot to ground in San Juan Bautista, and you tread on the early history of the State of California! Tough history even for a well-connected woman like Maria Castro. She was already widowed, and ailing, when she married MacDougall. He cared for the declining twelvemonth of her life, and inherited the task of raising her sons. He also inherited huge areas of real estate, which he promptly sold off at a smart profit in California's first land boom. The history you tread out here is, above all else, the history of the anglification of a traditional ranchero economy, and a declining mission culture. For Maria's memorial is in the floor of the north aisle of the last and greatest of the California missions, the only one that is still self-supporting, not an embalmed ward of the state, and now the focus of deep, fierce and inscrutable Hispanic sentiment that even the most crass of outsiders cannot but sense. We began to hear about San Juan as soon as we came to this part of the world—a shrine; a truly magic place; a real centre of people-energy, man; exquisite; the essential mission. Not all of that may be apparent at first approach, through the usual agribusiness mess and dusty sidestreets of your average small town in "Steinbeck country" (the TV version of East of Eden was largely filmed in San Juan Bautista) but as you penetrate deeper the style begins to change—false-front stores, galleried adobes, fancycarpentered Anglo houses, all suggest that this must be a town where the second half of the last century failed to happen. And that's about true; like Stamford in Lincolnshire, San Juan was a coaching town (a team-change on the Butterfield Stage) that the railways ignored. Time did not stand quite still, however. The ranching economy survived, and the flat valley-bottom was put down to intensive market gardening, and the town, pocketed in a ring of pretty hills, evolved very slowly, keeping its extraordinary live links to the past. The silver mines up the canyon may have failed, but the last mission Indian did not die until 1973, and the long tradition of the church has delivered the mission into the 1980s looking, sounding, even smelling unlike any other. It is large, and its three-aisled plan is almost unknown elsewhere among the Spanish missions. Like all big adobe constructions, however, it is solid, lumpy and nowhere quite upright. Yet it is rendered graceful by delicate country-rococo painted garlands on the massive square columns between the aisles . . . decorations that apparently still follow the designs and colours of the original work, done by an Irish carpenter who jumped ship in San Francisco, and finished up married to yet another Castro and Hispanicised as Felipe Santiago (not bad for Tom Doak!). The three ponderous adobe vaults also give the mission church acoustics so stunning that local choirs and orchestras compete decorously to perform here, but the music I am hearing right now, as I stand with my left foot by Maria Castro's modest memorial, comes from the fiddles, trumpets and deep-backed guitars of the Mariachi Caltecas, for this is the midday Mass of the Day of the Dead, one of the two great annual festivals of San Juan Bautista. The other is the Fiesta Rodeo, the celebration of the ranchero culture—equestrian parades and clattering harness all hung about with silver ornaments, the caballero gear that has snobs and yobs alike filling the plaza outside the mission with western hats, the rodeo itself, and then the streets running with beer and piss at night and the stores boarded up against the ritual violence. El Dia de los Muertos is different——but that doesn't mean that it's anything like Eisenstein's Que Viva Mexico either! It is relaxed and a bit arty and more bucolic and very friendly (gentle even) though quite loud when the music gets going, and “historical" in the demotic California sense that people dig heirloom suits and uniforms and velvet gowns out of the mothballs and, cheerfully heedless of whether or not they are matched for period, stroll around in couples like the extras on Main Street in a routine western. Quite half of them will have their faces made up (masks are rare) as Deatn's Heaas and will have forgotten about it before midday, so that one has weirdly normal conversations with street vendors, uniformed officers of the peace, local dignitaries, parking attendants and strangers, all looking like death and perfectly cheerful about it. Ordinary folks, with their kids, will be mostly picnicking or listening to the music in the Plaza, a regular rectangle of grass about the size and smell of a smaller English village green: One side of the Plaza is entirely occupied by the external arcade of the mission; the lower end is closed by the Plaza Hotel and the ancient home of the Castros (from whom there is no escape hereabouts, it seems!). Across from the mission stands an enormous false-fronted livery stable, then the Zanetta house with its outside galleries, its palatial pretensions and its large upstairs ballroom, and the only other building on that side, at the upper end, opposite the entrance to the mission church, is the so-called Dressmaker's Cottage. The fourth side of the plaza, between the cottage and the church, is without buildings. Instead, a double row of trees stands along the top of a short, steep drop to the flat valley bottom. The rodeo grounds are down there, and the tiered seating for rodeofanciers is simply built down the slope, a natural grandstand. But this is no commonplace declivity; it is the local manifestation of the most portentous geological feature in all California—the dreaded San Andreas Fault! Whatever else is marvellous, magical and unique about San Juan is given heightened impact, profounder emotional charge, by the visible and unavoidable presence of this slumbering threat of that ultimate doomquake that occupies the thoughts of every Californian for some part of every waking day. On this cheerful day of the living dead the symbolism is so obvious that you can't be bothered, but the threat is always there under the trees and sunshine. Meanwhile, the mass is over and the crowd is drifting down to the low end of the Plaza, where a platform for speeches has been set up in front of the gap between the hotel and the Castro adobe, for this is no ordinary Day of the Dead. After years of work the state parks service has finished (at last!) the restoration of all the secular buildings that front the Plaza. Last night there was a great fandango danced on the newlyrepaired maple floor upstairs in the Zanetta house; today there are ceremonial discourses from the mayor, the priest, the man from the parks—and from someone who has been visible and omnipresent all day, a stocky Hispanic figure conventionally dressed in jacket and slacks, shirt and tie, but with a splendid flat-brimmed hat worn rakishly low on the brow: Luis Valdez! Valdez? The name should mean something to members of the bien-pensant left, even outside North America. While it would be bizarre to describe him as an Hispanic Joan Littlewood, there are similarities and he admires her work. His Teatro Campesino is an historical consequence of the road-and-field politics of the grape-picker strikes in the sixties that made César Chavez a world figure, and its style is song-and-dance agitprop. It is also loud, energetic and funny. If you have seen his regular musical Zoot Suit, then that is not Teatro Campesino (being more of an adult West Side Story) but might be described as an urban equivalent that replaces the folk, mythic and rural strains of the Teatro with street-smarts and big-band pizazz. The real Teatro Campesino, country-bound in spite of its sophistication and deep literary sources, has found in San Juan a near perfect operational base, within striking distance of both big city resources and campus creativity but close to the surviving roots of whatever makes Californian Hispanic culture something distinctive, and in the visible presence of the agricultural labour that made it politically necessary. And it was clear, as the day progressed, that the Teatro, as embodied by Valdez and his busy aides, is now a kind of third force in the town, making it a community energised by powers spiritual, temporal and theatrical. The physical presence of the Teatro is not normally conspicuous, their permanent stage is half a block off the main drag, at the back of the Jardines de San Juan restaurant, but on this Day of the Dead one was aware of their animating activity behind practically every public act—the place has more style than is halfway decent for so small a community! Just how the three powers feel about one another is not altogether clear—this, after all, was a day of goodwill and welcome to all—but one had the feeling that Valdez might just take over completely one day, and make the place a permanent festival that would put Spoleto and Salzburg right in the shade—or that what would crumble when the Fault terminally stirred itself, would just be an elaborate stage set, the quake itself an ultimate production number or comic act of audience participation, leaving the church with the authorised Apocalyptic script, but no one left to play it! For the present, however, as the afternoon grows late, the triumvirate of church, state and theatre holds its productive equilibrium, to the clear advantage of the town, for such is the international clout of El Teatro Campesino (who at one point persuaded Peter Brook that he should act, not just direct) that they have been able to bring to this almost unknown country place the last goody of the day, the prestigious Folcloricos group from Mexico City. A few hundred souls are still sitting on the grass, listening and eating; the “historical" costumes are still strolling around the perimeter of the Plaza, and from the upper gallery of the Zanetta house, we can see the other little miracle that makes San Juan magical. Beyond the trees on the fault line; beyond the rich, flat valley-lands, the modest dry-grass hills that enfold every view from the town are beginning to take their sunset aspect, the low golden light modelling their humped outlines and sharp valley like draped green velvet. You can see that almost anywhere in Steinbeck country, but around San Juan they seem particularly artful, irresistibly fetching. Could this too be Valdez's fault. . . . O, Bright Star.. . . . . of constabular authority, resplendent on the uniformed bosom of the female deputy sheriff who had just meticulously hand-checked my carry-on luggage. Hand-checked— no x-rays or metal detectors; they keep up the ancient skills and value-systems in that high inter-mountain country where Marlboro Men roam in their pick-up trucks and elegantly-worn blue denim. Indeed, it's all so macho and hairy-chested that you have to wonder how they ever managed to deputise a woman. . . . Musing on these matters while waiting for Sagebrush Airways flight 665 to whisk us away to less arid climes, I watched her go back into her office and close the brown plywood door behind her. On the door was a very much enlarged version of the same star of authority, about 18 inches across, presumably a plastic decal to go on the side of a patrol car. This badge of authority bore looking at: like all good sheriff stars it had points, six of them. The points had round knobs on their extremities, and the triangular spaces within them were filled in with distinctly Victorian foliate decoration. And there were words, laike Sheriff and Robson County, on scrolls, surrounding the Great Seal of the State in the centre. It is not often that one has a chance to study such an object in magnified detail like this—to get an equally good look at the one the deputy was wearing I would have had to lean close enough to get myself arrested. Neat, I thought; fascinating. But the pleasure of seeing a sheriff star under a microscope, as it were, was suddenly terminated by a dread thought which persistently afflicts all those who profess the trade of design-historian: Who designed it? Sheriff stars can't just happen; some person or group had made decisions, based on taste or tradition, standing orders or divine revelation, and had thus determined its form and iconography. And I had no idea who. Similar horrors of ignorance have doubtless afflicted persons of my calling confronted with the bright-work on British bobbies' bonce-cosies, or the heraldry on the reverse of Maria Theresa dollars, or all that squiggly stuff around Her Britannic Majesty's Principal Secretary of State inside the front cover of your passport, but I was stuck, there and then, with the problem of who designs sheriff stars. It's taken a long time to find out, because a certain reticence surrounds the whole topic. There is no literature that I or our indefatigable campus library staff have been able to turn up, and bare-faced inquiries directed at law enforcement personnel tend to get very dusty answers—don't ask a policeman, because he will immediately suspect the worst; there are far too many unlicensed stars and badges in circulation already. In the end, it was the sheriff of Salinas, caught with his guard down when my credentials were up, who broke the silence and told me where his department went to buy their insignia, and this lead (the appropriate cliche, you'll agree) led me to Acme Star and Badge Co, and that's not their real name either, but the company's reticence is catching. Actually it led me in the first place to a telephone conversation with the company secretary, who sent me their catalogue, which confirmed that I had indeed got on to the right kind of operation, and then to an extended conversation with the proprietor, which confirmed that I had also got on to an enthusiast—to put it very mildly indeed. I probably should have guessed this last from the rhetoric in the trade-literature I had already received: “All of our badges are hand-made and use silver solder for ribbons, attachments etc, and these consume enormous amounts of silver. Since our solders are 45 per cent and 66 per cent silver these costs reflect ultimately in the price. "We could change our methods of construction and utilise lead solder but that would just make an inferior product, and in this plastic world quality will not be eliminated at Acme Star and Badge Co. The only companies that remain in business are firms that are serious about their craftsmanship." In this plastic world. it turns out, about a dozen companies in the whole of North America are serious enough about their craftsmanship to have survived, four of them here in California, and mostly firms about the same size as Acme, with an output of less than 10,000 pieces a year. Not quite a cottage industry, then; more like the little maisters in Sheffield, only in this case spread across a continent. Not that the premises were anything like Sheffield, when I got to them: three 1920ish single-storey shop units on an island of older development amid all the urban renewal in downtown Oakland. The firm was founded before the turn of the century, but has only been on this site since 1971, when it was urban-renewed out of its old building, and the present proprietor has only been in charge since 1968. The entirely convincing air of unshakable traditionalism that pervades the operation may thus be no more than an optical illusion by now (the old shops must have been comfortably wellworn before they moved in) or it may be generated by the process of manufacture, as we shall see. The first impression on entering the front office is that you have walked into a badge freak's paradise. In the glass display case on the wall are some 100 badges and stars, some labelled as being from the early 1900s, while under the glazed top of the counter opposite are another 120 or more, loose on jewellers' trays. Pay-dirt for the badge design-historian, but how to mine and refine it? The more you look at this board the less sense of orderly stylistic or technical development you can discern. Some of the most ornately Victorian are clearly recent, some of the most obviously modern-movement, in plain undecorated silver with stern sanserif lettering, are among the oldest on display. Perhaps we are looking at a world of design that has become timeless, frozen out of the tides of fashion. But if that is so, then whence the very large variety of different designs, not at all the narrow range that would normally come from a static vernacular? The answer, again, lies in the production process, which is in itself something of an historical monument. The raw stock is bronze strip, plated with the appropriate gold, silver or alloy on one face, and the blank star is punched out on it on a Roussell punch—which, like most of the machinery employed, comes from Providence, Rhode Island, another bit of American traditionalism. The blank is then taken to a Standard Machines die-press, and the foliated decoration in the points is bashed into relief on it. Three or four thumps are needed to make the embossing deep enough, and since the metal work hardens, it has to be taken away and annealed between thumps, acquiring a coating of oxide that dulls it to anything but a bright star. Then another thumping press raises its centre into a dome, if that is what's required. The lettering is drawn on by hand, meticulously with a sharp-pointed scriber, to ensure its just spacing and proper arrangement before it is punched into the metal with hand-held letter-punches, a small hammer and finicky precision. This done, the recessed letter-forms are filled—in a positively mediaeval way—with a slurry of coloured ground glass and water, and popped into a minute and non-mediaeval electric oven in order to fire the slurry into enamel. The now more-or-less complete badge or star comes out of the oven looking like an archaeological relic, all blackened and biotchy. But some smart fettling by hand, before it goes into a tumbler to be sloshed around with a quart or two of steel balls to take out every minutest scratch or blemish, and out comes as supernaturally gleaming a star of authority as you could ever hope to see. Now, this technology permits someone to do quite a lot of designing without ever having to put pencil to paper. Where dies, ribbons, etc, are compatible, a good deal of mix and match is possible—decorative devices can be selected, rejected, omitted, for instance, or the same infill patterns can be applied to stars with or without knobs on their points, the whole thing could be domed or flat, and so on. The possible variations are, theoretically, a mathematical product of the numbers of compatible dies, and there are supposed to be at least 300 assorted dies on the shelves along the workshop wall (it looked a lot more to me) and there are thought to be about the same number in the “archive" or “mausoleum" of abandoned patterns. Currently, Acme are recovering old designs from the archive and finding them saleable, which is one reason for the historical confusions. Another is the fact that rather few absolutely new designs are being created from scratch because they have lost their old die-cutter, and failed to find anyone trained to work at his bench, in spite of advertising as far afield as Germany. They can farm out their die-cutting, but I got a distinct impression that they don't really care to do that; it would be a concession to the plastic world, somehow. Whether the cutting of totally innovative designs was ever common I now take leave to doubt, and at the moment it is patently unnecessary. For the foreseeable future, Acme should be able to cruise along on its large visible stock of existing designs and variations, and the hidden assets of the mausoleum—especially in the present conservative (not to say nostalgic) climate of opinion out in Law'n'Order-land. That still leaves the design-historian with his ultimate problem, however: accepting that dayto-day designing is done by choosing motifs from catalogue and archive, where did those motifs come from in the first place? Are they all variations from some unique original sheriff badge, some kind of Urstern or Platonic Idea shining untarnished in the dawn's early light of American lawenforcement? It would be tempting to think of it as something profoundly simple and unadorned, but that temptation should be resisted because—as far as I can ascertain—such a badge would have been made in the early 1850s (when New York police are first described as wearing stars) and would therefore be likely to be crusted with early Victorian ornament, acanthus leaves flourishing in every point, plaited borders on every edge, droopy scrolls for the lettering—something like Acme's present No. 646 as worn by the Oregon Highway Patrol, perhaps. I doubt we will ever know: the origins of this prized emblem are probably lost behind a jungle of foliation, borders, state seals, scrolls, ribbons, heraldic beasts, sunbursts, republican eagles . . . and bitter arguments about whether to have five, six or seven points. Those arguments are still proceeding, or something very like them—while l was perusing Acme's stock of stars and badges, the company secretary was on the phone, burning the ears off someone at a local YMCA about the arrangement of the lettering on their official seal: “No way; the Founded 1897' should go around the bottom of the circle, right? Then the ‘YMCA' goes across the middle, and 'Commerceville' goes around the top, OK? Oh, you're welcome, but you shoulda asked me first 'cause I could have told you all that stuff." I think I heard an official seal being designed. If I'd hung around a bit longer, perhaps I might have heard a sheriff star being designed? Within a settled idiom, design does not necessarily require drawings, but that's something they dare not tell you at the Royal College of Art or its American equivalents. It's only originality that needs drawings! ## Stirling Escapes the Hobbits Moriturus Caesar . . . and all that. About to die, I salute the editor of New Society for allowing me to do it all over his columns. My death will be at the hands of the Paranoiat (or Taste Police) and its instance will be my praise of the new addition to the Staatsgalerie in Stuttgart. That addition is the work of James Stirling, Michael Wilford and Associates—and as anyone will know who keeps up with the English highbrow weeklies (professional, intellectual or satirical), the only approvable attitude to James Stirling is one of sustained execration and open or veiled allegations of incompetence. At first sight that is odd. His disaster rate is about average for super-star architectural practices in Britain in the last two decades, and he has done nothing remotely as obscene as the Hunslet Grange housing estate in Leeds. But that counts for nothing in this argument. He has put up buildings in Oxbridge, where the Hobbits of the intellect can see them (they can't see Leeds—"North of Banbury, isn't it?"), and for being thus visible he will never be forgiven. So my doom was probably sealed as soon as anybody knew I was off to Stuttgart. Disinformation was readily volunteered about Stirling's art gallery. The roof leaked and the walls were so damp that plants were already growing out of them. The external cladding was having to be replaced two months after the opening, and was covered in protest graffiti anyhow. The only graffito I could find on arrival looked like a spoof by the management, and the rest had apparently been removed by magic. The cladding story had to be grudgingly disavowed by the editors of the Architects' Journal, the story about the roof could not be checked on the spot, and the veritable plants growing out of the walls had been put there on purpose as part of a classicising joke about Piranesi's engravings of Roman ruins. The doubts expressed about the actual gallery spaces I can share to some extent. But the design of all gallery spaces these days is very moot, and Stirling was unlikely to please everybody. For me it was less that the means and mechanisms of the lighting were too visible above the glazed ceilings, but that in combining ancient forms— rectangular plan, coved cornices and central lanterns to admit light—with the wide spans made possible by modern structural techniques, he had created spaces that were almost disorientingly expansive. I felt an awfully long way from the artworks at times. But galleries as such are a very small part of what museums need nowadays. What they usually need most desperately, when they expand out of their earlier accommodations, are all kinds of auxiliary spaces that lead up to the point where art and public finally confront one another: everything from cloakrooms to conservation laboratories, by way of lifts for the disabled and small auditoria. About all this kind of stuff I have no complaints of substance within, and really nothing but praise without. Indeed I have to say that I was almost knocked out by a level of sustained inventiveness and poised wit that I haven't seen in a new building for a long time. The site demands inventiveness anyhow, not just because the new work has to make visual and functional sense in relation to the older museum alongside, but because the ground slopes up fairly steeply from the Konrad Adenauer Weg in front to the Urbanstrasse behind. The solution, basically, has been to put the galleries round three sides of a square courtyard at the top, with the open side of the square looking down over a series of terraces which contain all those necessary etceteras that support the exhibition of the art——in this case, literally support. So far this is only a bit more than functional and sensible. Where the design takes off into the realm of inspiration is in the management of a circulation problem peculiar to the site. The pedestrian way up from the Weg below to the Strasse above begins by ramping across the faces of the terraces, then plunges into a deep rotunda in the centre of the gallery courtyard, climbs around half its perimeter, and finally passes through a narrow slot in the highest parts of the building to emerge at upper street level next to a couple of enormous high-tech air intakes. The rotunda is the real key to the design as the visitor experiences it. Serving as a sculpture court for the whole museum, it also brings light down into the back of the entrance hall below. Glassless windows in its upper parts enable museum visitors to look down on both their fellow art-fanciers and those who are merely crossing the site; and to admire the ingenuity with which the two circulation patterns never actually interfere with one another, nor does the public foot-way constitute any threat to the security of the museum itself. All this big sweeping geometrical terracing and its monumental intruding cylinder would be handsome and clever even if it were finished only in standard, value-free modern white. Stirling being Stirling, however, it isn't finished in anything of the sort. The walls are mostly covered in what appears to be multi-hued sandstone masonry, rising at gallery level to huge, plain, coved cornices—an Egypto-Zaüberflote touch that is echoed in the pair of dumpy-Doric columns between which one enters the rotunda from below. The ramps have enormously fat Kandy-coloured handrails in pink and blue, the entrances are sheltered by greenhouse-roofed canopies suspended on constructivist-looking steel bracketing, and the entrance proper, once you have gone inside, proves to be floored in a yelping garden-green compound that has been the talk of Germany for months. Such free-form bravura may sound like the usual post-modernist omnium-gatherum of eclectic historical details, but isn't. Stirling is not only one of the most visually erudite architects of his generation but—like Le Corbusier, his first hero—is also extremely observant of things which are not particularly architectural, and can turn practically any of them to architectural effect. If the visitor to the Staatsgalerie will look around him at the city beyond with only moderate attention, he will see that with barely a couple of major exceptions—the pit-head gear re-deployed as a lift shaft, the aforementioned Piranesi plantings on the top of the rotunda—the details seem to come from the museum's immediate urban surroundings. Stuttgart is—in its civic and governmental moods—a stone-faced city, given to large, serious cornices and the like. The segmental-arched window openings that Stirling employs so freely, are equally freely employed throughout historical Stuttgart. But the greenhouse-roofed canopies at the entrances are the local downtown bus shelters. Where the museum's less grandiose minor accommodations break out above the stone-faced terraces, or up at the back of the site, they display the regular yellow stucco (and even the dotty round windows) that were the commonplaces of Stuttgart's rebuilding after the air raids at the end of the second world war, the vernacular townscape of Fassbinder's Maria Braun. In modern architecture, this sort of thing used to be called “cribbing," especially by Stirling and his mates who made no bones about it (“Okay, then, historian Banham; name my influences!’). But when the post-modernists and other wets of academe moved into the act, it was elevated to the status of typology or contextualism. What Stirling and Wilford have done at Stuttgart could just about be called typological in the sense that it looks something like yer typical art gallery, and contextual in that it looks something like its context—ie, the neighbourhood. Contextualism, however, has been increasingly taken to mean looking so nearly exactly like the neighbourhood that no one will notice that you have done a new building at all, and that is what recommends it to Young Fogey pundits of the David Watkin/ Roger Scruton neo-conservative tendency. Stirling can do that number, too, as his extensions to the Architecture Building at Rice University in Houston testify, all looking so like the blandly third-rate architecture to which they are attached that you don't immediately twig what a first-rate piece of work he has done. The relationship to the Stuttgart context isn't like that at all. This is a big bold building, commanding on its site, respectful of the older museum next door as one professional to another, and—above all—a sort of celebration of the city of Stuttgart itself, and its architectural traditions—including the proud place it occupies in the mythology of modern architecture because of the manifesto houses by practically every accredited Hero of Modernism that survive from the exhibition of 1927 on the hill of Weissenhof overlooking the city. The ultimate strength of Stirling's design, as William Curtis pointed out recently in the Architectural Review, lies not in its classical references, but in its underlying discipline of modernist compositional methods. Stirling himself is prone to compare the plan with that of Berlin's Altes Museum, because of the central rotunda. But the way everything else is put together goes back to the more formalist aspects of Modernism, such as he was taught at Liverpool in the forties. It is on the basis of this inward strength that he can compliment the city of Stuttgart by making what are very highlevel architectural jokes about it, and for it. The best of these jokes is that the necessary ventilation for the car parking under the lowest terrace has been made by way of a couple of “accidents" to the front wall. Gaping holes have been made where blocks of stone have apparently fallen out, and there they are, lying half-buried in the grass by the sidewalk—and everybody in that well-informed city knows that the exact location of each “fallen" block, and the exact degree of its burial in the grass, were meticulously designed by Stirling and Wilford, and equally meticulously executed by the German builders. They like that kind of wit in Stuttgart, where the well-known proverb, “A German joke is no laughing matter," has a special meaning, it seems, which Stirling is able to tapas no German can. This is a building that could only be built in Germany, but no German could have done it; only someone with Stirling's special relationship to that culture. At which the Oxbridge Paranoiat will doubtless exclaim, "Then, why doesn't he go and stay in Germany for good?" (Like "Why don't all you bloody socialists go and live in Russia?") That is actually the wrong question on the right topic. It should be: How can so quintessentially English a Liverpudlian Scot as Stirling only find architectural happiness outside his native isles? The immediate answer would have to be: "Budget." As Michael Wilford said recently of the demise of their scheme for Columbia University in New York, "We are expensive." But good budgets are a product of will as well as affluence, and tend to come from clients who want architecture, not just square footage of floor area. German culture, since about 1800, has seemed to want architecture, and to attribute to it almost magical powers, both in civic and cultural life, and in the Bildung of the individual human being. No wonder those who saw Stirling at work on Stuttgart, and in meetings or the site, report that he has never seemed so cheerful, so relaxed. He needs the break. Who knows what the Oxbridge hobbits will try to do to him when his Tate Gallery extensions are opened? Fiat The Phantom of Order Last year's grand international consultation (don't ever call it a competition) on the future and re-use of the old Fiat car factory at Lingotto in the inner suburbs of Turin, was demonstrably a gilt-edged occasion, since the exhibition of the proposals, mounted in the abandoned building itself, the sumptuous accompanying literature and all the associated manifestations clearly cost a pretty lira or two, and the architects consulted included our own James Stirling and Sir Denys Lasdun, as well as other heavy-duty talents from both sides of the Atlantic. Like the equally grand consultations to find an architect for the second Getty Museum in Los Angeles, it may prove to be one of the major architectural events—or possibly non-events—of the past year or so. But why all the bother? Locally, the issue seems to be simply that Fiat is Turin, and Turin is Fiat. The company embodies and symbolises the industrial power of the city, and the factory commemorates all that labour history and union politics that have marked the long years of the love-hate relationship between Fiat and its workforce. Indeed, one reading of local history would insist that the plant was built in its very straightforward concrete-and-glass form in "deliberate and concrete response to the factory occupations, the demand for syndicalist control, the workers' councils." More than that, however, the Lingotto plant is just the biggest thing in town. A single building four storeys high and half a kilometre long, with a press shop and other ancillaries at either end that bring it up to almost the full kilometre, it outbulks even the most grandiose of Turin's baroque monuments. Its disappearance would not only remove a big piece of local history, a memorial, a symbol, it would also leave a huge hole in the skyline along the via Nizza. It would also remove a building whose unique position in the history of modern architecture cannot be equalled anywhere in the world. Hence the international interest of which Fiat is so acutely aware. Yet it was the work of no great or famous architect, and the name of its designer—Giacomo Matte Trucco—seems to attach to no other building that is known at all. Nevertheless, its status has been that of a masterpiece ever since it began to be known in 1920–21. It got into all the forward-striving books by people like Le Corbusier immediately, and into English language texts by the likes of Lewis Mumford within a decade. For this rapid acceptance there are two reasons, I think: one is that it fulfilled a modernist myth; the other is that it had a terrific gimmick. The gimmick is the most obvious attribute of the building. How else could it be a gimmick if not obvious, even if it is a travesty of the designer's intentions to call it one? The building has a high-speed test-track on its roof! Two 500 yard straights are linked by high, embanked curves at either end. The track is reached by spiral ramps of extraordinary ingenuity—and beauty—that thread their way up through floor after floor. The undersides of the ramps are reinforced by concrete beams that radiate from the columns around the central well like the ribs on the underside of water-lily leaves. They were in all those Anglo-Saxon books in the thirties, but in the twenties all the real modernists had already been up the ramps and had then had themselves photographed standing on the roof. The photographs of D'Annunzio, Marinetti, Le Corbusier I have seen recently; those of Gropius and Owen Williams (the engineer who gave you the Empire Pool at Wembley, the Daily Express building, and those appalling bridges on the first section of the M1 motorway) I have not seen for some time, but I bet they are all in Fiat's comprehensive archives, together with those of everybody else who ever was anybody in modernism. Including, recently, myself. It was a weird experience—like finally arriving in the Sistine Chapel, Niagara Falls, or somewhere else that you've heard about since ever. But it was radically different in that this is the one you must arrive at by car, and experience from a car. To do it any other way would be almost a blasphemy, like arriving at a pilgrimage church in the Middle Ages with anything but bare feet. The Fiat company car came up the ramp, slowly enough for me to enjoy the structural ingenuity going on all around, and finally emerged through a narrow slot round the back of one of the bankings and there was that famous view of 500 yards of rooftop straight, stretching ahead to where the banking curved up to the left at the other end. It was exactly like all those commemorative photographs, and I almost expected to see the ghost of Corbu standing there with his white pants, black jacket, glasses and briar pipe (though I now know it is quite a different ghost who has the best claim to walk the circuit of that roof). Round that famous circuit we went—and after one single lap you knew why Fiat gave up using it for serious testing. A high-speed track it emphatically is not. Even a modern Fiat, with all that clever suspension geometry underneath and good Pirelli rubber wrapped round its wheels, is in tyre-squealing, body lurching trouble on those banked curves even at a modest 6Okph. The curves are desperately tight, and have to be or the track wouldn't fit on top of the building. But something seems to be unsettlingly askew with their geometry, too, as you come on and off the banking. What all this must have been like in the early twenties, when Fiats stood tall on their highpressure “knife-edge" tyres and artillery-style springing but could, every one of them do better than 70k . . . well, exciting, that's for sure! Which is what the whole design is about anyhow—the excitements of the automotive age. Giovanni Agnelli, the boss of Fiat when Lingotto was conceived in 1914, wanted an American-style factory like Ford's famous (and even longer) plant at Highland Park in Detroit. But what separates Lingotto from American plants of the same period that I have been studying recently, is sheer rhetoric. The American plants are useful and fairly cheap facilities for manufacturing things in. Fiat, which is uncannily like an American concrete-framed building in all its details, is also a public statement about modern manufacture, about modernity itself. Marinetti hailed it (of course) as "the first invention of Futurist construction." He got it wrong. Had he known what he was talking about, he would have had to damn it with the foulest epithet in his inflamed vocabulary: passeiste. By the time Lingotto and its ramps were finished in 1926, it was already becoming passé by American standards, for Henry Ford was getting out of multi-storey Highland Park, and moving more and more of his operation into huge single-storey tin sheds at the River Rouge. Lingotto was really a monument—a memorial to a myth of modernity, and of America as the home of modernity. The racetrack on the roof was the final and necessary symbolic flourish, like the stone laurel wreath on the head of a statue. That last simile I have borrowed more or less directly from Edouardo Persico, the most intelligent, eloquent and tormented of the younger Italian architects who perished under the Mussolini regime. Disappointment was probably the core of his torment. As the youngest member of Musso's pioneering embassy to the Soviet Union in 1923, he must have hoped that the fascists would keep open the links between their radicalism and that of the left, but he was barely back from Russia before he had the first of his political troubles and found himself in jail. From then until his death in 1936, he had the sort of existence that can be immensely productive in both designwork and writing, yet remains somehow marginal to real life. For part of that time, he actually worked at Lingotto. Out of that experience he produced, in 1927, his first architectural writing. It is an extraordinary piece of work, dominated by the sheer bulk of the building, and its intimations of a secret order beyond the human: Atop the building, the test track is like a king's crown, and just as a crown symbolises some essential and dominating Idea, so here the car and its speed are celebrated in a form that presides over the work of the factory below, not only in terms of the rationality of utility, but also according to some secret standard that regulates the ends of things. A mysterious logic of harmony—which the architect has followed intuitively as a sign of authority—has elevated the track to the summit of a work of man; much as the authority of a crown on the head of a king transcends the merely human face below, and weighs upon it with the force of a dominant rule. I don't think this has anything to do with the Divine Right of Kings—however well such a concept might have suited Agnelli, I/ Re dell'Industria—but it has a lot to do with the desire for a comprehensible sense of order in a disorderly world, where the old rules of God had been banished and replaced by . . . well, nothing, except the dictates of a rationality bent to the service of madmen like Mussolini. An order beyond human lunacy had its desperate attractions. Persico describes the workers waiting to enter the plant for the morning shift: They do not speak, they do not move as they would in other human assemblies; they wait. All things are already in order, nothing can be changed; everything obeys an order which is not the expression of human will, but of a wisdom submissive to the Laws.They await the Laws; they are a people still confused, without order, an image of humanity without rules . . . they have more need of order than of bread. As one who, long ago, used to stand amorphously in a waiting crowd, silent in front of the gates of quite a different factory, I can vouch for the observational truth of that. I don't, however, buy that apparent appeal for order at any cost, even though I know that it is not an appeal for the corporate order of the new fascist state but more likely an amalgam of Persico's disciplined Catholic upbringing, and the Ordine Nuovo, “a just society, an orderly society, made up of equals," imagined from prison by Antonio Gramsci, the only other Italian thinker of the period whom I find as sympathetic as Persico and organiser of the syndicalist occupation at Fiat after the first world war. But in the abandoned hulk of Lingotto, that thirst for order is an ever-present factor. Those vast empty floors, almost purged of signs of human use or occupation, and inhabited only by endless rows of square concrete columns that stretch to apparent infinity, obeying no visible law save those of perspective . . . See, it's catching! The phantom of order conjured up by Persico will not go away now for me. On the roof, even if I can't take the test track too seriously, it seems okay to be yer regular cheerful modernist, but in the body of the works, a different order . . . damn, there it is again . . . seems to prevail, and here Lingotto is superficially very like its American predecessors. I have seen the inside of a lot of abandoned American industrial real estate over the last few years in the course of my researches, and I kept catching that quality, long before I re-discovered that Persico text. Cleaned and abandoned, with vast windows and endless rows of regular repetitive columns, these clean well-lighted spaces have an uncanny and deeply reassuring calm. The noise and bustle of production, the bulging accumulations of racked products, have long departed. All that remain are rational frameworks for human activities—awaiting their orders. But even in what remains of Ford's “Old Shop” at Highland Park, the only American site that has anything like the historical importance and cultural consequences of Lingotto, they are just neutral containers for which alternative uses, if any, will be found by the normal mechanisms of the market economy. Lingotto is not just a neutral container. Too much cultural weight, too much selfconscious pursuit of modernism, too many quests for the order of the Laws, still haunt its 70 year old concrete. Whatever their real motives, Fiat are perfectly right to propose that its future be taken out of the hands of the market. But I see in none of the competition entries—sorry! consultative proposals—much real sense of that phantom of order which Persico left to stalk its echoing floors and which ascends by the two spiral ramps to the track that crowns the whole enterprise with a “a concrete image of speed . . . where nothing may deny the car."