# Modern Monuments In many an attempt to make learned (as opposed to common) sense of the new Lloyds Building, and other examples of High Tech architecture, one will read references to some mysterious Maison de Verre. But what “House of Glass" is meant? Everybody knows that Modern Architecture is “just a bunch of glass boxes," so it could be anything or nothing. Or is it perhaps a Platonic ideal; some pure conception of the ultimate glass box that has been trying to get itself built ever since Modernism came in? Retrospectively it almost is just that—if you look for a comprehensive prototype for all the mechanistic romanticism and engineer-styling that comes with recent British High Tech buildings, you are liable to find yourself falling backwards through time until you soft-land in the late twenties, touching down in the Septième Arondissement of Paris, outside an uninformative gate in an equally anonymous standard Rive Gauche facade, where you have to address an electronic squawk box to be admitted. Inside, you confront a wall of glass bricks set in concrete in a black steel frame at the back of a standard Paris-type courtyard, with two steel ladders flying up on either side, and some massive floodlamps carried on clever steel brackets. Even if you know it from photographs, the physical presence is still a shock in that traditional-type context. This is not modern architecture as it is generally understood; not the modern architecture of Gropius, or Le Corbusier, yet it is unmistakably “modern" in its materials, its aesthetics, the kind of earnest life-style it implies. It's as if its architects, the French Art-Deco superstar Pierre Chareau, and the Dutch modernist, Bernard Bijvoet, had invented an alternative Modernism to the one that is in all the books, and that is why the Maison isn't in those books; not in Giedion, not in Pevsner (which is probably why it isn't in Banham, either; I caught up with it later), not in Hitchcock, nor all those lay-person's “introductions" to modern architecture. It appears briefly in Tafuri's revisionist Modern Architecture, and in William Curtis's equally revisionist text under the same title. But—sensationally—it's not in Frampton's Modern Architecture; a Critical History, even though he has made himself the world expert on the house. Known and admired it is still “un-assimilated to the canon." In a way, it almost threatens the canon, which is probably why it is so much in vogue at present. The interior, in particular, is not only a knockout, but it suggests even more forcibly than the façade how Modern might have been quite different. On the ground floor are doctor's consulting rooms but they are not in the standard chrome-and-glass iconography of Modernist hygiene; there's wood, and the metal is black. Everything is rational but different; sliding doors rotate on hidden pivots, screens concertina away on curved tracks. From the consulting level you go upstairs—at a low angle on a light-metal open-riser staircase that is mounted on a hinge at the top and sliders at the bottom, with low hand-rails spread so wide that they seem intended only to catch you if you fall off!— and at the top you come into what must be one of the greatest rooms of the 20th century, irrespective of style or period. It is two storeys high behind that wall of glass bricks, which becomes a wall of light when seen from inside. Photographs make the room look too tall and too dark; whereas the reality is marvellously luminous and spacious in all directions. The furniture is stolidly well-made Art Deco wood, but everything else is strictly "Machine Age." The originator rubber floor is still in place and intact, though it looks its age; exposed steel columns rise through the space, jointed with dozens of hefty nuts and bolts—but partly clad in expensive marble! Electrical conduitry and switchgear are all in view but the main light-fittings are partly concealed and heating comes out of metal grilles in the floor and every cubic inch of wooden cabinet work is carried in skinny black metal framing that is a continuation of the handrails around balconies and stairs. And it is all lovingly handcrafted, as if even the metal was cabinetmakers' work. It shows how good modern architecture might have been if it had been properly made! And, looking at all that neat black metal, some of it perforated even, you can see only too clearly where so much current black and perforated High Tech furniture (the stuff you see in Astrohome in Covent Garden) had its origins. The wheel of fashion has creaked around, and the house that didn't fit the canon a decade ago is now the house that everyone wants to see. Which is very tough on doctors trying to practise on the ground floor and the descendants of Dr Dalsace (who built it), trying to live on the upper floors. This happens to all inhabitants of great modern architecture, of course—some owners of houses by Frank Lloyd Wright in Chicago suburbs really do keep a sawn-off shotgun handy, because their openlawned front yards don't give any protection against marauding architecture buffs. This whole issue of public access to private dwellings that are monuments in the history of culture is something you don't have to be called Bedford or Bath to know about, but there is a twist in the case of the Maison de Verre: can a work of such determined Modernism be historic, a monument? It is surely a contradiction of the intentions and nature of Modernism for its products to stand around long enough to become monuments anyhow, even if some of the exhibits in the Museum of Modern Art in New York are over a hundred years old! I still get a funny feeling whenever I write a phrase like “the modern tradition" even though I know it stands for something real, and I think that at least one of the reasons why we have been having the “crisis of modernism" that gets academics so excited at conferences is that we are faced with the problem of forcing a lot of anti-historical material into historical categories that it was deliberately designed not to fit. The problem is worse when the monument in question is as private unto itself, as independent of the institutionalised movement of Modernism, as the Maison de Verre. You can see this clearly enough if you contrast its case with that of Weissenhof Siedlung, in the suburbs of Stuttgart. Built in 1927 as a public demonstration of modern housing, master-planned by Mies van de Rohe, it is not so much “assimilated to the canon," it is the canon. Its white-walled, flat-roofed buildings by Le Corbusier, Mies himself, Gropius, J. J. P. Oud, Peter Behrens and others, including mystery men like Mart Stam and rank expressionists like Hans Scharoun, represented the first major rally of modernist architects, the first all-modern community whose townscape one could walk about in. This past summer, at my third visit, there was nothing casual, dis-regardful or bashed up about the Weissenhof scene as there had been when I first visited it after the war. The great German Kulturschutzmaschine has taken over; all is now neat and tidy, the buildings put back like 1927. All that saved it from being completely mummified and spooky was that the restoration work was not absolutely completed; the famous apartment block by Mies van de Rohe was only half done, and one could sneak into the unfinished parts where the crews were still at work, and see original structural steel exposed, original brass handrails, even original bath-room tiling, and those horizontal strip windows that still give such spectacular panoramic views over the ring of mountains that frames the city below. What else saved it from being a total mausoleum was that people actually live in it, hang ludicrous chandeliers in their living rooms, put cheerfully wrong curtains in the windows, hang surprisingly provocative underwear out to dry, and generally behave like living Volk. The effect, for me, was very strange; it is good to see quality buildings being given the upkeep they deserve but is the embalmed result modern any more? I think not—unless you treat Modern as just another historical style, like Rococo or Flamboyant, which is very definitely not how any self-respecting modern architect, dead or alive, has ever regarded it. The problem seems worse in architecture than in the non-constructive arts—Finnegans Wake, for instance, has been procrusted into the canon of great literature it set out to mock rotten—but the persistence of the classic (oh?) monuments of architectural modernism is of a different order, and they defy “interpretation" in ways that other arts do not. Great works of architecture—and ancient ones tend to be as resistant as modern ones—seem to populate the history of western culture in a nonconforming mode and on a different time-scale that together make nonsense of the seamless web of “Zeitgeist." Impressionist painting, impressionist literature, impressionist music, even impressionist sculpture—but impressionist building? Only at the expense of voiding the word of usable meaning. Could it be the same with Modern, and that the “permanent masterpieces" of modern architecture operate under a different rule book in which the canon is almost irrelevant, so that the houses on the hill of Weissenhof can sit around being public, canonical and kulturgeschichtlich, and the Maison de Verre can go on being private, uncanonised and category-proof, without being any the less significant for being so unconformable? Or will the Maison de Verre turn out to be the basis of an alternative canon? More and more architecture pundits have lately been running this up the proverbial flagpole to see if anyone else is paying attention. The usual format of the argument, made explicit in the catalogue of the massive exhibition Vision der Moderne, das Prinzip Konstruktion, at the Deutsches Architektur Museum in Frankfurt this year, is that historianpropagandists of modern architecture got the Zeitgeist twisted, and propagandised a style (that was to become canonical) of closed volumes, simple geometrical forms and smooth surfaces, while offering to trace its ancestry from objects like the Crystal Palace and the Eiffel Tower, that were open-work, complicated and less smooth than rugged. If High Tech is that ancestry reasserting itself (and Lloyds looks very much like it) over the established canon, then the Maison de Verre has its uneasy place as the first example of a modern architecture true to its claimed parentage. But does even that make it a permanent monument, like, say, Stonehenge?