In the modern world, human life experience is largely played out in interior spaces. We may love the out-of-doors for the open air and sky, for the escape it offers from life inside enclosure, but the very joy of being outside reflects the reality that so much of life is spent inside. Most of the time, most of us live inside a house, a flat, or a room. We sleep, eat, cook, bathe, and spend free time “at home”—that is, inside. Work takes place in an office, a factory, a specialized work space such as a hospital, concert hall, museum, school, or college . . . the list is endless. There have been human beings on earth, scientists now estimate, for about 1.7 million years. The detailed record of events and developments that we call “history” stretches back for only about six or seven thousand years. There have been many speculations about when and where people first learned to use shelters and what the earliest habitations were like. Early shelters existed to provide the interior spaces that offered comfort to their inhabitants. Those interior spaces influenced the lives of their occupants. Interior design, whether professional or not, is an aspect of life that is impossible to escape. In addition to the domain of one’s own home, the interiors of the homes of friends and relatives, of offices, stores, restaurants, schools, hospitals, transport vehicles, and every other sort of place where modern life is lived, make up the modern world as we know it. It is obvious that people in bygone times had a different life experience in large measure because they occupied interiors that were different from those that are now commonplace. To consider for a moment the life of a medieval serf living in a farm dwelling, a knight in a castle, a monk in a monastery, the lord and lady in an eighteenth-century mansion, a Victorian family in a city row house brings to mind a life pattern based on the spaces created in such past times. Social, economic, and political realities also influenced life in the past and these forces have had major impact on built environments. Buildings and their interiors are planned to serve the purposes and styles of the times of their origins, but they exert their influence on the activities and lives that they house as long as they continue in use. The study of interior design, its development and change through history, is a useful way both to explore the past and to make sense of the spaces in which modern life is lived. Professional interior designers are expected to study design history, to know the practices of the past in terms of “styles,” and to know the names and the nature of the contributions of those individuals who generated the most interesting and influential approaches to design. Since the interiors that one might wish to visit are scattered across the globe and often difficult to access, it becomes necessary to turn to photographs, descriptions, and, increasingly, film, television, and the internet to gain an insight into the history of humanly constructed interior space. The sheer number of books on the subject and the variety of emphasis can make a coherent history of interior design difficult to extract and understand. The purpose of this book is to deliver in one volume of reasonable size a basic survey of six thousand years of personal and public space. Development of such a book is inevitably beset by a number of complications. Interiors do not exist in isolation in the way that a painting or a sculpture does, but within some kind of shell—a hut, a building, even a ship or airplane. They are also crammed with a great range of objects and artifacts: furniture, lighting, textiles, ## Preface sometimes art. This means that interior design is a field with unclear boundaries, overlapping as it does the realms of construction, architecture, art, the crafts, the technologies of heating, cooling, ventilation, lighting, water and drainage equipment, and what is now called “product design,” in the forms of appliances, plumbing fixtures, and other kinds of equipment. The number of interiors that have been created over time, even the number currently in existence, is staggering. The author of one compact history is thus faced with a vast range of choices about what to include and what to exclude. No two writers in this field will make the same choices and the decisions made in writing this book are those of the writer and are based on the following assumptions: 1. Interiors are integral to the structures that contain them. This means that interior design is inextricably linked to architecture and can only be studied within an architectural context. 2. Owing to the vast geographical spread of human design activity, coverage in this book is necessarily limited to emphasize Western, that is European and American, design practice and its prehistoric origins. 3. Making a selection of interiors for discussion and illustration requires the acceptance of certain criteria. The examples chosen in this book are either aesthetically outstanding in their own right or epitomize a certain time and place in history. Some examples are so well-known that they require inclusion (the Pantheon in Rome and the cathedral of Chartres, for example); other examples are chosen because they are unusually well-preserved or because they illustrate the work of a particularly interesting or important designer. Along with discussion of wellknown “important” examples, there is also attention to the “everyday,” vernacular design of historic periods. 4. Enclosed spaces such as ruins, ancient sites, and open courtyards are given due consideration even though the sky may be their only ceiling and they are therefore not strictly interiors. 5. Quotations from primary sources are included in “Insights” boxes within a number of chapters. These offer some sense of the contemporary view in the work of particular periods. The reader is encouraged to seek further discussion of periods, examples, personages, and related subjects to whatever extent curiosity and interest allow. The bibliography provided will serve as a guide to books that offer extended coverage of innumerable aspects of interior design. Best of all, of course, is visiting the spaces that are of interest. While time and expense will limit such visits for most readers, seeing some examples that are closer to hand will fill out the limits of any book and offer a richer experience of the realities of interior space. ## Preface to the Fourth Edition John Pile had a career of more than five decades as a respected designer, author, and teacher. Facing the challenge of revising what is probably the most important and influential of his 12 books is not a task I took on lightly. John’s narrative of architectural and design history is essentially as accurate and readable as when it was first written, requiring only occasional additions. Most are factual—companies no longer in business, architects or designers no longer living. The most obvious change has been the replacement of many black-and-white images with color, and the inclusion of several new illustrations. Editorial revisions are primarily in the latter chapters: adding information from the closing decades of the 20th century that has become apparent with the perspective of distance, projects that have proven more significant than they seemed when first built, and designers omitted in the original text. In recent years, dramatic social change and unprecedented advances in technology have reshaped the world, generating an explosion of new design and altering the ways in which design is planned and implemented. Architecture and interior design are now practices with ethical issues, no longer free to exploit and consume natural resources, the results of which have irreparably damaged the world we inhabit. Interior designers, along with urban planners, educators, and governments have assumed new responsibilities as form-givers of the built environment and implementers of social change. These changes called for an entirely new chapter—a separate narrative dealing with developments affecting interior design during the first decade of the 21st century. These developments have crystallized into several perceptible directions, though no dominant style trend; indeed, the global nature of today’s design world suggests that the time of a “one size fits all” aesthetic vocabulary is past. It remains to the decades, and the centuries, that follow, to decide whether the innovations of this century prove timeless, timeworn, or something else. Some designs from this turbulent era will be relegated to the margins of historical narrative, but the best of them, hopefully most of those documented in these pages, will become icons of the future. Though it faces radical change, the future of interior design seems increasingly broad and undeniably bright. I hope that I have been able to effect a smooth transition from one century to the next, and from one author’s view to another’s. I think that John would have approved. – Judith Gura, December 2012