## Glossary ## Guide to Pronunciation Pronunciation guides for selected terms appear in parentheses. Strongly stressed syllables are shown in large-size capital letters; lightly stressed syllables are shown in small-size capital letters. Most of the symbols, which use ordinary letters or combinations of letters, should be selfexplanatory. The following may need clarification: a cat ah father, clock ay date, play dh that, mother e net, berry i it, big igh ice, light kh Bach n French bon (shows that the vowel is nasalized) ng think, sing oe French deux, German schön oh open, cold ou sound, cow u put, book ue French rue, German über uh cup, about, bird, paper zh measure, beige abacus The topmost block of a Greek Doric column capital. acanthus An ornamental leaf element surrounding the capital of a Corinthian column. Adirondack style (AD-uh-RAHN-dak) Interior and furniture style developed in the American Adirondack mountains using rough tree branches. adobe (uh-DOH-bee) Brick made of dried earth and straw. Also structures built of this material. adze A heavy chisel-like long-handled tool. Aesthetic movement 19th-century British art and design movement. agora (AG-uh-ruh) The open market square of an ancient Greek city. aisle A passage at the side of the nave of a church. alignment Prehistoric arrangements of large stones in straight lines. ambulatory (AM-byuh-luh-TAWR-ee) A passage around the sides and rear of the chancel of a church. andiron (AN-digh-uhrn) One of a pair of metal stands used to support logs in an open fireplace. andron A vestibule parlor near the entrance of an ancient Greek house. apse (aps) The semicircular end of a basilica or church chancel. aqueduct A bridge structure supporting a water channel. arabesque (AR-uh-BESK) A light and flowing surface decoration. arcade A series of adjacent arches. arch A structure of wedge-shaped blocks bridging over an opening. architrave (AHR-ki-TRAYV) The lowest horizontal band of an entablature. archivolt (AHR-ki-VOHLT) A molding on the face of an arch following its curve. armoire (ahrm-WAHR) A movable wardrobe cabinet with door front. arris (AR-is) The sharp edge formed where two surfaces meet. Art Deco (AHR(T)-DAY-koh, -DEK-oh) A decorative style of the 1920s and 1930s using elements intended to suggest modern technological developments. Art Nouveau (AHR(T)-noo-VOH) A late 19th-century stylistic development using flowing curves and nature-inspired elements to replace historic decorative elements. Arts and Crafts An aesthetic movement of the latter half of the 19th century in England, led by the teaching of William Morris. ashlar (ASH-luhr) Building stone cut in regular rectangular blocks; walling made up of such blocks. astragal (AS-truh-guhl) A small concave molding, often ornamented with carved beads. asymmetry Avoidance of symmetrical balance. atrium (AY-tree-uhm) In ancient Roman architecture, the central open courtyard of a house. By extension, any central open space. attic The upper story of a building; interior space beneath a roof. aubusson (OH-bue-SAW<sup>n</sup>, OH-buh-SAHN) A handmade French rug or carpet with a flat weave. Axminster (AKS-min-stuhr) A traditional carpet construction using a cut pile of wool in a wide variety of pattern and color. baldacchino (BAHL-duh-KEE-noh, BAL-) A canopy supported by columns, usually above an altar or tomb. ball and claw foot A decorative element at the bottom of a furniture leg in which a carved claw grasps a spherical ball element. ball foot A decorative element of spherical form at the bottom of a furniture leg. baluster (BAL-uh-stuhr) A post or column supporting a handrail. Baroque The architectural and design style developing from the latter phase of the Renaissance. Spaces of complex form with elaborate decorative detail are typical. barrel vault A masonry vault of semicircular form. Also called a tunnel vault. barrow An ancient tomb in the form of an artificial hill. basilica (buh-SIL-i-kuh) Originally, an ancient Roman courthouse of a type that became a Christian church, having a high central nave with lower aisles on either side. bas-relief (BAH-ri-LEEF) Sculptural carving of a flat surface in low relief. batter Inward slope of a vertical wall surface. Bauhaus (BOU-hous) A German school of art and design of 1919 to 1932. Under the direction of Walter Gropius the school was strongly influential in the development of modernism in all aspects of design. bay A unit of a structural system using repeated identical elements. bay window A projecting window element. bead and reel A carved ornamental treatment using alternating elements of semi-spherical and semi-cylindrical form. beam A horizontal element providing structural support. Beaux-Arts (boh-ZAHR) An architectural style developed at the French school of art and design in Paris, the Ecole des Beaux-Arts. bentwood A technique of forming strips of wood into curves by applying steam heat and placing the softened wood on molds. Furniture made by this technique is designated as bentwood. bergère (ber-ZHER) A low upholstered armchair developed and used in France. beton brut (bay-taw<sup>n</sup>-BRUET) The French term for exposed reinforced concrete. Biedermeier A German 19th-century style of furniture, combining Neoclassical and provincial elements. bilateral symmetry Design using elements in two symmetrically placed locations. blockfront Furniture unit with a three-part front, projecting on either side and recessed in the center; a popular type with 18th-century American (especially New England) cabinet makers. bombé (bahm-BAY, baw<sup>n</sup>-) French term for furniture using outward-swelling curves. boulle (bool) Metal and tortoise-shell inlay work as developed in France by Charles Boulle. box (finger) joint Wood joint with interlocking projecting teeth. breakfront desk A furniture unit made up of an upper bookcase with a projecting desk below. broken pediment A pediment with a central opening. brownstone Soft brown sandstone. Also, buildings of this material. brutalism (or new brutalism) Modern architectural style using massive elements, usually of exposed concrete. bureau à cylindre (bue-ROH-ah-see-LA<sup>n</sup>-druh) Writing desk with cylindrical roll-top closure. burl Decorative veneer made from wood with irregular growth patterns. buttress A element of masonry structure providing bracing or support. (See also flying buttress.) cabriole (KAB-ree-OHL) A curving, tapered furniture leg. caldarium (kal-DER-ee-uhm) Chamber of ancient Roman bath for hot steam bath. canapé (KAN-uh-PAY) French term for a couch or sofa. cantilever (KAN-tuh-LEE-vuhr) A horizontal projecting beam or other structure supported only at its inward end. Cape Cod cottage A much-imitated colonial American house-type of one story, with a gable roof. capital The top element of a classical column. Carlton House desk An 18th-century English writing table with small drawers and compartments lining the back and sides of the writing surface. Carolean (KAR-uh-LEE-uhn) The English style of the time of Charles II. Carolingian (KAR-uh-LIN-j(ee) uhn) The Romanesque style of France and Germany from 750 to 1000 C.E. Carpenter Gothic American Victorian carpenter-built structure using Gothic decorative elements cut from wood. caryatid (KAR-ee-AT-id, KAR-ee-uh-TID) A column used as a structural support carved in human form. casement window Window with side-hinged sash. cassapanca (KAS-uh-PANG-kuh) Italian Renaissance ornate chest with paneled back and arms so that it can also be used as a bench. cassone (kuh-SOH-nay, -nee) Italian Renaissance elaborately carved chest. cella (SEL-uh) The enclosed chamber of an ancient Greek temple. centering Temporary wood structure used in building an arch or vault. chaise (shayz) Side chair. chaise longue (SHAYZ-LAWNG) A chair with an extended seat area usable as a lounge. chancel (CHAN-suhl) The sanctuary area of a church or cathedral, also called choir. chevet (shuh-VAY) A grouping of chapels around the choir and ambulatory of a Gothic cathedral. Chinoiserie (sheen-WAH-zuh-ree) Use of decorative elements derived from Chinese traditional design in 18th-century France and England. chintz A plain weave cotton textile with a decorative printed pattern, usually glazed. choir The chancel area of a cathedral or church, originally occupied by the choir of monks. Churrigueresco (CHOOR-ee-guh-RES-koh) Spanish Baroque design of 1650 to 1780. cimborio (sim-BAWR-ee-oh) Spanish term for a lantern or elevated structure above a main roof to permit window openings. clapboard (KLAB-uhrd) Exterior building siding using overlapping horizontal, flat boards. clerestory (KLEER-stawr-ee) Windows or openings in the upper part of a wall. cloister Enclosed open courtyard of a monastery. Also, by extension, a monastery or convent. coffer A hollowed out panel in a ceiling, vault, or dome. colonial Design from a period of colonial history, especially American work before 1776. colonnade A series of columns. commode A piece of furniture containing drawers or shelves. compression A force tending to squeeze or compress materials to which it applies stress. Consulate style French decorative style of the Napoleonic era. corbel A projecting element supporting a structural element such as a beam or the base of an arch. Corinthian (kuh-RIN-thee-uhn) The most elaborate of the Greek and Roman orders of architecture using a grouping of carved (acanthus) leaves around the capital of each column. cornice The topmost element of an entablature or any projecting element at the top of a wall. coro The choir of Italian and Spanish Gothic or Renaissance churches. cove A concave projecting molding or element, a trough or recess. Craftsman Movement American design and furniture style based on Arts and Crafts movement in Britain. credenza (kri-DEN-zuh) A horizontal cabinet with shelves or drawers. crocket Ornament using projecting form based on foliage. crossing The intersection of nave, choir, and transepts in medieval church and cathedral design. cruciform Having the shape of a Latin cross. crypt An underground space below the floor of a church or cathedral, often used as a chapel or burial place. curule (KYOOR-ool) Ancient Roman seat intended for person of high rank. dado (DAY-doh) Lower portion of an interior wall with a special finish; also, in woodworking, a groove. Danish Modern 20th-century decorative and furniture style developed in Denmark. Dante chair (DAHN-tay, -tee) Italian Renaissance folding chair using stretched leather for seat and back. deconstructivism In late 20th-century architecture, design making use of broken and separated elements. Decorated The second period of English Gothic architecture (14th century). dentils (DEN-tlz) Tooth-like projecting decorative details used in Ionic and Corinthian classical architecture. desornamentado (des-AWR-nah-MEN-tah-doh) Late Spanish Renaissance decorative style using minimal decorative detail. De Stijl (duh-STIGHL) A Dutch movement (1917–31) of early modernism in art and design. Directoire (dee-rek-TWAHR) French design of the post-revolutionary period (1795–1804) emphasizing ancient Roman decorative elements. di sotto in sù (dee-SAWT-taw-in-SOO) Ceiling painting in perspective with upward-looking illusion. dolmen A prehistoric grouping of stones made up of two or three upright stones topped with a horizontal. Probably part of an ancient tomb. dome A circular vault derived from rotation of an arch; may be hemispherical, flattened (saucer dome), or elliptical in plan. Doric The simplest of the Greek and Roman classical orders of architecture. dormer A projection on a sloping roof providing location for a window; also, a window placed in such a projection. dosseret (DAHS-uh-RET) A block placed above a column capital, often supporting arches above. dovetail A woodworking joint using interlocking elements of tapered form. dowel A round pin fitted into matching holes to join two elements; also a type of joint used in carpentry and cabinet making. dravida A style of temple architecture in southern India. drop-leaf desk A box-form desk with a down-swinging panel to form a writing surface. (Also called a fall-front desk.) duplex An apartment or flat of two stories. Dutch bed A bed fitted into an enclosing alcove. Early English The earliest of the periods of English Gothic architecture (13th century). Eastlake style A florid Victorian decorative style introduced by Thomas Eastlake. echinus (i-KIGH-nuhs) The round element of a Doric column capital at the top of the column and below the abacus. eclecticism The borrowing of design from various earlier periods, common in architectural and interior design of the first half of the 20th century. egg and dart A decorative detail used to ornament molding in classical architecture with alternating egg-shaped and dart-like elements. Elizabethan English design period corresponding to the reign of Queen Elizabeth I (1558– 1603). Empire A period of French Neoclassical design corresponding to the reign of Napoleon (1804– 14). entablature (in-TAB-luh-chuhr, -choor) The horizontal band supported by the columns of classical architectural orders. It is made up of the three elements, architrave, frieze, and cornice. entasis (EN-tuh-sis) The swelling or outward curvature of the shaft of a classical column. Etruscan style Decorative style based on early ancient Roman precedents. exedra (pl. exedrae) (EK-suh-druh) Room or other area of semicircular shape intended for conversation. Expressionism Art and design style striving for emotional expression. fan vault A vault with many ribs radiating in a pattern suggesting a palm fan. fasces (FAS-eez) An ancient Roman symbol of imperial power, in the form of a bunch of sticks tied together. The form was revived in decorative design of the Empire period in France to symbolize the power and ambitions of Napoleon. fauteuil (foh-TUH-ee) A French Renaissance upholstered armchair with open arms. Federal A period of American architecture and design (1780–1830) following the colonial era. feudal system The governmental system of medieval Europe based on the holding of land and the authority of a hierarchy of rule. finial (FIN-ee-uhl) A top or crown ornament. Flamboyant The last period of French Gothic architecture (14th to 16th centuries) characterized by elaborate flame-like decorative tracery. fluting Carved parallel grooves as used on the shafts of classical columns. flying buttress A buttress of half-arch form, spanning over an open space to a point where pressure is applied to resist the thrust of an internal vault. folded pilaster A pilaster fitted into a corner by giving it bent or folded form. fresco A painting done on wet or damp plaster using tempera colors. frieze (freez) The second or middle band of a classical entablature and, by extension, any horizontal decorative band. frigidarium (FRIJ-i-DER-ee-uhm) Chamber of ancient Roman bath containing a cold water pool. frosting Decorative surface elaboration suggesting cake icing. Futurism Italian art and design style of the 1920s featuring movement, mechanization, and speed. gable The triangular end wall of a structure with slanted roofs. gambrel roof (GAM-bruhl) Gable roof having two angles of slope, steeper below and flatter above. gargoyle (GAHR-goil) A projecting water spout carved in fantastic form. gate-leg table A table with hinged leaves supported by swinging its leg(s) out. General Grant style American Victorian architectural and decorative style of the time of Ulysses Grant’s presidency (1869–77). Georgian The style of the English and American periods corresponding to the reigns of the English kings George I to George IV (1714–1830). ger see yurt. gimp Upholstery trimming of thin braids of fabric wound around a wire or cord. gingerbread Informal term for elaborate Victorian surface ornament. girandole (JIR-uhn-DOHL) A decorative candle holder, often a mirror with a candle holder on either side. Glastonbury chair An English Tudor folding chair with X-leg base. Golden mean A ratio or proportion in which the smaller number is to the larger as the larger is to the sum of the two, or A:B = B:A + B. Golden Oak style American furniture style of the late 19th century using brown colored oak. Gothic The architectural style of the later Middle Ages characterized by the use of pointed arches. Gothic Revival A 19th-century style in which the forms of medieval Gothic architecture are used. Greek cross A cross having four arms of equal length. Greek key A decorative pattern used in ancient Greek design in which a key-like motif is used. Greek Revival A 19th-century style in which the forms of ancient Greek architecture are used. groin vault A vault formed by the intersection of two vaults producing the intersecting edge lines called “groins.” grotesque Fanciful and distorted form; carving of such form. gueridon A candlestand with a sculptured figure holding a circular tray for the candle. half timber A system of wood construction in which posts and beams with bracing are exposed on the outside of a structure with in-filling of brick or plaster. hall church Church having one large interior nave space without aisles. hammer beam A type of truss in which a horizontal tie at the base is omitted. high altar The most important central altar in a church or chapel where there are several altars. highboy A tall chest with many drawers. High Gothic Medieval Gothic architecture of the most fully developed periods. high-tech 20th-century modern architecture and design featuring elements typical of advanced technological design, such as that of aircraft and spacecraft. hipped roof Roof with slanted surfaces at its ends as well as at front and back. historicism The practice of using historic forms in design. humanism Thought or philosophy based on human actions and values. hypocaust (HIGH-puh-KAWST) A hollow space beneath the floors of some ancient Roman buildings providing heat from flue gases passing through the space from a remote furnace. hypostyle hall (HIGH-puh-STIGHL) A space containing many columns supporting a roof structure above. impluvium (im-PLOO-vee-uhm) In ancient Roman architecture, a pool or cistern in the center of a courtyard open to the sky. impost block (IM-pohst) A masonry block at the base of an arch. inlay Decorative surface ornament made by inserting forms of contrasting color or material in spaces cut out from a background material with a flush surface finish. intarsia (in-TAHR-see-uh) Elaborate decorative inlay work often forming abstract or pictorial design, as used in the Italian Renaissance. International Style A 20th-century architectural style based on function, usually without ornament, and characterized by flat roofs and large glass areas. Ionic (igh-AHN-ik) The second of the three orders of ancient Greek and Roman architecture. Column capitals are characterized by the use of a pair of volutes of spiral form. Italianate (i-TAL-yuh-NAYT) American Victorian (as well as more general) design imitative of Italian precedents. Jacobean (JAK-uh-BEE-uhn) English design dating from the reigns of James I and Charles I (1603–49). jacquard (JAK-ahrd, juh-KAHRD) A type of loom developed in France, capable of weaving elaborate patterns. Also, a fabric made by the jacquard process. Jugendstil (YOO-guhnt-SHTEEL) The term for late 19th-century German, Austrian, and Scandinavian design of an Art Nouveau character. kas (kahs) Large Dutch wardrobe cabinet with hinged door front. keep The most securely defended, usually central, part of a medieval castle. kitsch Low-quality, often playful, design of poor taste. klismos (KLIZ-mahs) An ancient Greek form of chair with forward curving front legs and curved rear leg and back supports supporting a concave curved back. laconicum (luh-KAHN-i-kuhm) Chamber of an ancient Roman bath using hot, dry heat to promote sweating. lacquer An Asian varnish used as a wood finish, with many coats forming a high-gloss surface. The term is used for modern finishes of similar character made from synthetics. ladderback chair Chair with a back using several horizontal slats. lantern A windowed structure rising above the top of a dome or roof. late modernism A term used to describe late 20th-century architecture and design that continues the qualities of early modern (often International Style) design. lath Thin wood strips that form a base for plaster surfaces. Modern lath may also be of metal mesh or plaster board with holes to help bonding of plaster. Latin cross A cross having three equal arms and one longer one. Liberty style A British term for Art Nouveau style. linenfold Carved wooden surface ornament suggesting folded linen. lintel A horizontal member bridging an opening such as a door or window. A lintel also provides support for the wall or other structure above. lit en bateau (LEE-ah<sup>n</sup>-bah-TOH) A French form of elaborate bed in a form suggesting a boat, developed in the Empire period. loggia (LOH-jee-uh) A covered porch or veranda with columns supporting the roof. Louis XIV style (LOO-ee-kuh-TAWRZ) The French style of architecture and design typical of the period of the reign of Louis XIV (1643–1715). The term Baroque is used to describe the character of the style. Louis XV style (LOO-ee-KA<sup>n</sup>Z) The French style of architecture and design of the period 1730– 65, named for the king who reigned from 1723 to 1774. The character of the period is usually designated as Rococo. Louis XVI style (LOO-ee-SEZ) The design style of 1765 to 1790 in France, named for Louis XVI who reigned from 1774 to 1792. The period is characterized by Neoclassical restraint. maksura (mahk-SOOR-uh) Sanctuary area of an early mosque with wood or stone perforated enclosure. Mannerism A term applied to architecture and design in Italy toward the end of the Renaissance, in which there was an effort to escape the strict classicism of the High Renaissance. The term is also used to identify work in northern Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries. The term has been applied to modern work which attempts to replace the domination of modernism. mansard roof A roof with steeply sloping surfaces as developed in the French Renaissance. Mansardic style American Victorian architectural style using a mansard roof. marquetry (MAHR-kuh-tree) Elaborate surface decoration using inlay in wood veneering. megaron (MEG-uh-RAHN) The large central hall space of early Greek palaces. metope (MET-uh-pee) In ancient Greek architecture, the square panel which alternates with triglyphs in the frieze of a classical Doric entablature. mews A narrow alley used for service behind rows of houses. mezzanine (MEZ-uh-NEEN, MEZ-uh-NEEN) An intermediate partial floor above a principal level of a building. mihrab (MEE-ruhb) Niche in a mosque oriented toward Mecca. mimbar The pulpit for preaching in a mosque. minimalism Design using little or no decorative detail. Mission style 19th-century American design suggesting the design of the California missions. Often used as synonymous with Craftsman or Golden Oak design. miter A joint between two pieces, with each cut at an angle to fit at a corner of the (usually rightangle) intersection. Moderne (moh-DERN) French language term for modern or modernistic design. modernism 20th-century architectural and design styles based on function and structure. modernistic 20th-century decorative design using elements suggestive of the modern world. module A single geometric unit in a series of repeated units making up a modular design. modulor A system of dimensioning and proportion developed by Le Corbusier. monopodia (MAHN-uh-POH-dee-uh) Decorative carving of furniture leg using grotesque head and body tapered to a single foot. Moorish arch Semicircular or pointed arch raised by vertical stilts which may curve outward. Morris chair 19th-century armchair with adjustable back. mortise and tenon (MAWR-tis; TEN-uhn) A wood joint in which a projecting tongue (tenon) is inserted into a fitted opening (mortise). mosaic Small squares of colored stone or tile fitted together to form patterns or images. mosque A prayer hall, the most important type of religious building in Islamic countries. mud brick Masonry block made by impacting and drying mud in a mold. mudéjar (moo-DHAY-hahr) Spanish decorative style developed under Islamic influence in the 13th to 17th centuries. mullion (MUHL-yuhn) A vertical member dividing the panels or panes of a window or door. mural A wallpainting. nagara A style of temple architecture in northern India. narthex (NAHR-theks) A porch or vestibule at the front of the nave of a church. nave The main central space of a cathedral or church. Neoclassical A style of architecture and design derived from ancient Greek and Roman architecture. Norman The English Romanesque style of the 11th and 12th centuries. oculus (AHK-yuh-luhs) A circular opening or window at the top of a dome. oecus (EE-kuhs) The main room of an ancient Greek house. orchestra The round central stage of an ancient Greek theater. Also now used for the lowest level of seating in a theater. order (of architecture) One of the systems of design used in ancient Greek and Roman architecture based on column and entablature. The three important orders are Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian. ormolu (AWR-muh-LOO) Gilded bronze used as decorative detail on furniture of the Neoclassical period. palazzo (puh-LAHT-soh) Italian word for palace. Palladian (puh-LAY-dee-uhn) Design based on style of Andrea Palladio. panel A surface enclosed by framing. Paneling is a form of wall treatment using wood surface panels. parquet (pahr-KAY) Flooring of strips of wood often forming patterns. pediment Triangular form created by the end of a gable. The pediments of classical Greek and Roman architecture are often used as ornamental detail in interiors and furniture. pegged lap joint Wood joint in which two pieces are overlapped and held together with a peg or pin passing through both pieces. pendentive A triangular area of masonry used to connect the base of a dome to a square space below. peristyle A sequence of columns surrounding a building or interior court. perpendicular A line at right angles to another (usually horizontal) line. Also (Perpendicular), the 15th- and 16th-century style of English Gothic architecture. piano nobile (PYAH-noh NAW-bee-lay) Italian term for the principal (usually second) floor of a building. pilaster (pi-LAS-tuhr) A flattened form of a column set against a wall surface. pillar and scroll style American 19th-century style developed by Duncan Phyfe, using carved classical column and scroll elements. piloti (pi-LAHT-ee) Massive pylon-like support column used to elevate building mass above ground-floor level. Plateresco (PLAT-uh-RES-koh) Early to mid-16thcentury Spanish design style, characterized by fine detail suggesting the work of a silversmith. polychromy (PAHL-ee-KROH-mee) Ornamental surface design using several colors. portico A colonnade supporting a roof to form a porch, usually at the entrance to a building. portière Curtain hung at the sides(s) of a doorway or other opening and then drawn across. post and lintel A basic system of construction using vertical elements (posts) to support horizontal members (beams or lintels). post-modernism 20th-century architectural and interior design succeeding modernist work, characterized by historicism and use of decorative elements. Prairie house Term used by Frank Lloyd Wight to describe his mid-western houses designed with horizontal emphasis. provincial Design of historic periods of vernacular or informal character. French and Italian provincial style of the 17th and 18th centuries is often admired and imitated. pueblo (PWEB-loh) Flat-roofed adobe house or group of houses as built by native American communities in the southwest states of Arizona and New Mexico. pylon (PIGH-lahn) A massive masonry element as used on either side of the entrance front of ancient Egyptian temples. pyramid A building, usually a tomb, of pyramidal form as built in ancient Egypt. quadratura (KWAH-drah-TOOR-ah) Illusionistic painting in perspective on walls or ceilings. quadripartite vaulting (KWAH-druh-PAHR-tight) Vaulting in which each vault is divided by ribs or intersection lines into four parts. quadro riportato (KWAH-droh-REE-pawr-TAH-toh) Paintings on panels set into a vault or paintings simulating this pattern. quatrefoil (KA-truh-foil, KAT-uhr-) An ornamental element of four lobes. Queen Anne English design style of the early 18th century, named for the English queen (reigned 1702–14). The style was revived in the second half of the 19th century, marking a return to Neoclassicism. quoin (koin, kwoin) A projecting stone at the corner of a building forming a decorative corner band. radial symmetry Symmetry across several axes in a circular pattern. rattan Palm bark used in thin strips for caning and for weaving wicker furniture. Rayonnant (RAY-oh-NAH<sup>n</sup>) A 13th-century phase of French Gothic architecture characterized by rich and complex tracery. reeding Parallel thin semicircular moldings used decoratively. refinements In ancient Greek architecture, small modifications in seemingly straight lines and geometric relationships intended to correct for optical distortions and improve aesthetic qualities. Régence (ray-ZHAH<sup>n</sup>S) A French design style of the early 18th century named after a period falling between the reigns of Louis XIV and Louis XV (1715–23). Regency An English period in architecture and design of the early 19th century, corresponding in date to the regency of Prince George before he became George IV (1811–20). reinforced concrete A system of construction in which steel reinforcing rods are embedded in concrete to absorb tensile stresses. reja (RAY-hah) An elaborate iron grille in Renaissance Spanish church interiors. reliquary (REL-i-KWER-ee) Chest or other container for the relic of a revered saint or other personage. Renaissance The period beginning around 1400 in Italy and continuing in European design until about 1800, in which a revival of classical design concepts was dominant. reredos (RER-uh-DAHS, REER-dahs) A screen behind the altar of a church, usually sculptured or decorated. Restoration period The era of Charles II and James II in England, 1660–88. Rococo (ruh-KOH-koh, ROH-kuh-KOH) A style of architecture and decoration of the 18th century following the Baroque period, which made use of simpler forms and more delicate decoration than the Baroque style. rolltop desk Desk with a top cover that could be rolled away. Roman arch An arch of semicircular form as used in ancient Roman architecture. Romanesque (ROH-muh-NESK) The architectural style of the early Middle Ages in Europe, characterized by use of Roman arch forms. The term Norman is used in England. Romanticism Interest in romantic concepts such as medieval and Gothic periods as developed in the late 18th and early 19th century. rondel (RAHN-dl, rahn-DEL) A round element of surface decoration, often containing a sculptural element. rose window The large round window, usually in the façade of a Gothic cathedral or church. rotunda (roh-TUHN-duh) Round, domed interior space. row house A house built into a continuous row of adjacent houses. rustication Stonework treated with projecting stones and recessed joints to form a strong surface pattern. sacristy (SAK-ruh-stee) Room of a church intended for the robing of clergy. sail vault Vault of flattened curvature forming ceiling of an interior space. salt-box A house form in which a gable roof extends much lower at the rear of the building than at the front, a form suggesting a commonplace kitchen salt container. Savonarola chair (SAV-uh-nuh-ROH-luh) Italian Renaissance folding chair said to be used by Savonarola. Savonnerie carpet (SAV-uhn-REE) French carpet of the 18th century produced by factory at Savonnerie. scarsella Italian term for a small connected square chancel of a chapel or church. sconce A decorative wall bracket holding candles or light bulbs. screens Room adjacent to the hall of a medieval manor house acting as a vestibule or pantry. scroll saw Mechanical powered saw capable of cutting complex curves. Secession A movement in Vienna at the end of the 19th century in which architects and designers (and other artists) withdrew from academic exhibitions in order to create a nontraditional style. Second Empire French Louis XVI revival style of 1850s and 1860s. secretary desk Desk with bookcase above and writing desk below as developed in 17th- and 18th-century England and America. sedia (SED-yah) Italian Renaissance chair. set-back In tall buildings, a reduction of size from one upper level to another as required by zoning laws. sexpartite (seks-PAHR-tight) A type of medieval vaulting in which the vault surface was made up of six parts. sgabello (skah-BEL-oh, zgah-) A small, easily portable chair developed in the Italian Renaissance. Shaker style Reserved and simple style as developed by the American Shaker religious society. shingle A thin slice of wood used to form external covering of buildings. Shingle style Architectural style of the late Victorian era in America with building exteriors covered by shingles. shogi Sliding screen panels used to divide space in traditional Japanese house architecture. soffit (SAHF-it) The underside of any element. space planning 20th-century office and other interior planning. splat back A chair back using a wide vertical element of wood at its center. split lath Thin sheets of wood partially split to form a base for plaster which forms keys as it is pressed into the splits. spool and knob Decorative detail using alternate cylindrical and spherical elements. stave church Early medieval church in Finland using massive vertical structural members. stereotomy (STER-ee-AHT-uh-mee, STEER-) Art of stone cutting to form elements of complex vaulted structure. stoa (STOH-uh) Covered loggia at one side of the open marketplace (agora) in ancient Greek cities. strapwork Carved or plaster decorative detail suggesting bands cut from leather. stripped classicism Design of the 1920s and 1930s based on classicism but with classical detail simplified or omitted. stupa A Buddhist religious monument, usually of domelike form, often containing a relic. A stupa may be a complete building or part of a building, either external or internal. stylobate (STIGH-luh-BAYT) The step forming the base of a classic colonnade. swag Decoration in the form of a hanging garland. symmetrical balance Balance achieved with matching elements on either side of a center line. tablinum (ta-BLIGH-nuhm) A small room or alcove in an ancient Roman house at the end of the atrium where family records and portraits were kept. tambour door (TAM-boor) Flexible sliding door formed of parallel thin strips glued to a canvas back. tamped earth Earth pounded to form a firm surface to serve as a floor. temple house House built in the form of a Greek temple. tepee American native portable house formed of poles supporting skin or blanket external surfaces. tepidarium (TEP-i-DER-ee-uhm) Room of ancient Roman bath providing moderate heat. terrazzo (tuh-RAHT-soh, -RAZ-oh) Small chips of marble imbedded in cement and polished to form a smooth surface suitable for flooring. textile block Concrete block developed in the 1920s by Frank Lloyd Wright with patterned surface to provide a textile-like surface pattern. thrust The outward force exercised by arches, vaults, and domes, requiring restraint from solid masonry or from buttressing. tokonoma An alcove in a traditional Japanese house where a picture is hung and a vase or some other ornamental object is placed. tongue and groove Wood joint using projecting tongue fitting into matching groove. torchere (tawr-SHER) A candle or lamp stand. torchier (tawr-CHEER) Stand or fixture holding torches or candles to provide lighting. tower house Medieval castle type in which a vertical stack of rooms creates a defensible tower. trabeated (TRAY-bee-AY-tid) See post and lintel. tracery Gothic ornamental carved detail in thin, complex patterns. traditionalism Design limited to elements borrowed from historic precedents. transept Outward-projecting arm on either side of a cathedral or church forming a cross-shaped (cruciform) plan. transom The top element of a window, or a window located above a door, usually arranged to open separately. transparente (TRAHNS-pah-REN-tay) An elaborately sculptured backing for an altar in a Spanish cathedral, permitting observation of the sacrament from the chancel and from the ambulatory behind. travertine A soft limestone marble having small voids, sometimes filled with plaster or mortar. trefoil (TREE-foil, TREF-oil) A carved decorative element having three leaf forms. triclinium (trigh-KLIN-ee-uhm) The dining room of an ancient Roman house using three reclining platforms arranged to form an open square. triforium (trigh-FAWR-ee-uhm) The gallery above the main nave arcade and below the clerestory of a Gothic cathedral or church. triglyph (TRIGH-glif) A panel carved in three vertical strips used in alternation with the metopes that ornamented the frieze of a Greek Doric entablature. triptych (TRIP-tik) A three-panel painting in which the side panels are hinged to form doors to cover the center panel. trompe-l’oeil (trawmp-LOI) Realistic painting technique creating an illusion of reality (literally, “fools the eye”). trulli (TROO-lee) Simple dome-topped buildings typical of Apulia in southern Italy. truss Structural element of wood or steel spanning open spaces through use of triangulation. Tudor The style of early Renaissance architecture of England in the reigns of Tudor monarchs from 1485 to 1601. turkey-work Embroidery imitative of oriental textiles used for upholstery in Renaissance England. Tuscan Ancient Roman simplified Doric order. tympanum (TIM-puh-nuhm) The triangular panel formed within a pediment. unité d’habitation (ue-nee-TAY-dah-bee-tah-SYAW<sup>n</sup>) Term given to large apartment dwellings as developed in the 20th century by Le Corbusier. Usonian (yoo-SOH-nee-uhn) Term coined by Frank Lloyd Wright to describe his American (U.S.) design. vargueño (vahr-GAYN-yoh) A form of drop-fronted desk developed in the Spanish Renaissance. vault A masonry construction in which one or more arch forms are used to cover an open space. vernacular Design produced through common practice without assistance from trained or professional aid. Victorian The design period in England and America corresponding to the reign of Queen Victoria (1837–1901). villa An Italian country house, usually of great luxury. The term has come into more general use for any large country house. volute (vuh-LOOT) A spiral decorative form used as the major element in the capital of a column of the Ionic order of architecture. voussoir (voo-SWAHR) A stone of an arch, wedge-shaped to retain its place in the completed arch structure. wainscot (WAYN-skaht, -skuht) A lining for the lower part of an interior wall. Werkbund (VERK-bunt) A German, and later an Austrian, organization dedicated to the promotion of better design. Werkstätte (VERK-shte-tuh) Austrian organization promoting the work of Vienna Secession design through workshops, shops, and displays. westwork Frontal structure of German medieval churches. what-not Victorian shelf unit intended to hold decorative ornaments. wheelback chair Victorian chair using a circular wheel form as a back. wicker Woven fibers of rattan, bamboo, or other materials used to form furniture, also called wickerware. wigwam A hut of grass and thatch as built by native American tribes in the eastern American continent. William and Mary The English style of the 17th century during the reigns of William III and Mary (1689–1702). The design of the period is Baroque in character. Windsor (chair) A chair with a simple saddle seat using many thin wood turnings to support a bent-back rim. wing-back chair Chair with a high back and forward-projecting upholstered elements. WPA style Architectural design of the 1930s projects of the American governmental agency using stripped classical forms. yurt (yoort) A movable round hut used by migratory Mongolian tribes.