## Bibliography ## General Abercrombie, Stanley, Century of Interior Design, 1900–2000. New York: Rizzoli, 2003. Abercrombie, Stanley and Sherrill Whiton, Interior Design and Decoration (6th edn). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008. Ball, Victoria Kloss, Architecture and Interior Design, 2 vols. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1980. Banham, Joanna, ed., Encyclopedia of Interior Design, 2 vols. Chicago and London: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1997. Battersby, Martin, The Decorative Thirties. New York: Walker, 1969; rev. and ed. by Philippe Garner, New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1988. Blakemore, Robbie G., History of Interior Design and Furniture: From Ancient Egypt to Nineteenth-Century Europe. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1997. Bogen, Louise Ade, The Complete Guide to Furniture Styles (rev. edn). Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 1997. Boyce, Charles, ed., Dictionary of Furniture (2nd edn). New York: Facts on File, 2001. Byers, Mel, The Design Encyclopedia. London: Laurence King, 2004. Campbell, Gordon, The Grove Encyclopedia of Decorative Arts. New York: Oxford University Press, 2006. Ching, Francis, D. K., Interior Design Illustrated. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1987. Copplestone, Trewin, ed., World Architecture (rev. edn). London: Hamlyn, 1975. Dorfles, Grillo, Kitsch: An Anthology of Bad Taste. New York: Universe Books, 1969. Edwards, Ralph and L. G. G. Ramsey, eds, The Connoisseur’s Complete Period Guides to the Houses, Decoration, Furnishing and Chattels of the Classic Periods. New York: Bonanza Books, 1968. Fairbanks, Jonathan L. and Elizabeth Bidwell Bates, American Furniture: 1620 to the Present. New York: Richard Marek, 1981. Fazio, Michael, Marian Moffett, and Lawrence Wodehouse, World History of Architecture. London: Laurence King, 2008. Ferebee, Ann and Jeff Byles, A History of Design from the Victorian Era to the Present: A Survey of the Modern Style in Architecture, Interior Design, Industrial Design, Graphic Design, and Photography (2nd edn). New York: W.W. Norton, 2011. Fletcher, Banister, A History of Architecture (20th edn), rev. by Dan Cruikshank. London: Heinemann, 1996. Framton, Kenneth, Modern Architecture: A Critical History (3rd edn). New York and London: Thames & Hudson, 1992. Giedion, Sigfried, The Eternal Present: The Beginnings of Architecture (2nd edn). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1981. Space, Time and Architecture (5th edn). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982. Gottfried, Herbert and Jan Jennings, American Vernacular Buildings and Interiors, 1870–1960. New York: W.W. Norton, 2009. Harris, Jennifer, ed., Textiles: 5000 Years. New York: Abrams, 1993. Harwood, Buie, Bridget May, and Curt Sherman, Architecture and Interior Design: An Integrated History to the Present. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 2012. Heathcote, Edwin, Furniture and Architecture. London: Wylie-Academy, 2002. Hine, Thomas, Populuxe. New York: Knopf, 1986. Ireland, Jeannie, History of Interior Design. New York: Fairchild, 2004. Jervis, Simon, Dictionary of Design and Designers. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1984. Kostof, Spiro, A History of Architecture (2nd edn). New York: Oxford University Press, 1995. Lewis, Adam,The Great Lady Decorators: The Women Who Defined Interior Design, 1870– 1955. New York: Rizzoli, 2010. Lucie-Smith, Edward, Furniture: A Concise History (2nd edn, rev.). New York: Thames & Hudson, 1990. McCorquodale, Charles, A History of the Interior. New York: Vendome Press, 1983. Morley, John, The History of Furniture. New York: Little, Brown, 1999. Oliver, Paul, ed., Shelter and Society. New York: Praeger, 1969. Oman, Charles C. and Jean Hamilton, Wallpapers: An International History and Illustrated Survey from the Victoria and Albert Museum. New York: Abrams, 1982. Pevsner, Nikolaus, Outline of European Architecture. New York: Penguin, 1943; repr., 1991. Pioneers of Modern Design from William Morris to Walter Gropius (rev. edn). New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005. The Sources of Modern Architecture and Design. New York: Praeger, 1968. Pile, John, Furniture, Modern and Post Modern. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1990. Interior Design (4th edn). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2007. Praz, Mario, An Illustrated History of Furnishing. New York: George Braziller, 1964. Rappoport, Amos, House: Form and Culture. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1969. Thornton, Peter, Authentic Decor: The Domestic Interior, 1620–1920. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1984. Form & Decoration: Innovation in the Decorative Arts, 1470–1870. New York: H.N. Abrams, 1998. Trachtenberg, Myron and Isabelle Hyman, Architecture from Prehistory to Post-Modernism/The Western Tradition. New York: Abrams, 1986. Venturi, Robert, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (rev. edn). New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1977; repr., 1990. Wanscher, Ole, The Art of Furniture. New York: Reinhold, 1967. Whiton, Sherrill, Interior Design and Decoration (5th edn), ed. by Stanley Abercrombie. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002. Wiffen, Marcus and Frederick Koeper, American Architecture, 1607–1976, 2 vols. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981–83. Ancient Egypt, Greece, Rome Badawi, A., Architecture in Ancient Egypt and the Near East. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1966. Brown, Frank E., Roman Architecture. New York: Braziller, 1961. Edwards, I. E. S., The Pyramids of Egypt. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1947; rev. 1993. Gromort, George, The Elements of Classical Architecture. NY: W.W. Norton, 2001. Lawrence, A. W., Greek Architecture (5th edn) rev. by R.A. Tomlinson, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996. Scully, Vincent, The Earth, the Temple and the Gods: Greek Sacred Architecture. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1962; rev., 1979. Smith, W. S., The Art and Architecture of Ancient Egypt (3rd edn), rev. by W. K. Simpson. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998. Stern, P. V. D., Prehistoric Europe from Stone Age Man to the Early Greeks. New York: Norton, 1969. Stuart, James and Nicholas Revett, The Antiquities of Athens, 3 vols. London: John Haberkorn, 1762; repr. New York: Benjamin Blom, 1968. Vitruvius, The Ten Books on Architecture. trans. M. H. Morgan. New York: Dover, 1960. Early Christian, Byzantine, Romanesque Conant, K. J., Carolingian and Romanesque Architecture: 800 to 1200. New York: Pelican, 1959; 4th edn, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993. Krautheimer, Richard, Early Christian and Byzantine Architecture (4th edn), rev. by Slobodan ur i . New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996. Oursel, R., Living Architecture: Romanesque, trans. K. M. Leake. London: Oldbourne, 1967. Temple, Richard, ed., Early Christian and Byzantine Art. London: Element Books, 1990. ## Precolumbian America Dwyer, J. P. and F. B. Dwyer, Traditional Art of Mesoamerica and the Central Andes. San Francisco, CA: Fine Arts Museums, 1973. Kubler, George, The Art and Architecture of Ancient America. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1962; repr. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993. Miller, Mary Ellen, The Art of Mesoamerica: From Olmec to Aztec (3rd edn). New York and London: Thames & Hudson, 2001. Stone-Miller, Rebecca, Art of the Andes: From Chavin to Inca (2nd edn). New York and London: Thames & Hudson, 2002. Ueda, Atshushi, The Inner Harmony of the Japanese House. New York and Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1990. Volwashen, Andreas, Living Architecture: India. New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1969. ## Islamic and Asian Traditions Bernstein, Valerie, India and the Mughal Dynasty. New York: Abrams, 1998. Blair, Sheila S. and Jonathan M. Bloom, The Art and Architecture of Islam, 1250–1800. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994. Brend, Barbara, Islamic Art. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991. Clunas, Craig, Art in China. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1997. Drexler, Arthur, The Architecture of Japan. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1955. Edwardes, Michael, Indian Temples and Palaces. London: Hamlyn Publishing Group, 1969. Ettinghausen, Richard, Islamic Art and Architecture, 650–1250 (2nd edn). New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001. Fisher, Robert E., Buddhist Art and Architecture. New York: Thames & Hudson, 1993. Harle, J. C., The Art and Architecture of the Indian Subcontinent (2nd edn). New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1994. Hillenbrand, Robert. Islamic Art and Architecture. London: Thames & Hudson, 1999. Irwin, Robert, Islamic Art in Context: Art, Architecture, and the Literary World. New York: Abrams, 1997. Ishokawa, Tadashi, Palaces of Kyoto. London: Ward Locke and Co. and, Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1968. Knapp, Ronald G., The Chinese House: Craft, Symbol, and the Folk Tradition. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990. Lee, Sherman E., Japanese Decorative Style. New York: Harper & Row, 1972. Liu, Laurence G., Chinese Architecture. New York: Rizzoli, 1982. Meech-Pekarik, Julia, et al., Momoyana. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1973. Pal, Pratapaditya, et al., Romance of the Taj Mahal. New York: Thames & Hudson with the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 1989. Rawson, Philip, The Art of Southeast Asia: Cambodia, Vietnam, Thailand, Laos, Burma, Java, Bali. London: Thames & Hudson, 1967; repr. 1990. Rowland, Benjamin, The Art and Architecture of India. Harmondsworth, England, and Baltimore, PA: Penguin, 1967. Stierlin, Henri, Islamic Art and Architecture. New York and London: Thames & Hudson, 2002. ## Gothic Branner, Robert, Gothic Architecture. New York: Braziller, 1961. Fitchen, John, The Construction of the Gothic Cathedrals. London: Oxford University Press, 1961; repr. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 1981. ## Italian Renaissance Wilson, Christopher, The Gothic Cathedral. London and New York: Thames & Hudson, 1990. Ackerman, James S., The Architecture of Michelangelo. Harmondsworth, England and Baltimore, PA: Penguin, 1970. Palladio. Harmondsworth, England and Baltimore, PA: Penguin, 1966. Borsi, Franco, Leon Battista Alberti, trans. Rudolf G. Carpanini. New York: Harper & Row, 1977, repr. New York: Electra/Rizzoli, 1989. Lowry, Bates, Renaissance Architecture. New York: Braziller, 1962. Masson, Georgina, Italian Villas and Palaces (2nd ed.). London: Thames & Hudson, 1966. Murray, Peter, The Architecture of the Italian Renaissance. New York: Schocken, 1966; rev. ed. New York and London: Thames & Hudson, 1986. Palladio, Andrea (intro. Adolph K. Placzek), The Four Books of Architecture. Venice: 1570; London: Isaac Ware, 1738; repr. New York: Dover, 1965. Thornton, Peter, Seventeenth-Century Interior Decoration in England, France, and Holland. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1978. The Italian Renaissance Interior, 1400–1600. New York: Abrams, 1991. ## Baroque and Rococo Blunt, Anthony, Baroque & Rococo Architecture & Decoration. New York: Harper & Row, 1978. Fürst, Viktor, The Architecture of Sir Christopher Wren. London: Lund Humphries, 1956. Hitchcock, Henry-Russell, Rococo Architecture in Southern Germany. London: Phaidon, 1968. Millon, Henry A., Baroque and Rococo Architecture. New York: Braziller, 1961. Portoghesi, Paolo, The Rome of Borromini, trans. Barbara Luigia La Penta. New York: Braziller, 1968. ## French and English Renaissance Blunt, Anthony, Art and Architecture in France, 1500–1700. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1957; 5th edn rev. by Richard Beresford, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1999. Summerson, John, Inigo Jones. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1966; repr. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000. Sir Christopher Wren. Hamden, CT: Archin Books, 1965. ## Eighteenth Century Adam, Robert and James Adam, Works in Architecture, 3 vols. London, 1773, 1778–1822; (excerpts) London: Alec Tiranti, 1959. Campbell, Colen, Vitruvius Britannicus. 2 vols. London, 1727. Chippendale, Thomas, The Gentleman & Cabinet-Makers Directory (3rd edn). London, 1762; repr. New York: Dover, 1966. Hepplewhite, George, The Cabinet-Maker and Upholsterer’s Guide. London, 1786; 3rd edn, London: I. & J. Taylor, 1794; repr. New York: Dover, 1969. Sheraton, Thomas, The Cabinet-Maker and Upholsterer’s Drawing Book. London, 1793; repr. New York: Dover, 1972. Yarwood, Doreen, Robert Adam. New York: Scribner, 1970. ## American Colonial and Revival Hamlin, Talbot, Greek Revival Architecture in America. New York: Oxford University Press, 1944; repr. New York: Dover, 1964. Isham, Norman M. and Albert F. Brown, Early Connecticut Houses. New York: Dover, 1965. Kelly, J. Frederick, The Early Domestic Architecture of Connecticut. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1924; repr. New York: Dover, 1963. Kenny, Peter M., et al., Duncan Phyfe: Master Cabinetmaker in New York. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2011. Kettell, Russell Hawes, The Pine Furniture of Early New England. New York: Doubleday Doran, 1929; repr. New York: Dover, 1929. Rogers, Meyric, American Interior Design, Bonanza Books, 1947. ## Victorian Church, Ella Rodman, How to Furnish a Home. New York: Appleton, 1881. Gere, Charlotte, Nineteenth-Century Decoration: The Art of the Interior. New York: H. N. Abrams, 1989. Kassay, John, The Book of Shaker Furniture. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 1980. Ochsner, Jeffrey Karl, H. H. Richardson: Complete Architectural Works. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982. Pevsner, Nikolaus, High Victorian Design. London: Architectural Press, 1951. Schaefer, Herwin, Nineteenth Century Modern: The Functional Tradition in Victorian Design. New York: Praeger, 1970. Scully, Vincent, Jr., The Shingle Style and the Stick Style. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1971. Sprigg, June, Shaker Design. New York: Whitney Museum of American Art, 1986. Watkin, David and Philip Hewat-Jaboor, eds, Thomas Hope: Regency Designer, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008. Wilk, Christopher, Thonet: 150 Years of Furniture. Woodbury, NY: Barrons, 1980. ## Arts and Crafts Briggs, Asa, ed., William Morris: Selected Writings and Designs. Baltimore. PA: Penguin, 1962. Cathers, David M., Furniture of the American Arts and Crafts Movement. New York: New American Library, 1981. Clark, Fiona, William Morris: Wallpapers and Chintzes. New York: St. Martin’s Press, and London: Academy Editions, 1973. Eastlake, Charles L., Hints on Household Taste in Furniture, Upholstery and other Details (3rd edn). London: Longmans Green, 1872. Gere, Charlotte, Nineteenth-Century Decoration: The Art of the Interior. New York: Abrams, and London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1989. Kaplan, Wendy, The Arts & Crafts Movement in Europe & America: Design for the Modern World. London: Thames & Hudson/Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 2004. Kaplan, Wendy and Elizabeth Cumming, The Art and Crafts Movement. London: Thames & Hudson, 1991. Parry, Linda, William Morris Textiles. New York: Viking Press, 1983. Smith, Bruce, Greene & Greene: Masterworks. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1998. Stickley, Gustav, Craftsman Homes: Architecture and Furnishings of the American Arts and Crafts Movement. New York: Dover, 1979. Volpe, Tod M. and Beth Cathers, Treasures of the American Arts & Crafts Movement, 1890– 1920. New York: Abrams, 1988. Art Nouveau; Vienna Secession Amaya, Mario, Art Nouveau. London: Studio Vista, 1960; repr. New York: Schocken, 1985. Arber, Katie, Turn of the Century Style: Home Decoration and Furnishings between 1890 and 1910. London: Middlesex University Press, 2003. Barnes, H. Jefferson, Some Examples of Furniture by Charles Rennie Mackintosh in the Glasgow School of Art Collection. Glasgow: Glasgow School of Art, 1969. Bitcliffe, Roger, Charles Rennie Mackintosh: The Complete Furniture, Furniture Drawings, and Interior Design. New York: Dutton, 1986. Brunhammer, Yvonne, et al., Art Nouveau Belgium/France (exh. cat.). Houston, TX: Institute for the Arts, Rice University, 1976. Burckhardt, Lucius, ed., The Werkbund: History and Ideology, 1907–1933, trans. Pearl Sanders. Woodbury, NY: Barrons, 1977. Fahr-Becker, Gabrielle, Art Nouveau, Cologne: Taschen, 2007. Graham, F. Lanier, Hector Guimard. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1970. Greenhalgh, Paul, Art Nouveau, 1890–1914. London: Victoria & Albert Museum, 2000. Howorth, Thomas, Charles Rennie Mackintosh and the Modern Movement. New York: Wittenborn, 1953; repr. 1977. Kaplan, Wendy, ed., Charles Rennie Mackintosh. New York: Abbeville Press, 1996. Osthaus, Karl Ernst, Van de Velde. Hagen: Folkwang-Verlag, 1920; repr. Berlin: Frölich & Kaufmann, 1984. Rheims, Maurice, The Flowering of Art Nouveau. New York: Abrams, 1966. Ruckschcio, Burkhardt and Roland Schachel, Adolf Loos (2nd edn). Salzburg and Vienna: Residenz Verlag, 1987. Sekler, Eduard F., Josef Hoffmann: The Architectural Work. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985. Selz, Peter and Mildred Constantine, eds, Art Nouveau. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1960; rev., 1975. Spencer, Robin, The Aesthetic Movement: Theory and Practice. London: Studio Vista, and New York: Dutton, 1972. Tschudi, Stephan Madsen, Art Nouveau. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967. ## Eclecticism The American Revolution, 1876–1917. New York: Brooklyn Museum, 1979. Drexler, Arthur, ed., The Architecture of the École des Beaux-Arts. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1977. ## De Stijl; Bauhaus Herzogenrath, Wulf, ed., 50 Years Bauhaus. Stuttgart: Würtem-bergischer Kunstverein, 1968. Hochman, Elaine S., Bauhaus: Crucible of Modernism. New York: Fromm, 1997. Jaffé, Hans L. C., De Stijl. New York: Abrams, 1967. Naylor, Gillian, The Bauhaus. London: Studio Vista and New York: Dutton, 1968. The Bauhaus Reassessed. New York: Dutton, 1985. Overy, Paul, De Stijl. London: Thames & Hudson, 1991. Scheidig, Walther, Crafts of the Weimar Bauhaus. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1967. Whitford, Frank, ed., The Bauhaus: Masters & Students by Themselves. Woodstock, NY: Overlook Press, 1993. Wingler, Hans M., The Bauhaus. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1969; repr. 1978. ## Art Deco; Industrial Design Arber, Katie, Thirtiestyle. London: Middlesex University Press, 2003. Bayer, Patricia, Art Deco Architecture Design: Decoration and Detail from the Twenties and Thirties. London: Thames & Hudson, 1999. Benton, Charlotte, Tim Benton, Ghislaine Wood and Oriana Baddeley, Art Deco: 1910–1939, London: Victoria and Albert Museum, 2003. Bony, Anne, Furniture and Interiors of the 1940s. trans. Lysa Hochroth. Paris: Flammarian, 2003. Breon, Emmanuel and Rosalind M. Pepall, Ruhlmann: Genius of Art Deco, New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2004. Buddensieg, Tilmann and Henning Rogge, Cultura e Industria: Peter Behrens e la AEG, 1907– 1914. Milan: Electa, 1979. Bush, Donald J., The Streamlined Decade. New York: Braziller, 1975. Duncan, Alastair, American Art Deco. New York: Abrams, 1986. Art Deco Furniture: The French Designers. New York: Thames & Hudson, 1992. Hennessey, William, Russel Wright: American Designer. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1983. Heskett, John, Industrial Design. London: Thames & Hudson, 1980; repr., 1997. Hillier, Bevis, Art Deco. Minneapolis: Minneapolis Institute of the Arts, 1971. Martin-Vivier, Pierre-Emmanuel, Jean-Michel Frank: The Strange and Subtle Luxury of the Parisian Haute-Monde in the Art Deco Period. New York: Rizzoli, 2008. Meikle, Jeffrey L., Twentieth Century Limited: Industrial Design in America, 1925–1939 (2nd edn). Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2001. Schönberger, Angela, ed., Raymond Loewy: Pioneer of American Industrial Design. Munich: Prestel-Verlag, 1990. Sembach, Klaus-Jürgen, Style 1930. New York: Universe Books, 1971. Windsor, Alan, Peter Behrens: Architect and Designer, 1868–1940. New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1981. ## Modernism Abercrombie, Stanley, George Nelson: The Design of Modern Design. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000. Adam, Peter, Eileen Gray: Her Life and Work. Munich: Schirmer/Mosel, dist. Prestel Publishing, 2009. Albrecht, Donald, The High Style of Dorothy Draper, New York: Pointed Leaf Press/Museum of the City of New York, 2006. Ambasz, Emilio, ed., Italy: The New Domestic Landscape. New York: New York Graphic Society, 1972. Banham, Reyner, Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (2nd edn). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986. Bayley, Stephen, ed., The Conran Dictionary of Design. London: Conran Octopus, 1985. Blake, Peter, The Master Builders. New York: Knopf, 1964; repr. New York: Norton, 1996. Calloway, Stephen, Twentieth-Century Decoration. New York: Rizzoli, 1988. Clark, Robert Judson, Design in America: The Cranbrook Vision, 1925–1950. New York: Abrams, 1983. Doordan, Dennis,Twentieth-Century Architecture. New York: Abrams, 2002. Frankl, Paul T., Form and Re-Form. New York: Harper, 1930; repr. New York: Hacker Art Books, 1972. Garner, Philippe, Contemporary Decorative Arts. New York: Facts on File, 1980. Twentieth-Century Furniture. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1980. Giedion, Sigfried, Mechanization Takes Command. New York: Oxford University Press, 1948; repr. New York: Norton, 1969. Goldberger, Paul, The Glass House. New York: Skira Rizzoli, 2011. Hanks, David, The Century of Modern Design: Selections from the Liliane and David M. Stewart Collection. Montreal: Museum of Art, 2010. Hiesinger, Kathryn B. and George Marcus, eds, Design Since 1945. Philadelphia: Philadelphia Museum of Art, 1983. Landmarks of Twentieth-Century Design: An Illustrated Handbook. New York: Abbeville Press, 1993. Hine, Thomas, Populuxe. New York: Knopf, 1986. Hitchcock, Henry-Russell, Architecture: Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries (4th edn). Harmondsworth, England and Baltimore, PA: Penguin, 1987. and Philip Johnson, The International Style: Architecture since 1922 (3rd edn). New York: Norton, 1966. Johnson, Stewart, American Modern, 1925–1940: Design for a New Age. New York: H.N. Abrams, 2000. Kaplan, Wendy and Bobbye Tigerman, California Design, 1930–1965 : Living in a Modern Way. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press/Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 2011. Larrabee, Eric and Massimo Vignelli, Knoll Design. New York: Abrams, 1981. Lutz, Brian, Knoll: A Modernist Universe. New York: Rizzoli, 2010. Mang, Karl, History of Modern Furniture. New York: Abrams, 1979. Massey, Anna, Interior Design Since 1900 (3rd edn). London: Thames & Hudson, 2008. McFadden, David, Scandinavian Modern Design. New York: Abrams, 1982. Museum of Arts and Design, Crafting Modernism: Midcentury American Art and Design. New York: Museum of Arts and Design, 2011. Myerson, Jeremy, New Public Architecture. London: Laurence King, 1996. Naylor, Colin, ed., Contemporary Architects (2nd edn). Chicago and London: St. James Press, 1987. ed., Contemporary Designers (2nd edn). Chicago and London: St James Press, 1990. Phillips, Lisa, et al., High Styles: Twentieth-Century American Design. New York: Whitney Museum of American Art/Summit Books, 1985. Pile, John, Open Office Planning. New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1978. Puglisi, Luigi Prestinenza, New Directions in Contemporary Architecture: Evolutions and Revolutions in Building Design Since 1988, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2008. Pulos, Arthur J., The American Design Adventure, 1940–1975. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988. Raizman, David, History of Modern Design (2nd edn). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2010. Rouland, Steven and Linda, Knoll Furniture 1938–1960. Atglen, PA: Schiffer Publishing, 1999. Sembach, Klaus-Jürgen, Contemporary Furniture. New York: Architectural Book Publishing, 1982. Smith, C. Ray, Interior Design in 20th-Century America: A History. New York: Harper & Row, 1987. Smith, Elizabeth A.T. and Esther McCoy, Blueprints for Modern Living: History and Legacy of the Case Study Houses. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,1998. Case Study Houses. Köln: Taschen, 2002. Sparke, Penny, A Century of Design: Design Pioneers of the 20th Century. Hauppage, NY: Barrons, 1998. Elsie de Wolfe: The Birth of Modern Interior Decoration, New York: Acanthus Press, 2005. The Modern Interior, London: Reaktion Books, 2008. Walker Art Center, Nelson, Eames, Girard, Propst: The Design Process at Herman Miller (Design Quarterly 98–99). Minneapolis: Walker Art Center, 1975. Wilk, Christopher, ed, Modernism: Designing a New World, 1914–1939, London: Victoria & Albert Museum Publications, 2008. Wilson, Richard Guy, Dianne H. Pilgrim, and Dickman Tashjian, The Machine Age in America 1918–1941. New York: Abrams, 1986; repr., 2001. Woodham, Jonathan, Dictionary of Modern Design, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004. ## Alvar Aalto Fleig, Karl, ed., Alvar Aalto, 3 vols. Zurich: Editions Girsberger, 1963. Reed, Peter, Alvar Aalto: Between Humanism and Materialism. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1998. Schildt, Göran, Alvar Aalto: The Early Years. New York: Rizzoli, 1984. Alvar Aalto: The Decisive Years. New York: Rizzoli, 1986. The Complete Catalogue of Architecture, Design, and Art. New York: Rizzoli, 1994. ## Marcel Breuer Wilk, Christopher, Marcel Breuer, Furniture and Interiors. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1981. ## Le Corbusier Blake, Peter, Le Corbusier: Architecture and Form. Baltimore, PA: Penguin, 1964. De Fusco, Renato, Le Corbusier, Designer: Furniture 1929. Woodbury, NY: Barrons, 1977. Le Corbusier, Creation is a Patient Search, trans. James Palmes. New York: Praeger, 1960. The Modulor I and II, trans. Peter de Francia and Anna Bostock. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980. 1929 Sitzmobel. Zurich: Galerie Heidi Weber, 1959. Oeuvre complète, 7 vols. Zurich: Girsberger, 1937–67. Towards a New Architecture, trans. Frederick Etchell. London: Architectural Press, 1927; New York: Dover, 1986. Le Corbusier Le Grand. New York: Phaidon, 2008 ## Charles and Ray Eames The Work of Charles and Ray Eames (exh. cat.). New York: Abrams, 1997. Drexler, Arthur, Charles Eames Furniture from the Design Collection. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1973. Neuhart, John, Marilyn Neuhart, and Ray Eames, Eames Design. New York: Abrams, 1989. Neuhart, Marilyn and John,The Story of Eames Furniture. Munich: Gestalten, 2010. ## Walter Gropius Fitch, James Marston, Walter Gropius. New York: Braziller, 1960. Giedion, Sigfried, Walter Gropius. New York: Reinhold, 1954. ## Mies van der Rohe Blaser, Werner, Mies van der Rohe: Furniture and Interiors, trans. Roger Marcinik. London: Academy Editions, 1982. Drexler, Arthur, Mies van der Rohe. New York: Braziller, 1960. Glaeser, Ludwig, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe: Furniture and Furniture Drawings. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1977. Johnson, Philip C., Mies van der Rohe. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1947. Lambert, Phyllis et al., Mies in America. New York: Abrams, 2001. Riley, Terence, Mies in Berlin. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2001. Tegethoff, Wolf, Mies van der Rohe: The Villas and Country Houses. New York: Museum of Modern Art/Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986. ## Frank Lloyd Wright Gill, Brendan, Many Masks: A Life of Frank Lloyd Wright. New York: Putnam, 1987; New York: Da Capo Press, 1998. Heinz, Thomas A., Frank Lloyd Wright: Interiors and Furniture. London: Academy Editions, 1994. Hitchcock, Henry-Russell, In the Nature of Materials. New York: Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1942; New York: Da Capo Press, 1975. Kaufmann, Edgar, Jr. and Ben Raeburn eds, Frank Lloyd Wright, Writings and Buildings. New York: Meridian, 1960. Wright, Frank Lloyd, An Autobiography. London and New York: Longmans Green, 1932. Post-modernism and Deconstructivism Brownlee, David, David De Long, and Kathryn B. Hiesinger, Out of the Ordinary: Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown and Associates – Architecture, Urbanism, Design. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001. Farrell, Terry, Interiors and the Legacy of Postmodernism. London: Laurence King Publishing, 2011. Jencks, Charles, Architecture Today. New York: Abrams, 1982; rev. 1988. The Language of Post-Modern Architecture (4th edn, rev.). New York: Rizzoli, 1984. Modern Movements in Architecture (2nd edn). Harmonds-worth, England: Penguin, 1985. Johnson, Philip and Mark Wigley, Deconstructivist Architecture. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1988. Klotz, Heinrich, The History of Postmodern Architecture, trans. Radka Donnell. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988. Kron, Joan and Suzanne Slesin, High-Tech. New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1978. Labaco, Ronald T. and Dennis P. Doordan, Ettore Sottsass: Architect and Designer. London: Merrill/Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 2006. Papadakis, Andreas C., ed., Post-Modernism on Trial. London: Academy Editions, 1990. Riewoldt, Otto, Intelligent Spaces: Architecture for the Information Age. London: Laurence King, 1997. ## Contemporary Design Adam, Peter, Eileen Gray: Architect, Designer. New York: Abrams, 1987. Antonelli, Paola and Emily Hall, Ron Arad: No Discipline. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2009. Barreneche, Raul A., New Museums . New York: Phaidon, 2005. Bell, Jonathan, 21st-Century House. London: Laurence King Publishing, 2006. Bertoni, Franco, The Architecture of Philippe Starck. London: Academy Editions, 1994. Brayer, Marie-Ange, Archilab’s Future House: Radical Experiments in Living Space. London: Thames & Hudson, 2002. Brownlee, David B. and David E. De Long, Louis I. Kahn: In the Realm of Architecture. New York: Rizzoli, 1991. Buchanan, Peter, Renzo Piano Building Workshop: Complete Works. 2 vols, London: Phaidon, 1993–95. Cannell, Michael T., I. M. Pei: Mandarin of Modernism. New York: Carol Southern Books, 1995. Danz, Ernst, Architecture of Skidmore, Owings and Merrill, 1950–1962, trans. Ernst van Haagan. New York: Praeger, 1963. De Sessa, Cesare, Zaha Hadid: eleganze dissonanti. Turin: Testo & Immagine, 1996. Fiell, Charlotte and Peter Fiell, Designing the 21st Century, Köln: Taschen, 2005. Foster, Norman, Deyan Sudjic, and Spencer de Gray, Norman Foster and the British Museum. Munich: Prestel, 2001. Frampton, Kenneth, ed., Tadao Ando: Buildings, Projects, Writings. New York: Rizzoli, 1984. Garner, Philippe, Eileen Gray: Design and Architecture, 1878–1976. Köln: Taschen, 1993. Gast, Klaus-Peter, Louis I. Kahn: The Idea of Order, trans. Michael Robinson. Basel: Birkhäuser, 2001. Gehry, Frank, New York: Guggenheim Museum Publications 2001. Gissen, David, National Building Museum, Big & Green: Toward Sustainable Architecture in the 21st Century, Washington, D.C.,National Building Museum, 2002. Grieg, Suzanne and Thierry Grieb (eds), Museums in the 21st Century: Concepts, Projects, Buildings, Munich: Prestel, 2006. Gura, Judith, Design After Modernism: Furniture and Interiors 1970–2010, New York: W. W. Norton, 2012. Sourcebook of Scandinavian Furniture: Designs for the 21st Century, New York: W.W. Norton, 2007. Hadid, Zaha, Zaha Hadid. New York: Guggenheum Museum Publications, 2006. Hudson, Jennifer, 1000 New Designs 2 and where to find them: A 21st Century Sourcebook. London: Laurence King Publishing, 2010. Koolhaas, Rem and Veronique Patteeuw, Considering Rem Koolhaas and the Office for Metropolitan Architecture. Rotterdam: NA Publishers, 2003. McCoy, Esther, Richard Neutra. New York: Braziller, 1960. Miller, R. Craig, Penny Sparke, and Catherine McDermott, European Design Since 1985: Shaping the New Century, New York: Merrell, 2009. Miller, R. Craig and Rosemarie Haag Bletter, U.S. Design, 1975–2000, Munich: Prestel/Denver Art Museum, 2001. Morrison, Hugh, Louis Sullivan: Prophet of Modern Architecture. New York: W. W. Norton, 1935; rev. 2001. Moxon, Sian, Sustainability in Interior Design. London: Laurence King, 2011. Newhouse, Victoria, Towards a New Museum (revised edn). New York: Crown, 2007 Site and Sound. New York: Monacelli Press, 2012 Pawler, Martin, Eva Jiricna: Design in Exile. New York: Rizzoli, 1990. Phaidon Atlas of 21st-Century World Architecture. New York: Phaidon, 2011. Ragheb, J. Fiona, ed., Frank Gehry, Architect. New York: Guggenheim Museum Publications, 2001. Richards, Brent, New Glass Architecture. London: Laurence King Publishing, 2006. Román, Antonio, Eero Saarinen: An Architecture of Multiplicity. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2003. Ross, Philip and Jeremy Myerson, 21st-Century Office. New York: Rizzoli, 2003. Schneiderman, Deborah, Inside Prefab: The Ready-Made Interior. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Architectural Press, 2012. Sheridan, Michael, The Furniture of Poul Kjaerholm: Catalogue Raisonné New York: Gregory R. Miller & Co, 2008. Sommer, Degenhard, Ove Arup & Partners: Engineering the Built Environment. Basel: Birkhaüser, 1994. Scully, Vincent, Jr., Louis I. Kahn. New York: Braziller, 1962. Shibata, Naomi, Herzog & de Meuron. 2002–2006, Tokyo: A+U Publishing, 2006. Sparke, Penny, The Modern Interior. London: Reaktion Books/University of Chicago, 2008. Japanese Design. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2009. Sudjic, Deyan, Norman Foster, Richard Rogers, James Stirling: New Directions in British Architecture. London: Thames & Hudson, 1986. Ron Arad. London: Laurence King, 1999. Sweet, Fay, Philippe Starck: A Subverchic Design. London: Thames & Hudson, 1999. Sullivan, Louis H., The Autobiography of an Idea. New York: Dover, 1956. Temko, Allen, Eero Saarinen. New York: Braziller, 1962. Tsonia, Alexander, Santiago Calatrava: Complete Works. New York: Rizzoli, 2007. Uchida, Shigeru, Japanese Interior Design: Its Cultural Origins, Toyko: Uchida Design, 2007. Venturi, Robert and Denise Scott Brown, Venturi Scott Brown & Associates on Houses and Housing. London: Academy Editions, and New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1992. Williams, Gareth, The Furniture Machine, Furniture Since 1990. London: V&A Publications, 2006.