Acknowledgments They say that it takes a village to raise a child. The same goes for this book; it’s the result of encounters and shared experiences over several years that gave rise to the questions, first raised at Doors of Perception conferences, that are now addressed here. The most insightful of these questions are not mine: They come from the late Peter Dormer, John Chris Jones, Derrick de Kerckhove, Jouke Kleerebezem, Ezio Manzini, Caroline Nevejan, Jogi Panghaal, Chee Pearlman, Aditya Dev Sood, and Marco Susani. A number of the examples in the book are based on encounters in Japan and East Asia enabled by Tadanori Nagasawa and Kayoko Ota. Kayoko also introduced me to my first Amsterdammer, Willem Velthoven, who, in turn, helped organize the first Doors of Perception conferences. I owe a lot to Harry Swaak, who hired me to run the Netherlands Design Institute in 1993; it was there that many of the perplexities in this book crystallized, and where Doors of Perception was born. Our journey since then has been much enlivened by the presence of fellow explorers: Janet Abrams, Conny Bakker, Ole Bouman, Rob van Kranenburg, Bert Mulder, Michiel Schwarz, and Gert Staal. Doors speakers, who inspired us with their insight, have also been unfailingly generous in spirit. The warmth and insistent collaboration of the Doors tribe—the compost that has nurtured this book—are due to the stewardship of our producer, Janneke Berkelbach, and her livewire colleagues. My optimism about the future of design comes from working with some fabulous practitioners in recent times: Michael Samyn and Remon Tijssen on the Doors and Netherlands Design Institute websites; Wouter van Eyck and Ton Homburg on publications; Edith Gruson and Lynne Leegte on venues; and Abhishek Hazra on Doors East. Debra Solomon has artfully connected Doors with food and design. Aya van Caspel and Jane Szita have been wordsmiths to die for, and Livia Ponzio helped