many journalists keep us on our toes. Together with our software and engineering maestros Jan Jaap Spreij and Paul Jongsma, I’ve been truly privileged to learn about design, on the job, with such an amazing group of people. Ivo Janssen, who animated the whole enterprise with his piano performances at Doors, also introduced me to the music of Simeon ten Holt, which has provided me with the metaphor that concludes the book. Doors has flourished as a fledgling enterprise thanks to the stewardship of our Board: Dingeman Kuilman, Christian Oberman, Ben Pluijmers, Walter Amerika, and Krijn van Beek. A central theme of this book is the design of projects and institutions. The subject has been brought to life for me by working with some highly enlightened commissioners. Jakub Wejchert, at the European Commission, enabled many of us in Europe to put social issues at the center of technology innovation projects for the first time. Paola Antonelli, at MoMA, gave me the opportunity, as one of her helpers on Workspheres, to explore the future design of work. Roger Coleman and Jeremy Myerson at the Royal College of Art, Elena Pacenti at Domus Academy, and Tim Brown at Ideo were inspiring partners on the Presence project about elders online. Franco Debenedetti, Barbara Ghella, and Gillian Crampton Smith invited me along on a fabulous adventure: to get Interaction Design Institute Ivrea up and running. Most of what I know about interaction design (and Canavese food) I’ve learned from them and the Institute’s gifted faculty: Walter Aprile, Michael Kieslinger, Simona Maschi, Stefano Mirti, Casey Reas, Dag Svaenes, and Jan-Christoph Zoels. Sean Blair and Kevin Gavaghan in London and Claire Byers at One North East in Newcastle involved me in the design of a region-specific institution—and in my hometown, to boot. Victor Lo and John Frazer, on the Hong Kong Design Task Force, introduced me to the complexity of developments in China. Without Yrjo Sotamaa, Eija Salmi, and Jan Verwijnen in Helsinki, Peter Gall Krogh in Aarhus, Alessandro Biamonti in Milan, and Arvo Parenson in Tallinn, I would not have been able to visit the farthest and most fascinating corners of Europe for the Spark! project. Cathy Brickwood and Martine Posthuma de Boer, and my colleagues in Virtual Platform, introduced me to Europe’s best media art when we did E-Culture Fair together. Luuk Boelens, of Urban Unlimited, opened my eyes to the need for services connecting high-speed trains to the places where they stop; he also alerted me to the emerging phenomenon of design-free zones.