cess to open spectrum is important. Citizens need to understand that the network exists and how to get access.<sup>41</sup> When the Internet and wireless communications first made the news, some architects and urbanists wildly overreacted. ‘‘Bandwidth has replaced the boulevard: five blocks west has given way to the mouse click,’’ gushed Lars Lerup, dean of the architecture school at Rice University. ‘‘After thousands of years of bricks held together by mortar, the new metropolis is toggled together by attention spans. To understand the city, we must see it as a volatile gas and no longer as an inert solid.’’<sup>42</sup> After that initial exuberance, it’s now clear that wireless communication networks are an additional layer of infrastructure—not a replacement of the physical city. A wireless infrastructure, unlike hard and heavy roads and buildings and bridges, is malleable. Jo Reid, who is involved in a project called Mobile Bristol in the United Kingdom, talks about ‘‘drag-and-drop mediascapes.’’<sup>43</sup> In Britain, more mobile phones are used among homeless people than among the general population,<sup>44</sup> and Bristol Wireless is the initiative of a group of underemployed information technology professionals loosely based in Bristol, England, who proposed the idea of a wireless community local area network.<sup>45</sup> They had determined that rapidly emerging wireless technologies meant that even the most deprived communities would be able to create cheap wireless infrastructures that they could use. Ad hoc networks and reconfigurable radio networks provide a digital canvas over a whole city, a tapestry into which rich situated experiences can be painted and in which new commercial ventures explored. As you walk through the city, a diverse range of digital experiences such as soundscapes, games, and other interactive media bring the city alive in new ways. Researchers at Trinity College Dublin have developed an ad hoc wireless network called DAWN (the Dublin Ad Hoc Wireless Network) that supports instant messaging, Web and phone applications, e-mail image attachments, and more. Project leader Linda Doyle talks of ‘‘a network that comes into being on an as-needed basis. It grows, shrinks and fragments as nodes join and leave, or move in and out.’’<sup>46</sup> ## Rural Locality In rural areas, the hope for services enabled by wireless networks is that they will slow down urbanization by improving the living standards of people on the land. Already in industrialized agriculture, farmers have