been able to reduce their use of nitrogenous fertilizer by 34 percent by using GPS and accurate field-mapping and data-gathering techniques to apply chemicals only where they are needed. There have been additional fuel savings from reduced spraying of crops and the reduced use of unprofitable land. Take-up of these services has been slow in Europe because farms tend to be smaller and have less capacity to invest in sophisticated communication systems. One solution to this cost obstacle is for agrochemical and fertilizer suppliers to create a service package that includes these smart services rather than just sell bulk chemicals.<sup>47</sup> But the big opportunity for mediascapes is in countries such as India, in which hundreds of millions of people live in rural localities and farming remains small scale. Distribution networks are already extraordinarily effective in India, even without technology, but ITC, one of India’s largest trading conglomerates, is deploying a system called Soya Choupal that connects rural farmers, information, products, and services, to remarkable new effect. Soya Choupal is a service designed to provide physical service support through a Choupal Sanchalak—himself a lead farmer—who acts as the interface between computer terminal and the farmers.<sup>48</sup> Srinavasa Rao, who leads the Soya Choupal agricultural business, explained to me that a choupal, traditionally, is where farmers meet to share news and information. Through the Soya Choupal Web portal, which is in Hindi and other local languages, farmers can access the latest local and global information on weather and scientific farming practices as well as market prices at the village itself. ITC claims that the system enhances farm productivity, improves farm gate price realization, cuts transaction costs, and facilitates the supply of high-quality farm inputs and the purchase of commodities.<sup>49</sup> The basic cost of providing conventional telephone and Internet connections in India is about 750 dollars per line. An operator would require a monthly revenue of about twenty-two dollars to break even on that line. As a monthly payment, this figure is affordable to barely 3 percent of Indian homes—and these are concentrated in large cities. To resolve this dilemma, a system called nLogue uses wireless local loop (WLL) technology to provide multifunctional access to a network of kiosks. n-Logue facilitates relationships among hardware providers, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), content providers, and local governments. Rather than directly promoting and maintaining countless WLL networks, nLogue is developing a network of local entrepreneurs to provide front-line implementation