and services to local subscribers. These local service partners (LSPs) set up access centers in small towns and rural areas that provide simultaneous Internet and telephony access to subscribers within a thirty-kilometer (nineteen-mile) radius.<sup>50</sup> In India, Sparse Area Communications involve combinations of satellite and fixed or wireless local loops, with relay stations and devices powered by solar panels, deployed to connect even isolated communities. When I visited the Centre for Knowledge Societies in Bangalore, a researcher described walking for three hours up a hill to a village that was inaccessible by road. When he arrived, he discovered that children in the village were all computer literate—and one showed him a PowerPoint presentation. I wasn’t sure then, or now, that finding a PowerPoint presentation at the top of a mountain represented progress. The more heated debate among communications designers concerns whether proprietary systems like Soya Choupal and nLogue are compatible with the ideal of an open-systems society. ‘‘The trick is to think and act rural,’’ advises Ashok Jhunjhunwaller, a promoter of the electronic kiosks that are transforming connectivity in rural India. Even if individual farmers do not own a PC or handset themselves, 85 percent of India’s seven hundred thousand villages now have functional access to some form of connectivity. Many hundred millions of people use the country’s million-plus public call offices (PCOs), and PCO revenues currently account for an astonishing 25 percent of India’s total telecom revenues. A remarkable man named Sam Pitroda came up with this idea of ‘‘an entrepreneur in every street,’’ and since he first outlined his vision to me in 1995, it has been has been realized in vast areas of the country.<sup>51</sup> Pitroda’s PCO innovation had relatively little to do with technology; it was mainly a business brilliant business model: first, to aggregate demand, and second, to scale the service rapidly by involving existing local entrepreneurs. Jhunjhunwaller is hoping to leverage similar scalability dynamics, optimistic that kiosk systems as an enabling infrastructure should make it possible to double average incomes in rural India from today’s two hundred dollars per year to four hundred.<sup>52</sup> ## From Far to Deep In chapter 3, I told you about the law of locality used by telecommunications network designers to allocate capacity. As I noted earlier in this