chapter, much of the world’s GDP is highly localized. Local conditions, local trading patterns, local networks, local skills, and local culture remain a critical success factor for the majority of economic activity in the world. Especially if we steer them in that direction, mediascapes can improve the resource efficiency of the places we live in. Big business is already using mediascapes to shape the evolution of localities. Locational data and demographic models are used by Starbucks and McDonald’s to site new stores. Huge volumes of point-of-sale information are mined to help firms like WalMart tune the placement of wares, even inside stores. My proposition is this: The same kinds of software and data that enable WalMart to locate its huge stores can be repurposed to optimize local-area service ecologies. Flows of resources can be shaped that minimize the movement of people and goods. New parameters can be introduced into open planning systems—for example, that 50 percent of produce in a shop or railway station should be local or have traveled no more than fifty kilometers from where it was grown. Local-area service ecologies can be further enhanced by referral and ratings systems. Position index databases, social navigation, quick messaging, local polling on handheld or worn devices: All these have the capacity to combine depth with lightness in economic life in a locality. A similar approach could optimize the siting of decentralized educational facilities, too. ## Participatory Place In Tokyo, cement trucks sport the slogan ‘‘Begin the next.’’ When you buy cellophane tape at the corner shop, the bag carries a slogan: ‘‘Perhaps we are at the beginning of a new renaissance.’’ Honda’s Dio motorcycle sports an entire text on the faring that declares: ‘‘Movement: The City is a 24 hour stage where we act out a life. Be it day or night, we go out anytime looking for something new.’’ Hardly surprising that they call Tokyo the ‘‘sea of desires’’: Its citizenry revels in continuous change and innovation.<sup>53</sup> Change—and multiple and changing cultures—are what cities are about. But this makes it hard to come up with design criteria. The other downside of mediascapes and urban networks is although we can’t live without them, they are not stable. In recent times urbannetwork collapses have become more frequent and more alarming. A