An Icelandic designer, Halldor Gislason, has also looked into the ways designers can help rejuvenate localities devastated by the loss of fishing but where assets remain: harbors, keys, boats, fish factories, etc. In one town in the north of Iceland, where the trawlers have all been sold off, Gislason developed a new kind of cultural tourism that features whale watching and an exhibition space dealing with timber boats and Viking sailing technology. These experiences have taught me that among the success factors in design-for-locality projects, the most important are a real-world context; a service orientation; a requirement to connect actors in new combinations and exploit network effects; and above all, an insistence that the incoming project team work with local people and ensure, where feasible, that expertise is left behind after the project ends. This kind of bottom-up design is not easily reconciled with security-driven control of networks. The beauty of projects like Spark! is that they help citizens perceive their own locality through fresh eyes. The most valuable service designers and artists can provide a locality may therefore be to help it develop a shared cultural vision of the future, but not to design that future for it. ## Design-Free Zones As with networks and infrastructure, so too with localities: Too much of our world is just too designed. Too much control over networks is detrimental to the social innovation upon which our future fortunes depend. It is welcome to note, therefore, that several European cities are contemplating the protection of design-free situations, or free zones, in which planning and other top-down, outside-in improvements will be kept at bay to make space for the kinds of experimentation that can emerge, unplanned and unexpected, from wild, design-free ground. It’s tough for planners to embrace a phenomenon that flourishes because it is not planned, and free-zone promoters face tough opposition from both security and health and safety officials, who hate the idea of places outside their control. (Tickets for the Burning Man Festival in Arizona include the disclaimer that the buyer may suffer injury or death.) We can learn a lot from the free-form approaches to urban design that flourished in situations in which the state was collapsing. A project called Wild City: Urban Genetics involved a group of designers called Stealth in