street-level research undertaken in Belgrade over a number of years. The city experienced an abrupt change from centralized to atomized growth as the result of a decade of crisis and a United Nations embargo in 1992. As the state and its institutions collapsed, individual initiative led to innovation in literally every urban domain, from commerce to housing production and public services. The new, nonregulated structure that emerged flooded the public realm and, in the designers’ words, ‘‘superimposed a layer of mutants on the existing city.’’ Mapping the interactions between nonregulated processes (street traders moving into spaces vacated by defunct official businesses) and existing city fabrics (the green market or a department store), Stealth has developed tools to map actors and forces that previously did not figure in urban design notation.<sup>56</sup> This research into urban genetics focuses on the evolutionary, time-based character of nonregulated transformations. It is a practice of discovering the inherent logic of emergent processes, based on the assumption that the result is often more sophisticated than a conventionally designed one. Through this experiment, a set of tools and a specific methodology have been experimentally developed for visualizing, monitoring, and to a certain extent, predicting spatial and organizational changes over time. Stealth’s objective, in the longer term, is ‘‘to point out the undiscovered potentials of specific locations.’’<sup>57</sup> As the Wild City researchers put it, the city itself acts like a wild garden, as an ‘‘incubator of new urban forms. The paradigm of ‘wildness’ emerged through non-planned and scarcely regulated processes. In the urban domain, these processes feature a remarkable degree of innovation. They lead to possibilities for redefining institutional participation in the creation of urban space.’’<sup>58</sup> Wild City provides empirical evidence that an adapt-and-provide focus on the adaptation of existing infrastructures to serve new purposes can work. ## Conclusion The list of challenges facing the design of the places in which we live is daunting. In chapter 1, I explained that the ecological footprints of cities appear to be unsustainable. In chapter 2, I described the many indications that constant acceleration is wearing us, and our institutions, out. In chapter 3, I described the costs we incur for spending more time on the move than on being there.