In this chapter, I have looked at the often malignant impact of place marketing on the identity of regions and cities. I have shown that powerful but bland retail chains threaten to turn our homes into ‘‘clonetowns’’ and that far too much money is being spent on point-to-mass buildings in which we are supposed to pay and gawk at culture and sport performed by others. Overlaying it all is a layer of technology-based systems that we depend on but that are overcomplicated and fault-intolerant. These systems and networks occupy far too much of the attention of our planners and urban designers, whose high-level thinking causes them to operate in an ever-more-abstract realm. All these trends are antithetical to the open, collaborative, bottom-up design promoted in this book. These challenges look daunting, and they are. But the beauty of the metaphor of tipping points is that in a context of complex systems and constant change, even small actions can have a powerful, transformative effect on the bigger picture. Thinking local and thinking small is not a parochial approach, and it is not an abdication of responsibility for the bigger picture. On the contrary, we will get from here to there by a series of small, but carefully considered, steps. We have to live somewhere, and if nature and social history are any guide, that somewhere is local. Proximity and locality are natural features of the economy. Most of the world’s GDP is highly localized. Around the world, the vast majority of small and medium-sized companies operate within a radius of fifty kilometers of their headquarters location. Local conditions, local trading patterns, local networks, local skills, and local culture are critical success factors for the majority of organizations.