nizations. In the extreme view, ownership of any kind of asset other than information is a liability. For Bill Mayon-White, a professor at the London School of Economics, the physical assets owned by most corporate giants represent ‘‘an albatross hanging around their necks.’’<sup>2</sup> Companies gain flexibility by not owning physical assets, by concentrating on ownership of intellectual property and moving that around. A big part of the impetus to such thinking has come from the Spanish economist Manuel Castells, who wrote evocatively about the networked economy as a ‘‘space of flows.’’<sup>3</sup> The constantly changing flows of people and ideas that characterize a dynamic learning organization, and the quality of interactions with other people and communities and customers, are more important than the boxes we meet in, the chairs we sit in, or the keyboards we punch to communicate with. If innovation is a social process that involves complex interactions among individuals, communities of practice, and customers, then fostering these complex interactions—designing the context of innovation and learning—brings so-called soft aspects of workplace design to the fore. The keyword here is minds in the plural—and in particular the innovative capabilities of groups. Learning happens best when people participate in different communities of practice. The best collaboration environments provide the opportunity to meet, share ideas, discuss, and learn from one another’s experiences. We need to interact in them, not pose in them. Design does not take place in a situation; it is the situation. As planners, designers, and citizens, we need to rethink our spaces, places, and communities in order to better exploit the dynamic potential of networked collaboration. Gadgets, furniture, and high-design buildings are of modest value, at best, in this context, and the solution to high-tech environments is not to add more tech. Learning relies on personal interaction and, in particular, on a range of peripheral, but nonetheless embodied, forms of communication. Technology obscures these kinds of liminal communication more than it enhances them. Understanding, relationships, and trust are time-based, not tech-based. I cannot recall ever having an intelligent conversation in a smart room. For Nobel laureate Murray Gell-Mann, innovation is an ‘‘emergent phenomenon’’ that happens when a person or organization fosters interaction between different kinds of people and disparate forms of knowledge.<sup>4</sup> Designing the context of innovation and learning is therefore about fostering