reinforce what philosophers call our ontological alienation, a sense of rootlessness and anxiety, of not quite being real, of being lost in space. Aviation is typical of the way the whole world is going: saturated with information and systems, complex but incomprehensible, an exhilarating human achievement and a terrifying prospect at the same time. It’s time design came to grips with these ambiguous features of our technology-filled environment. Different kinds of space affect the way we think and feel. Building plans, of the kind you find in an architect’s office, say almost nothing about the quality of our interactions in complex technical spaces like transport hubs or high-tech offices—the operating environment within which space, electronic signals, and people interact with one another continuously on a global scale. An immense global system determines what architects would call the program of an individual airport building. As we saw in chapter 3, aviation is a vast system. The world’s airlines now carry one-sixth of the world’s population—more than one billion passengers—on scheduled flights. As I write this, three hundred thousand people are in the air above the United States alone. They’re in a uniquely space-out office. The world’s aviation system, of which airports are one component, is distributed not just in space, but also in time. Its earthbound infrastructure is linked into a complex operating environment, or aviation space. Airports exist at the intersection of airways—the space through which aircraft pass—which are densely crisscrossed, in three spatial dimensions and at different times, by the routes planes are flying, have flown, and will fly. Aviation space is saturated with electronic information from humans and machines, chattering out directions to thousands of aircrews—and onboard computers—at any one moment. The fact that people—passengers, aircrews, ground staff, air traffic controllers, and the like—are part of the system, too, adds to the complexity. As we saw in chapter 3, these huge flows of people and matter and information are increasing in volume and power at an increasing rate. The biggest international airport hubs—the United States alone has thirty—are like giant pumps that greatly increase flow through the whole system. Phenomenal costs land on those places that wish to join the hub club. Once road and rail links, baggage-handling systems, air traffic control systems, and so on are factored in, the capital cost of an international airport can quickly exceed a billion dollars. That’s a high-end office rent.