Planning a big transport hub is like designing a city with more than half a million inhabitants. But it’s not like living in one. A big hub handles more than a thousand airline movements a day, and the ground traffic generated by all the associated workers, passengers, well-wishers, cab drivers, and so on is also enormous.<sup>5</sup> Frankfurt’s airport, with a workforce in excess of forty thousand, is the biggest single-site employer in Germany. London’s Heathrow employs fifty-five thousand people directly—meteorologists, air traffic controllers, pilots, cabin crew, cleaners, caterers, check-in staff, baggage handlers, engineers, firemen, police, security guards. Another three hundred thousand or more people are employed by myriad suppliers—all those van drivers and sandwich makers. Airports are also the world’s largest employers of dogs. Costs on this scale are sustained because airports and railway termini have become large multinational businesses in their own right. Less than 50 percent of Heathrow’s earnings come from landing fees or servicing aircraft. Commercial activity on the ground is one of the main sources of airport revenue, and hence one of the main drivers of airport design. Transit passengers not flying spend an average of thirty-five dollars a head at Heathrow’s hundreds of shops, restaurants, hairdressers—and four caviar bars. Heathrow is also the largest market for Havana cigars in the world— including Havana. Powerful commercial and network operation agendas drive the way both space and time are designed. In the old days, when airports and transport hubs were conceived as transport utilities—if only for an elite—engineers and operations people would have regarded an idle passenger as evidence of system inefficiency. Not today. Mobility is just one of the products on sale at a modern interchange. To commercial managers, ‘‘passenger discretionary time’’ or ‘‘dwell time’’—the time spent by passengers killing time between journeys or between links of a journey—is a sales opportunity. The management of dwell time to optimize commercial yield is one reason—traffic jams are another—that throughout my lifetime, the proportion of time I have spent in the air on a journey has steadily decreased. The design of work and the experience of mobility are merging. In today’s networked economy, many people spend their lives doing projects to earn a living; they do not necessarily have jobs. For project workers, life on the road has replaced the daily commute to an office. The growing