amount of business carried out across national boundaries in the new economy has fueled demand for meeting rooms, exhibition and showroom facilities, business centers, and other non-travel-specific facilities—inside, next to, under, and on top of most new airports and railway stations. Transport interchanges have replaced science and business parks as the epicenter of business real estate. These multiple programs and agendas—operational, commercial, political—are one reason these places feel strange. Cities have inhabitants, but in transport hubs, everyone is transient. ‘‘When public space becomes a derivative of movement,’’ says the writer Richard Sennett, ‘‘it loses any independent experiential meaning of its own. On the most physical level, these environments of pure movement prompt people to think of the public domain as meaningless. . . . [They are] catatonic space.’’<sup>6</sup> What is going on, when these great modern spaces have this effect? Any space, including artificial space, affects our minds and our bodies. But artificial environments shield us from phenomena like climate, and particularly daylight, whose cycles in the natural world expose us physically to the reality of constant change. In an optically static environment, like an airport, mall, or lobby, the body is physically desensitized from its sense of time. In ‘‘The Poetics of Light,’’ the American architect Henry Plummer observes that ‘‘our very sense of being is based on an experience of process, activity, and movement. We seem to find an image of our own existence in the changing lights of the natural world.’’<sup>7</sup> Moment-to-moment mutations of light also provide what the philosopher Henri Bergson called ‘‘lived time’’ and Ernst Cassirer ‘‘a consciousness of sequence.’’<sup>8</sup> I was reminded of this when, wandering slack-jawed around Anchorage’s airport en route to Japan, I accidentally stepped outside into an Alaskan night. It was literally like waking up from a dream. Startled by the cold, dank, spooky Alaskan air, I lost my bearings for a moment. Where was I? Nature, the real world, seemed alien. Luckily, a blast of noise, and the warm embrace of kerosene fumes, reminded me where I was. Lived time, natural time, cold, dank, spooky Alaskan air time stands in stark contrast to the so-called objective time of clocks and departure times in high-tech, systems-filled spaces. According to the psychologist David Winnicott, loss of temporality is a feature of the psychotic and deprived individual in which the person ‘‘loses the ability to connect the past with the present.’’ The bridging of the present into the past and into the future is,