says Winnicott, ‘‘a crucial dimension of psychic integration and health.’’ So there you have it. Systems-rich spaces, by scrambling your mind-and-body clock, create the preconditions for psychosis.<sup>9</sup> The implications of this for our technology-filled world are serious. According to IBM, growing complexity means that the number of IT workers required globally to support a billion people and millions of firms connected via the Internet—possibly within the next decade—may be over two hundred million, a number equivalent to two-thirds of America’s population.<sup>10</sup> That figure—two hundred million to keep our systems going— could be a grave underestimate if levels of stress and anxiety continue to grow and continue, as they do now, to keep people away from work. In Britain, days lost to stress, depression, and anxiety doubled in just five years during the late 1990s, and since then over half of all employees have seen increased absenteeism due to stress.<sup>11</sup> Stress-related absenteeism is one reason why staff shortages at British Airways in 2004 left travelers in long lines, people sleeping in the street, and heated exchanges between customers and check-in staff at several airports. A spokeswoman at the time said staff shortages were the result, too, of unusually high staff turnover: Twice the usual number had quit.<sup>12</sup> The penetration of systems-based design into public space is also bad for the body politic. Innovation thrives in conditions of diversity, not efficiency, and spaces designed for a single function—be it movement, sport, entertainment, or culture—are unlikely to foster innovation. This is why old-style cities remain unmatched as sites of creativity: Diverse peoples and cultures are crammed into them in a most undesigned manner. Monofunctional zones, gated communities, and themed districts all exclude the opportunity for surprise encounter and combination—the urban equivalent of the mutation and adaptation that determines evolutionary success in nature. This is also why corporate research laboratories are often so bad at social or service innovation. Many corporate labs are designed and function as gated communities, isolated physically and experientially from the messy real world. Dark reflective glass often intimidates the visitor on arrival; as often as not, you have to sign a nondisclosure agreement before even being let in the door. (I was once late arriving to give a talk at an IBM campus because guards with ferocious dogs would not let me in. The theme of my talk was ‘‘transparency in design.’’)