## Designing Situations Systems-rich situations pose three main challenges to a designer wishing to improve the experience for their users. First, there are the contradictory operational and commercial agendas to deal with; second, the designer has to tackle the impact of complex artificial environments on our physical and mental states; and third, the design and remaking of these spaces never stops—indeed, the rate of change is accelerating—so that the project-based model of design is inappropriate. The contradictory agendas of transport nodes are by themselves an intractable problem. The architect is one of the few people—along with the planner and the economist—who grapples materially with space as a totality. Everyone else looks after a little piece. Amsterdam’s Schiphol Airport is ‘‘run’’ by five people—but they do not direct what the fifty thousand people who work there do. The job of those three or four people is to manage the interactions among the many conflicting agendas of those involved in the airport’s operation. In such a context, the chances of an architect’s imposing a coherent and stable design solution are small. We will return to the consequences of that in a moment. The second challenge—that of artificial space which isolates us from the rhythms and sensations of nature—can at one level be tackled by something simple, like letting in fresh air (as any parent, opening a child’s window at night, knows intuitively). Window manufacturers are doing a huge song-and-dance about the fact that their latest high-tech products, some of which are being used in airports, can actually be opened. Even where windows remain sealed, letting in daylight is now a requirement in airport design. Perceptual confusion is a harder design nut to crack. Countless modern writers, from Karl Marx, to Baudelaire, to Richard Sennett, whom I quoted earlier, have written about the alienation we feel in modern places. Urban anxiety is part of our culture. Psychologists who study the phenomenon have discovered the importance of what they call ‘‘situated understanding’’—a clear mental picture of an artificial environment, which contributes to one’s mental health. An anthropologist, Lucy Suchman, brought the attention of a whole generation of human-computer interaction researchers to this topic in a 1987 book, Plans and Situated Actions. Suchman argued that that people do not just follow plans, such as those made