by architects or systems designers, when acting in the real world; rather, human action is deeply situated and interactive with the context.<sup>13</sup> When it comes to giving us a clear mental picture of our environment, a situated understanding, high-tech, systems-serving spaces don’t. In most of them, one is situated in a box, and it feels like it. Eero Saarinen’s TWA terminal in New York once had a particularly strong impact on the public imagination; it became for many critics a symbol of modernity. Today, Saarinen’s masterpiece at Kennedy Airport has all but disappeared from sight. You glimpse it every now and again, cowering between lumpish great buildings like a lost child in Times Square.<sup>14</sup> Transport and urban planners, swimming in a sea that keeps on rising, find it hard not to think in terms of boxes. Boxes contain lots of space, they can be packed together, and they stack up nicely, like Legos, when you need to expand. The result is usually functional, bland, and easy to get lost in. Creative architectural solutions do not necessarily improve the user’s experience. Roissy Terminal 1 at Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris, for example, is a design monument to system complexity and flows—and is a nightmare to use. I must have been through the terminal forty times, but it is still disorienting as I glide down its capillary-like tunnels into the featureless aorta of the main building. It’s like being in a Jacques Tati movie, or in one of those exhibits in a zoo in which ants crawl up and down transparent tubes from one nest to another. The experience is typical of any building that serves the system, rather than the system’s users. Architecture lacks a pleasing spatial language for flow-based contexts of this kind. One apologetic designer, Bernard Tschumi, put his finger on the problem: ‘‘Three thousand years of architectural ideology have tried to assert that architecture is about stability, solidity, and foundation—when it is the very opposite. Like modern scientific knowledge, buildings are constantly on the verge of change.’’<sup>15</sup> Another design diagnostician, Donald Scho¨n, concluded that design is now increasingly taking place ‘‘beyond the stable state.’’<sup>16</sup> And Rem Koolhaas, the architectural high priest of all that is big and fast in today’s world, finds that architects are confronted by ‘‘arbitrary demands, parameters they did not establish, in countries they hardly know, about issues they are only dimly aware of. More and more substance is grafted on starving roots.’’<sup>17</sup> Koolhaas the critic understands the problem, but Koolhaas the architect can’t do much about it. His design for Euro-Lille, in France, celebrates space, change, and movement—but