does virtually nothing to give passers-through a cognitive sense of place. You feel like one of those tiny humanoid figures architects use to decorate their models: sleek, but blind. (Architects frequently complain that the architectural models they make for competitions cost them tens or even hundreds of thousands of dollars to make. But a one-tenth scale model of a person standing can be purchased for seventy-five cents—far less than the five dollars it costs to buy a model car at the same scale.<sup>18</sup>) Some system hubs do try to make their spaces interesting. Schiphol, for example, installed a Jenny Holzer artwork in one particularly vapid void. Cryptic words and phrases flow up and down a twenty-meter-high digital display. Holzer no doubt spends a lot of her life staring at departure boards, and her piece is strong, clearly conceived, and well-executed. But the result is pitiful in the context of Schiphol as a whole. Phenomenologically, her piece is powerless to communicate amid the not-so-silent roar of people, movement, and information that pervades the rest of the airport. Confronted by ten thousand other signs and screens that battle for one’s attention, the artwork is struck dumb. Hub designers have a clear priority: to control and optimize flow. They devote all their energies to controlling one’s movement in a particular direction at a particular time. The signs they deploy are the design equivalent, for humans, of those metal strips on the floor that guide robots around automated factories. And they can work. When I arrive back at Schiphol from a trip, the design quality of the banks of video information screens and those large yellow signs are a reassuring pleasure. If one is going to be processed by a system, better to be processed by an elegant, even beautiful system than by a bad one. But even Schiphol’s signs are losing their perceptual potency as the space around them expands remorselessly. A sign pointing to ‘‘D’’ meant a lot when Pier D was a corridor, as it was ten years ago. Today, Pier D is continuously gaining width and height; it has become a bloated plaza in place of a tunnel. ‘‘D’’ has become a place rather than a direction.<sup>19</sup> To be a designer in the space of flows is like King Canute facing the tide: No individual has the authority to improve our experience of systems space. Some operators make their facilities cleaner, easier to use, and mildly more humane than others. Sometimes they hang art on walls, or put sculptures in concourses, or fountains in lobbies. But apart from the fact that most concourses are semiotically stronger than most art, this is not really