the point. The fundamental logic of hubs—their basic operating software— is to process passengers, not to enlighten us. The design of multimodal, multifunctional, multitemporal transport intersections is particularly advanced in the Netherlands. It’s a small and densely populated country in which infrastructure projects have become epicenters of extraordinarily complex spatial and building design processes.<sup>20</sup> Increasingly, in the design of these complex places, high-tech simulations and physical structure influence each other. ‘‘The diagramme functions for us as a sort of mediator in between the object and the subject,’’ says the architect Ben van Berkel of UN (United Net) Studio, a newgeneration design practice that uses diagrams for the proportioning of information—to represent visually, and where possible in real time, variable phenomena for a specific location such as climate, budget, construction processes, orientation, and activities. Van Berkel describes as ‘‘deep planning’’ the process by which his team scans a site for its flow structure. ‘‘These scans reveal its real problems and potentials,’’ says van Berkel; ‘‘the flows of the physical movements of people and goods reveal the relations between duration and territorial use.’’ The typical product of deep planning is a situation-specific, dynamic, organizational structural plan, using scenarios, diagrams, parameters, formulas, and themes, that encompasses the mapping of political, managerial, planning, community, and private relations.<sup>21</sup> Movement studies are the cornerstone of design proposals made by van Berkel and his colleagues. A project like Arnhem Central exemplifies the convoluted type of public construction that takes place when multiple networks and systems converge at one place. A multitude of designed activities is concentrated in a forty-thousand-square-meter site: central concourse, underground parking for a thousand cars and five thousand bicycles, tunnel, shops, offices. Six different transport systems converge on the station area. Every weekday, fifty-five thousand travelers move through the location as they transfer from one system to another. Designing these perpetual-motion environments involves combining physical circulation with the experiences people may have along the way. It’s not enough to design for pure movement: The designer has to build in spaces, activities, and intersections where people will leave the flow. Pure movement can be bad for business. Jan Benthem, who with his partner Mels Crouwel is the master architect of Schiphol, told me with glee