## Introduction ‘‘In the bubble’’ is a phrase used by air traffic controllers to describe their state of mind, among their glowing screens and flows of information, when they are in the flow and in control. Lucky them. Most of us feel far from in control. We’re filling up the world with amazing devices and systems—on top of the natural and human ones that were already here— only to discover that these complex systems seem to be out of control: too complex to understand, let alone to shape, or redirect. Things may seem out of control—but they are not out of our hands. Many of the troubling situations in our world are the result of design decisions. Too many of them were bad design decisions, it is true—but we are not the victims of blind chance. The parlous condition of the planet, our only home, is a good example. Eighty percent of the environmental impact of the products, services, and infrastructures around us is determined at the design stage.<sup>1</sup> Design decisions shape the processes behind the products we use, the materials and energy required to make them, the ways we operate them on a daily basis, and what happens to them when we no longer need them. We may not have meant to do so, and we may regret the way things have turned out, but we designed our way into the situations that face us today. The premise of this book is simply stated: If we can design our way into difficulty, we can design our way out. ‘‘Everyone designs,’’ wrote scientist Herb Simon, ‘‘who devises courses of action aimed at changing existing situations, into preferred ones.’’<sup>2</sup> For Victor Papanek, too, ‘‘design is basic to all human activities—the placing and patterning of any act towards a desired goal constitutes a design process.’’<sup>3</sup> Designing is what human beings do.