about the time when the commercial people insisted an area of seating be removed to make way for a row of shops. The result was the opposite of that intended: Revenues per square meter in the new shops, and in existing ones next to them, actually decreased after the redesign, which, as it happened, had created a kind of canyon through which passengers rushed like white water in the Rocky Mountains—too fast to stop and shop. The seats were put back. Flow designers like Jan Benthem and UN Studio have learned from such experiences to pay attention to what they call ‘‘kaleidoscope moments’’—the turns in flows where movement is tighter or more compact, or where they cross over other flows. ‘‘Obstacles to flow can be functional, and add value,’’ says van Berkel.<sup>22</sup> ## Situations and Meaning I have spent thousands of hours of my life in transport hubs and airports. I have visited countless high-tech offices and studios. I have had a beginner’s hands-on experience in the design of the building for knowledge-based institute. I have worked with the world’s most powerful cultural institution on an exhibition about workspace design. My conclusion? Gadgets and tools are of modest importance, at best. Creating community is only marginally about technology. What matters is the copresence through time of bodies and the emergence of shared meaning as we interact with each other in meaningful activities. Neither of these processes is much enhanced by mediation or locomotion. Spaces oversaturated with media actively harm them. What matters in situation design is the meaning and purpose of what we’re there to do. I learned this lesson a few years back when I arrived in New York to meet my daughter Kate for a vacation. She seemed her normal, sunny self, but as we chatted in the lobby of her mother’s hotel, we noticed a lump behind her ear. It did not hurt, Kate said, but we resolved to see a doctor just to check. It was a weekend, there was no house doctor on call, so we were advised to go to the emergency room of St. Vincent’s Hospital a block away. A gothic scene awaited us. There were armed guards at the door. Drunks and junkies lolled on the benches of the waiting room. A half-naked lunatic was running around. And most of the staff in the large, gloomy space wore bright pink face masks. Kate, who was six at the time, watched this all with great interest. Her parents were petrified.