‘‘Place is not given, it is made,’’ the writer Malcolm McCullough reminds us.<sup>23</sup> Interactions in a place create and add value to it for the interactants. That value never reaches a final equilibrium but remains constantly in play—from the routine of domestic microtransactions such as buying a quart of milk to the vast flows of capital markets. Context and situation were vital to craft in preindustrial times. The settings of shop and studio reified work practices, and props, supporting tools, and work process configurations—which had evolved through time and continuous improvement—embodied intellectual capital.<sup>24</sup> The same simple lesson is true today. The best situation for work, the most efficient and effective method of conveying information within a development team, is face to face. Computing and software professionals recognize this fact in the fastgrowing Agile Alliance, whose ‘‘Manifesto for Agile Software Development’’ includes these words: We are uncovering better ways of developing software by doing it and helping others do it. Through this work we have come to value Individuals and interactions over processes and tools Working software over comprehensive documentation Customer collaboration over contract negotiation Responding to change over following a plan.<sup>25</sup> I once talked to a group of computer scientists about ‘‘the thermodynamics of networked collaboration.’’ I chose this phrase as the title of my talk because we human beings are social creatures. Our networks and communities need the time, energy, presence, and participation of real people to flourish. Human systems need inputs of human energy to do well. Everything else—the Internet, agents, wireless, gadgets—is contingent. They’re support, not the thing itself. So when designing systems, services, infrastructures—and work itself—we should ask whether our design actions will enable or disable human agency. Embodiment is a killer app. Whatever it is that we design, it’s better if we design people in, not out.