## Wellware Confronted by unsustainable rates of growth in expenditure, much of the health industry is looking to automation and technology for ways to reduce costs. Thousands of services connecting our bodies to networks are in development. For Richard Saul Wurman, who runs an influential conference, TedMed (Technology, Entertainment and Design, and Medicine),<sup>9</sup> on the subject, health care and technology are ‘‘the next convergence.’’ TedMed covers everything from computer graphics and imaging of the human body through microlozenges that record their journey through the body, wearables of all kinds, visualization of blood, urine, and DNA, genomics, robotics, and nanotechnology, plus myriad information services designed to assist people in the planning of a healthy life. I would be foolish to argue that technology has no place in health care. After all, as I recounted in chapter 5, modern medicine saved my daughter’s life. If I were a paraplegic, I would welcome cyberspace as a working environment for doing things disallowed by my body right now. The oftengrim aftereffects of stroke—a present risk to millions of people—are being alleviated by new technologies: If I could not properly see or hear, I don’t doubt that sensory implants would be a godsend.<sup>10</sup> What I object to is not technology in health, but the overreliance on technology to do things that human beings can and should do better, and the false expectations raised by special-interest groups that should—and do—know better regarding what technology can do and what it can’t do in the realm of health care. Communications technology and simulation are prominent in high-tech scenarios for health. Health care industries already spend the better part of twenty billion dollars a year on ICT, and that figure is set to soar. One of the more extraordinary books I found during research for this book was the 1,276-page Telemedicine Glossary. This hefty tome lists 13,500 organizations and projects involved with health telematics; a single page lists thirty online journals and magazines. Other pages list six hundred telemedicine research projects with acronyms like KISS (Knowledge-Based Interactive Signal Monitoring System), DILEMMA (Logical Engineering in General Practice, Oncology and Shared-Care), ESTEEM (European Standardized Telemetric Tool to Evaluate EMG Knowledge-Based), CONQUEST (Clinical Oncology Network for Quality Standards of Treatment), WISECARE (Workflow Information Systems for European Nursing Care), PRE-HIP (Predicting