Clinical Performance of Cementless HIP Replacements), CLIFF (Cluster Initiative for Flood and Fire Emergencies), and HUMAN (Health Through Telematics for Inmates) as titles.<sup>11</sup> The last of these is about treating prisoners remotely. The mismatch between the innocuous-sounding acronym and its less-than-innocuous meaning is not untypical of the medical research world. Elsewhere, crisp young white people, their gorgeous bodies wrapped in microcircuitry, adorn the website for ‘‘New Generation of Wearable Systems for Health: Towards a Revolution of Citizens’ Health and Life Style Management?,’’ a trade conference. This vision of the future features physically immaculate people who don’t look remotely in need of implantable health systems. These wearables are ‘‘to manage people with risk factors and prevent diseases through health status monitoring and life style management.’’<sup>12</sup> This sounds fine, except that the almost casual penetration of technology onto and into our bodies is happening without discussion of its consequences. I call this phenomenon Borg drift. Borg drift is what happens when you add all these tiny, practical, wellmeant, and individually admirable enhancements together and find that the picture begins to look creepy. As often happens, artists and writers were the first to spot broader consequences of these trends. Donna Haraway, in her celebrated ‘‘Cyborg Manifesto,’’ observed that ‘‘late twentieth century machines have made thoroughly ambiguous the difference between natural and artificial, mind and body, self-developing and externally designed. Our machines are disturbingly lively, and we are frighteningly inert.’’<sup>13</sup> We are designing a world in which every object, every building—and every body— becomes part of a network service. We did not set out to design such an outcome, but that’s what’s coming if technology push proceeds unabated. The pity of it is that spending money on technology like this does not appear to buy better health—or at least, not a longer life. The biggest spenders on health care, North Americans, die earlier than Japanese or Spaniards, who spend far less on health care.<sup>14</sup> Medicine has become a two-trillion-dollar industry, and the world’s three-hundred-billion-dollar pharmaceutical industry turns out thousands of different drugs. But much of the world’s population dies of the same diseases that killed people a thousand years ago: malaria, tuberculosis, and malnutrition. A growing number of health professionals believe that medicine, as an institution, undermines health. When Ivan Illich wrote Medical Nemesis in 1976, he was dismissed as a crank for this celebrated polemic: