More and more people are convinced that, if they do not feel right, is it because there is something disordered inside them, and not because they are manifesting a healthy refusal to adapt to an environment or life that is difficult and sometimes intolerable. Adaptation to the misanthropic, genetic, climatic and cultural consequences of growth is now described as health. As sensible creatures we must face the fact that the pursuit of health may be a sickening disorder. There are no scientific or technological solutions to death. There is the daily task of accepting the fragility and contingency of the human condition.<sup>15</sup> Illich was not antitechnology. He argued that self-care and the use of modern technology could be mutually supporting. But he warned that technology push in health may itself be a sickening disorder. ‘‘When people no longer have the need or desire to resolve their problems within the network of their own relationships, medicine becomes the alibi of a pathogenic society.’’<sup>16</sup> Illich concluded that we have thrust the bad things of life—old age, death, pain, and handicap—onto doctors so that families and society will not have to face them. It took thirty years for Illich’s ideas to gain mainstream acceptance, but in 2002 the British Medical Journal, a bastion of the medical establishment, called for a turning back of the ‘‘medicalisation of everyday life.’’<sup>17</sup> The journal, citing Illich and the biologist Rene´ Dubois as its inspiration, proposed that we redefine good health as ‘‘the autonomous personal capacity to master one’s conditions of life, to adapt oneself to accidental modifications of one’s surroundings, and to refuse if necessary environments that are not tolerable.’’<sup>18</sup> Jean-Pierre Dupuy, who has studied the stress and burnout suffered by the medical profession firsthand, says that when doctors are asked to provide the impossible to patients, they do not gain power or control—they suffer: ‘‘The ability to cope with a series of profoundly intimate threats that all men face and will face—namely pain, disease and death—comes, in traditional societies, from his culture. The sacred plays a fundamental role in this. The modern world was born on the ruins of these traditional symbolic systems.’’<sup>19</sup> ## Decentralization Few health care professionals are ready to embrace ideas so radical as those of Illich, but the many actors in health and care are being urged to work in less-directed, more decentralized, and therefore less costly, ways. Hospitals