Two questions follow this understanding of design. First, where do we want to be? What exactly are the ‘‘preferred situations’’ or ‘‘desired goals’’ that Simon and Papanek talk about? Second, how do we get there? What courses of action will take us from here to there? Although this book addresses those two questions, it is not about the future, and it is not really about the new. I have organized the chapters that follow around ten themes that deal with daily life as it is lived now—not around fantastical science fiction futures. And I will tell you about aspects of daily life in which radical innovation is already emerging: Nothing you read here is a promise or a fantasy that may, one day, come true. One of the things that drove me to write this book was boredom with the schlock of the new. Many of the ‘‘preferred situations’’ that Simon talked about already exist—but in a different and often unexpected context. One of the things you can do next Monday morning, after reading this book, is walk out of your door and take a look around. I am confident you will be surprised by the variety of social innovation taking place in your environment. I have been. That said, addressing the question ‘‘Where do we want to be?’’ brings us up against an innovation dilemma. We’ve built a technology-focused society that is remarkable on means, but hazy about ends. It’s no longer clear to which question all this stuff—tech—is an answer, or what value it adds to our lives. Too many people I meet assume that being innovative means ‘‘adding technology to it.’’ Technology has become a powerful, self-replicating system that is accustomed to respect and receives the lion’s share of research funding. In NASDAQ , tech even has its own stock exchange. During the first part of the industrial age (and we are still in the industrial age, by the way), progress and development meant the continuous production of technology and more products, period. The spirit of that age is captured in an old Matsushita song: Let’s put our strengths and minds together Doing our best to promote production Sending out goods to the peoples of the world Endlessly, and continuously.<sup>4</sup> On the basis of this mindset, technology has evolved from a collection of tools used for doing things into a self-perpetuating system.<sup>5</sup> At the time, the benefits of technology seemed to be self-evident: better, faster,