peer production of wellness and care. In the language of health policy, this would be a shift from a biomedical to a biopsychosocial and epidemiological model. The aim would be to empower patients to take responsibility for their own well-being, facilitated by new forms of partnering and use of the Internet. A commons-based model would still involve teams of physicians and nurses. One radically decentralized model already operating is Shahal Medical Services, an Israel-based company with fifty-five thousand patientcustomers who suffer from the usual array of cardiac, hypertensive, and respiratory illnesses. The service also caters to elderly people and healthy people with a high level of health awareness. Shahal uses online and wireless services to organize therapy brought to the customer’s home (or wherever the customer is). Customers measure body signals that are sent to a monitoring center that is open twenty-four hours a day. These data are linked to immediate consultation and advice based on symptoms, medical history, and further real-time measurements. The system is designed around proprietary software modules, a broad range of advanced end-user devices, and protocols for the setup and maintenance of home care telemedicine systems. According to writer Richard Normann, ‘‘The system creates new linkages between end-customer-patients, the monitoring centre, physicians, public authorities, and a fleet of mobile intensive care units.’’ The Shahal system spans the real and the virtual in an integrated way.<sup>22</sup> The use of the Internet by citizens to find health information is booming. Sixty million Americans troll the Net in search of health-related information, and research shows that nearly nine out of ten people want as much information as possible from their doctor—good or bad—so that they can participate in planning their own health care. Medical professionals increasingly involve patients in evidence-based medicine—the conscious, explicit, and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients. Multidisciplinary teams of statisticians, health economists, academics, and health practitioners work increasingly alongside service users and caregivers to sift through available evidence and disseminate the results to clinicians. As Andrew Moore, editor of Bandolier, one of the most popular evidence-based sites in the United Kingdom, puts it, ‘‘There are six million research papers out there and most of them are bollocks. We’re entering a new age of medicine where the doctor and patient forge a therapeutic alliance.’’<sup>23</sup>