we live longer, and they fear that escalating social, welfare, and health care costs will soon be an intolerable burden on society. Business, for its part, either ignores elderly people or assumes that they are all dependent and infirm. James Pirkl, a leading expert on aging, is contemptuous of what he calls the ‘‘myth of senility,’’ which states that all older people are either disabled, decrepit, senile, or locked away in nursing homes. Frail elderly people living in institutions, he points out, comprise less than 5 percent of the over-sixty population.<sup>29</sup> The potential market for services that will enable us to live independently as we age is vast—but it’s unclear who will pay for them. Elders control nearly two-thirds of disposable consumer income in developed countries, and people over sixty-five already control more than 77 percent of all assets in the United States, but no old person I have ever met wants to spend a penny on being ‘‘looked after.’’ The simplest way to think about design for old people is that ‘‘they’’ are ‘‘we.’’ Pirkl uses ‘‘transgenerational’’ design to bridge the physical and sensory changes associated with aging—a process that most of us, after all, go through starting the day we are born.<sup>30</sup> The European Design for Ageing Network lists ubiquitous products that need to be modified to accommodate older members of the population: packaging that opens without the need to slice it (and, potentially, one’s hand) open with a knife; clothing that is easy to wear and maintain but still looks good; chairs that are easy to get into and out of; houses that can accommodate changing space and equipment needs; clear signs and labeling on buildings, vehicles, and products in shops; cups, door handles, light switches, supermarket carts— the list is endless—that do not require the strength of a weightlifter, the eyesight of Superman, or the patience of Job to handle.<sup>31</sup> We all can benefit from the development of products that are sympathetic to the gradual decline in vision, hearing, and movement capabilities that will affect us as we age.<sup>32</sup> So there are practical reasons why elderly consumers are a good market for services and products that adapt to their changing needs. The majority of product and service innovation for elders treat the symptoms of social isolation but not the causes. They are perceived as passive recipients of ‘‘aging in place’’ infrastructures. Intel, for example, is exploring ‘‘a variety of proactive computing applications that could assist the aging in the digital home environment. As the name suggests, proactive computing is designed to anticipate people’s needs and take action to