There would be no tedium and no drudge. Work and family life would be in balance. Our every working moment would be filled with meaningful projects and boundless creativity. In this paradise, we would live effortlessly as high-tech nomads. The reality of Net work, for most of us, is turning out to be pretty much the exact opposite of those promises. A huge gulf separates the rhetorics of the information society from the logic, and hence realities, of the way it actually works. We are too busy working to look after one another. Reality check one: We are not living in an information society but in an information market. In this market, three powerful economic forces— downsizing, globalization, and acceleration—are fragmenting the social fabric. Says writer Eric Britton: ‘‘Jobs, for one thing, are disappearing; a twenty-year-old today has little chance of selling a hundred thousand working hours to an employer in advance upon joining an organization.’’<sup>35</sup> As a result, tens of millions of young adults will labor at short-term tasks— ‘‘the project’’—and change employer or client frequently. This kind of work—work that is marketed and sold as a commodity by intermediaries with names like Manpower—tends to be fragmented and atomized. Suppliers of the commodity languish near the bottom of the economic food chain in ‘‘spot markets’’ for ‘‘human resources.’’ Human beings ‘‘count,’’ in this new economy, in the same way that a sack of cocoa beans ‘‘counts’’: Free markets treat people as a cost, not as a value. Increased networking ‘‘unbundles’’ aspects of the employment relationship that once acted as social glue.<sup>36</sup> Reality check two: Work today is bad for our health, both physically and psychologically. In a 2000 survey by the European Commission, nearly half of Europe’s workers complained of physical health problems—posture discomfort, headaches, back pain, repetitive strain injury, and so on. Forty percent of all workers said they suffered from feelings of ‘‘high pressure, low control.’’ Two-thirds said they ‘‘do not have jobs of high intrinsic quality.’’ Fifteen percent experienced their work to be precarious, and onethird—in round numbers, a hundred million people—said they suffered from stress. Things are just as bad in the United States. Less than half of all Americans say they are satisfied with their jobs—the highest level of discontent since surveys were first conducted in 1995. The decline in job satisfaction is found among workers of all ages, across all income brackets and regions.<sup>37</sup> All recent studies of working conditions in the world’s most pros-