perous regions make similar points: New-economy patterns of work lead to ill health and early mortality.<sup>38</sup> Reality check three: New economy work leads to loneliness, disconnection, and a loss of identity. We tend to be judged by what we do, not by who we are—and that question is hard to answer when we’re working on multiple projects and tasks—‘‘spots’’ that are not connected, do not have a story, have no beginning, and no end. Spot markets for our labor fragment, atomize, and disconnect us from narrative. Singularity replaces connection and flow. ## Convivial Work Things look less bleak when you compare the time we spend unhappily doing projects with many of the activities that contribute to a convivial society that have never been packaged as jobs—meal preparation, shopping, laundry and cleaning, child care. Household work is part of health care provisioning, as the sociologist Ann Oakley has argued. Freshly cooked food, proper clothes, a clean surface and home, a dust-free environment, and a safe place where one can relax and sleep are essential necessities for healthy people.<sup>39</sup> Roughly half of all the labor hours in industrialized countries are spent on unpaid ‘‘nonmarket’’ work—so we’re talking about half the economy in time terms. In terms of the value of nomarket production, estimates range from 33 to 84 percent of GDP, depending on the value metric and methodology used.<sup>40</sup> Many governments have begun to redefine development to include all costs and benefits, not just those measured in money, and to take factors like literacy, health, and environmental quality into account.<sup>41</sup> Could we design some kind of online ‘‘farm-to-market’’ barter economy for the time we can and want to spend on care? There are interesting hints of what may indeed be a startling change. One of these is the growth of local exchange and trading systems (LETS). A wide variety of individuals and local businesses are discovering that it makes sense to receive payment in local barter currencies, which get called things like ‘‘bobbins,’’ ‘‘acorns,’’ or ‘‘beaks.’’ What happens is that local people form a club to trade among themselves, using their own system of accounts. They compile a membership directory containing offers and requests—goods, services, or items for hire; these are priced in local credits. Members use the directory to contact