one another whenever they wish. They pay for any service or goods by writing a LETS credit note for the agreed amount of local credit. The credit note is sent to the LETS accountant, who adjusts both members’ accounts. Each member receives a personal account statement, directory updates, and a newsletter. From humble beginnings in the small town of Courtenay, Vancouver, LETS have spread to the United States, New Zealand, Australia, and Europe. Tens of thoudands of people are participating in some four hundred local LETS around the United Kingdom alone; similar networks have been established in most European countries. All this despite the fact that, until recently, LETS have been completely manual, and people would sit for hours in each other’s kitchens filling out ledgers and sorting little bits of paper.<sup>42</sup> Some policymakers worry that the local tax base will be eroded if too many people start swapping tomatoes for baby-sitting—without recourse to (taxable) money in the transaction. Tax economists are even more worried about what might happen when the manual, grassroots world of LETS takes off on the Internet. The OECD calls this link the ‘‘missing network’’; OECD research on the future of money uncovered substantial unmet demand for real-time peer-to-peer virtual payments as an enabling infrastructure for LETS.<sup>43</sup> In the United States, one LETS-like scheme called Time Dollars is described by its founder, Edgar Cahn, as ‘‘a currency for rebuilding the core economy of family, neighborhood and community.’’ Says Cahn: The history of the past century or more is the history of the market economy taking over functions previously performed by the family, kinship groups, neighborhoods, and non-market institutions—because of seemingly superior efficiency. We have contracted out as many of the functions of the informal economy, the non-market economy, as we can. McDonald’s now provides the meals; Kindercare the day care; public and private schools the education (such as it is); Nintendo the child care and<sup>ˇ</sup>entertainment; Holiday Spa and Gold’s Gym the exercise; insurance companies the protection; Medicare and Medicaid the nursing care—and on and on the list goes.<sup>44</sup> According to the Time Dollars website, the following four core principles underlie Time Dollars: <sup>m</sup> Assets ‘‘No more throw-away people. Every human being has the capacity to be a builder and contributor.’’