<sup>m</sup> Redefining work ‘‘No more taking the contribution of women, children, families, immigrants, for granted. No more free rides for the market economy extracted by subordination, discrimination, and exploitation. Work must be redefined to include whatever it takes to rear healthy children, make neighborhoods safe and vibrant, and care for the frail and vulnerable.’’ <sup>m</sup> Reciprocity ‘‘Stop creating dependencies; stop devaluing those whom you help while you profit from their troubles. The impulse to give back is universal. Wherever possible, we must replace one-way acts of largesse in whatever form with two-way transactions. ‘You need me’ becomes ‘We need each other.’ ’’ <sup>m</sup> Social capital ‘‘No more disinvesting in families, neighborhoods and communities. No more economic and social strip-mining. Social Networks require ongoing investments of social capital generated by trust, reciprocity and civic engagement.’’<sup>45</sup> Systems like LETS and Time Dollars begin to acknowledge and compensate people for the time they invest in care and convivial activities. Margrit Kennedy, a German pioneer, says LETS are ‘‘immune from local or international recessions, interest on debts, thefts and money shortages. The world money system can collapse; the dollar or DM [deutsche mark] can lose their value; unemployment may rise; but Time Dollars . . . still function because they are guaranteed one hundred percent by work and by goods. The advantage of LETS is that it is limited only by the time and energy a person is prepared to invest.’’<sup>46</sup> According to Kennedy, between 10 percent and 30 percent of the world trade is barter trade. ‘‘Barter and exchange systems, specializing at a local, national or international level, have benefited greatly from the new information technology. The notion of a free exchange of goods and services . . . is now much easier to implement where information travels fast to any place in the world.’’<sup>47</sup> Noncash economic systems are, for me, where a genuinely new economy is being born. The dot-coms were a distraction from this much more profound transformation. If, as I have argued, a light and therefore sustainable economy means sharing resources more effectively—such as time, skill, software, or food—then economic systems for exchanging nonmarket work have got to be part of the answer. Nonmarket work includes much of