the essential activity we have always undertaken to raise and educate our families, get fed, and look after one another. Half of all the labor done in industrialized countries is spent on unpaid work. The fact that this kind of work is not considered to be part of ‘‘the economy’’ is partly a problem for economists to deal with, but partly, too, a service design challenge that we can sink our teeth into. ## Convivial Services Networked communications and wireless networks can be repurposed as enabling infrastructures to help systems like local and complementary currencies, Ithaca Hours, Time Dollars, LETS, microcredit programs, interestfree banking, and other community-oriented monetary systems scale up. These are not technology projects in the dot-com era sense of the word. Ben Reason, a service designer in London, reminded me that LETS grew strongly during the 1990s—the Internet decade—without themselves migrating onto the Net.<sup>48</sup> Reason, who keeps a close eye on social innovations emerging at a grassroots level, believes that the Mondragon cooperative in Spain and the KaosPilots business school in Denmark are also worth watching as new models that can have a big impact. The world’s telecommunications companies should be rejoicing at the news that the world needs these kinds of services. Communication, after all, is their business. But most telcos remain stubbornly fixated on the ‘‘purposive’’ or task-related communications of business. Business callers pay premium rates, which is why so many ads feature busy executives rushing around being, well, busy. Social communications, by comparison, tend to be a high-volume, low-margin business. Social communication occupies a large amount of time in our daily lives—about two-thirds of our conversational exchanges are social chitchat—but telcos don’t understand social contexts and find it hard to shift the focus of their innovation from work to everyday life. Everyday life contains many distractions. Humans are hard-wired to chat. The evolutionary psychologist Robin Dunbar believes that humans gossip because we don’t groom each other. In studies of the social organization of great apes, Dunbar observed that these animals live in small groups and maintain social cohesion through almost constant grooming. Grooming is a way to forge alliances, establish hierarchy, offer comfort, or make apology.