smarter—and usually cheaper—products. But as the extent of technology’s penetration into daily life has grown, the differences between gadgets have decreased; technology has become at best a commodity, at worst an infringement on personal space—a form of trespass even, or pollution. One reason the dot-coms failed is that they offered little value other than ‘‘tech’’ at a time when the culture had changed and tech was no longer an end in itself in our daily lives. I do not suggest that we have fallen out of love with technology, more that we are regaining appreciation and respect for what people can do that tech can’t. Throughout the modern age we have subordinated the interests of people to those of technology, an approach that has led to the unthinking destruction of traditional cultures and the undermining of forms of life that we judged, once, to be backward. The victims of this approach to modernization have not just been hapless people in rain forests. ‘‘Getting people to adapt’’ to new technology has affected us all. We believed that the assembly line and standardization would make the world a better place, yet along with efficiency came a dehumanization of work. We act no less as slaves to the machine today when we lambaste teachers as ‘‘obstacles to progress’’ when they do not embrace the latest technological fix for education.<sup>6</sup> The introduction of a new mass technology—telegraph, railway, electrification, radio, telephone, television, automobiles, air travel—has always been accompanied by a spectacular package of promises. A certain naı¨vete´ is excusable for the inventors of those early technologies: They had no way of knowing about the unforeseen consequences of their innovations. Today, we don’t have that alibi. We know that new technologies have unexpected consequences.<sup>7</sup> The worst kind of tech push combines irresponsibility with wishful thinking. One of the worst current offenders is biotech. When Eugene Thacker (no relation) studied the biotech industry for a book he was writing, he encountered ‘‘blatant disparity between hyper-optimism and an overall lack of concrete results.’’<sup>8</sup> The future promises of biotech are many and far reaching, but Thacker could not help noticing the comparative absence of any concrete, widespread, sustainable results of the application of biotech in medicine and health care. We are victims, says Thacker, of ‘‘biotech imagineering’’ by vested interests that participate in the assemblage of enticing future visions.<sup>9</sup>