Once a population expands beyond a certain number, however, it becomes impossible for each member to maintain constant physical contact with every other member of the group. Dunbar believes that we developed language as a substitute for physical intimacy.<sup>49</sup> Social communication is overwhelmingly local, as well as personal. As I noted in chapter 4, much of the world’s GDP is highly localized: The vast majority of small and medium-sized companies, for example, operate within a radius of fifty kilometers. Television images of global computerized dealing rooms tell only one part of the story of economic life. Local conditions, local trading patterns, local networks, local skills, and local culture remain a critical success factor for many companies and for most people. It was in this context that an increasing number of European researchers have focused on new ways to enhance social communication among an extended family in the community. Gossip and informal communication —sharing jokes, teasing each other, asking what kind of day you’ve had— is an important part of everyday life. Most families also do a lot of communicating to organize and schedule shared resources: carpools and school runs in the morning, ferrying kids to sporting events after school, getting in touch for help with homework in the evening. A big proportion of the one hundred billion minutes of telephone calls made each year are shortdistance; as I explained in chapter 3, network designers even have (and apply) a ‘‘law of locality.’’ So the market for any service that adds value to local, intracommunity communications is potentially vast.<sup>50</sup> ## Capitalist Care Howard Rheingold says of smart mobs, in his book by that name, that they ‘‘emerge when communication and computing technologies amplify human talents for cooperation. The impacts of smart mob technology already appear to be both beneficial—and destructive.’’<sup>51</sup> Among the potentially destructive consequences of technology-enhanced cooperation is the commercialization of access and social ties. ‘‘People yearn for support to help them through life’s complexities,’’ say Shoshana Zuboff and James Maxmin in The Support Economy. ‘‘Distributed capitalism creates wealth from the essential building blocks of relationships with individuals.’’ Zuboff and Maxmin write about investments in commitment and trust as if they were