commodities on the stock market, and they have invented an economic axiom for capitalists: Their task is to ‘‘maximise realised relationship value. Today’s individuals want to take their lives into their own hands and are ready to pay for the support and advocacy necessary to fulfill that yearning. Providing that support economy is the next episode of capitalism.’’<sup>52</sup> Another analyst, Chrysanthos Dellarocas, thinks it should be possible to make money by reengineering word-of-mouth networks and reputation systems. ‘‘In pre-Internet societies, word of mouth emerged naturally and evolved in ways that were difficult to control or model,’’ concedes Dellarocas. But he goes on: ‘‘The Internet allows this powerful social force to be precisely measured and controlled through proper engineering of the information systems that mediate online feedback communities. Such automated feedback mediators specify who can participate, what type of information is solicited from participants, how it is aggregated, and what type of information is made available to them about other community members.’’<sup>53</sup> These steps are feasible technically, of course—but I don’t buy the idea that word of mouth as a paid-for service will succeed in social situations in the same way it does on eBay. Happily for the optimists among us, noncommercial collaboration is already a strong social trend among the Internet generation. Free software is but one symptom, although the most visible one, of a much broader social phenomenon—a new mode of production in the digitally networked environment that New York University law professor Yochai Benkler calls commons-based peer production. ‘‘We are seeing the emergence of a new mode of production,’’ says Benkler, ‘‘distinguishable from the propertyand contract-based modes of firms and markets. Its central characteristic is that groups of individuals successfully collaborate on large-scale projects following a diverse cluster of motivational drives and social signals—rather than market prices or managerial commands.’’<sup>54</sup> Conviviality and decentralization go hand in hand. Although decentralization is a fashionable topic among today’s Internet theorists, the issue was first promoted by progressive social thinkers such as Harold Laski from the 1920s onward. The difference is that Laski’s generation did not have the Internet, and we do. The Internet gives us the capacity to design services and institutions that will give back to us the opportunity to organize our daily lives among ourselves—not by recourse to paidfor services.