## Connected Communities A network is not, per se, a community. A community embodies trust and social capital that develop through time as a result of embodied interaction between people. The Internet complements communities—it does not create them. Connections between people can be enabled by technology, but trust is dependent on the passage of time and the contiguity of bodies. As Pekka Himanen and his colleagues have written, ‘‘the tools and governance principles of the open source software community, in some modified form, could yield new approaches to community organization and problem solving.’’<sup>55</sup> To do this, we need supporting infrastructures that enable dialogue, encounter, and community. The collaboration tools and social software for these better-connected communities need to be designed. So how do we design support networks as effective ways to enable mutual support? A number of researchers have been preoccupied with this question for quite some time. Eve Mitleton-Kelly, for example, a professor at the London School of Economics, creates connectivity netmaps of organizational communications—e-mail, telephone, instant messaging, etc.—in order to reflect real-world interactivity and coevolving patterns of connectivity over time.<sup>56</sup> The aim is to reveal unexpected linkages and connections—or gaps—within social networks. Another researcher, Valdis Krebs, has developed social-analysis software that maps social networking in academia and other domains. ‘‘Experts have long argued about the optimal structure of a person’s professional network,’’ says Krebs. ‘‘Some say that a dense, cohesive network brings more social capital, while others argue that a sparse, radial network, one that provides opportunities for innovation and entrepreneurial activity, equates to greater social capital.’’ Krebs has constructed a links map of the so-called Erdo˜s network (about a celebrated mathematician by that name) that shows both patterns—a densely connected core, along with loosely coupled radial branches reaching out from the core.<sup>57</sup> These experiments in mapping social networks can be fascinating, but the conclusion I draw is that you don’t design social networks as you would a railway or cable network. Social networks generally start out small and develop gradually. The modest design actions we might take to improve the efficiency of information transfer within a network are to create hubs,