or add new links, to act as artificial shortcuts between otherwise distant regions. Mapping social networks and analysis of the topology of communication links within a network may help identify where such interventions are needed. Equipped with this information, managers or community stewards might be able to adjust network architecture, create clusters of linked individuals, or put together groups with complementary expertise.<sup>58</sup> ## Link and Do Design strategies for the creation of communities of practice have been considered by a number of leading organizations. Communities of practice are largely informal, voluntary, and self-organizing—like all communities—so it is a challenge for organizations to shape them. Etienne Wenger, an expert on the subject, cautions that ‘‘without an understanding of their dynamics and composition, community of practice initiatives can be wasteful, ineffective or even harmful.’’<sup>59</sup> Social computing, coordination technology, community software, and ‘‘groupware’’ in this context are just that: tools. Tools for collaboration, such as the Internet, agents, wireless, and knowledge mining, are support for the process, not the process itself. ‘‘All real living is meeting.’’ Martin Bu¨ber’s focus on dialogue and community marks him as an important thinker for service designers.<sup>60</sup> His fundamental concern with encounter as the basis for our relationships with one another and the world is a salutary antidote to technology push. Ivan Illich, too, was at first dismissed as a crank when he argued for the creation of convivial, rather than manipulative, institutions for learning, health, and care. As I noted in chapter 4, in French the word for these timeless insights—la vie associative—recognizes the importance of association in the widest sense of the word and the effect that such association can have both on the life of the individual and on the life of a village, town, region, or country.<sup>61</sup> In institutions such as churches, tenants groups, and youth organizations, people freely combine to produce goods and services for their own enjoyment. Many organize around enthusiasms ranging from swimming clubs to beekeeping societies and train-spotting circles, from allotment associations to antiques groups and basketball teams. These groups provide a sense of belonging and identity as well as a setting in which to meet and make friends with people.<sup>62</sup>