Throughout history, human beings have always established social communities, developed rules of social exchange, embedded their members in complex reciprocal relationships, and built social trust. We don’t have to invent conviviality: It’s already there. ## My Last Rocket My favorite shop in Amsterdam sells artistic funerals. All manner of caskets are shown: designer-chic ones, rustic-crafty ones, arty-weird ones. On the wall of the shop are photographs of processions in which people dressed up in strange, pagan outfits carry strange pagan objects on poles. My favorite item of all is a huge fireworks rocket, about six feet high, that has a container rather like a cookie jar hanging underneath it. One’s ashes are put in this container, a loved one lights the blue touch paper—and whoosh: up-up-and-away you go. The rocket explodes several thousand feet up, and your ashes are scattered among the stars. Everyday life, everyday death. The opportunities for service innovation are endless if only we shift the focus of innovation from work to everyday life. Many of the different ways we interact with one another can be improved by design. Edward O. Wilson, in contemplating the ultimate ‘‘consilience’’ of scientific knowledge and social science, has even furnished us with a list. Wilson unearthed a 1945 compendium, by the American anthropologist George P. Murdoch, that lists sixty-three ‘‘universals of culture’’ that had at that time been found to occur in hundreds of different societies (see box 6.1). These universals of culture are a gigantic ‘‘to do’’ list for service designers. Take one of these aspects of daily life, improve it, and figure out how to benefit from it in a nonmonetary way.