## Learning as a Design Issue You may remember the advertisement for an information services company that featured a water pipe, tied in a knot, over a person’s head. A solitary drop of water dripped out of the pipe’s open end. The ad’s visual metaphor and accompanying text were about the removal of information blockages. A good information system, the ad seemed to suggest, will pour information into our heads, a bit like filling up a bucket. Pipe-and-bucket thinking pervades policy that has to do with learning and education. The British government is even building a ‘‘National Grid of Learning’’ that will connect all schools to the Internet. It’s a great political metaphor—knowledge for all, just like water or electricity. But it’s an outdated model of learning. Learning is a complex, social, and multidimensional process that does not lend itself to being sent down a pipe—for example, from a website. Knowledge, understanding, wisdom—or ‘‘content,’’ if you must—are qualities one develops through time. They are not a thing one is sent. ## Content vs. Thought Formal education is already crippled by too much content and too little time to think. By the early 2000s, no fewer than 270 different entities were in a position to send directives to English schools. The tap has been left running for so long that teachers and pupils feel like submariners in a disaster movie—afloat near the ceiling, struggling to breathe. As Ivan Illich understood thirty years ago, when he proposed the ‘‘de-schooling of society,’’<sup>1</sup> the best solution to our many education dilemmas is probably to