be able to transfer knowledge from one context to another.’’<sup>6</sup> The new mantra is learning to learn: a range of skills—and the capacity to use them effectively—that will equip us to understand abstract concepts and complex systems and how to live among them and improve them.<sup>7</sup> The research army has also discovered that we learn in different ways: when we listen to stories, when we do things with our hands, when we ponder deep questions on our own, perhaps in the bath. We learn when we participate in group projects in the real world. We learn when we make music and do art. All this is uplifting stuff when I think back to the learnby-rote Latin lessons I endured at school. Amo, amas, amat. ## Earning from Learning There is a mismatch between the kind of learning prescribed by these enlightened experts and what many employers perceive to be their shortterm needs. As a result of this mismatch, the school-to-work transition has become an increasingly difficult phase, and many employers now take their own direct training measures. These tend to be heavy on applied skills— and light on metacognitive ones.<sup>8</sup> We might reject the narrow focus of much corporate education, but it’s partly our own fault as a society. We have filled the world with such unstable technology and clunky systems; these need to be looked after by people with limited horizons who do what they are told and don’t ask too many questions. Call centers—to name just one among a thousand support functions in our technological culture—don’t recruit people with metacognitive skills who look at the bigger picture. They need drones. The widening gap between what formal education provides and what business thinks it needs has stimulated the emergence of learning as a market. This market also benefits from the fact that governments are looking for ways to educate more people to ever higher levels—but without spending more money. They therefore encourage private-sector investment in what is known in new-economy-speak as the ‘‘education space.’’ On paper, education, like health and care, is a vast market. Spending on learning by all organizations in the United States amounts to some seven hundred fifty billion dollars, or 7 percent of GDP. That’s half what the country spends on health, but still a tidy sum. In France, Europe’s highest spender on education, the number is closer to 25 percent.<sup>9</sup> Spending by all organizations worldwide is estimated to be two thousand billion dollars.