Being skeptical about technology does not mean rejecting it. There’s a lot of technology in this book. For one thing, we don’t have an either/or choice: Terra firma, and terabits, are both here to stay. Broadband, smart materials, wearables, pervasive computing, connected appliances, and other stuff we don’t know about yet will continue to transform the ways we live. The question is, how? Means and ends have lived apart too long in discussions of innovation. Understanding why things change—and reflecting on how they should change—are not separate issues. In the pages that follow, I try to reframe issues of technology and innovation in ways that make it easier for nonspecialists to engage in meaningful dialogue—as things happen. Theodor Zeldin calls this the transition from an age of specifications to one of deliberation.<sup>10</sup> We cannot stop tech, and there’s no reason why we should. It’s useful. But we need to change the innovation agenda in such a way that people come before tech. It will be an ongoing struggle, of course. From nineteenth-century mill owners to twentieth-century dot-commers, businesspeople have looked for ways to remove people from production, using technology and automation to do so. A lot of organizations will continue on this path, but they’re behind the times. This book is about a world in which well-being is based on less stuff and more people. It describes an approach to innovation in which people are designed back into situations. In these situations, we will no longer be persuaded that to be better off, we must consume more trashy products and devices. The following pages describe the transition, which is already under way, from innovation driven by science fiction to innovation inspired by social fiction. I’ve collected the best examples I could find of designed services and situations in which people carry out familiar, daily-life activities in new ways: moving around, learning, caring for each other, playing, working. Some of these services involve the use of products, or equipment, to carry them out. This equipment ranges from body implants to wide-bodied jets. But objects, as a rule, play a supporting role. New principles—above all, lightness—inform the ways they are designed, made, used, and looked after. The design focus is overwhelmingly on services and systems, not on things. As well as designing people back into the picture, we need to design ourselves more time to paint it. Many of the so-called rebound effects of