institutions to join them; these included the London School of Economics, the New York Public Library, and the Universities of Chicago and Michigan. Industry gossip at the time had it that Fathom spent seventy-five million dollars building its portal website before the service was even launched.<sup>15</sup> Most e-learning start-ups were inspired by a simple idea: They would make money by ‘‘dis-intermediating’’ disposable steps in the production process of learning—namely, people. They compared the people costs of education (which are up to 80 percent) with those in manufacturing (20– 40 percent) and services (around 60 percent)—and concluded that it must surely be possible to produce learning in a more profitable way by automating the process.<sup>16</sup> The e-learning investment bubble burst when, in 2001, MIT announced that it would put all its content online—and access would be free. The university further committed one hundred million dollars to a project called OpenCourseWare in which public-domain websites would be built for all of its two thousand courses. Lecture notes, problem sets, syllabuses, simulations, even videos of lectures would be put online. As Charles Vest, MIT’s president, said at the time, ‘‘our central value is people, and the human experience of faculty working with students.’’<sup>17</sup> The private sector was not uniquely to blame for a skewed vision of learning that prioritized prerecorded content over people. Visions of a vast, semiautomated learning machine still bewitch many politicians— not just entrepreneurs—and the world is replete with government-backed plans to ‘‘penetrate the schools’’ with new technology. A senior Dutch minister once told me confidently that with the Internet, ‘‘we can beam lectures from the best 10 percent of teachers to classrooms and do without the other 90 percent.’’ The minister’s dream reminded me of a joke I once heard in Hungary about the factory of the future. It will have only two employees, a man and a dog: The man will be there to feed the dog; the dog will be there to stop the man from touching the equipment. Evangelists for computers in schools are perplexed that the computer revolution has moved so slowly. They observe that some areas of human activity—medicine, transportation, entertainment—have changed beyond recognition in the wake of modern science and technology. One institution that most definitely has not is school. MIT’s Seymour Papert has a vision of a truly modern school in which the computer is as much part of all