learning as the pencil and the book have been in the past. In Papert’s vision, computer-based media would enable children to master areas of knowledge that would otherwise remain inaccessibly difficult. Self-directed work would allow an unprecedented diversity of learning styles and opportunity for students to learn to take charge of their own learning. According to Papert, American schools have acquired more than three million computers, yet resistance to progress persists.<sup>18</sup> ## Anyplace, Anytime When students are sufficiently motivated or lack alternatives, they indeed seem to be prepared to take online courses in significant numbers. The most widely quoted success story, University of Phoenix, has more than thirty-seven thousand enrolled students, and its parent company, Apollo, was valued at more than six billion dollars in 2002.<sup>19</sup> The university, which caters specifically to working adults, relies wholly on distance learning; the Internet and e-mail are its primary means of communication. Online classes in the school’s master’s of business administration (MBA) program (one of a number of degree programs it offers) are conducted in groups of ten to twelve students, most of whom complete their degrees without ever having met a fellow student. The university employs no full-time academics. Instead, an army of eleven thousand working professionals teach online in their spare time. Far from being a cost-saving panacea, ‘‘anyplace, anytime’’ distance learning is not inexpensive to deliver. Distance-learning students will tolerate minimal human contact and low-bandwidth media such as e-mail if they have no choice, but they will not tolerate deficiencies in technical support, the quality of which can be a deciding factor for students shopping for virtual courses.<sup>20</sup> Colleges that take distance e-learning seriously have to offer late-night, weekend, or even twenty-four-hour-a-day, sevenday-a-week technical support. University of Maryland’s University College, with thirteen thousand online students, spends two hundred fifty thousand dollars annually on technical support. As a result, distance learning is not particularly cheap. A three-year MBA program at University of Phoenix costs upward of thirty thousand dollars. Convenience rather than price is the big selling point for students.<sup>21</sup> Governments that hoped to save millions on e-learning and dreamed of websites filled with course notes have been disappointed. But investment