in e-learning continues at significant levels. This is especially true in business education—but as an addition to, not a replacement for, existing course activities. Harvard Business School (HBS) has invested millions of dollars a year in its website since the early 1990s. Larry Bouthillier, head of IT at HBS during those years (and now an independent consultant), told a conference I organized at the time that ‘‘simulations, databases, statistical and industry analyses, are intensively used learning ‘objects’ among Harvard’s MBA students and researchers.’’<sup>22</sup> ICT also deepens the learning experience, according to Bouthillier. Online cases, audiovisual material, and computer-based exercises are useful extras. ‘‘Online is a microcosm of the new working environment graduates will encounter when they leave,’’ said Bouthillier; ‘‘our goal is the emergence of Harvard Business School as an integrated enterprise that organises and connects information, and people, in a dynamic and continuous way.’’<sup>23</sup> The ambition to be an open, connected, and integrated enterprise is shared by many advanced companies throughout the world—but by relatively few learning institutions. For Charles Hampden-Turner, who works in both domains, ‘‘there is a more open system of learning in most businesses than in most universities.’’ It is clear to business, he says, that knowledge has become too complex to be carried in the heads of itinerant experts: ‘‘knowledge is necessarily the shared property of extended groups and networks.’’<sup>24</sup> These learning networks need to be organized and looked after. Business schools like Harvard’s are working hard to add value to—not substitute for—a central function of universities: connectivity among a community of scholars and peers. Their approach uses the Internet to bring people together—not the opposite, as with pure distance education. As John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid write in The Social Life of Information, ‘‘Social distance is not overcome by a few strokes of the keyboard. Learning at all levels relies ultimately on personal interaction and, in particular, on a range of implicit and peripheral forms of communication that technology is still very far from being able to handle.’’<sup>25</sup> ## Corporate U For many companies, sending staff to an Ivy League campus—with or without a state-of-the-art website—is not an option. So they are going it alone. So-called corporate universities (CUs) are booming. There are almost two thousand in the United States alone. Few CUs have interesting curriculums,