some kind of Learning Central, that the head teacher had to read and feed into her school’s already overloaded curriculum. Whether we are SysOps running databases or teachers running a school, distant planners and developers often overload us with precooked input. The result is a pate´ de foie gras effect: Overregimented teachers are forced to cram too much predetermined content into students who spend so much time learning that they have no time to think. It’s a downward spiral. The more important learning becomes, the more demands we put on teachers and students within rigidly organized institutions. When Illich proposed that we should ‘‘deschool’’ society, his idea was that we should use existing technologies and spaces—the telephone, local radio, town hall meetings—to create learning webs through which learners would connect with their peers and with new contexts in which to learn. ‘‘We can provide the learner with new links to the world,’’ said Illich, ‘‘instead of continuing to funnel all education through the teacher.’’ Illich was right then, and he is surely right now. But a huge gulf separates his vision of what learning could and should be like from today’s reality.<sup>28</sup> Our educational institutions remain, in the words of David Hargreaves, ‘‘a curious mixture of the factory, the asylum and the prison.’’<sup>29</sup> A command-andcontrol model, based on long lists of the new skills we all need, simply adds pressure to an overloaded system and people inside it. ## From Factory to Farm A better design approach to learning is to shift our attention from outputs—courses taught, facts learned, certificates awarded—to the inputs of learning and, in particular, to focus on the interaction between networks and contexts. In chapter 6, economist Hazel Henderson talked about the need to decentralize health systems. Another think tanker, Tom Bentley of Demos, in the United Kingdom, says similar things in Learning beyond the Classroom: ‘‘We should think of learning as an ecology of people and groups, projects, tools and infrastructures’’—and allow stakeholders in each situation to take care of content issues. We need to reconceptualize education, he says, as an ‘‘open, living system whose intelligence is distributed and shared among all its participants. Schools and colleges need to become network organisations, to establish themselves as hubs at the center of diverse, overlapping networks of learning which reach out to the fullest