possible range of institutions, sources of information, social groups, and physical facilities.’’<sup>30</sup> So how might such an ecology be designed? What design principles should we apply in the development of networked learning? ## Design Principle 1: Time and Tempo The first design principle concerns time and tempo. Of the many damaging pressures placed on learning ecologies, time is probably the harshest. A first design task is to relieve that pressure. Time is a valuable resource within a school or daily life, yet the ways in which it is organized are often standardized and come with high costs and wastage. We also focus the great majority of our attention on formal learning time—school and college— forgetting that between birth and age sixteen, 85 percent of our waking time is spent out of school. In the United States, to put time further into perspective, children aged nine to fourteen spend nine hundred hours a year in school—but fifteen hundred hours a year watching television. When a Dutch researcher, Jos Baeten, studied the 168 hours available in an eighteen-year-old student’s week, he found that 16 were spent in formal lessons and 9 in self-study—which left 143 hours for other activities: 58 for sleeping, 20 for social and family commitments, 26 for relaxation, 14 for traveling, and 13 for eating and ‘‘pausing’’; 10 hours were spent in paid work.<sup>31</sup> On the basis of these numbers, perhaps Illich would have been pleased. It looks as if the deschooling of society is well under way. The problem is that policymakers see an opportunity to fill up more time with formal learning. Those hundreds of hours American children spend watching the box are under scrutiny as an opportunity for ‘‘edutainment.’’ With the notable exception of Sesame Street, nothing much of interest has resulted. Most educational or edutainment television casts children in the role of passive consumers; it continues to be based on a point-to-mass model—only with tinier budgets than the soaps or reality TV that command far more of young people’s attention. Those fourteen hours a week spent traveling by Dutch students are another tempting target. Why not put e-learning on the buses or in their mobile phones? In Japan, this has already started. In a country whose commute times are among the longest in the world, Rikkyo University has