launched a website accessible from i-mode phones. Students use the system to catch up on missed classwork, ask professors questions, and check for lecture cancellations. Text-messaging symbols—such as a smiling face or a broken heart—have started to appear in students’ essays. In other educational applications of text messaging (or SMS, short for ‘‘short message system’’), tutors send reminders and alerts to students on courses or send a daily message to learners, thereby providing them (as one e-learning website puts it) with ‘‘a daily dose of learning . . . the message is pushed to the learners so that they don’t have to actually go out and get it every day.’’<sup>32</sup> Content push is the wrong way to design the use of learning time. Those hours do not belong to policymakers or to mobile phone companies. They belong to the students. Rather than fill up all time with prepackaged content, we need to make it possible for learners, of whatever age, to use their own time more flexibly and actively.<sup>33</sup> New technology seems to work best when helping people interact across time, rather than across space. If students and teachers can access Web documents—or each other—at different times, they can escape the temporal confines of the classroom. For Seely Brown and Duguid, ‘‘Learning technology should be built around a conversational paradigm. The web has its own rules, rhythms, and speeds; new kinds of documents, and new kinds of interactions with students, are emerging.’’<sup>34</sup> Educational providers have started to offer thirty-minute ‘‘instant knowledge’’ options, twenty-fourhour cycles, and—perhaps learning from online computer games—courses that do not end. The best Internet tools, by common agreement, are an extension of—not a replacement for—face-to-face exchanges. New links—facilitated by the institution—can be made between students on campus with time and no money and students off campus with money but no time. According to Carol Twigg, ‘‘In such a scenario, a student’s university career would no longer be through a particular place, time or pre-selected body of academics, but through a network principally of their own making, yet shaped by the degree granting body and its faculty. A student could stay at home or travel, mix on-line and off-line education, work in classes or with mentors, and continue their learning long after taking a degree.’’<sup>35</sup> As I stated earlier, companies lead the way in reconfiguring space-time relations for training purposes.<sup>36</sup> Caroline Nevejan has developed a map (figure 7.1) to help her institution’s twenty-two thousand students