Marlborough College that he was the ideal person to build a school for teenage boys. Maybe they were right—but I cannot recall being bothered by my school buildings one way or another. What I do remember (fondly, for the most part) are teachers and fellow pupils and some of the things we did together. What matters most to all learners is activity, not architecture. We all deserve to spend time in safe, pleasant, and comfortable surroundings, rather than their opposite. Beyond that, most buildings will do. What learning needs most is a lot more space, as well as time, than it gets right now. There’s no need to purpose-build huge numbers of schools and colleges. Fine calculations about square meters per child or the relative merits of discrete classrooms along corridors versus communal halls are secondary issues. We need double, triple the space we have now, for learning. The world is filled with abandoned or underused cinemas, gas stations, power plants, warehouses, and railway yards. We should commandeer them for learning. As I suggested in chapters 3 and 4, we can use the resource management systems pioneered in the logistics industry to combine learners and spaces in new ways and at new times. ## Design Principle 3: Meaningful Projects Metacognitive skills—judgment, understanding, the capacity to reflect—do not lend themselves to being taught by rote. Nor are they easy to download from a website. Active learning happens when we participate in projects that are meaningful to us and engage with the real world. We need to believe that the task we are about to tackle is important and meaningful. As Charles Hampden-Turner and Alfons Trompenaars so wisely counsel, we often overlook ‘‘the extent to which needed applications give meaningful zest to our work and learning: Without shared purposes and moral meaning, we end up with a culture of self-absorption and narcissism.’’<sup>40</sup> Those words resonate uncomfortably when I think about some of the projects I see during my frequent visits to universities and design and architecture schools. Projects that enable self-expression by the individual student, but are otherwise pointless, are depressingly common. The design of meaningful projects is not easy—particularly if an instructor tries to do this on her own. A success factor for projects is that learners should help to design them. Precooked projects are usually uninspiring.