innovation—results that are the direct opposite of what we intended— occur because we have inadequate time to try things out small, observe what happens, and reflect on how the bigger picture is changing. As I argue in chapter 2, velocity may be an imperative in the computer industry, but speed can be damaging in social situations. One issue we need time to reflect on concerns the sheer number of people we have in the world. The planet’s population has doubled in my generation’s lifetime—something that never happened to a generation before. You and I are the first human beings who have had to adjust to such an explosion of numbers. And yet we persist in the pursuit of ‘‘laborsaving’’ devices and services—using tech as the means. It’s not that we’re dumb. On the contrary, many millions of people have exerted great intelligence and creativity in building the modern world. It’s more that we’re being swept into unknown and dangerous waters by accelerating economic growth. On just one single day of the days I have spent writing this book, as much world trade was carried out as in the whole of 1949; as much scientific research was published as in the whole of 1960; as many telephone calls were made as in all of 1983; as many e-mails were sent as in 1990.<sup>11</sup> Our natural, human, and industrial systems, which evolve slowly, are struggling to adapt. Laws and institutions that we might expect to regulate these flows have not been able to keep up. A good example is what is inaccurately described as mindless sprawl in our physical environment. We deplore the relentless spread of low-density suburbs over millions of acres of formerly virgin land. We worry about its environmental impact, about the obesity in people that it fosters, and about the other social problems that come in its wake. But nobody seems to have designed urban sprawl, it just happens—or so it appears. On closer inspection, however, urban sprawl is not mindless at all. There is nothing inevitable about its development. Sprawl is the result of zoning laws designed by legislators, low-density buildings designed by developers, marketing strategies designed by ad agencies, tax breaks designed by economists, credit lines designed by banks, geomatics designed by retailers, data-mining software designed by hamburger chains, and automobiles designed by car designers. The interactions between all these systems and human behavior are complicated and hard to understand—but the policies themselves are not the result of chance. ‘‘Out of control’’ is an ideology, not a fact.