degree and quality of reflection demonstrated, quantitative improvement in a technical skill, achievement of goals, and so on.<sup>45</sup> The fact that a portfolio is created and stored digitally is not a big deal. I remember as a child being asked to keep a ‘‘commonplace book,’’ and my own daughter today accumulates hardcover books containing project work, records of visits to museums, and reflections. Where ‘‘digital’’ can really add value is by leveraging the power of networks to enable peer assessment. For J. C. Herz, who studies the relationship between online gaming and learning, what underlies the dynamics of networked online environments is the process whereby individuals are evaluated and rewarded by the system itself, rather than by a specific individual. This process is perhaps most evident in massive multiplayer role-playing games (RPGs) like Sony’s Everquest, Electronic Arts’ Ultima Online, or Microsoft’s Asheron’s Call. For Herz, ‘‘the RPG game persona is the most fully dimensional representation of a person’s accumulated knowledge and experience in the months and years they spend in an online environment.’’<sup>46</sup> ## Design Factor 6: Mentors Learner autonomy and self-organization are crucial ingredients in successful learning—if only for defensive reasons. Formal education systems are under pressure to teach more and more students—while at the same time being given smaller budgets per student to do so. When a government pays a school less than six thousand dollars per pupil per year, as is the case in Britain—an amount equivalent to two or three days’ fees for a McKinsey consultant—quality face-to-face time between teachers and students will be minuscule.<sup>47</sup> The wise student does not wait to be taught. But in learning, self-organization works better when there’s someone there to guide it. The best learning experiences, besides being codesigned by the people who have them, also benefit from good coaching, facilitation, feedback, and mentoring. These are highly labor-intensive activities. Activity-based learning requires the presence, time, and attention of mentors in all shapes and sizes. For Theodor Zeldin, who teaches the art of conversation in a wide variety of contexts, ‘‘the most important skill, which underlies all creativity and all scientific discovery, is the ability to find links between ideas which