are seemingly unconnected. Our life stories are dominated by the encounters we have had with particular individuals, and by our constant search for new encounters. Oxford normally describes itself as having 16,000 students and 2,000 staff, devoted to acquiring knowledge. But that is to forget its 130,000 graduates all over the world, busy acquiring experience, which is far more valuable than the donations they are constantly being asked for.’’<sup>48</sup> Old people often have time to be mentors, and they usually know a lot. Søren Kierkegaard famously complained that his life would have made more sense had he known, as a young man, what he only discovered when he was old. In my own experience, young people crave feedback from any quarter possible; feedback from older people is appreciated not necessarily because it is better, but because it is better than none at all. After all, young people can be mentors, too. Families and communities are also important and influential places of learning. Many of us learn the basics about health, well-being, and key social skills at our mother’s knee—or on the street. The blockage is that learners and mentors do not easily or naturally meet each other. Teachers are surrounded by people, but they are often, distressingly, socially isolated. Classroom-bound, pressurized by timetables and the sheer numbers of students, they have limited access to the outside world. In the United States, only an estimated 12 percent of teachers have telephones in their classrooms provided by the school.<sup>49</sup> Our learning institutions tend to keep people out—or students in—when they should do the opposite. At Oxford University, Zeldin is developing the idea for a Muse Hotel that would not content itself with providing beds in which tourists can recover from the exhaustion of staring silently at the historical monuments. Instead, those who stayed at the hotel would be able to sample what is most valuable in the university, notably the mind-stretching private tutorial. The logistics of connecting learners and mentors does not need to be complicated: Institutions simply need to create space and time and a business model for these connections, and the students will do the rest. ## Design Factor 7: Mass Collaborative Learning Mentors and intimate conversation are clearly important. But the complex challenges facing us will not be confronted unless we find ways to enable