rapid, mass, large-scale learning, too. J. C. Herz’s investigations of the online gaming world reveal numerous examples of networks in which professionals—particularly those involved in fast-evolving technical domains— share information and experience. As Howard Rheingold confirms so cogently in Smart Mobs, we don’t have to reinvent the concept of collaboration: It’s in our nature as humans to collaborate, and this existing social characteristic is being amplified and accelerated by new communication tools ranging from data mining and ratings software to wireless devices.<sup>50</sup> A well-known example is Slashdot,<sup>51</sup> a website for technology news and discussion. Unlike that of a traditional technical journal, in which a small team of specialist writers roam the world’s trade fairs and labs and then write articles about technology, the editorial content of Slashdot is created by its users. Any Slashdotter can submit a text or comment on one already there. Submissions to Slashdot are filtered and rated by moderators. Despite the craze for ‘‘social software’’ and the growth of websites such as LinkedIn and Orkut that promise to revolutionize our social and profesional lives, the Internet does not own mass collaboration. In all forms of learning, the best collaboration involves live contact, and this, too, can be designed. To give just one example, ‘‘OroOro’’ was a three-day event organized by Caroline Nevejan, research director of the Amsterdam University of Professional Education, with its twenty-two thousand students and more than one thousand teachers. Nevejan was looking for ways to support collaboration among teachers fatigued by years of forced continuous reorganization and by a government intent on pushing more and more students through the system. Many of the university’s teachers were being confronted by students who knew more about the technical details of their subject—for example, Java programming—than the teachers did. It was a recipe for demoralization. ‘‘My job was not to bring in yet more technology—we already had that,’’ Nevejan told me at the time, ‘‘but to design processes that would enable our teachers and students to make better use of new tools.’’ The aim of ‘‘OroOro’’ was to accelerate this new approach. Part symposium, part hands-on workshop, it enabled 1,000 teachers to explore together new ways to organize relationships between what—and who—we know.<sup>52</sup> The lesson of projects like ‘‘OroOro’’ is that communities of practice can be designed—in this case, within a single institution—and they are not principally about technology. Communities of practice are defined by