a common disciplinary background, similar work activities and tools, and shared stories, contexts, and values. They are not defined by the technology that helps them function. IBM, to its credit, has put hard numbers on the fact that communities of practice grow through time; they are not built with tech. It investigated communities of practice within several large organizations, including IBM, Scandinavian Airline Systems, World Bank, United Technologies, and British Telecom, and identified and priced four major cost drivers: <sup>m</sup> the cost of participation time for community members (52 percent) <sup>m</sup> meeting and conference expenses (32 percent) <sup>m</sup> technology (10 percent) <sup>m</sup> content publishing and promotional expenses (6 percent)<sup>53</sup> ## Design Factor 8: Copyrights and Cryptolopes In the flawed logic of early e-learning models, reinforced by government policy, teachers were treated as a discretionary cost. The opposite is nearer the truth. There is no limit to the number of teachers society could use, if money were no object. I once spent two weeks learning Dutch in a language school in which every lesson was one-to-one. Despite being a lousy student, I made pretty good progress, but it cost my employer a lot of money. E-learning is not a cost-saving panacea either: It’s an expensive add-on. It doesn’t work well on its own, and it can cost up to a million dollars to produce a sophisticated module. So how are we to pay for all the active, self-directed, and lifelong learning that we all have to do? One solution is to change the question. Asking how society is to pay for all this education implies an expensive point-to-mass service delivered by one supplier (the state or the market) to people who have little or no money to pay for it (the people). A more promising approach would be to reframe education as an ecology in which time and knowledge and money flow in many different directions. Among those flows, new ways to leverage the value of what—and whom—we know are bound to emerge that nobody has thought of yet. Esther Dyson said before the e-learning boom that we should think of published material—books, course notes, websites, and so on—not as something to sell, to make a living, but as the means to begin a relationship