with a learner. What people really value, Dyson realized, is attention, interaction, and the opportunity thereby to discover new insights, to make new connections between ideas.<sup>54</sup> This is why a business model for learning based on the sale of intellectual property and copyrights will never work. Turning teachers into free agents and expecting them to earn a living as content providers, by selling copyrights and royalties, or on some kind of fee-per-use basis, won’t work either. People will pay only for what is scarce, personal, customized, tangible, nonreproducible. In a learning society, that’s the presence, time, and attention of wise or interesting people. If intellectual value is the presence of other people, often specific ones, interacting formally or casually or both, new business models need to be based not on the sale of content, but on personalized services—such as hosting online forums, rating others’ contributions, custom programming, and consulting. A similar problem afflicts the attractive notion of an economy of micropayments. Quite a lot of people visit my website, for example, and if they all left me a five-cent tip each time they visited, my pension would finally be taken care of. If it works in the restaurant business, why not in the writing or teaching business? A business model along these lines can be based on hits and links—people pay a higher price to look at my stuff the more people are linked to it. As a content provider I would be paid every time someone clicked on one of my texts (or ‘‘reusable information object’’— RIO—in the ineffable language of Cisco). This business model for publishing, including personal publishing, has been discussed for a decade. The system architectures and software applications for such schemes are nearly in place, including the cryptolopes that will enable secure micropayments. But institutional barriers, especially the wretched banks, continue to slow things down. The fact must also be faced that revenue from micropayments is unlikely to cover the huge amounts of time that teachers need in order to teach, professionals to study, mentors to mentor. These activities are even more time- and more labor-intensive than traditional teaching. Teaching a set curriculum lends itself more to standardization and mass production than helping students assess their own progress, helping design and facilitate learning projects in the real world, building and supporting learning communities, or integrating real and virtual, synchronous and asynchronous learning processes. We don’t have sustainable business models for all this yet. But as I explained in chapter 6, the raw materials