for a hybrid cash and time barter economy are in place. It’s just a matter of combining them in new ways. ## Design Factor 9: Playtime The film director Jean-Luc Godard regretted that growing up meant losing permission to play: ‘‘It takes a lifetime to become the child that you should be,’’ he lamented.<sup>55</sup> Play informs our culture, our imaginations, our experiences. But most educational policies—and nearly all projects to wire up classrooms to the Internet—take us in the opposite direction. Rather than make space for all of us to learn in new and playful ways, most ‘‘wired classrooms’’ are more like cages filled with experimental rats. Only the rats are our children—or ourselves. It is a welcome irony that budgets for school Internet projects are increasingly overshadowed by the amounts now being spent each year on computer games. The market for video, computer, online, and wireless games is growing far faster than the market for e-learning, and the games industry has overtaken Hollywood in terms of its gross revenues. Many parents worry about the shoot-and-slash storylines of computer games and fear their children’s minds are being turned to mush. But experts who study these effects tend to be more sanguine. When Sonia Livingstone, a professor at the London School of Economics, studied the media habits and expectations of children and the impacts of the stroboscopic effects of fastmoving multimedia on children, her results were surprising. She discovered no measurable deterioration in terms of their powers of persuasion, retention, and recall—and observed that computer gaming often demands extraordinary feats of skill, intelligence, and motor coordination. She concluded that children were learning to learn in new ways.<sup>56</sup> For the writer Douglas Rushkoff, too, ‘‘the television remote-control, the videogame joystick, and the computer mouse, have irrevocably changed young people’s relationship to media . . . young people have adapted well to this constant barrage on their senses and have mutated into ‘screenagers.’ ’’<sup>57</sup> Where children have led, business now follows. Gaming theory in general, and visual simulations in particular, are a hot topic in business. When it comes to understanding how an economy, a company, or an ecosystem works, modeling and simulation—which provide a rich mixture of learning and doing—are a remarkably powerful tool for genuine under-