standing. Banks, oil companies, city planners, and environmental agencies are all using gaming and simulation techniques to enrich their understanding of future scenarios. Might we design these qualities into the rest of our learning and work? According to J. C. Herz, even in their first incarnation, computer games exhibited the same qualities that we saw are key to all successful projects for learning—especially meaningfulness and collaboration. ‘‘All the knowledge and skills acquired in the process of creating Spacewar were a means to an end,’’ writes Herz of an early game; ‘‘programming physics simulations, allocating resources, representing scale and perspective—all of these were necessary to make the game better.’’ For Herz, the dynamics of networked learning differ fundamentally from classroom instruction, and from traditional notions of distance learning. ‘‘Where classroom instruction is one-to-many, and traditional distance learning (i.e., correspondence schools and most online ‘courses’) are one-to-one,’’ she writes, ‘‘networked learning environments have their own design principles, criteria by which people and their projects are evaluated.’’<sup>58</sup> Online games are an object lesson for academia, Herz says, not because universities need to be making games, but because online games illustrate the learning potential of a network and the social ecology that unlocks that potential. Among young people who appear demotivated in formal learning situations, learning and teaching occur in a collaborative, highly social way in a game context. Herz continues: ‘‘If a gamer doesn’t understand something, there is a continuously updated, distributed knowledge base maintained by a sprawling community of players from whom he can learn. Newbies are schooled by more skilled and experienced players. Far from being every man for himself, multiplayer online games actively foster the formation of teams, clans, guilds, and other self-organizing groups.’’<sup>59</sup> The salient point here for Herz is that ‘‘players are a constituency, not just an audience. The designers, far from being auteurs, are more like local politicians.’’ The very nature of the product enables distributed innovation to happen in a parallel, decentralized fashion. ‘‘Of course, not all players roll up their sleeves and write plug-ins,’’ she concedes, ‘‘but if even one percent contribute to the innovation of the product, even if they are only making minor, incremental improvements or subtle tweaks, that’s ten thousand people in research and development.’’<sup>60</sup>