All this is a bottom-up, distributed, self-organizing process. The relevance of this, for institutions of higher learning, is not that students should create their own courses. Rather, it is that online content needs to leverage the same kind of social ecology that drives networked interaction in online multiplayer games. Says Herz: ‘‘Beyond the technological infrastructure, there is a cultural infrastructure in place to leverage these interpersonal dynamics. Tools and editing modes allow players to extend the game experience. But more important than the stand-alone benefit of these assets is their value as social currency. The creator of a popular level, object, or plug-in may not receive monetary remuneration. But he garners notice, and even acclaim, from his fellow gamers.’’<sup>61</sup> ## New Geographies of Learning Technology fixes for education are an old and discredited story. The delivery of precooked content, by whatever means, is not teaching. Radio, film, television, the videocassette recorder, fax machines, the personal computer, the Internet, and now the mobile phone: It was promised of each of these, in turn, that here was a wonder cure that would transform education for the better. And yet here we are, hundreds of years after the first books were printed, and teachers are still giving lectures, and students still line up to hear them. Why? They do this because the best learning involves embodiment—live experiences and conversation between people: Most people prefer talking to one another to talking to themselves. Educational institutions change slowly and social interaction remains their core activity. This is not to deny that our learning infrastructures need to evolve. More than 70 percent of learning experiences in the modern workplace are informal or accidental, not structured or sponsored by an employer or a school.<sup>62</sup> This kind of learning is pervasive, continuous, and profoundly social. It happens wherever people do their work: on a shop floor, around a conference table, on site with customers, or in a laboratory. So let’s be optimistic and anticipate a near future in which tech disappears quietly into the background, just as electricity did a hundred years ago. What, then, will be the important design issues among those I have discussed here? There are three that matter. The first issue before us is time: We need far more time for learning than we allow ourselves now. The second issue is the need to redesign the job descriptions that define