A few years ago I met a woman in Bombay who was completing her Ph.D. in social anthropology. She had just returned from a field trip to Rajasthan, where she had spent time with a group of traveling storytellers. This particular group went from village to village, unannounced, and would simply start a performance in the village square. Although each story would have a familiar plot—the storytelling tradition dates back thousands of years— each event would be unique. Prompted by the storytellers, who held up pictorial symbols on sticks, villagers would interact with the story. They would be part of the performance. I commented to the woman that with that depth of knowledge about interaction and the combined use of words and images, she could get a job with Microsoft tomorrow. ‘‘What’s Microsoft?’’ was her reply. This episode confirmed my prejudice that when we talk about design for communication, what we actually mean and do is the design of messages. As a consequence, the world is awash in print and ads and packaging and e-mail spam, but these one-way messages do not contribute to our understanding. On the contrary, they are the output of a point-to-mass mentality that lies behind the brand intrusion and semiotic pollution that despoil our perceptual landscape. The average American is now exposed to 254 different commercial messages in a day, up nearly 25 percent since the 1970s. Advertising people call this the ‘‘clutter problem’’—and solve it, of course, by adding to the clutter.<sup>1</sup> We’re so flooded by noise that it’s hard to understand what’s going on. True, we have learned to filter out noise and distraction, but in so doing we have also constrained our capacity to reflect on and make sense of the bigger picture. Our perceptions of change through time and the behavior of processes are especially weak. Our way of life is probably threatened by changes to our natural and social support