system taking place over years and decades—but we tend not to notice changes over a few years or decades. Cumulatively wasteful behaviors often seem trivial in themselves—leaving the light on, printing out an e-mail, eating a plate of Kenyan beans—but the accumulation of such tiny acts can weigh on the planet. In order to do things differently, to reassert some kind of control over the evolution of events, we need to design ways to see things differently. Tomorrow’s literacies therefore need to be process and systems literacies. In this chapter I explore what it might mean to design new perceptual aids to understanding the state of our natural, human, and industrial systems. I ask whether new kinds of sights, sounds, symbols, and experiences could tell us about how these systems work, what stimulates them, and how and why they change through time. And I conclude by asking which, if any, of these design actions would help us more than simply talking to one another. We are not starting from scratch here. Many affective representations of complex phenomena have been developed in recent times. Physicists have illustrated quarks. Biologists have mapped the genome. Doctors have found ways to represent immune systems in the body. Network designers have mapped communication flows in buildings. Managers have charted the locations of expertise in their organizations. Our world is filled with representations of invisible or complex phenomena. But most of them have been made and used by specialists as objects of research. So the design challenge described in this chapter has a second aspect: how to deploy new representations in such a way that they influence wider groups of people. ## Overloaded, Underframed A word first about the perceptual context. Although information overload is frequently discussed in the media—which help cause it—our dilemma is not that we receive too much information. We don’t receive anywhere near the quantity of data it takes to overload our neurons; our minds are capable of processing and analyzing many gigabits of data per second—a lot more data than any of today’s supercomputers can process and act on in real time. We feel flooded because we’re getting information unfiltered, unsorted, and unframed. We lack ways to select what’s important. The design task is to make information digestible, not to keep it out.