of paper, most of it kept above deck for ready reference; this raised the ship’s center of gravity so much that its speed, maneuverability, and fuel economy were adversely affected. When the time came to build the Space Station Freedom, the only way to measure the amount of documentation required was not by quantity, but by cost: a billion dollars for documentation—5 percent of its total cost.<sup>5</sup> Top-heavy warships, and warplanes that could not take off while carrying their own manual, were among the main drivers of the digitization of technical documentation. But this dematerialization of technical data has accelerated its growth. We now produce between one and two billion gigabytes of original information per year—roughly 250 megabytes for every man, woman, and child on the planet. In 2002 alone, five exabytes of new information—roughly five billion gigabytes—was created: That’s like half a million libraries as big as the previously mentioned print collections of the Library of Congress.<sup>6</sup> Over a three-year period, we create significantly more information than has been created since the beginning of time.<sup>7</sup> ## Vital Signs Some of the scientists who helped unleash this data explosion are well aware of the dangers and want to fix the problem. One of these, computer scientist Danny Hillis, says we need ‘‘more signal, and less noise.’’<sup>8</sup> A longrunning attempt to capture the biggest picture began when NASA launched the first civilian Earth observation satellite, Landsat, in 1972. This complex project was the fruit of governments’ enthusiasm to peer down on Earth to monitor its atmosphere, oceans, forests, and deserts. The trouble is that although governments are always keen to know more about areas of the planet under their control—or about the location of natural resources in areas they do not—they are not yet inclined to be interested in, let alone take responsibility for, the whole.<sup>9</sup> What would it mean to monitor our planet’s signs in real time? Would it be feasible to design perceptual aids to help us to understand the invisible natural systems that surround us? In Germany, a design group called ArtþCom has an interface ready and waiting. This interface, called T-Vision, generates the entire face of the Earth out of topographical data and satellite images. Using a level of detail to manage scenic complexity, the work presents a model of Earth as seen from a million kilometers above its