surface or at the level of an office interior in Berlin. Other media artists have achieved just as stunning results at ground level. At a recent Venice Biennale of Architecture, multimedia artist David Rokeby presented a work entitled Seen that visualized the flows of people passing through and hanging out in Piazza San Marco. Rokeby used a video camera and applied special algorithms to each pixel to capture the trajectory of every pigeon and pedestrian in the piazza; each track left a fading trail that defined the direction and speed of movement. ‘‘We have a highly developed visual system that outperforms computers at many tasks involving large correlated fields of data,’’ says Rokeby; ‘‘the computer is capable of shifting invisible phenomena into the range of our perception, allowing us to use our own highly refined abilities.’’ This is especially true, Rokeby notes, of cross-temporal phenomena that constitute flow: movement patterns that happen too quickly or too slowly for us to properly register with our eyes.<sup>10</sup> We might feed into a T-Vision interface data from sensors spread over the landscape. John Gage of Sun Microsystems talks about sprinkling ‘‘smart dust’’ over the world—millions of tiny sensors that would monitor the physical world remotely. Wireless sensors could be dispersed anywhere: Tiny thermometers, miniature microphones, electronic noses, location detectors, or motion sensors could provide information about the condition of the physical world and convert analog data about anything physical—pressure, light, gas, genes—into bits and bytes that they communicate wirelessly to a network.<sup>11</sup> A lot of research into remote sensing is funded by the military. True, many of the military’s applications of this technology involve sensing things in order to kill them, but it would not take much to repurpose these tools for civilian applications. The advertising for a once-classified product called GammaMaster proclaims, ‘‘Where Is Your Radiation Detector When You Really Need It?—On Your Wrist!’’ A precision timepiece with a built-in Geiger counter, the GammaMaster bills itself as ‘‘ideal for emergency personnel who may have to respond to accidents, incidents or terrorist attacks, which could involve radioactive material.’’<sup>12</sup> I’m also taken by the HazMat Smart Strip, a baseball-card-sized device that changes color when exposed to nerve agents, cyanide, chlorine, fluoride, arsenic—in liquid or aerosol form—and other substances that are toxic in small quantities. A change in color in any of eight categories alerts users to ‘‘get additional gear, decontaminate, or evacuate.’’ ‘‘It’s not cool to use your nose to detect chemical