on passive consumption of authoritative data.’’<sup>16</sup> The goal of this project is a collective one: to enable ongoing monitoring and intelligent interpretation of data thereby gathered by many interested persons, lay and expert alike. For instance, a local perfume developer, Yosh Han, anticipates that leaves from the different sites of these genetically identical trees will have different smells; researchers interested in asthma rates in varying neighborhoods can monitor the absorption of particulate matter, or grime (which clogs the stomata in leaves and irritates the alveoli in our lungs), on the leaves of the genetically identical trees. In another project, the Map for Bikes and Birds, Jeremijenko and colleagues will facilitate the collective observation and volunteer monitoring of many other environmental interactions that create the dynamic spectacle of the San Francisco Bay Area. Anyone can upload his or her observations, speculations, and ideas onto each site’s blogservatory. Harvesting accurate data is one thing; deciding what the data mean, and what to do about them, is another. Environmental sensing—by humans, by remote sensors, or by trees—raises tricky issues of calibration. Who determines where the red line starts that indicates when the measurements of a variable have reached a level that shows it is harmful? People and cultures evaluate data in different ways. An Eskimo might judge to be too hot a room that a child from New York would find just right. Comparable differences of interpretation occur on a planetary scale. Violent arguments greeted publication of the Danish scientist Bjorn Lomborg’s The Skeptical Environmentalist in 2001 because Lomborg questioned the way ecological data had been interpreted.<sup>17</sup> For me, the Lomborg debate missed the point. Without defending sloppy scientific reporting, I question whether it is necessary for ecological doomsday scenarios to be true for them to be important. Uncertainty is a persistent feature of a complex world. We cannot prove that the world will become uninhabitable for humans. Neither can we prove that it will not.<sup>18</sup> ## Planetary Dashboards Systems literacy is not just about measurement. The learning journey up the ladder of complexity—from quarks, to atoms, to molecules, to organisms, to ecosystems—will be made using judgment as much as instruments. Simulations about key scientific ideas and visualizations of complex knowledge