can attract attention—but the best learning takes place when groups of people interact physically and perceptually with scientific knowledge, and with each other, in a critical spirit. The point of systems literacy is to enable collaborative action, to develop a shared vision of where we want to be. Before-and-after knowledge maps are useful in this regard; they can represent the state of a system now and its state as we would wish it to be in the future. Many businesses already use spreadsheets in this way for numbers: Spreadsheets are a kind of map that enables ‘‘what if?’’ scenarios to be recalculated with different variables factored in. As I explained in chapter 3, spreadsheets have evolved into important tools for the control of complex systems. Gary Reiner, chief information officer of General Electric, has a long-term plan to put all the company’s vital processes into an uber-spreadsheet, digitizing as much of the business as possible. As he told the journalist Ludwig Siegele, this not only means buying and selling most things online but, more important, ‘‘setting up a digital nervous system that connects anything and everything involved in the company’s business.’’ The aim is to monitor IT systems, factories, and employees, as well as suppliers, customers, and products, in real time, he told Siegele; company-wide ‘‘digital dashboards’’ would compare how certain measurements, such as response times or sales, perform against goals.<sup>19</sup> ‘‘From a distance it [Reiner’s dashboard] looks like a Mondrian canvas in green, yellow and red,’’ Siegele recounted; ‘‘a closer look reveals that the colours signal the status of software applications critical to GE’s business. If one of the programs stays red or even yellow for too long, Mr. Reiner gets the system to e-mail the people in charge. He can also see when he had to intervene the last time, or how individual applications—such as programs to manage book-keeping or orders—have performed.’’ According to Siegele, ‘‘to advocates of the concept, the real-time enterprise is a giant spreadsheet in which new information, such as an order, is automatically processed and percolates through a firm’s computer systems and those of its suppliers.’’<sup>20</sup> In the civilian domain, the Canadian designer Bruce Mau staged a large exhibition as his response to our pressing need to make visible the as yet invisible. ‘‘So much of life occurs outside the range of visible light,’’ explained Mau at the time. ‘‘Through scientific tools and methods, we have reached far beyond this narrow slice of the electromagnetic spectrum to colonize its full range, from radio waves and infrared to x-rays, gamma radiation and cosmic rays. Now, existence in all its glorious complexity, from the dynamic division of living cells to the vastness and vibrancy