of the entire known universe, has been rendered accessible to our visual capacity.’’<sup>21</sup> Many of the components and systems required for real-time business already exist. The global spreadsheet is a matter of joining them together. Juice Software, based in New York, helps users link spreadsheet cells to data sources. KnowNow helps firms improve the visibility of critical business information. A company called Rapt provides pricing optimization software based on real-time feedback from markets. Arzoon (which changed its name from Vigilance) helps multinationals ‘‘globally manage your inventory motion.’’ Closedloop Solutions, SeeBeyond, CrossWorlds: The list of players in this vast enterprise is as endless as is the inventiveness of their names. The potential market is huge. Dashboards will be needed for buildings, cities, and regions—not just for corporations. Buildings, for example, consume a lot of energy—but we don’t ‘‘see’’ heat flying out of the windows. If we could, our behavior and use of the building would probably change. A dashboard to monitor the ecological footprint of a city would also be handy. Real-time representations of energy performance can help us use buildings and places in new and more sustainable (and cheaper) ways. ## A Word of Caution Some late entries to the field are wildly exaggerating what dashboards might (or should) do. Unisys is selling something called the 3D Visible Enterprise with a bewitching promise: ‘‘Imagine any change, strategic or operational, and knowing how it will affect every layer and process of your organization. See cause-effect relationships that were hidden. See interactions from multiple perspectives. We’re creating a highly predictive tool that allows you to see effects of change and make smarter choices.’’ Bizarrely, the website of the new service features a crystal ball on its home page that shatters as the page announces, ‘‘The future isn’t what it used to be. Now it’s more predictable because it’s more visible.’’ An informational page then appears, from which one can link to a case study headlined ‘‘Integrated Justice Optimized with 3D Visible Enterprise,’’ which make the implausible—if not logically impossible— promise that the ‘‘Unisys 3D Visible Enterprise methodology will help government decision-makers see the effects of changes even before they’re made.’’<sup>22</sup>