Criticism of the global-dashboard idea goes back a long way. Saint Augustine, in City of God, attacked ‘‘scenic games’’ as being responsible for the death of the soul. Ivan Illich believed that things all started to go wrong in 1120, when monks stopped reading texts aloud to each other and became solitary scholars.<sup>23</sup> Some art historians date the birth of the spectator to the seventeenth-century invention of linear perspective. Martin Jay, a contemporary chronicler of the passive role accorded to spectators in Western thought, charges that visual information tends to be ‘‘too static . . . in comparison with other senses; vision still seems tied to the Platonic valorization of static eternal Being, over dynamic, ephemeral Becoming.’’<sup>24</sup> Another critic of pictorial information, Susan Sontag, memorably alerted us to the danger that photographs—and by implication all visualizations—have a tendency to ‘‘shrivel sympathy. An image is drained of its force by the way that it is used,’’ she warned. ‘‘Images shown on television are, by definition, images of which one sooner or later tires. Image-glut keeps attention light, mobile, relatively indifferent to content.’’<sup>25</sup> The other problem with dashboards is that new images, however striking, enter a world that is already filled with signs and ads and a million other competing signals. Matthew Chalmers, a psychologist at Glasgow University, warns that striking visuals can cause a loss of narrative flow if they obliterate the links and connections that constitute the trail of a story.<sup>26</sup> Understanding is situational, and we live in a society of spectacle wherein a thousand and one other messages vie constantly for our attention. ## Visual to Sensual Visual representations also undervalue the knowledge we have by virtue of having bodies. Sensitivity to changes in our environment through time develop best if we learn to use all our senses, not just sight. Otherwise stated, our monitoring systems need to be more visceral. In his 1945 book The Phenomenology of Perception, the philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty argued that perception is a process in which an active body enters into a ‘‘communion’’ with its surroundings. Perception, for Merleau-Ponty, is a continuous interaction that involves the subject’s intentions, expectations, and physical actions. There is no purely active ‘‘sender’’ nor any purely passive ‘‘receiver,’’ he wrote; without action, there can be no experience of anything