‘‘external’’ to the subject. ‘‘The body is our general medium for having a world; sight and movement are specific ways of entering into relationships with objects,’’ he wrote.<sup>27</sup> For Merleau-Ponty and other critics of visuality as a privileged medium of understanding, it is meaningless to talk about perceptual processes of seeing without reference to all the senses, to the total physical environment in which the body is situated.<sup>28</sup> Merleau-Ponty memorably counseled us to ‘‘move beyond high altitude thinking . . . towards a closer engagement with the world made flesh.’’<sup>29</sup> Designers struggling to improve the usability of computer systems have learned the hard way about the limits to disembodied visual information. ‘‘Understanding is not only embodied, it is also situated,’’ says anthropologist Lucy Suchman, who wrote a classic text on the subject. Suchman has spent her career trying to persuade senior managers and computer scientists that ‘‘human activity is not primarily as rational, planned and controlled as we like to think. It is better described as situated, social, and in direct response to the physical and social environment.’’ Meaning is always created in a situation, continues Suchman; ‘‘ordinary interpersonal interaction is far more complex than the constrained and choreographed interactions enabled by computers.’’<sup>30</sup> The problem for Suchman and her design colleagues is that their bosses and clients remain in thrall to technologybased notions such as ‘‘context independence’’ and ‘‘anytime, anywhere functionality’’—a beguiling litany now augmented by the 3D Visible Enterprise I mentioned earlier in the chapter. These are catchy sales slogans, but misleading and irresponsible descriptions of how computers and people interact. In reaction to the limited bandwidth of technology-enhanced vision, ecological thinkers emphasize that our senses—taste, smell, sight, hearing, touch—are the fundamental avenues of connection between the self and the world.<sup>31</sup> Luis Ferna´ndez-Galiano, in a remarkable book called Fire and Memory, argues that we need to shift our perceptions ‘‘from the eye to the skin—to develop not just an understanding, but a feeling of how complex urban flows and processes work.’’<sup>32</sup> When I met him at a 2002 Doors of Perception conference in Amsterdam, Ferna´ndez-Galiano elaborated that ‘‘we need sensual, not just visual, seismographs.’’ The Internet, especially when coupled with sensors and telerobotic devices, potentially enables us to observe and even act on distant objects. But do these techniques provide us with meaningful knowledge? This is