the human colon.<sup>39</sup> (I have not had the opportunity to listen to what the experiment sounds like, but it boggles the mind.) Sound is particularly good for signaling changes in system states. With sonification, applications can be designed to produce a background tone or tempo that increases in pitch or speed as data change. Sound also provides insight into patterns that may not be apparent on a purely visual interface. ‘‘If you’re driving a stick shift, you change gears when the engine revs up too high, without thinking,’’ explains David Jameson, a project manager at IBM’s Computer Music Center and former member of the 1970s Irish band Time Machine. ‘‘You do it without thinking, even while talking to a passenger.’’<sup>40</sup> Much of the research on sonification focuses on determining what kinds of noises work best to indicate information flow. Thus, a tone tracking the stock market would likely be a pleasant background tone that changes pitch with the arrival of new data.<sup>41</sup> Rhythm and pitch can be used to give each alarm a distinct identity, to convey the appropriate sense of urgency, and to mimic the alarm’s meaning. Bill Gaver, a pioneer of sound used in interaction design, says that ‘‘auditory interfaces have so far drawn relatively little on the profound possibilities of music. Rhythm, for example, offers a great deal of inherent structure that could be mapped to the structure of data or events. Gaver cites the example of increasing tempo that indicates that the speed of an aircraft is too high. If there’s a drawback to the use of sonic alarms, it’s that they quickly proliferate. As many as sixty alarms may have sounded during the 1979 Three Mile Island nuclear power plant accident.<sup>42</sup> The idea that sound might be a better communication medium than vision in the way that it attracts and holds our attention through time is not new. In 1917 the founder of the futurist movement, F. T. Marinetti, wrote that ‘‘noise is the language of the new human-mechanical life . . . music is closely related to human perceptions of time and its segmentation.’’<sup>43</sup> The art historian Ernst Gombrich has explained that in listening to repeated sounds, like the ticking of a clock, the dripping of a tap, or the rumbling of a train, we subdivide and shape the flow of identical impressions by projecting alternative rhythms. In music, it is the performer who sets the accents according to the demands of the score: There is no choice but to follow the auditory patterning. ‘‘Humans are sensitive to change, but we don’t like perceiving too much of it,’’ Gombrich observed. ‘‘Our mental apparatus is set somewhat like a homeostat indicating ‘no change’ until a