break in continuity demands and arouses attention.’’<sup>44</sup> This is why the Geiger counter is so effective. Its low-level clicking makes us aware; a crescendo of noise triggers our bodily flight responses: Get out of here! There’s a relationship, of course, between the design of sound-based information systems and making music. Good musicians know all about ways to attract, but not overload, our attention. In recent years, as human beings have become increasingly frazzled by acceleration, some artists have searched for stillness. Brian Eno’s Music for Airports album, in 1978, offered nervous travelers a moment of calm amid the worry and confusion of perpetual motion. Recalls David Toop, ‘‘Eno’s music offered a kind of glue with which briefly to cement together the fragments engendered by such a fluid, potentially stressful environment.’’<sup>45</sup> Whereas Eno created music as a counterpoint to urban clamor, others are tackling the clamor itself. The first person to tackle noise pollution directly was an American, R. Murray Schafer. Schafer established the World Soundscape Project during the late 1960s as an educational and research group. He argued at the time that to improve the soundscape, we need to increase sonological competence through an education program that attempts to imbue new generations with an appreciation of environmental sound. It is hard not to pity Schafer as a sonic King Canute; the world is surely noisier now than when he began his crusade. But three decades later, sound-sensitive design projects continue to emerge.<sup>46</sup> In a project called Tuning the City, interaction designer Benjamin Rubin studied the use of sound as an information medium in the New York City subway network. This huge system, with its hundreds of stations and thousands of trains, uses three designed signals: those marking turnstile transactions, train arrival, and the closing of subway car doors. The three sounds are clearly audible but bear no meaningful harmonic relationship to one another; the train arrival signal, for example, is often masked by the turnstile beeps. This is the predictable result, says Rubin, of using sounds within the same one-third-octave frequency range: ‘‘Despite its use of tonal signals, the mix that results sounds unintentional, technological, and out of tune; the New York City subway system sounds decidedly unmusical.’’ The turnstile bank in particular, with its microtonal pitch variations, often sounds like a badly tuned instrument. Since the pitch variation is random and carries no information, we perceive it as mildly grating dissonance. Sound in the subway is viewed by riders as entirely utilitarian. Rubin has now