designed a new set of sounds, based on the notion of a wind chime, to improve communication effectiveness by using a wider variety of easily distinguished signals and to improve listenability through the use of an expanded sound palette and deliberate composition. A variety of timbres, pitches, and rhythms are used to create a soundscape that is harmonic, varied, and textured.<sup>47</sup> ‘‘Our cities talk to us,’’ says the typographer Paul Elliman. They speak from the walls and ceilings of buildings, from elevator cars, supermarket checkouts, and subway trains. Objects and spaces offer directional advice, even warnings. These exchanges may not amount to a full dialog, but through a range of technology, involving recordings as well as complex language-modeling programs, our movement is guided increasingly by the voices of audio signage. These spoken forms of way finding occupy their own place in the city, which Elliman calls an ‘‘acousmatic space.’’<sup>48</sup> The term, which comes from Michel Chion’s film theory, describes characters that speak but remain concealed. New York subway car announcements feature presenters from Bloomberg radio, the station owned by the mayor, Michael Bloomberg—making Bloomberg one of Chion’s concealed speakers. Airports and railway stations were the first places to adopt talking signs. Since the 1970s, ‘‘Mind the Gap!’’ warnings on London’s underground have been a sonic landmark for anyone visiting the city. In Amsterdam, a row ensued when a soap actor’s voice was used to announce stations on the city’s metro. On the Madrid subway, the recorded voices of two opera singers perform a short duet just before each station. The male singer opens with ‘‘Pro´ xima estacio´ n’’ and is closely followed by the female singer, who identifies the stop: ‘‘Plaza de Castilla.’’ In Shanghai, a friendly female voice follows you from train to platform, to ticket hall, to street, pointing out safety features and directions, suggesting bars, restaurants, and department stores. Voice, once thought of as uniquely human, is ‘‘a new benchmark in our relationship with technology,’’ says Elliman—talking and walking us though the spaces of the city.<sup>49</sup> In his book Audio-Vision, the film theorist Michel Chion proposes that one kind of sensual perception influences another and transforms it. People have a natural urge to fuse sounds and images, in particular, as a strategy for making sense of the world. We never see the same thing when we also hear; we don’t hear the same thing when we see it as well. Chion’s