book is about how this tendency extends to our experiences of viewing films, in which cinematic and theatrical sound influences our perception of time, including our perception of movement, speed, rhythm, and pacing. The eye is more spatially adept, the ear more temporally adept. The eye perceives more slowly because it has more to do at once: It must explore in space as well as follow along in time. People are more capable of acutely tracking the details of motion with the ear than with the eye; people who possess both sight and hearing can usually understand spoken language faster than they can read.<sup>50</sup> ## Ouch! Our monitoring systems might have more impact if they could touch us, literally. Some designers are working on this. Interaction that involves physical contact between a user and a computer is referred to as haptic, after the Greek word meaning touch, or contact. A surprising thesis is that rather than the most difficult of social senses to transmit, touch may well be the easiest. Back in 1993 Ken Goldberg (who edited the book on telepistemology I referred to earlier) and Richard Wallace connected two simple touch sensors and haptic actuators to create Datamitt. One of these devices was placed inside a metal tube on each coast of the United States, so that if a participant in Los Angeles placed her hand inside the Datamitt there and squeezed, a participant in New York with her hand inside the Datamitt there would feel the pressure, and vice versa. Datamitt was remarkable for its low resolution: It incorporated a one-bit sensor actuator whose modes were squeeze or no-squeeze, with nothing in between. And yet the effect was quite engaging. So while it is true that a true handshake is a highly situated, multisensory experience—complete with eye contact, sweaty palms or otherwise—a low-bandwidth version can do a pretty good job.<sup>51</sup> ## Yuck! What if things smelled bad when they were going wrong? Robert Levine, in A Geography of Time, tells us that for the Ongee of the Andaman Islands (in the Indian Ocean), the universe and everything in it is defined by smell. Their calendar is constructed on the basis of the odors of flowers that