come into bloom at different times of the year. When greeting someone, the Ongee do not ask, ‘‘How are you?’’ but ‘‘Konyune onorange-tanka?’’ meaning ‘‘How is your nose?’’ Natives of the Adaman jungle in India have constructed a complex annual calendar built around the sequence of dominant smells of trees and shrubs in their environment. According to Levine, ‘‘When they want to check the time of year, they simply smell the odors outside their door.’’<sup>52</sup> Smell is probably the most undervalued of the senses in modern Western cultures. According to cultural historian Kate Fox, this was not always so: The current low status of smell in the West is a result of the ‘‘revaluation of the senses’’ by philosophers and scientists of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The intellectual elite of this period decreed sight to be the all-important, up-market, superior sense, the sense of reason and civilization, writes Fox, ‘‘while the sense of smell was deemed to be of a considerably lower order—a primitive, brutish ability associated with savagery and even madness. The emotional potency of smell was felt to threaten the impersonal, rational detachment of modern scientific thinking.’’<sup>53</sup> Although the human sense of smell is a hundred times less acute than that of a dog, it is nonetheless more acute than we sometimes realize. We can recognize thousands of different smells, and we are able to detect odors even in infinitesimal quantities. According to Fox, humans are capable of detecting certain substances in dilutions of less than one part in several billion parts of air. ‘‘We may not be able to match the olfactory feats of bloodhounds,’’ she writes, ‘‘but we can, for example, ‘track’ a trail of invisible human footprints across clean blotting paper.’’<sup>54</sup> The development of more sophisticated technology for synthesizing or ‘‘capturing’’ previously elusive smells appears to be keeping pace with the advances in high-tech noses to detect the smells we already have. ‘‘Headspace’’ technology now allows accurate analysis and synthetic reproduction of almost any smell. One new fragrance for men allegedly includes both the distinctive odor of a famous New York tobacconist shop and ‘‘essence of racing car.’’ Another manufacturer claims to have reproduced the scent of financial newspapers. A process known as ‘‘soft extraction,’’ which has been in use for some time in the food industry, is the latest vogue among perfume manufacturers. By passing a special form of carbon dioxide through an object such as a coffee bean, food technologists have been able