<sup>m</sup> consider material and energy flows in all the systems we design; <sup>m</sup> give priority to human agency and not treat humans as a ‘‘factor’’ in some bigger picture; <sup>m</sup> deliver value to people—not deliver people to systems; <sup>m</sup> treat ‘‘content’’ as something we do, not something we are sold; <sup>m</sup> treat place, time, and cultural difference as positive values, not as obstacles; <sup>m</sup> focus on services, not on things, and refrain from flooding the world with pointless devices. Values and manifestos are an important guide to design decisions. But design defined only by limits and prohibitions will not flourish. Telling people to be good seldom works. As the underground classic BoloBolo puts it, ‘‘too many visions of the future stink of renunciation, moralism, new labors, toilsome rethinking, modesty and self-limitation. Of course there are limits, but why should they be limits on pleasure and adventure? Why do most alternativists only talk about new responsibilities and almost never about new possibilities? Why be modest in the face of impending catastrophe?’’<sup>16</sup> The creation of interesting social alternatives has to be as exciting and engaging as the buzz of new technology used to be. A culture of community and connectivity has to be fun and challenging, as well as responsible. An aesthetics of service and flow should inspire us, not just satisfy us. In the Bubble is about sustainable and engaging futures and the design steps we need to take to realize them. Our journey is not an easy one. We need to think, connect, act, and start processes with sensitivity. We need to foster new relationships outside our usual stomping grounds. We have to learn new ways to collaborate and do projects. We have to enhance the ability of all citizens to engage in meaningful dialogue about their environment and context, and foster new relationships between the people who make things and the people who use them. The ‘‘we’’ here is important. In a world of complex systems and constant change, we are all, unavoidably, ‘‘in the bubble.’’ The challenge is to be both in the bubble and above it, at the same time—to be as sensitive to the big picture, and the destination we are headed for, as we are to the smallest details of the here and now.