to extract coffee aroma. The procedure is now being used to capture the fragrance of flowers that are resistant to more traditional scent extraction techniques. When he was a researcher at MIT’s Media Lab, Joseph ‘‘Jofish’’ Kaye looked at ways to use smell proactively as a medium of interaction.<sup>55</sup> Scent can exist quietly in the background, he observes, unnoticed by our conscious mind, but can bring itself to our attention when necessary—as in cases such as the alarming odor of burning electrical insulation. A number of companies, notably Digiscents and TriSenx, have announced plans to produce computer-controlled devices that output smell. The companies’ literature proposes scented websites and ‘‘smelltracks’’ for DVDs or games. Kaye believes that the optimal use of the smell emission technology is in generation of a smell icon, or ‘‘smicon’’: a release of scent to convey information about an event or condition. ‘‘We have evolved to use olfaction to sense information about our environment,’’ says Kaye. ‘‘Information about burning, what’s being cooked, food freshness, and disease diagnosis can all be conveyed using smell.’’<sup>56</sup> Another interaction designer, Bill Gaver, at the Royal College of Art in London, has proposed the use of scent emission to let the user know a loved one is thinking of him or her.<sup>57</sup> Other designers have proposed less poetic applications such as the display of stock market changes through a personal device held in the pocket that would heat up or cool down depending on the state of the market. A device known as Dollars & Scents releases scents into the air: roses if the market is going up, and lemons if it is going down. I began this chapter with a story about traveling storytellers in India. They are an example of embodied, situated, and unmediated communication that prevailed before we invented mass media. For hundreds of years, when the majority of the population was illiterate, participatory ritual and performance were the main ways that beliefs were shared within a culture. Today’s Internet, virtual-reality technology, and new media as a whole are exciting additions to the communication landscape—but they are not a substitute for direct, embodied communication. Besides, if the ozone layer had a voice and could tell us about its hole, would we listen? I doubt it. Adding more voices to an already noisy environment is more likely to