make us switch off than on—especially if those voices are harbingers of bad news about the environment. The same caveat applies if we feed the data from remote environmental sensing into fancy interactive displays. A backlash against interactive displays in museums and science centers is already evident. Armando Iannucci, a British writer, took his children to the Natural History Museum in London; he concluded that ‘‘interactivity is a superficial sham leading only to hunger and emptiness. The relentless, raucous, lapel-grabbing interactivity of the newer displays was so offputting. The display cases invited participation in a process, only to lead you to the conclusion that the process was not worth pursuing. Interactivity implies participation—but does not deliver it.’’<sup>58</sup> Dwell time at an interactive exhibit at the average science center is forty seconds. ## Don’t Look, Talk ‘‘All knowledge is dialogic,’’ said the theologian Martin Bu¨ber.<sup>59</sup> Maybe we just need to talk to other human beings more—face to face. It sounds trite, but for thousands of years, talk was one of the main ways that humans tried to understand and influence the world around them. Then came media. Ivan Illich discovered that in the 1930s, nine out of ten words that a man had heard when he reached the age of twenty were words spoken to him directly—one to one, or as a member of a crowd—by somebody whom he could touch and feel and smell. By the 1970s, that proportion had been reversed: About nine out of ten words heard in a day were spoken through a loudspeaker. ‘‘Computers are doing to communication what fences did to pastures and cars did to streets,’’ Illich said in 1982.<sup>60</sup> For Illich, there was a huge difference between a colloquial tongue—what people say to each other in a context, with meaning—and a language uttered by people into microphones. Theodor Zeldin, who has written a book about conversation, believes that conversation can penetrate the intellectual barriers that are often associated with specialized professions. ‘‘The really big scientific revolutions have been the invention not of some new machine, but of new ways of talking about things,’’ argues Zeldin, adding, ‘‘what we need now is stimulation, not information.’’<sup>61</sup> Thirty-five years after Illich’s comments about conversation, Zeldin’s book has clearly struck a chord; one reviewer said