Zeldin’s book signified ‘‘the end of rational planning and the turn to conversational communities.’’<sup>62</sup> Zeldin’s ideas on conversation are not just talk. He has set up a organization called The Oxford Muse to help people and organizations converse to good effect. At one conversation dinner, held at the World Economic Forum in Davos, participants sat at tables laid for two, each with a partner they had never met before. A ‘‘Muse Conversation Menu’’ listed twentyfour topics through which they could discover what sort of person they were meeting and his or her ideas on many different aspects of life (such as ambition, curiosity, fear, friendship, and the relations of the sexes and of civilizations). One eminent participant said he would never again give a dinner party without this menu, because he hated superficial chat. Another said he had in just two hours made a friend who was closer than many he had known much longer. A third said he had never revealed so much about himself to anybody except his wife. When someone we trust tells us to our face that a thing is important, we pay attention. Conversation is a more powerful medium of understanding than messages projected at us by media. But tomorrow’s literacies need not exclude artifice and creativity. Someone has to orchestrate the dinners and cook the food. The context where we eat and talk can be enhanced by artful means. Music, the visual arts, and especially time-based or performance art can powerfully enhance our capacity to understand processes and systems. When added to the designer’s powerful representations, the artist’s critical intuition—especially when used to trigger our own insight—can shift our focus away from the material world and its visual artifacts toward a deeper understanding of natural processes and social relationships. ## Joining In For nearly a hundred years now, the artistic avant garde has fought to bridge the schism in Western thought that separates the creator from the spectator. Three generations of nonconformists have bitterly opposed art and literature whose sole purpose is entertainment. Throughout the twentieth century, avant-garde artists’ groups such as the Russian Constructivists, the Dada artists, Surrealists, COBRA, Lettrists, and Fluxus fought against the idea that art was about the creation of beautiful, static forms.