Fluxus—a movement of artists influenced by John Cage—considered traceless art forms (dance, music, song, and storytelling) to be an opportunity to modify the evolution of culture. Their approach was to make unexpected social contact with people. These artists remind their audiences: ‘‘there is no artifice here: this is happening now, in real time.’’<sup>63</sup> These groups and ideas all confronted the movement, energy, dynamism, and sheer process-ness that modern man encounters in the modern places we have made. They treated the deadness and catatonia of the technologyswamped public domain as both a rebuke and a challenge. Robert Irwin, who constantly pushes at the barriers that keep art from dealing with the universal experience of change, concludes that art should be ‘‘knowing in action’’ and ‘‘delegate a major share of the creative act to the observer.’’<sup>64</sup> In recent times media art and so-called telepresence art have repurposed the Internet and wireless communication to trigger new kinds of experience. In the Australian artist Jeffrey Shaw’s Legible City, participants bicycle down a virtual street where, instead of buildings, they pass words. Shaw worked with a writer to create the project, and together they produced a template for the words based on the grid—and actual buildings—of Manhattan. If the participant turns a corner, she moves from one narrative—or sentence—into another one. Another artistic use of technology that moved me tremendously was installed in the Netherlands Design Institute in 1994 by an English artist, Paul Sermon. Two identical blue sofas were placed in different locations. Each sofa faced a very large video monitor. On top of each monitor sat a video camera, pointing at you, the participant, as you sat on ‘‘your’’ sofa. Whenever someone sat down on the sofa at the other location, the two video camera images merged into one on the screen. The technology was simple, but the experience was sublime. Keiici Irie, one of the most media-savvy of Japanese architects, used sound to animate and delineate space in a work called Movable Realities. Wearing headphones and walking round a space, participants passed through ‘‘cones’’ of sound, each a different sound or sequence. In a show called T-Zone, which Riiche Miyake and I did together in London and Glasgow, Irie created ten-meter-high slabs of glass behind which were video cameras that captured one’s picture as one walked past and replayed it, with a delay, on small monitors. In Scotland we had to turn the thing off because the frequencies were interfering with air traffic control at Glasgow Airport. Another Japanese artist, Masaki Fujihata, has also achieved magi-