cal results with simple technology. In a piece called Light on the Net, visitors encountered a large monitor displaying the entrance hall to a building somewhere else, plus a seven-by-seven matrix of light bulbs in one corner of the screen. By clicking on any of them, participants from anywhere in the world were able to switch on one of the real bulbs in the distant building. The concept and its implementation were simple and beautiful. Even with something so simple as spelling out ‘‘Hi’’ from a distance, the effect was extraordinary. The idea that time delay and distance contribute positively to reflection is not a new one. Aesthetic theories since the eighteenth century have seen spatial distance and temporal delay as preconditions for critical musing. Twentieth-century thinkers worried that space and time for reflection would be undermined by the culture of simultaneity ushered in by the telegraph. Decades later, Susan Sontag restated the same dilemma: How much do we really know about the trash heaps, slums, and wars depicted by today’s imaging technologies? These technologies are supposed to give us a clearer image—but by sanitizing the subject, they prevent us from knowing reality itself.<sup>65</sup> ‘‘In the Bay Area we are more likely to look to our palm pilots for information, than to look to the tree we are standing under,’’ says Natalie Jeremijenko (who lives in San Francisco). ‘‘We are more familiar with distributed computation than the distributed human intelligence.’’<sup>66</sup> Today’s media artists work with the ambiguity and tension between ‘‘here’’ and ‘‘there’’ that is an inherent property of communication technologies. They play games with mediation so that the participant is both the observer and the observed. In so doing, they sensitize us to the need to use media critically. Jeremijenko (discussed earlier as the originator of the OneTree project) created feral robotic dogs that would ‘‘sniff out’’ radioactive contamination and thereby locate radioactive hot spots. ## Tomorrow’s Literacies If tomorrow’s literacies are to be system and process literacies, then the tools and sensibility of media and network art have two crucial roles to play. First, in terms of content, media art can draw our attention to phenomena in our world that exist but are not seen—the hidden forces that shape the places and situations we live in. Second, media art can also teach