technology to the people who are supposed to buy it, on the other. I have enshrined this tendency in two design laws, the first of which I have taken the liberty of naming after myself. Thackara’s law states: If you put smart technology into a pointless product, the result will be a stupid product. Thackara’s law has a daughter, the law of diminishing amazement (LODA). LODA states that the more fancy tech you pack into a product, the harder it becomes to impress people with its benefits. I invented LODA after someone drove me across Germany in a brand-new top-of-the-line Mercedes. This mobile temple to technology had everything: remote keyless entry, full power train control, aircraft-like instrument clusters, adaptive suspension, theft-deterrent systems, crash sensors, diagnostics, traction control, seat memory (in five directions), satellite-based navigation, vehicle radar, intelligent cruise control. It was fun, I have to admit, being driven down an autobahn in the big Benz at 150 miles an hour—but the litany of gadgets recited by the proud owner left me cold. I felt: ‘‘So?’’ My nonamazement must have been a disappointment to my host, who had paid two hundred thousand dollars for the car—never mind to the brilliant engineers at Benz who sweated blood getting all this stuff to work. When not hurtling down autobahnen, we also hear a lot in Europe about wired domestic appliances. But I can’t say the prospect fills me with joy. Ericsson and Electrolux (among others) are developing a refrigerator that will sense when it is low on milk and order more direct from the supplier. Direct from the cow for all I know. I can just see it. I’ll be driving home from work, and the phone will ring. ‘‘Your refrigerator is on the line,’’ the car will say; ‘‘it wants you to pick up some milk on your way home.’’ To which my response will be: ‘‘Tell the refrigerator I’m in a meeting.’’ ## Biomimicry Why can’t we all live as lightly as penguins? Nature offers us countless examples of designs that could help us meet our basic needs in more elegant and efficient ways than our man-made ones: how to keep warm, find shelter from the rain, get food. ‘‘Nature,’’ says Janine Benyus, ‘‘crafts materials of a complexity and functionality that we can only envy.’’ Benyus, author of a definitive book on biomimicry, points out that the inner shell