of an abalone is twice as tough as our high-tech ceramics. Spider silk, ounce for ounce, is five times stronger than steel. Mussel adhesive works underwater and sticks to anything—without a primer. Bone, wood, tusks, heart muscle, antlers, skin, blood vessels, tendons—they are a ‘‘bounty of resilience,’’ says Benyus, ‘‘miracle materials all.’’<sup>2</sup> We do, on occasion, learn from nature—but we are clumsy students. The design of Kevlar, for example, was inspired by the properties of silk. Kevlar is indeed extremely tough: It can stop bullets. But compare, as Benyus has done, a quietly spinning spider to the violent and expensive process we need to manufacture Kevlar: ‘‘We pour petroleum-derived molecules into a pressurized vat of concentrated sulfuric acid and boil the noxious brew at several hundred degrees Celsius into a liquid crystal form. We subject this crunchy mush to extremely high pressures, in order to force the fibers into alignment as we draw them out. The energy input in this process is extreme, and the by-products are toxic. The spider, by comparison, makes her equally strong (and much tougher) fiber at body temperature—and without the need for high-pressure vats, heat, or corrosive acids. ‘‘She also produces locally,’’ concludes Benyus, ‘‘with no need to drill holes in the middle of stormy oceans in order to obtain her raw materials.’’<sup>3</sup> Perhaps we would learn more quickly from penguins and spiders if we were not surrounded by swarms of our own technologies. Stranded on an ice floe, with nothing but penguins for company, we’d probably study them more closely. But we live in a world filled with materials and devices invented by ourselves. I touched on today’s flood of technical information in chapter 8. A comprehensive technical directory, in the improbable event that one could be produced, would contain four and a half million terms today—and would be growing at a fast-accelerating pace. ‘‘I have a hammer, but I need a nail,’’ say Swedish materials scientists. New opportunities presented by our global technology machine come faster than we can find uses for them. We’ve never before had to deal with such an uncontrolled increase in technical performance and forms. For the first million years or so after his appearance, man used essentially five materials to make all his tools and objects and structures: wood, rock, bone, horn, and leather—a small number, but themselves the product of millions of years of evolution. Today, in contrast, most big companies own research factories that churn out technical knowledge in impressive quantities. But they often don’t know what to do with it. Sometimes they