are unaware that particularly valuable inventions—which they have paid for—even exist. A few years ago, I organized the visit of twenty postgraduate design students to the six-hundred-person research labs of one of the world’s leading glass manufacturers. For the students, it was like visiting Aladdin’s cave. Everywhere they turned, they encountered technical innovations that triggered their imaginations: exotic surface treatments, lasers being used to project images on glass, experimental ways to suffuse light. In just two days, they came up with a series of scenarios for applying these technical marvels in daily-life contexts: ‘‘smart’’ shop windows, house windows that changed color, tabletops as monitors, even spectacles as personal digital assistants. The glass company’s boffins (who you in the United States refer to as ‘‘experts’’) and management were astounded. It turned out that the company’s economic lifeblood was the sale, in gigantic quantities, of plate glass—which preoccupied their marketing people—while the labs were busy mainly with well-paid but narrowly focused defense-related work on such applications as cockpits for military jump jets. The great majority of the world’s research facilities are just as narrowly focused, and the career model of scientific research amplifies the tendency for knowledge to pile up in vertically specialized ‘‘silos.’’ Your career goes well if you specialize, and you become a star among stars if you invent a new discipline that nobody else understands. As a result we confront an innovation dilemma. We’ve constructed ourselves an industrial system that is brilliant on means, but pretty hopeless when it comes to ends. We can deliver amazing performance, but we are increasingly at a loss to understand what to make and why. ## Materials of Invention This is where design comes in. A conscious effort is needed—a design effort—to connect the properties of the myriad materials and processes available—whether natural or man-made—to the needs we have as people in our daily lives. This takes us into unknown territory. Designers and manufacturers are faced with an enormous and expanding field of possibilities—in the selection of materials and of industrial processes to transform them. Known and trusted physical limits, which used to be embedded in the skills and cultures of craftsmen and production engineers, are disappearing. As well as choosing among myriad alternatives to meet