existing needs, designers also confront the problem: What should a product look like? What form should it take? New materials have no absolute form. Neither do they have ‘‘natural properties’’ to determine a product’s shape. We are confronted, for the first time, by what the Museum of Modern Art’s design curator Paola Antonelli has nicknamed ‘‘mutant materials.’’<sup>4</sup> Or as Ezio Manzini put it in his modern classic, The Material of Invention, ‘‘materials are no longer ‘found.’ Rather, we can now engineer materials to achieve a specific, desired performance.’’<sup>5</sup> But what performance? The problem for companies and designers is that inventors and laboratories tend to categorize their materials according to what they are—rather than what they do or what they are for. Grouping materials by type makes sense in an archive and (to itself at least) in a company’s sales catalogue—but such classification systems are of little help to the product designer or structural engineer. Confronted as she is by directories and databases bulging with thousands of plastics, ceramics, fiber, composites, rubbers and foams, glass, wood, and metals, it’s hardly surprising that the busy designer so often reverts to tried and tested materials she has used in the past. What’s needed are information systems—and multidisciplinary professional communities of knowledge exchange—that direct designers first to properties, and thence to the different materials or systems that possess them. The most important property quality required of tomorrow’s materials is lightness. The structures and systems we design have to act light, as well as be light—light to make, light to assemble, light in operation, light to recover, and light to recycle. For a natural organism, Benyus tells us in Biomimicry, shape is cheap, material is expensive. All the material it uses, it uses in an effective way. This is because a lot of metabolic energy is needed not just to assemble material, but also to disassemble it: According to the eminent British engineer Julian Vincent, who is one of the fathers of biomimetics, there are good reasons, based on evolutionary selection pressure, why biological organisms usually represent minimum-energy solutions to particular problems. ‘‘Biological organisms compete with each other for the use of available energy which comes from sunlight, or it is stored, as biomass, from previous eons of sunlight,’’ explains Vincent. ‘‘If an organism uses more energy than its neighbor, it usually does not reproduce so well, leaves fewer offspring, so eventually dies out. The most successful organisms therefore take the minimum amount of energy