and optimize the distribution of the energy between all its different functions.’’<sup>6</sup> We’re in a transition from an industrial system organized on the basis of the idea that material is cheap and that shape—the forming processes—is expensive. ‘‘To make a structure that stands up, we have tended to slap on layers of heavy reinforcement, which we call redundancy, not to design it more cunningly,’’ says Vincent. Nature has completely internalized the chemistry of materials and the need to recycle. ‘‘We would not be here,’’ says Vincent, ‘‘had not our ancestors rotted. All organisms are designed with the intention of being recycled. Learning from nature, this means we have to be careful about bond energies in materials and see that they can be broken down easily.’’<sup>7</sup> Light structures need not only to use less matter, but also to use their matter more effectively. According to scientists at Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), materials with these properties could be used in the future to build skyscrapers with ‘‘smart’’ structural columns that can change their physical properties. These columns could stiffen the building to resist high wind loads but could also soften it to help it ride out shock waves from an earthquake.<sup>8</sup> The problem with a technology-based smart structure—with its sensors, actuators, structural members, and control hardware—is that it’s complex. Many elements have to work in harmony together to produce a system that works. So-called active systems of this kind require fast, real-time, stable, and failure-free computing. Scaling them up so that the system includes the deployment of the millions of sensors you’d need in a large building poses a tremendous complexity challenge in the design of software control architectures. Could smartness be simpler? Researchers at Smart Architecture, in Holland, in their search for light structural solutions, have looked at the foundations that houses, factories, and other structures rest on.<sup>9</sup> The Earth itself is easily strong enough to support houses, towers, and offices. But builders have become accustomed to the tradition of hammering or pushing heavy concrete piles, weighing thousands of tons, deep into the ground. In Amsterdam, where I live, concrete piles sixty feet long are being hammered by gigantic machines into the Earth, one meter apart, as I (try to) write. Smart architecture proposes, as an alternative, to build structures on a light ‘‘floating’’ raft made out of polystyrene foam. This can only be part of the solution, since the density of the ground and the mud under a building