tend to vary through time. Therefore, the raft needs to be put on some kind of smart stabilizing base that would be able to compensate for these changes. A structure with these properties could, say the researchers at PARC, be designed like a cuttlefish skeleton—which is extremely rigid despite the fact that its volume is only 7 percent solid.<sup>10</sup> Inside a cuttlefish are channels that alternate with layers of plates. Inside these narrow channels is a gas: By changing its pressure, the fish can go up and down. A cuttlefish-style trim layer under a building could work in a similar way. But back to my penguin story. Buildings consume some 50 percent of the world’s energy.<sup>11</sup> By some estimates, at least half that could be saved if heating and cooling systems were more sensitive to the minute-by-minute needs of users.<sup>12</sup> At present, even the most advanced buildings—never mind my wasteful home in Amsterdam—consume vast amounts of energy to sustain average temperatures even when rooms or buildings are empty. Traditional buildings perform little better: In the classic sealed-skin solution, a layer of bricks or cladding on the outside is backed by a layer of insulating foam: The system excludes the cold to a degree—but the gap has to be filled by energy-guzzling heating systems. To act light, and not just be light, our buildings need the ability to sense and respond to changes in their environment—just like our own skin or a penguin’s fur. Energy, materials, and space are consumed at prodigious rates when buildings are put up, but over the life of most buildings, cumulative energy costs usually exceed even these initial construction costs. Computer-driven actuators can adjust sunshades and enable the local control of openings, surfaces, and heating and cooling systems. A good example is the ‘‘liquid architecture’’ projects of NOX in The Netherlands.<sup>13</sup> Biomimics are impressed—but so far also baffled—by the penguin. So some designers are attempting to transform the skins of our buildings by learning from the polar bear.<sup>14</sup> Like the penguin, the polar bear maintains a steady body heat in extreme cold. The bear’s skin, which is black, is covered in a thick layer of translucent white hairs; these combine with trapped air to form an insulating layer that absorbs heat brilliantly. The hairs themselves guide infrared light toward the skin. Each individual hair is able to convey any external heat back to the skin, which absorbs it. Transferring this kind of functionality to a building, say researchers, would mean a black facade: Panels would consist of two transparent layers with capillary-like tubes mimicking the hairs between them.