The potential is fantastic, but we have work to do persuading architects and building designers of our case. A growing number of building designers have recently begun to tackle the profligate and unsustainable energy performance of buildings, but many others have been more interested in the appearance of transparency, demassification, and lightness in buildings— with the result that their buildings’ environmental footprint has in some cases increased in size.<sup>15</sup> Lightweight glazing systems, translucent floor and wall panels, and light-reflective finishes that look transparent, almost ethereal, can be horrendously heat inefficient when the total life costs are added up. Other ‘‘smart’’ and hard materials, such as modern ceramics and advanced composites, can be nearly as hard as diamonds and are equally resistant to heat and corrosion: They are being made into turbines, dental braces, prosthetic body implants, even bullet-proof face masks. But they require enormous amounts of energy to manufacture. Other new materials are so light and ethereal that we have not yet worked out how to exploit them: Silica aerogel, for example, is an ultralight material, comprising 99.9 percent air, developed at the Livermore National Laboratories in California. For one design critic the substance had ‘‘the translucency of clouds and the eerie, phantasmagoric look of a hologram.’’<sup>16</sup> Aerogel is used as an insulating material and as a filter—but has not yet been exploited by product design. ## Flying by Light An aircraft or a building with a smart skin can do without a good bit of heavy-engineering redundancy. Such a skin might incorporate different kinds of sensors and strain gauges—myriad little bits of fine wire, or piezoceramics, that generate an electric charge when strained. The ‘‘nerves’’ in such smart structures are optical fibers that distribute signals about changes to processors so that distant environments, such as a wingtip, may be monitored remotely. In a smart system, sensors give us information. But a great deal of processing power is needed to analyze and make useful sense out of the mass of information generated and transmitted by arrays of sensors. And once the information system has decided what needs to be done, it must relay instructions back to the structure and cause it to respond in an appropriate way—avoiding something, repairing itself, or activating a control surface.