Julian Vincent sees carbon fiber structures as a more elegant solution. Carbon fiber is conductive: If it is damaged, the whole potential field across the structure changes—and that can be sensed. Rather than discrete sensors’ being attached on discrete points, the whole structure becomes an integrated sensing element.<sup>17</sup> Vincent also sees more actuator potential in collagen, a load-bearing material that the Achilles tendon is made of, as are many other membranes that hold the body together. Collagen can under some circumstances be made into an actuator by changing its crosslinking properties.<sup>18</sup> One group of animals—sea urchins, brittle stars, starfish, sea cucumbers, and sea lilies—performs a trick with collagen. By changing the amount of calcium, these creatures have made themselves a skeleton, or skeletal appendages, that can be modified and redesigned. Vincent’s team has been looking at the sea cucumber and trying to understand—and then model—the mechanism whereby it changes its stiffness and shape.<sup>19</sup> Another potential actuator, elastin, is a rubbery substance found in arteries. By changing its chemistry, elastin expands and contracts over different temperature ranges. Researchers are looking at leaves that can open and close as potential internal pressure actuators. A possible application: tents that can be unfolded in a very short time.<sup>20</sup> Aircraft designers, who usually have access to the most advanced technology around, are looking at birds for ideas. Martin Kemp, a technical expert on smart sensing who works in the aviation industry, marvels at the way a bird’s wing adapts during flight and changes its shape during landing, whereas an aircraft is kept in the air by a great slab of aluminum wobbling up and down with hydraulic cylinders and a flap at the back end. ‘‘It is incredibly crude engineering, compared to nature,’’ he says. ‘‘If we could change the aircraft’s whole shape during flight, we’d have a very elegant, lightweight structure. The way a bird’s wing changes shape is so natural and obvious. If you were in an aircraft and the wing just sort of gracefully twisted, as you came in to land, you’d think: Beautiful!’’<sup>21</sup> Before one air show, when his company’s marketing department requested a smart-technology demonstrator, Kemp realized that most of his applied research was actually invisible—embedded or inside something else: We had all the technology on the shelf. We knew that piezo-ceramics change shape when voltage is applied to them. We knew that shape memory alloy wires change