shape when you heat them up. But when we tried to make [a model dragonfly to demonstrate their performance in practice], we found lots and lots of little problems. Like: How do we connect the wires to the composites? Run things down the body, down this branch? Then there was the whole control side: we had a complete 486 PC underneath the thing, controlling it. The Duck Syndrome: very calm and sedate on top—but underneath, paddling like mad! We had about three kilos of power supplies, with computers of all sorts controlling it. It brought home the whole issue that lab technology is very nice, that in theory you can do anything, but the actual realisation can completely defeat you.<sup>22</sup> Man-made smartness tends to be overly complicated. Every step, every intermediary process, in a smart-technology-based system, takes time and reduces efficiency. There are three thousand lines of code in my electric toothbrush.<sup>23</sup> The mouth of a polar bear, so far as I am aware, contains none—but benefits from many thousands of years of evolutionary design. Natural lightness, which has evolved over eons, tends to be simple. Engineers, realizing this, now try to minimize complex and therefore failureprone assemblies of subcomponents. The most sought-after material innovations behave like mechanical devices but are simpler—for example, the substitution of membrane keyboards for mechanical ones, or of electroluminescent surfaces for light bulbs. The ambition of today’s engineers is to keep the ‘‘nuts and bolts’’ in absolutely the most simple state possible, because that’s where they expect most problems to occur. As one eminent engineer told me, ‘‘if you have twenty micro-chips and one soldered joint, chances are, the latter will fail.’’ Clearly, my mechanical friend had never used MSWord! A lot of today’s modern software is buggier than a pile of dung. Communications systems are always at risk of failure because the million lines of software they comprise are impossible to check. Software architects are trying to reconfigure large technical systems so that they are built up from self-contained modules of verifiable code. Their hope is that software systems composed of many small blocks will be more stable than those made up of a large mass of undifferentiated code. This kind of modularity and hierarchy, an elegant solution in nature, can render man-made systems more stable. Vincent explains: ‘‘Cells are all only about ten microns across, and anything large tends to be made up in layers. You can pull out bits at different levels and replace them without bringing down the whole structure, which is more efficient on the repair side.’’<sup>24</sup>