Structural self-repair is another area in which we are learning from nature. An Australian researcher, Robyn Overall, cut into some pea roots to see what would happen. She used an immune system to investigate the orientation of microfilaments in the cell membrane in order to find out about the orientation of cellulose in the cells. Cells in the wounded root responded to stresses around them, she found. These cells are under a high internal pressure, anything up to ten atmospheres; when their internal pressure changes, the cell elongates. This enables the cells to grow into the wound area and to repair it.<sup>25</sup> Vincent is convinced that damage control in man-made systems can benefit from this approach: local, isolated effectors.<sup>26</sup> We tend to think of products as lumps of dead matter: inert, passive, dumb. But products are becoming lively, active, and intelligent. Objects that are sensitive to their environment, act with some intelligence, and talk to each other are changing the basic phenomenology of products— the way they exist in the world. The result is to undermine long-standing design principles. ‘‘Form follows function’’ made sense when products were designed for a specific task—but not when responsive materials that modify a product’s behavior are available. Another nostrum, ‘‘truth to materials,’’ was a moral imperative of the modern movement in design; it made sense when products were made of ‘‘found’’ or natural materials whose properties were predetermined. But ‘‘truth’’ is less helpful as a design principle when the performance and behavior of materials can be specified in advance. ## Learning, Not Copying To what questions will all this stuff be an answer? After 3.8 billion years of evolution, nature has a pretty good idea of what works, what is appropriate, and what lasts. ‘‘Nature solves problems; engineers seek answers; what better marriage could you ask for?’’ asks Vincent.<sup>27</sup> Learning from the principles of nature can save a lot of time and cost. We can learn about the ways in which natural systems have achieved minimum-energy solutions, run on sunlight, use only the energy they need, and so on. We can learn how natural systems optimize, rather than maximize, their use of materials. We can learn, like nature, how to create artifacts that sense and respond to their local situation, recycle everything, and do not foul their nests. But