error works when millions of years are available, but we humans are flooding the world with error-prone gadgets all at once. Trillions of smart tags, sensors, smart materials, connected appliances, wearable computing, and body implants are now being unleashed upon the world all at once. It’s by no means clear to what question they are an answer—or who is going to look after them, and how. According to one industry expert, ‘‘80 percent of embedded systems are delivered late, are hopelessly bug-ridden, and share the same problems of lousy quality, buggy tool chains, (and) poorly thought-out product specifications.’’<sup>30</sup> You might think that the social consequences that could follow when every object around us becomes smart and connected would be widely discussed—but they’re not. The slogan of the main Web portal for embedded systems developers is ‘‘thinking inside the box.’’<sup>31</sup> Most of us think about technology in much the same way that a frog thinks about boiling water. The story goes that if you drop a frog into a pan when the water is boiling, it will leap out; but if you put the frog into a pan of cold water, and then heat it steadily toward the boiling point, the frog—unaware that any dramatic change is taking place—will just sit there and slowly cook. So, is technology cooking us? Many hard objects around us are certainly beginning to ‘‘soften.’’ In New York, Tokyo, or London, right now, we encounter an embedded system on average 150 times a day.<sup>32</sup> The world is already filled with hundreds of microprocessors for every man, woman, and child on the planet. Think of all those ATMs, ticket-vending machines, traffic lights, billboards, cellular phones, pagers, and cash registers. A new car from General Motors contains \$675 worth of steel and \$2,500 worth of electronics. Ted Lewis, a professor at the U.S. Navy’s graduate school, says that as global sales of PCs reach one hundred million, embedded systems are set to expand to at least a thousand times as many units. Concludes Lewis, ‘‘the business of ‘sense-and-communicate’ is already many times larger than the business of ‘compute-and-store.’ ’’<sup>33</sup> More and more of the objects around us do not function alone, but as part of a service enabled by networks. This is why people in the airline industry describe a Boeing 747 as ‘‘equipment’’—as in, ‘‘The equipment is late incoming from Detroit.’’ One of the largest and most complicated objects made by man is more or less useless unless connected. Along with objects