tripled, economic output has risen by a factor of five, and computer processing speeds and storage have both increased over a millionfold. It took from the beginning of human history to the year 1900 to grow a world economy that produced six hundred billion dollars in output; today, the world economy grows by that amount every two years. This acceleration is like a cultural centrifuge. The faster the economy grows, the heavier we feel. A few years ago we hoped that digital communication networks would lead to a lighter economy and a cleaner environment. But that has not happened. Global temperatures are rising faster than ever before recorded, bringing increased instability to weather systems across the world.<sup>1</sup> With heat comes dust. More than one hundred million European and North American citizens live in cities in which the air is unsafe to breathe. When I visited Hong Kong during research for this book, the news broke that a ten-million-square-mile, two-mile-thick ‘‘Asian brown cloud’’ of man-made pollutants had been discovered. It contained a dynamic soup of vehicle and industrial pollutants, carbon monoxide, and minute soot particles or fly ash from the regular burning of forests and wood used for cooking in millions of rural homes. The cloud was spreading across the whole Asian continent and blocking out up to 15 percent of the available sunlight.<sup>2</sup> At ground level, too, the information age is heavier than we anticipated. I realized after my near miss on the Languedocienne that we made a fundamental error with the theory of dematerialization. We supposed that an information society would replace industrial society, whereas the information society has in fact been added to the industrial one and increased its intensity. Apart from its impact on the wider economy, information technology is heavy in itself. It’s a heavy user of matter in all the hardware needed to run it. One of the hidden costs of the misnamed silicon age is the material and energy flows involved in the manufacture and use of microchips. It takes 1.7 kilograms of materials to make a microchip with 32 megabytes of random-access memory—a total 630 times the mass of the final product.<sup>3</sup> The ‘‘fab’’ of a basic memory chip, and running it for the typical life span of a computer, eats up eight hundred times the chip’s weight in fossil fuel. Thousands of potentially toxic chemicals are used in the manufacturing process.<sup>4</sup> A single microchip is, it is true, a small thing—on its own. But