## Embedded—but Not Asleep The disappearance of computing is a bad reason to stop thinking about it. If citizens do not set the agenda for its use, others will. The most energetic developers of new applications for pervasive computing right now are logistics industries, as we saw in chapter 3, and security and police interests. When the computing industry started pushing pervasive computing hard in the late 1990s, it often used ‘‘House of the Future’’ mock-ups to showcase potential applications and attract the attention of potential funders. These mock-ups usually featured (and still do) lots of voice-controlled and touch screens. Microsoft’s Easy Living project focused on the software technologies needed to create a smart home environment, such as software agents, computer vision, and machine learning.<sup>38</sup> But in the aftermath of September 11, attention switched en masse from home to homeland security (HS). Reliable figures for the total public and private expenditures on HS technologies are hard to find, but estimates are that total HS outlays—by federal, state, local, and private entities in the United States—grew from \$5 billion in 2000 to \$85 billion in 2004, with a forecast that they will grow to \$130 billion—and possibly as high as \$210 billion—by 2010.<sup>39</sup> Are disappearing computers a menace? Think about that frog again. How does his behavior compare with our own relationship to technology? I’d say that like the frog, we have a vague sensation that ‘‘things seem to be getting warmer around here’’—but for most of us, the condition of ‘‘getting warmer and less comfortable’’ has been a constant throughout our lives. We’re used to it. It’s not so much that technology is changing quickly; change is one of the constants we have become used to. And it’s not that technology is penetrating every aspect of our lives; that, too, has been happening to all of us since we were born. The shocking thing to me, at least, is the rate of acceleration of change—right now. As I described in chapter 2, the accelerometer has disappeared off the right-hand side of the dial. And critical reflection on this new wave of technology is in short supply. And yet, in the domain of policing and law enforcement, a whole new industry has emerged called digital ID. It already has its own conference and trade show, Digital ID World, which specializes in ‘‘the identity management space.’’<sup>40</sup> The world’s largest smart-card rollout has already started in China; all Chinese over the age of sixteen are being issued a smart card as