an identification document. The rollout of these chip-bearing cards to 1.3 billion citizens is expected to be completed by the year 2008, according to the official news agency Xinhua.<sup>41</sup> Surveillance is permeating our environments. As the writer Mike Davis puts it, ‘‘Tall buildings are becoming increasingly sentient and packed with firepower. The sensory system of the average office tower already includes panoptic vision, smell, sensitivity to temperature and humidity, motion detection, and, in some cases, hearing. Some architects predict the day when the building’s own AI security computer will be able automatically to screen and identify its human population and even, perhaps, respond to their emotional states (fear, panic, etc.).’’<sup>42</sup> ## Bodies in the Network We seem equally unperturbed by—or are simply unaware of—the new machines and systems that scan, probe, penetrate, and enhance our bodies. As often happens, artists and writers have seen the big picture more clearly. Donna Haraway, in her celebrated ‘‘Cyborg Manifesto,’’ wrote back in 1991 that ‘‘late twentieth century machines have made thoroughly ambiguous the difference between natural and artificial, mind and body, selfdeveloping and externally designed. Our machines are disturbingly lively, and we are frighteningly inert.’’<sup>43</sup> The ethical issues raised by these developments are profound but remain low to invisible on the radar of public awareness. In chapter 6 I described this passive acceptance of technology into our bodies as ‘‘Borg drift.’’ It’s what happens when knowledge from many branches of science and design—a million small, specialized acts—converge without our really noticing. Bio-mechatronics and medical telematics are spreading at tremendous speed, not because there’s a Dr. Frankenstein out there, but because thousands of creative and well-meaning people go to work every day to fix or improve a tiny bit of our bodies. Oticon, in Denmark, for example, is developing hundred-channel amplifiers for the inner ear.<sup>44</sup> Scientists are cloning artificial livers and hearts and kidneys and blood and knees and fingers and toes—smart prostheses of every kind.<sup>45</sup> Progress on excellent artificial skin is excellent.<sup>46</sup> Tongues are a tough challenge, but they’ll crack that one, too, in due course. As one prosthetic manufacturer somewhat creepily puts it, ‘‘Artificial limbs are taking on new life