thanks to advances in embedded-chip technology.’’<sup>47</sup> According to writer Thomas Grose, ‘‘Because of embedded chip technology, artificial limbs permanently attached to amputees and controlled by their brains could be available some time within the next decade or two. And while it’s unlikely that such prostheses could ever improve upon a real arm or leg, bioengineering nevertheless offers America’s 1.3 million amputees the real possibility of mechanical limbs that closely mimic nature’s. ‘It is a matter of when, and not if, such technology will be ultimately realized,’ says Joel W. Burdick, deputy director of the California Institute of Technology’s Center for Neuromorphic Systems Engineering.’’<sup>48</sup> Our bodies are not just being synthesized bit by bit; they’re also being connected to the Net. Soon we’ll all be always on, thanks to fast-spreading connectivity between monitoring devices on (or in) our bodies, on the one hand—and health care practitioners, their institutions, and their knowledge systems, on the other. Heart disease is a big driver of the trend. You give every heart patient a wearable or implanted monitor; it talks wirelessly to computers, which are trained to keep an eye open for abnormalities: Bingo! Your body is very securely plugged into the network. That’s pervasive computing, too. Health and medical telematics are expanding and connecting to each other in the same unobtrusive—and unplanned—manner that characterizes the way our body parts are being changed. In one project, a vast database containing information about tens of millions of experiments and drug tests is being centralized.<sup>49</sup> In dozens of different experiments, patient records are being digitized and coded—which means they can be accessed online from anywhere.<sup>50</sup> Medical journals are migrating at high speed to online publishing environments, thereby shrinking the time lag between discovery and dissemination of new discoveries.<sup>51</sup> The drug industry is putting performance data about thousands of drugs online.<sup>52</sup> And bioengineers have devised a multitude of noninvasive, digital patient-monitoring systems that measure, record, and evaluate our vital functions—continuously.<sup>53</sup> The result of this is a vast, distributed, and—for the wired-up patient— immersive medical knowledge system in which the boundaries between ‘‘me’’ and ‘‘the system’’ are dissolving. This is why artists talk about ‘‘wetware’’ and ‘‘the recombinant body.’’ The body itself will become a communication device if some engineers have their way. IBM’s Thomas Zimmerman is a specialist in ‘‘intrabody communications’’; he says our