own bodies will be used before too long as the wiring of a very small but very useful ‘‘personal area network’’ (PAN). ‘‘Wearable’’ electronic devices will exchange data by passing low-voltage currents through the body and into hand-held appliances, head-mounted displays, shoes, watches, credit cards, and the like. The hardware necessary to build such a novel interface is inexpensive and could be implemented with cheap microcontroller chips costing a few dollars. Once this technology is perfected and standardized, all kinds of devices monitoring bodily functions can be given networking capability. Adds Zimmerman, ‘‘the usefulness of each will be multiplied by the exchange of information with any other device we carry with us, and completely new devices will be invented to take advantage of this networking frenzy.’’<sup>54</sup> PAN medical sensors, for example, could provide any kind of biological monitoring, transfer the data to your cellular phone, and relay everything to a nearby hospital. Arthur Kroker, an iconoclastic writer who has observed the convergence of technology and the body with glee, is enthusiastic. Writing with Michael Weinstein, he says: ‘‘Why be nostalgic? The old body type was always OK, but the wired body is infinitely better— a wired nervous system embedded in living flesh.’’<sup>55</sup> One of those medical sensors could well be monitoring your brain. A Finnish company, Neuromag, offers a spectacular example of the speed with which brain-scanning technology has advanced in recent years. Wilhelm Konrad Roentgen’s discovery of X rays was one of the wonders of the twentiety century; brain imaging is as impressive now. It’s completely noninvasive, too: With magnetoencephalography (MEG), cortical activity all over the head can be followed from outside.<sup>56</sup> Neuromag’s system has the potential to identify neurological and psychiatric disorders invisible to existing diagnostics. It is able simultaneously to measure 370 discrete channels. Neuromag’s system is a large device, but soon brain scanning will be done remotely. A team from the Centre for Physical Electronics at the University of Sussex has developed a technique that, instead of measuring electric current flow through a fixed-on electrode, takes advantage of the latest developments in sensor technology to measure electric fields from the brain without actually having to make direct contact with the head. ‘‘We deal with patients who have Alzheimer’s disease and schizophrenia who often have delusions about electrodes in their head,’’ Professor Yonmoy Sharma told the BBC.<sup>57</sup>