## AmI? The mission for ambient intelligence (AmI), as expressed by the European Commission’s Information Society Technologies Advisory Group (ISTAG), sounds innocuous enough: ‘‘See how information technology can be diffused into everyday objects and settings, leading to new ways of supporting and enhancing people’s lives.’’ In the ambient intelligent environment (which in the United States tends to be called ‘‘ubiquitous computing’’ or ‘‘pervasive computing’’) envisaged by its promoters, human beings will be surrounded by computing and networking technology embedded in everyday objects. Furniture, clothes, vehicles, roads, and smart materials—even particles of decorative substances, like paint—will merge, as ISTAG puts it, in a ‘‘seamless environment of computing, advanced networking technology and specific interfaces.’’ Technology will be embedded, personalized, adaptive, and anticipatory. All of which sounds fine and dandy, except that all these promises are based on wildly implausible assumptions. No technology delivered by competing private companies will ever be ‘‘seamlessly’’ integrated. No foreseeable software will be able to ‘‘respond intelligently to spoken or gestured indications of desire,’’ as ISTAG asserts.<sup>58</sup> A visit to Greece in the summer of 2003, for the ‘‘Tales of the Disappearing Computer’’ conference, amplified my feelings of unease. It’s not so much that bad men in black hats are plotting dastardly deeds—more that enthusiastic researchers are failing to think at all about possible downsides to their inventions. One paper presented at the conference, held in Santorini, looked forward to ‘‘anthropocentric interfaces’’ that, enabled by ‘‘cognition technologies,’’ will ‘‘enhance or substitute for our senses.’’<sup>59</sup> Context-aware and proactive systems will ‘‘hide overall system complexity, and preserve human attention, by delivering to us only information which is rich with meanings and contexts.’’ Faced with a ‘‘tera-world’’ filled with ‘‘open, unbound, dynamic and intelligent systems,’’ we will soon need to ‘‘provide them with learning, and gracefully evolving capabilities, as well as self-diagnosis, self-adaptation, and self-organization capabilities.’’ Now maybe I am missing something, but to me this translates as: Build systems that are too complicated to understand and then, after they are deployed, find ways to master their complexity. Hmmm.