Greger Linden, a Finnish expert in ‘‘psychosocial computing,’’ anticipated, in another conference presentation, that when direct braincomputer interfaces are implemented, ‘‘people will be the problem. Rather than concentrate on one thing at a time, which suits the software, people tend to think about other things. This messes up the results.’’<sup>60</sup> Linden, who leads a large Franco-Finnish ‘‘proactive computing’’ consortium, appeared undeterred by twenty thousand years of human subtlety: He plans to develop models for ‘‘disambiguating’’ users’ vague commands and anticipating their actions. Alas, poor Yorick. Other researchers are developing machine vision systems that will scan us for ‘‘psycho-physiological signals’’ and ‘‘sense and understand human actions.’’<sup>61</sup> Eye gaze, pupil dilation and contraction, gaze direction through time, blinking, facial tics, breathing, and heart rates—all will be monitored remotely by systems designed to ‘‘understand our cognitive and emotional state of mind.’’<sup>62</sup> Serious dangers are often created by individuals who try to carry out critical activity when they are ‘‘not in a fit state to,’’ said one scientist at the conference. Agents will monitor these users and decide on behalf of them for their welfare. He mentioned driving cars while under the influence and drowsing at the wheel of a bus—but it was not evident that the system could not be recalibrated to detect other impure thoughts. Civilian companies are also taking liberties with our liberty. Several firms are pushing the concept of ‘‘proactive’’ computing. This kind of computing, according to Intel, is ‘‘perceptive of our needs.’’ Intel, which is also pushing the ‘‘proactive computing paradigm,’’ makes the airy promise that ‘‘autonomic computing . . . will make us . . . more productive . . . and leave human beings free to concentrate on higher level functions.’’ Intelenabled ‘‘robotic hypothesis generation software . . . produces answers before they are required.’’<sup>63</sup> Many of the policymakers, engineers, designers, and companies now promoting pervasive computing speak as if the natural world and its inhabitants—you and I—simply did not exist. The inaugural issue of Pervasive Computing is not untypical: ‘‘Our world is like the American West . . . a rich, open space where the rules have yet to be written and the borders to be drawn.’’<sup>64</sup> Think about the last part of that statement. In the brave new world of pervasive computing, people everywhere are reduced to the status of Native American Indians—and we know what happened to them.