Pervasive computing technologies promise to transform the ways we experience and live in the world. But did anyone ask our permission to ‘‘produce answers before they are required’’? Have we debated the consequences of proactive computing? No, we have not. In its Scenarios for Ambient Intelligence in 2010, the European Union is not much more thoughtful. This key document outlines a vision of ‘‘convergence’’ as a point at which ‘‘the human is surrounded by computing and advanced networking technology which is aware of his presence, his personality, his needs—and is capable of responding intelligently to spoken or gestured indications of desire, and even in engaging in intelligent dialogue.’’ The AmI landscape, as it’s known in Euro-speak, is embedded, personalized, adaptive, and anticipatory. It provides ‘‘an evolutionary path from current modes of human behaviour to new behaviours that benefit from AmI enhancement.’’ The dominant mode of communication is laid-back, rather than lean-forward, concludes the document, with great confidence.<sup>65</sup> The problem with these visions is that they are based on one implausible assumption and one plain wrong assumption. The implausible assumption is that all people, and all systems, will perform optimally at all times. No technology has ever done that, and none ever will. Even if 99.9 percent of the smart tags, sensors, smart materials, connected appliances, wearable computing, and (soon) implants that are now being unleashed upon the world work as instructed—what about the millions that, inevitably, will fail, or run amok? As my water-filled bag testifies, when human beings issue instructions to devices, the results are not always benign. The plain-wrong assumption is that we know what the consequences of these new technologies will be. We know, for a fact, that technology always has unexpected as well as expected consequences. ## People Will Always Be Smarter The worst-case scenario is the most likely: that smart technology will be used in dumb ways, for the wrong reasons, with irritating if not disastrous results. I recently purchased a train ticket from Amsterdam to Switzerland—a ten-hour, four-train journey. A pleasant and expert woman at the ticket desk, in Amsterdam Central Station, helped me select the best route. It was a complicated transaction, but she was an expert intermediary between me and the various databases and websites that needed to be con-