sulted. The twenty-minute transaction, as a result, was not unpleasant, and I made the trip without trouble. Imagine my horror, then, when the train company, NS International, announced its intention to close all its international ticket desks. Anyone traveling to Belgium, Germany, France, or Switzerland would have to buy their ticket from ‘‘self-service’’ websites or—and here it boggles the mind—via text messages on their mobile phones. The director of NS International at the time (February 2004), Frits Marckmann, told me that ‘‘we are adopting modern methods of distribution.’’ Now, technically speaking, it may well be more ‘‘modern’’ to sell tickets by SMS than via a human being. But as an example of service design—not to mention plain common sense—the NS action would be laughable if it were not also irresponsible. If it takes an expert human being, with years of experience, twenty minutes to sell me one ticket to Switzerland, how many hours would the same transaction take me using SMS? Ten? If I am elderly, if I do not speak English or Dutch, if I do not have Internet access, or if I simply refuse to spend hours of my life in clunky NS websites—in these cases, I will be denied access to the service altogether. By the time we reach that point, it will be too late to turn back. Up to three hundred jobs are being designed out of the NS system. Assuming an average of ten years’ experience per person, that’s three thousand years of human experience that will be have been removed from the system. How smart is that? The defining feature of services in this self-service economy is that they take place with little or no human contact. The customer does work once carried out by an employee but is not paid for so doing. On the contrary: Netonomy, a firm that provides self-service software to telecom operators, reckons online self-service can cut the costs of a transaction to as little as ten cents, compared with around seven dollars to handle the same transaction at a call center. A self-service kiosk in a supermarket can handle the work of two and a half employees at a fraction of the cost. In 2001, Amtrak introduced an interactive voice recognition (IVR) system called Julie. The service handles a third of the rail system’s bookings, and The Economist reported at the time that 80 percent of callers surveyed were happy with the service.<sup>66</sup> That doesn’t sound so bad until you remember that Amtrak carries an average of 22 million passengers a year—which means that nearly 4.5 million passengers had a bad experience buying their ticket online. When Forrester Research surveyed 110 large companies, it found that only 18 percent of customer needs were met by IVR systems.<sup>67</sup>