there are a lot of them about—and many more to come. Promoters of ubiquitous computing promise us that trillions of smart or embedded devices are on the way.<sup>5</sup> The ecological footprint of computing is not limited to the chips. The manufacture of electronic devices also involves highly intensive material processes. A great deal of nature has to be moved during the production of communications equipment. Many components require the use of highgrade minerals that can be obtained only through major mining operations and energy-intensive transformation processes. One of the most startling pieces of information brought to light in Paul Hawken, Amory Lovins, and Hunter Lovins’s Natural Capitalism is that the amount of waste matter generated in the manufacture of a single laptop computer is close to four thousand times its weight on your lap.<sup>6</sup> Fifteen to nineteen tons of energy and materials are consumed in the fabrication of one desktop computer.<sup>7</sup> To compound matters: As well as being resource-greedy to make, information technology devices also have notoriously short lives. The average compact disc is used precisely once in its life,<sup>8</sup> and every gram of material that goes into the production and consumption of a computer ends up rather quickly as either an emission or as solid waste. In theory, electronic products have technical service lives on the magnitude of thirty years, but thanks to ever-shorter innovation cycles, many devices are disposed of after a few years or months.<sup>9</sup> Information networks also stimulate the use of old-media matter, such as paper. Ethernets, which enabled computers and printers to talk to one another, were one reason the use of paper in offices rose eightfold after the paperless office was predicted. Every single employee of the European Commission, which is a digital-savvy organization, prints out 247 pages of hard copy a day.<sup>10</sup> Information networks don’t just use a lot of stuff. They also guzzle energy. George Gilder predicts in his book Telecosm that Internet computing will soon consume as much power as the entire U.S. economy did in 2001—some three trillion kilowatt hours.<sup>11</sup> The PC on your desk, whirring away in standby mode, uses its own share of that; but the real energy gluttons are server farms—entire floors, or whole buildings, filled with powerful computer servers. A single server farm consumes the same amount of energy as a city the size of Honolulu.<sup>12</sup> Information technology has been added to the world; it has not made it lighter.