Four grand pianos, their lids removed, are placed nose to nose, like the leaves of a flower, under sharp spotlights in the concourse of a railway station. Each of the four musicians plays from a double-width score that is half as wide as the piano itself. Every now and again, one of the players signals the transition to a new section by nodding his head backward. Every hour or so, a new team of pianists takes over, in a kind of relay: The old shift keeps playing but in sequence, one stands up, and a pianist from the new shift takes her place. This happens four times until the new team is in place. Canto Ostinato, as the piece is called, has no prescribed end; it can go on for hours. Simeon ten Holt, its composer, describes it as a perpetual work in progress. ‘‘My own life has been largely determined by chance,’’ he says, ‘‘and as composer, I decline to indicate intensity, phrasing and so on, on the score. Too-rigid instructions are in conflict with the dynamics of the overall sound balance, and they frustrate the performers in formulating a staging of their own.’’<sup>1</sup> The score of Canto Ostinato is laid out as a route for the performers to take, says ten Holt; they use so-called drift parts at will, but its total length, and the number of repetitions of the various sections on which the composition is built, are undetermined. Canto Ostinato is a metaphor for a new approach to design. Its composer, his incomplete score, the pianists, the railway station, the people present on the night of the performance—all these elements interact in subtle and complex ways. These interactions are difficult to describe to someone not present—and they would be impossible to orchestrate remotely. Neither the pianists nor the audience know exactly what will happen next, so no complete score or blueprint is possible. But they do not fly blind. They understand the principles of the system and work with it. They follow the score, to a point. They interact with one another. And they interact with