the situation. In a sense the situation is itself designed: The composer places an idea, a score, and people on the stage, but he does not furnish a finished script. ## Designing in the Space of Flows The Catalan economist Manuel Castells describes the modern world as a ‘‘space of flows’’—flows of people, capital, information, technology, images, sounds, and symbols. ‘‘Flows are not just one element of social organization,’’ says Castells, ‘‘they are the expression of the processes dominating our economic, social and symbolic life.’’<sup>2</sup> Flows sound soft, and smooth, and benign—but flows also wash things away, sometimes unexpectedly. We have been taken aback by events, such as climate change, that we seem to have caused, but that were not our intention. Other flows have brought changes that were the opposite of what we hoped and intended: These are the so-called rebound effects, such as the increased traffic that the Internet has stimulated or the additional use of paper it has generated, rather than replaced. One reason we feel helpless in the face of this type of change is that experts tell us we are. Economists describe as ‘‘exogenous’’—arising from outside society—the seismic forces, such as technology, that are changing our world. They are wrong. Technology has not come from ‘‘outside society’’—we made it. Technology is a product of human decisions and actions. These actions may have been misguided or based on assumptions that we are now beginning to question—but they were not an accident. A redesign of this space of flows is a tall order, because the precise behavior of complex systems—including human ones—is not predictable. But we are now beginning to understand the principles by which complex systems evolve. Redesigning the space of flows needs to be continuous, rather than episodic. It needs to focus on how things work, rather than (just) on what they look like. And it entails a fundamental change in the relationship between the people who make things and the people who use them. In this concluding chapter I summarize the lessons I have learned about designing in a complex world. Rather like ten Holt with Canto Ostinato, I will suggest frameworks for action rather than lay down hard-and-fast rules. This is partly because I don’t know what fixed rules there ought to be. As the eminent American designer John Carroll says of design in today’s