would nudge it into another more desirable one. This means designing as steering more than designing as shaping. From thinking of ourselves as the authors of a finished work, we had better evolve toward thinking of ourselves as facilitators whose job is to help people act more intelligently, in a more design-minded way, in the systems we all live in. This shift in emphasis from what things look like to how they behave— from designing on the world to designing in the world—is a big one for design. Peter Bøgh Andersen, who designs maritime instrumentation, compares interacting with today’s dynamic environments to navigating a ship. ‘‘When I started teaching human-computer interaction in the 1980s,’’ he recalls, ‘‘the ideal was that the user should be in control of the system. The system should not act unless the user asked it to do so. In process control, however, the situation is quite different. Here, physical processes are running independently of the user, whose task is partially to control them. The art of navigation is similar: it is to pit the controllable forces— rudder, propeller—against the uncontrollable ones—the sea and the wind —to achieve one’s purpose.’’ The computer game world is analogous, he says. Process control and computer games share important features: In both cases there is a dramatic conflict between a protagonist (on a ship, it’s the captain) and bad guys (which for the captain, are the wind and the sea) who are active, unpredictable, and only indirectly controllable.<sup>7</sup> The systems themselves can also change our activities in ways that we do not need or want. ‘‘Design changes the world within which people act and experience, and this changes the requirements for further designs,’’ says Carroll.<sup>8</sup> Design in such a framework becomes a process of continuous observation, measurement, and feedback. In Japan, designers describe this kind of reactive, incremental innovation as ‘‘the patter of tiny feet.’’ Kyoshi Sakashita, when he was design director of Sharp, told me that teams designing complex systems proceed not by great leaps forward, but by ‘‘thousands of tiny steps’’: partial solutions, continually produced. In the development phase, the rapid-prototyping approach involves the use of computer simulations and physical mock-ups—but it need never, in principle, stop.<sup>9</sup> ## From High Concept to Deep Context Hippocrates said twenty-five hudred years ago, in Ancient Medicine: Airs, Waters, Places, that in order to understand the disorders in any subject, we must study its environment. ‘‘The greater part of the soul lies outside the