body,’’ said the sage; ‘‘treatment of the inner requires treatment of the outer.’’<sup>10</sup> Peter Drucker, a modern business sage, teaches businesspeople a similar lesson: ‘‘Innovation is a system’s adjustment to its surroundings— and sometimes this is best accomplished by adjusting the surroundings.’’<sup>11</sup> Now what Drucker describes innocuously as an ‘‘adjustment,’’ others might judge to be cultural imperialism, global domination, or ecological devastation—but the basic point is clear enough: When one is designing in the space of flows, context is key. As I explained when discussing situations in chapter 5, life in systemsrich environments is understudied—but insights into a variety of contexts are beginning to emerge. What we have now come to appreciate is that the more diverse an ecological system is—be it a swamp or a city—the richer it is. Sprawling monocultural suburbs, multilane highways, golf courses, airports, and the like are impoverished contexts. Our speed culture fosters particularly barren contexts. Very large grids, very big global hubs, and the massive flows of people and matter in between them are functional but not nourishing. The close, the complex, and the slow can be much richer.<sup>12</sup> I have mentioned throughout this book the importance of thinking about consequences as we contemplate design actions. Context matters, says Malcolm Gladwell, because specific and relatively small changes in the environment can serve as tipping points that transform the bigger picture.<sup>13</sup> Small changes to interconnecting subsystems can make things better, but they can also make things worse. This is why the application of ‘‘high-concept’’ design to contexts we barely understand is irresponsible and probably counterproductive. A good example of high-altitude but lowquality thinking is evident, as I write, in a clutch of advertisements for information technology firms. IBM, British Telecom, and Hewlett-Packard have released television commercials and print ads that feature besuited young professionals floating, gravity free, in abstract urban spaces that look just like scenes in computer games. A more sensitive approach to people, contexts, and networks leads to a way of approaching the world that is, as Tom Bentley puts it, ‘‘purposeful and ambitious, but also careful and humble, seeking to maintain and develop systems of increasing complexity so that they support people’s needs and interests in appropriate, sophisticated ways.’’<sup>14</sup> Networks and systems in nature generally start out small and develop during a process of gradual growth. That’s also how we should design man-made ones: Act lightly, sense the feedback, act again.