## From Top-Down Design to Seeding Edge Effects Biologists describe as ‘‘the edge effect’’ the tendency for a greater variety and density of organisms to cluster in the boundaries between communities. In complexity theory, too, there is an ‘‘edge of chaos’’ paradigm that posits that in a system containing perfect internal order, such as a crystal, there can be no further change. At the opposite extreme, in a chaotic system such as boiling liquid, there is very little order to change. The system that will evolve most rapidly, explains Edward O. Wilson, ‘‘must fall between, and more precisely on the edge, of chaos—possessing order, but with the parts connected loosely enough to be easily altered either singly or in small groups.’’<sup>15</sup> As in nature, so too in a networked economy: Variety, density, and interaction are success factors. But the way we organize things now, the potential benefits of edge effects are designed out, not in. Most of us live and work in sealed-off boxes: a company, a university, a profession. We work within communities, not between them. Stuck inside organizations that perpetuate divisions between domains and that isolate knowledge from the contexts in which it is to be used, we become less competent at tackling complex and multidimensional social questions. If our connections to the edge are inadequate, we find it hard to figure out what people really need— and end up pushing products that they don’t. The idea of edge effects is not new. Ever since Aristotle, people have criticized the division between disciplines and professional communities. But the problem has now become acute. Specialization may well have helped build industrial society—but it’s like grit in the wheels of the network society we’re building now. What to do about the edge effect is a design issue. To find out what’s happening on the edge, we first need good peripheral vision. We need to spot opportunities at the juncture between industries, to imagine relationships and connections where none existed before. Above all, we need to look in new places for inspiration, because most solutions will involve new alliances and new connections. We need to cultivate the habit of looking for the people, places, organizations, projects, and ideas that do not appear on the radar screens used by our captains up there on the bridge. Edge cities, and the boundary zones between them, are always good places to look. So, too, are places that specialize in exchange—hubs, entrepoˆts, ports like Hong Kong, Singapore, Hanseatic cities, Venice and Genoa,