and Amsterdam. Places whose lifeblood flows through a rich web of connections are a better bet than places that think of themselves as centers. This applies to countries and regions, too. The first major industry, textiles, owed a great deal to the transfer of knowledge from India. A great deal of potential innovation comes from the study of plants. Of the roughly 265,000 plant species that we know exist, probably 40,000 have medicinal or nutritional applications for humans—yet only 1,100 have been thoroughly studied. In catching up, we would be wise to learn from other cultures, which are often better informed about their potential than we are. Ethnoecology, the study of indigenous ways of using local resources, can help us here. Forest-dwelling peoples classify and use 99 percent of the rich biological diversity.<sup>16</sup> Susantha Goonatilake describes as ‘‘civilizational knowledge’’ such cultural constructs as metaphors, which he describes as ‘‘the pregnant mother to scientific innovation.’’ Theories in science often originate in metaphors, says Goonatilake; ‘‘a vast soup of metaphors and theoretical constructs exists in the Asian world. These vary from sophisticated debates on the nature of ontology and epistemology to discussions in psychology, the nature of mind, mathematics, and medicine. Such an infusion would help enlarge our scientific horizons.’’<sup>17</sup> The potential is huge. During the last hundred years, probably two thousand catalogues of known South Asian manuscripts have been compiled. Each catalogue encompasses about two hundred manuscripts, so the resource adds up to four hundred thousand manuscripts. Others have estimated that South Asian manuscripts amount to some five hundred million. ‘‘The Renaissance, the Scientific Revolution, the Enlightenment and the great discoveries in the 19th and 20th centuries were the result of recombining, not just discovering, ideas,’’ says Goonatilake. ‘‘The rediscovery of Asian thought is a second renaissance in the cultural history of the West, with the potential to be equally important as the rediscovery of Greek thought in the European renaissance.’’<sup>18</sup> We need to become hunter-gatherers of ideas and tools: How have other societies lived in the past? How do societies live in other parts of the world today? Has this question been answered somewhere else already? ## From Blank Sheets of Paper to Smart Recombination Designers are needlessly constrained by the myth that everything they do has to be a unique and creative act. Rather than expect to design