everything from scratch, we should search far and wide for tried-and-tested solutions that others have already created. Kevin Gavaghan, who set up Britain’s first Internet bank, FirstDirect, says that wherever possible, we need to reuse and recombine actors, ideas, and organizations.<sup>19</sup> The capacity to think across boundaries, to spot opportunities at the juncture of two or more industries, and to draw relevant analogies from seemingly unrelated industries is as valuable as deep experience of a single sector. When edge people, edge ideas, and edge organizations are brought together, something interesting and valuable usually happens. What management consultants refer to as ‘‘strategy creation’’ (and I call design) involves the creation of new combinations of knowledge, resources, and capabilities—many or most of which may already exist. It means connecting with actors from different economic and knowledge domains. We need to recombine relationships—among people, ideas, and organizations—and exploit scientific, natural, and cultural knowledge that is usually ignored, whether it be mimicking biology or learning from storytellers in India. Putting old knowledge into a new context creates new knowledge. We need to become hunter-gatherers of models, processes, and ways of living. The challenge is to innovate by learning from the world. For Yves Doz, a business professor at Insead in France, competitive advantage in the future will come from discovering, accessing, mobilizing, and leveraging knowledge from many locations around the world. ‘‘Most multinationals fail to harvest the most precious resources—ideas and innovation—from the farflung regions in which they operate,’’ says Doz.<sup>20</sup> In an economic world dealing in knowledge, the secret of success is the combination of different types of expertise in a productive manner. For Nobel laureate Murray Gell-Mann, innovation is an ‘‘emergent phenomenon’’ that occurs when a person or organization fosters interaction among different kinds of people and disparate forms of knowledge. When edge people, edge ideas, and edge organizations are connected, something interesting and valuable usually happens. In my work as a conference organizer and advisor, this approach certainly seems to work. Recombining relationships—among people, ideas, and organizations—does seem to foster innovation. ## From Science Fiction to Social Fiction I have tried in this book to describe an approach to innovation that, rather than foist technology onto a world that does not need it, looks for ways to