If highways like the Languedocienne carry the lifeblood of our economy, they are like the arteries of a fat-addicted man on the brink of a massive coronary. Most of the flows they carry are wasteful. Only 1 percent of material flows in the U.S. economy ends up in, and is still being used within, products six months after their sale. Hawken and his colleagues reckon that so-called developed economies are less than 10 percent as efficient as the laws of physics allow.<sup>13</sup> Every product that enters our lives has what they call a ‘‘hidden history’’—an undocumented inventory of wasted or lost materials used in its production, transport, use, and disposal. Industry, say the writers, ‘‘moves, mines, extracts, shovels, burns, wastes, pumps and disposes of billions of pounds of material in order to deliver the products we take for granted, but which are needed for roads and buildings and infrastructures.’’ They go on to list waste in the form of tailings, gangue, fly ash, slurry, sludge, slag, flue gases, construction debris, methane—and other wastes of the extractive and manufacturing processes, overuse of resources, pollution, and destruction of natural areas—that continue to threaten life on the planet.’’<sup>14</sup> The pie\`ce de re´sistance in the extraordinary analysis of Natural Capitalism is that the amount of matter and energy wasted, or caused to be wasted, by the average North American consumer is roughly one million pounds a year: a ‘‘million-pound backpack.’’<sup>15</sup> These numbers may sound implausible, but they are based on serious long-term research. The material flows of industrial society, its ‘‘metabolism,’’ have been measured with increasing precision since the 1960s.<sup>16</sup> Materials flow analyses (in Germany called Stoffflussanalyse) register, describe, and interpret these otherwise unseen metabolic processes. In Germany they call all this waste the ‘‘ecological rucksack’’ of a product or lifestyle. A million pounds of weight is an awfully big rucksack to carry around. It’s the same as ten thousand one-hundred-pound bags of cement. I once had the idea, before a lecture, of piling this many cement bags on the stage, as a stunt, to illustrate this point. But when the venue management worked out that this would result in a pile of cement the area of a tennis court, sixty feet high, they called it off, saying the stage would collapse. All the world’s a stage, I told them. Individual companies are not uniquely responsible for environmental impact. Communities add their own weight, which has been measured in the form of ecological footprints. Researchers at the University of British Columbia have translated various categories of human consumption into