enhance the kinds of daily life that we experience here and now. Of course it’s true that new technologies give rise to new ways of living and organizing that would not exist without them—and some of those changes are benign. But they should be the result of human actions informed by intelligent reflection on alternatives. Innovation is not a neutral activity. Many innovation agendas are driven by technological determinism; they often disguise creepy social agendas, too. ‘‘From The Matrix to Enemy of the State, successful descriptions of the future have an ability to draw us towards them, to command us to make them flesh,’’ complains the English writer Harry Kunzru; ‘‘the effect of futurist fictions, projections and predictions is to fuel our desire for a technology boom.’’<sup>21</sup> Overblown research agendas, such as Europe’s Information Societies Technology (IST) program, hog too much public money for technology projects—but at least they are subject to discussion. Hollywood’s hymns of praise to the machine do more damage because they paint reactionary social futures as inevitable and dress them up as progress. ‘‘The worst culprits are those apologists of the new economy,’’ writes Kunzru; ‘‘wearing liberal and countercultural hats, [they] eulogize decentralization, nonlinear causality, and the impossibility of control—but fail to explain why these trends are so wonderful when centralized power, extreme social inequality, and ecological devastation are increasing in the world.’’<sup>22</sup> A better innovation approach is to switch attention from sciencedominated futures to social fictions in which imagined new contexts enrich an otherwise familiar world. Design scenarios are powerful innovation tools because they make a possible future familiar and enable the participation of potential users in conceiving and shaping what they want. The important point when envisioning scenarios of human activity is to distinguish explicitly between what Ezio Manzini calls disabling and enabling solutions.<sup>23</sup> Many of the frustrating and stress-inducing encounters we have with service providers have been given an anodyne name in recent times: the ‘‘self-service economy.’’<sup>24</sup> The hallmark of such services is that they take place with little or no human contact; the customer does the work once done by an employee. This arrangement saves the service supplier a ton of money but simply loads work onto—and steals time from—the user. Nine out of ten people would rather talk to a person when searching for advice or service on the Internet—so we need to demand of providers that they put a person at the other end of the line.