What service designers refer to as sweet spots—instances in which real value is created—occur at the intersection of latent social needs, open systems, smart consumers, and smart companies. New services constantly evolve. This is one reason why Lavrans Løvlie, a service designer with Live|Work in London, prefers what he calls ‘‘topological’’ social scenarios that enable people to become participants rather than audiences for a scenario and imagine their own ways of engaging with services and products. Løvlie and his colleagues use a technique called ‘‘evidencing’’ to create the impression an imagined service might make—but without generating a working prototype at an early stage. In a project on time banking for the telecommunications operator Orange, for example, Live|Work mocked up computer screens, paper invoices, magazine advertisements, reviews in newspapers, and a range of other ‘‘touch points’’ that gave people an impression of a service that did not yet exist.<sup>25</sup> Too many design methods can indeed limit innovation. Someone also has to provide aesthetic stimulus—to throw wild ideas into the ring—to provoke fresh thinking. Social critics and artists are good candidates for this role. Avant-garde media artists, in particular, intervene on issues of networks, the body, identity, and collaboration. Many of their ideas are exciting and insightful in a way that methods-driven solutions are not. Design can be a useful mediator in breaking down the isolation from one another of artists, computer scientists, and users and in promoting the fruitful interaction among them that may just yield the new concepts and applications that are needed to fulfill the promise of the new technologies. ## From Designing For to Designing With We have learned by now that information technology changes the world continuously. So do people when they use it. Anyone using a system— responding to it, interacting with it, feeding back into it—changes it. Technology has penetrated every aspect of our lives. Human, natural, and industrial systems are irrevocably interpenetrated. So where does this leave our relationship with complex systems—as designers or as citizens? The story of the Netherlands and its water control system is one example of where our relationships with technology may be headed. The creation of new land out of water is a several-centuries-old tradition in the Netherlands. The famous Delta Works, the biggest Dutch