public project ever, created giant pumping stations, dikes, and modern tidal protection systems to protect the land from the sea and the rivers. Behind these impressive achievements were a select cadre of engineers and planners,<sup>26</sup> the true ‘‘makers’’ of Holland—people whom writer A. den Doolaard called the ‘‘water wizards.’’<sup>27</sup> A sense of civic duty and solidarity motivated the Dutch citizenry to take care of the dikes collectively—with the dike warden as a key figure to this day. The dike warden can order people to work in the dikes for the greater good of shared protection from the water. The tradition of the dike warden and his approach to managing the water lies behind the Dutch ‘‘polder model’’ of shared responsibility, consensus, and a degree of skill at living together in a small space.<sup>28</sup> The relationship of the Dutch to dikes demonstrates that looking after technology is as much a matter of social organization as it is of engineering. People are too often described and thought of by designers as users or consumers when we really need to think of them as actors. A sense of responsibility comparable to that demonstrated in the water systems of Holland is evident in the open-source movement, in which a new collaborative approach, uniquely adapted to the Internet, has enabled the development of high-quality infrastructures. The collaborative approach of open source is now spreading to other domains. Biologists have embraced open-source methods in genomics and informatics, building massive databases to genetically sequence E. coli (yeast). NASA has adopted open-source principles as part of its Mars mission, calling on volunteer ‘‘clickworkers’’ to identify millions of craters and help draw a map of the Red Planet. Astronomy, too, has been transformed by the growth of collaborative networks. Hilary Cottam and Charles Leadbeater, who are studying the implications of open systems for the design of services, report that ten thousand professional astronomers in the world—as well as hundreds of thousands of dedicated amateurs—now collaborate across the Internet. In the last twenty years, they say, ‘‘the earth has acquired thousands of new eyes to look into deep space—and the Internet has provided the optic nerves to connect them up. Increasingly astronomy is a science in which a small body of professionals will work in alliance with a vast body of dedicated amateurs.’’ The basic principles of this new landscape, say the authors, can be described as ‘‘share the goal; share the work; share the results.’’ They quote as a more down-to-earth example the BBC’s Neighbourhood Gardener scheme, which aims to create thousands of