local user experts whom people can call on for help and advice. The scheme is being orchestrated around the BBC’s well-known gardening programs and aims to create local peer-to-peer communities of learning and support.<sup>29</sup> Unlike the point-to-mass paradigm of the manufacturing era, a collaborative or open model implies mass participation in creation of a service or situation. A new kind of immersive innovation emerges as the functional divisions between users and producers of a service become blurred. More than seventy-five thousand collaborative software projects are listed at Sourceforge.net, a website for the open-source community with eight hundred thousand registered users. Sourceforge is part of the Open Source Development Network, whose websites deliver more than 160 million page views and reach 9 million unique visitors per month. Projects listed on Sourceforge range from communications (10,327 projects) and games/ entertainment (9,648 projects) to sociology (262 projects) and religion (194 projects).<sup>30</sup> Canadian writers Felix Stalder and Jesse Hirsh call this collaborative gathering and analysis of information ‘‘open-source intelligence.’’ Its principles include peer review, reputation, the free sharing of products, and flexible levels of involvement and responsibility.<sup>31</sup> For Thomas Goetz in Wired, ‘‘open source is doing for mass innovation what the assembly line did for mass production.’’ Goetz tells the story of how an intravenous (IV) saline drip was redesigned by a group called Design That Matters to make it cheaper to use in cholera outbreaks. (These most often occur in lessdeveloped countries, where the high costs of products designed in the North are hard or impossible to sustain.) The team needed to draw on more medical expertise than it had available, so it turned to ThinkCycle, a Web-based industrial-design project that brings together engineers, designers, academics, and professionals from a variety of disciplines. Physicians and engineers pitched in—vetting designs and recommending new paths. Suggestions that emerged from ThinkCycle’s collaborative approach led to an ingenious new IV system that costs about \$1.25 to manufacture, against the \$2,000 of previous solutions. ‘‘Open source harnesses the distributive powers of the Internet, parcels the work out to thousands, and uses their piecework to build a better whole,’’ reported Goetz; ‘‘it works like an ant colony, where the collective intelligence of the network supersedes any single contributor.’’<sup>32</sup>