Our world is fast being suffused with software as well as devices, and the open-source approach is a revolution in the way software is designed. ‘‘The free sharing of information has nothing to do with altruism or a specific anti-authoritarian social vision,’’ say Stalder and Hirsh. ‘‘It is motivated by the fact that in a complex collaborative process, new creations are built on previous creations and provide inspiration for future ones. The ability to freely use and refine those previous creations increases the possibilities for future creativity.’’<sup>33</sup> Lawrence Lessig calls this an ‘‘innovation commons’’ and cites its existence as one of the major reasons why the Internet as a whole developed so rapidly and innovatively. In the open-source environment, the hurdle to participating in a project is extremely low. Valuable contributions can be as small as a single, one-time effort—a bug report, a penetrating comment in a discussion.<sup>34</sup> Yochai Benkler, a law professor at New York University, calls this new mode of production in the digitally networked environment ‘‘commonsbased peer production.’’ Its central characteristic is that groups of individuals successfully collaborate on large-scale projects following a diverse cluster of motivational drives and social signals—rather than market prices or managerial commands. Collaborative design means finding ways to share a vision of a system among all its actors and stakeholders as the system evolves. Open, networked collaboration works best in the real world and face to face. The most advanced software designers, who call themselves ‘‘extreme programmers,’’ have come to value individuals and interactions among them over abstract processes and tools. These principles are the basis of a new paradigm in software that is embodied in the Agile Alliance, which I mentioned in chapter 5. As its website explains, the alliance wants to ‘‘restore a balance. We embrace modeling, but not in order to file some diagram in a dusty corporate repository. We embrace documentation, but not hundreds of pages of never-maintained and rarely used tomes. We plan, but recognize the limits of planning in a turbulent environment.’’<sup>35</sup> The alliance’s ‘‘Manifesto for Agile Software Development’’ describes better ways of developing software by doing it and helping others do it. ‘‘Through this work,’’ says the manifesto, ‘‘we have come to value individuals and interactions over processes and tools, working software over comprehensive documentation, customer collaboration over contract negotiation, [and] responding to change over following a plan.’’<sup>36</sup>