## From Design as Project to Design as Service Our business models in design have to change if collaborative, open, and continuous design is to flourish. In the past, design was about the form and function of things. These features, which were limited in space and time, could be delivered in a fixed form, such as a blueprint. In today’s ultranetworked world, it makes more sense to think of design as a process that continuously defines a system’s rules rather than its outcomes. Stand-alone products—refrigerators, cars, cookers, televisions, and widebodied jets—are needed within product-service systems, but the real action will take place among the organizations developing new services and infrastructures. In logistics and manufacturing, the elements of a light economy are already being prepared—although their designers are not always aware of it. A growing number of companies that once sold only products now think of themselves as service providers. Their number includes Xerox (formerly photocopiers, now document services), Interface (formerly carpets, now floor-covering services), Electrolux (formerly vacuum cleaners, now industrial cleaning), IBM (formerly computers, now a whole range of business transformation services), and Wilkhahn (formerly a desk maker, now in service support for ‘‘working, conferencing and relaxing’’). Few of these companies have made ethical decisions to go green, but a product-service system approach allows a firm to move away from the commodification of the product and the reduced profit margins that typically entails.<sup>37</sup> Demand-responsive services and dynamic resource allocation are transforming the ways matter, energy, money, and people are flowing through the system. Against this backdrop of situations in which systems don’t stop changing, the idea of a self-contained design project—of ‘‘signing off’’ on a design when it is finished—makes no sense. A project-based business model in design is like a water company that delivers a bucket of water to your door and pronounces its mission accomplished. Interaction designer Alan Cooper is scornful of this flawed development model. ‘‘It’s harder than you think to squander millions of dollars, but a flawed software development process is a tool well-suited to the task,’’ he quips. ‘‘Most software products don’t have a description; all they have is a shopping list of features. [But] a shopping bag filled with flour, eggs, milk and sugar is not the