same thing as a cake.’’<sup>38</sup> Designing with, rather than for, people raises further questions about current business models. Who pays whom, and for what, when ‘‘consumers’’ add value to a system by being part of its development? As a wide range of organizations transforms itself into service providers, design too is better thought of as a service than as a manufacturing activity. ‘‘System design is a complex process, period,’’ says Carroll. ‘‘The novelty and complexity of technical issues is compounded by interactions among these issues, and with the particular skills and backgrounds of team members. Managing such processes is not just a matter of control and coordination: management means finding ways to share a vision of the system among all the team members as it evolves.’’<sup>39</sup> I don’t know how service as a utility should be paid for, or by whom. But because demand for it is clear enough, new business models will surely emerge. I can foresee a design economy that is based on rolling service contracts—but then again, perhaps a totally different business model will emerge. I hope so. ## The Dance of the Big and the Small ‘‘What do I see when I think of History? I see the dance of the Big and the Small.’’ Eugenio Barba, who runs the Odin Theatre in Denmark, describes our situation beautifully. There are moments during this dance when we are swept along by events, he says, and others when we ourselves influence the course of time. Says Barba: ‘‘Children who build a small dam on the margins of the current of a great river, who make a tiny pool in which to bathe and splash around, do not play in the rushing current, yet neither are they separated from the water flowing in the centre of the river. They create, along its banks, small inlets and unexpected habitats, thus passing to the future the marks of their difference.’’<sup>40</sup> We’ve allowed too long the idea that the world is ‘‘out of control’’—be it our cities, the economy, or technology. We’ve filled the world with complex systems and technologies that are indeed hard to understand, let alone shape or redirect. But we’re people, not ants. We have a culture, and language, and the ability to understand and share knowledge about abstract phenomena. Ants don’t have that. Neither do they have a tool, design, with which to shape them. We do.