transformation in our cities and lives. Along the way the car has enabled sprawl, disrupted communities, polluted the air, and killed a lot of people—and it continues to do so. But its inventors could not have known this would happen. 8. For Thacker, the main actors in biotech imagineering are science research institutions, pharmaceutical companies, public policy negotiations, science education, medicine, and popular science culture. ‘‘Its primary aim,’’ he says, ‘‘is to forge intimate links, if not outright linear histories, between future promises and current research.’’ Eugene Thacker, ‘‘The Science Fictioning of Biotechnology,’’ 032c, no. 4 (Winter 2002–2003), 106, available through the publisher’s website (www.032c.com). 9. The ‘‘vested interests’’ Thacker refers to are those mentioned in note 8. Thacker, ‘‘The Science Fictioning of Biotechnology,’’ 109. 10. ‘‘Conversation is our next instrument providing the inspiration for achieving ambitions which have hitherto seemed impossible,’’ says Zeldin. ‘‘Big changes are superficial unless they are the sum of a lot of little changes in the way we understand and treat one another.’’ To faciliate such conversations, Zeldin set up The Oxford Muse in 2001. ‘‘The First Outline of the Aims of The Oxford Muse 2001,’’ available on The Oxford Muse website at http://www.oxfordmuse.com/museideas/museaims.htm. 11. Statistics taken from the South African website CellularOnline (http://www .mobileoffice.co.za/stats/stats-main.htm). 12. Franc¸ois Je´gou and Ezio Manzini, Sustainable Everyday: A Catalogue of Promising Solutions (Milan: Edizione Ambiente, 2004). Manzini ran design scenario workshops in several countries as preparation for the exhibition ‘‘Sustainable Everyday: Scenar ios for Urban Life,’’ which was held at the Milan Triennale in 2003. 13. The English writer Charles Leadbeater has written extensively about innovation as platform building. See, for example, Charles Leadbeater, Personalisation through Participation (London: Demos, 2004). 14. Papanek, Design for the Real World, 14. 15. Alain Findeli, ‘‘Rethinking Design Education for the 21st Century: Theoretical, Methodological, and Ethical Discussion,’’ Design Issues 17, no. 1, 5–7. 16. BoloBolo is a visionary booklet that addresses the question ‘‘How would I really like to live?’’ The book’s author, styled only as ‘‘P.M.,’’ discusses the constituent elements of a human-scale utopia. P.M., BoloBolo (New York: Autonomedia, 1995), 58. ## 1 Lightness 1. According to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, the Earth’s surface temperature has risen by about one degree Fahrenheit in the past century, with accelerated