areas of productive land needed to support them. They discovered that the ecological footprint of one Canadian is 4.8 hectares (an area 220 meters long by 220 meters wide—roughly comparable to three city blocks). This statistic means that if everyone on Earth lived like the average Canadian, we would need at least three Earths to provide all the material and energy essentials we currently use.<sup>17</sup> The World Wildlife Fund calculates that mankind’s ecological footprint is already 1.2 Earths. Another way to describe environmental impact is called ‘‘weighting.’’ In weighting, different impacts—or ‘‘endpoints,’’ as they are described in the dry terminology of international standards—are assessed in tandem: damage to human health, damage to ecosystem quality, and damage to resources. Damages to human health are expressed in disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), a system used by the World Health Organisation and the World Bank.<sup>18</sup> Collecting all these data is one thing; making sense of them holistically is another. Other researchers are working on that. A British project, Environmental Life Cycle Information Management and Acquisition (ELIMA), integrates data on human, ecological, and industrial processes. The assessment of environmental impacts on human health (from carcinogens, respiratory organics and inorganics, climate change, radiation and ozone layer depletion, and so on) is linked to data about ecosystem quality (from ecotoxicity, acidification/eutrophication and land use, and so on). These data, in turn, are connected to data about industrial processes such as raw-materials use, especially minerals and fossil fuels.<sup>19</sup> Environmental impact researchers are also bringing us harder and better information about individual products. A Dutch group called PRe´ has developed software for product and packaging designers that enables them to model a complex product and its life cycle. Built into the software package are more than two hundred eco-indicators for commonly used materials such as metals, plastics, paper, board, and glass, as well as production, transport, energy, and waste treatment processes. The software calculates the environmental load and shows which parts of the product ‘‘weigh’’ the most. These can then be rethought.<sup>20</sup> Environmentally sound product life cycle design takes into account all processes that occur in relation to the product during its life cycle, from cradle to grave—or even better, from cradle to cradle. One of the methods used to document findings is the so-called MET matrix—a scorecard for the