8. Lennart Forseback, Case Studies of the Information Society and Sustainable Development (Brussels: European Commission Information Society Directorate General, 2000), available at www.forseback.se/pdf/case\_infosoc.pdf. 9. Each year in Europe around seven million metric tons of electronic waste are generated. When electronic devices are disposed of, some materials can be put back through various cycles to be recouped. But for this to be possible, the recouping needs to be designed in at the start. Since 1994, a system has been in place in Switzerland for take back and disposal of office electronics, computers, equipment from the graphics industry, telephone end devices such as answering machines, mobile telephones, and equipment from entertainment electronics. The system is financed by means of a recycling fee that is included in the contract. Following Switzerland, the European Union has now specified binding recycling targets, and other countries are developing similar initiatives. Manufacturers of equipment, of components, and of the materials contained in them are considering how best to react to the European Union’s new directive. Swiss Association for Information, Communication and Organisational Technology (SWICO), Activity Report 2001: The Environment (Zurich: SWICO, 2002); and Association of Plastics Manufacturers in Europe (APME), Ecoefficiency of Plastic from Electronic and Electric Equipment (Brussels: APME, 2002). 10. Franz A. Hartmann and Lorenz M. Hilty, ‘‘Integration von Material- und Informationsflussanalysen’’ (Information of Material and Information Flows Analysis), in Proceedings of the Workshop ‘‘Operations Research im Umweltschutz’’ of the German Society for Operations Research, Karlsruhe, 2001, ed. Franz A. Hartmann and Lorenz M. Hilty, available at http://www.empa.ch/plugin/template/empa/\*/7132/---/l=3. 11. George Gilder, Telecosm: How Infinite Bandwidth Will Revolutionize Our World (New York: Free Press, 2000), 5. 12. Rachel Konrad, ‘‘Server Farms on Hot Seat amid Power Woes,’’ CNET News.com, May 14, 2001, available at http://news.com.com/2100-1017-257567.html?legacy= cnet. 13. Hawken, Lovins, and Lovins, Natural Capitalism, 81. 14. Ibid., 51. 15. Ibid., 52. A lot of the million-pounds weight in an ecological rucksack consists of building materials. Mass balance, and other modeling tools, are used to assess impacts associated with various construction processes, and thus to develop a more sustainable system for their management. A British initiative coming to grips with these material flows is called ‘‘Rocks to Rubble,’’ available at http://www.biffa .co.uk/pdfs/massbalance/Rocks2RubbleNW.pdf. 16. The complex interaction between a product and the environment is dealt with in a life cycle assessment (LCA). The basis of an LCA is an inventory of all the inputs