23. Han Brezet, Philip Vergragt, and Tom van der Horst, eds., Vision on Sustainable Product Innovation (Amsterdam: BIS Publishers, 2001); see also the Kathalys website (http://www.kathalys.com). 24. Hawken, Lovins, and Lovins, Natural Capitalism, 9. 25. Ibid., 73. 26. ‘‘Natural capital,’’ according to the forum, ‘‘is any stock or flow of energy and material that produces goods and services. It includes: Resources renewable and non-renewable materials Sinks that absorb, neutralise or recycle wastes Processes climate regulation Natural capital is the basis not only of production but of life itself! Human capital consists of people’s health, knowledge, skills and motivation. All these things are needed for productive work. Enhancing human capital through education and training is central to a flourishing economy. Social capital concerns the institutions that help us maintain and develop human capital in partnership with others; e.g., families, communities, businesses, trade unions, schools, and voluntary organisations. Manufactured capital comprises material goods or fixed assets which contribute to the production process rather than being the output itself—e.g., tools, machines and buildings. Financial capital plays an important role in our economy, enabling the other types of Capital to be owned and traded. But unlike the other types, it has no real value itself but is representative of natural, human, social or manufactured capital; e.g., shares, bonds or banknotes. Sustainable development is the best way to manage these capital assets in the long-term. It is a dynamic process through which organisations can begin to achieve a balance between their environmental, social and economic activities.’’ Forum for the Future’s extensive website includes explanations of four different models of sustainable development: Triple-Bottom Line, Five Capitals Model, Twelve Features of a Sustainable Society, and The Natural Step Framework. The text quoted here is from ‘‘The Five Capitals Model,’’ available at http://www.forumforthefuture.org.uk/aboutus/fivecapitalsmodel\_page814.aspx. 27. Hartmann and Hilty, ‘‘Integration von Material- und Informationsflussanalysen’’; Ernst von Weizsa¨cker, Amory Lovins, and L. Hunter Lovins, Factor Four: Doubling Wealth, Halving Resource Use (London: Earthscan, 1997); E. Heiskanen and M. Jalas, Dematerialization through Services—A Review and Evaluation of the Debate (Helsinki: Ministry of the Environment, 2000); E. Heiskanen, M. Halme, M. Jalas, A. Ka¨rna¨, and R. Lovio, Dematerialisation: The Potential of ICT and Services (Helsinki: Ministry of the Environment, 2001); H. Herring, ‘‘The Rebound Effect, Sustainable Consumption and Electronic Appliances,’’ in ‘‘Sustainability in the Information Society,’’ special issue, Environmental Impact Assessment Review 22, no. 5 (2002); Lorenz M. Hilty, T. F. Ruddy, and D. Schulthess, ‘‘Resource Intensity and Dematerialization Potential of Information Society Technologies’’ (discussion paper no. 2000-01, Sus-