tainable Europe Research Institute [SERI], Solothurn University of Applied Sciences, Olten, Switzerland, 2000, available at http://www.seri.at/globalisation/). 28. The three hundred watts of electricity consumed by a computer server may not sound like a lot, but one thousand such servers in a building require enormous amounts of electricity (see Konrad, ‘‘Server Farms on Hot Seat Amid Power Woes’’). Most of the time personal computers, too, are powered on even when not in use. One study found that 74 percent of PCs are on during the day but used only about 12 percent of the time. G. Newsham and D. Tiller, ‘‘The Energy Consumption of Desktop Computers: Measurement and Savings Potential,’’ IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications 30, no. 4 ( July/August 1994). 29. Ian Swingland, Capturing Carbon and Conserving Biodiversity: The Market Approach (London: Earthscan/The Royal Society, 2003). 30. Major companies such as British Airports Authority, British Petroleum, DuPont, Ford, Novartis, British Telecom, Co-operative Bank, Shell, and Unilever have already acknowledged formally the need to address the ‘‘triple bottom line’’ of sustainable development. Shell is developing internal management systems, in its case the Sustainable Development Management Framework, to take things to the next level. A consulting firm called SustainAbility helps businesses from a variety of industries and world regions understand and respond strategically to the evolving challenges of sustainable development. SustainAbility’s website (http://www.sustainability.com) includes a well-selected range of links, case studies, and publications. 31. Statistic quoted in Design Council, Annual Review 2002 (London: Design Council, 2002), 19. 32. Hawken, Lovins, and Lovins, Natural Capitalism, 73. 33. For examples of this trend, see Per Sorup and Tom Gameson, Natural Resources and the Environment Panel Report (Futures Report Series 05, Institute for Prospective Technological Studies, Seville, Spain, June 1999), 59. A comprehensive archive of European policy and research publications on environmental issues is available at http://europa.eu.int/comm/sustainable/pages/links\_en.htm. 34. Ezio Manzini and Carlo Vezzoli, Product-Service Systems and Sustainability: Opportunities for Sustainable Solutions (Paris: United Nations Environment Programme, 2002). 35. Franc¸ois Je´gou and Ezio Manzini, Sustainable Everyday: A Catalogue of Promising Solutions (Milan: Edizione Ambiente, 2004). 36. Ibid. 37. In Amsterdam, where my wife and I lived, it is illegal to throw away electrical appliances, or even batteries—but the city runs a collection service for these items, and once a month, a truck came to our area. It took me several trips to throw the