defunct answering machines and other electrical junk of just one household into the back of the truck. 38. Forseba¨ck, Case Studies of the Information Society and Sustainable Development, 61. ## 39. Ibid., 27. 40. Chris Pacione, ‘‘Bodymedia Case Study’’ (keynote address at Doors of Perception 6: Lightness, Amsterdam, November 11–13, 2000, available on the Doors of Perception website at http://museum.doorsofperception.com/doors/revamped\_ frameset.php?doorid). ## 41. Ibid. 42. Paul Brown, ‘‘Life on the Planet under Threat: Influential Body Says Last Chances Must Be Seized,’’ Guardian (U.K.), January 9, 2003, p. 13. 43. Theodore Roszak, Mary E. Gomes, and Allen D. Kanner, eds., Ecopsychology (San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1995). 44. Ezio Manzini, ‘‘Space and Pace of Flows’’ (presentation at Doors of Perception 7: Flow, Amsterdam, November 14–16, 2000, available on the Doors of Perception website at http://flow.doorsofperception.com/content/manzini\_trans.html). 45. Hawkens, Lovins, and Lovins, Natural Capitalism, 176. 46. Clive Hamilton, Growth Fetish (London: Pluto, 2004), 14. 47. Antoine Saint-Exupe´ry, Flight to Anas (1942), trans. Lewis Galantiere (New York: Harvest, 1969). 48. William McDonough and Partners, ‘‘The Hannover Principles: Design for Sustainability’’ (report prepared for EXPO 2000, Hannover, Germany, William McDonough Architects, Charlottesville, Va., 1992, available at http://www .mcdonough.com/principles.pdf). 49. William Uricchio, ‘‘Technologies of Time,’’ in Visions of Modernity, ed. J. Olsson (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press). ## 50. Ibid., 42. 51. William McDonough and Michael Baumgart, in introduction to Cradle to Cradle: Remake the Way We Make Things (New York: North Point, 2002). 52. Theodore Roszak, ‘‘Where Psyche Meets Gaia,’’ in Theodore Roszak, Mary E. Gomes, and Allen D. Kanner, eds., Ecopsychology (San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1995), 12. 53. Italo Calvino, ‘‘Lightness,’’ in Six Memos for a New Millennium (London: Vintage, 1996), 7.