## 2 Speed 1. Bruce Chatwin, The Songlines (London: Vintage, 1987), 228. 2. Michael Dell, quoted in Joan Magretta, ‘‘Managing Velocity: The Power of Virtual Integration’’ (interview with Michael Dell), Harvard Business Review (March–April 1998). 3. The slogan was attributed to the head of Hitachi’s portable computer division during the 1990s in M. Ryan, The Power of Patience (Manchester, Vt.: Northshire, 2003). 4. World Bank, Globalization, Growth and Poverty: Building an Inclusive World Economy (Washington, D.C.: International Bank for Settlements and the World Bank, 2002), available at http://econ.worldbank.org/prr/globalization/text-2857/. 5. Edward O. Wilson, Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge (London: Little Brown, 1998), 146–147. 6. Dee W. Hoch, quoted in Uffe Elbek, ed., KaosPilot A–Z (Aarhus, Denmark: Kaos-Pilots, 2004), 100. 7. Jim Clark, quoted in Michael Lewis, The New New Thing: A Silicon Valley Story (New York: Norton, 1999). 8. Wolfgang Sachs, ‘‘Why Speed Matters’’ (presentation at Doors of Perception 5: Speed, Amsterdam, November 7–8, 1996, available on the Doors of Perception website at http://museum.doorsofperception.com/doors/revamped\_frameset.php?doorid =sachs). ## 9. Ibid. 10. Susan George, ‘‘When I Was Growing Up’’ (presentation at Doors of Perception 5: Speed, Amsterdam, November 7–8, 1996, available on the Doors of Perception website at http://museum.doorsofperception.com/doors/revamped\_frameset .php?doorid=george). 11. T. S. Ray, ‘‘A Network-Wide Biodiversity Reserve for Digital Organisms,’’ in Proceedings of Imagina 96 (Bry-sur-Marne, France: Institut National De L’audiovisuel, 1996), 15–26. 12. Sachs, ‘‘Why Speed Matters.’’ 13. Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilization (1934), quoted in Robert Levine, A Geography of Time: The Temporal Misadventures of a Social Psychologist (New York: Basic Books, 1997), 63. 14. Levine, A Geography of Time, 57. 15. Ibid., 164.