16. Interaction designer Michael Kieslinger develops this analysis further in his project Fluid Time, which is also discussed on page 47. See the project description on the website of the Interaction Design Institute Ivrea (http://projects.interactionivrea.it/endofyear/it/research/fluidtime.asp) for further information. 17. Writing, in 1846, about his time in the woods, Thoreau noted, ‘‘here is an incessant flow of novelty into the world, and yet we tolerate incredible dullness.’’ Henry David Thoreau, Thoughts from Walden Pond (Petaluma, Calif.: Pomegranate Communications, 1998). 18. Marshall Sahlins, Stone Age Economics (New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1972). 19. P.M. (pseudonym), Bolo Bolo (New York: Autonomedia, 1995), 39. 20. Ibid., 41. 21. Levine, A Geography of Time. 22. Ibid. 23. For a popular account of the trend, see Michael Smolensky, The Body Clock Guide to Better Health (New York: Holt, 2000). 24. David Winnicott, Psychoanalytic Explorations (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989). 25. Levine, A Geography of Time, 27. 26. Pierre Bourdieu, quoted in Ibid., 19. 27. Levine, A Geography of Time, 164. 28. Tristram Hunt, Building Jerusalem: The Rise and Fall of the Victorian City (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2004), 4. 29. ‘‘Civilization alone does not cause nervousness. The Greeks were certainly civilized, but they were not nervous,’’ writes Beard. ‘‘Edison’s electric light is now sufficiently advanced in an experimental direction to give us the best possible illustration of the effects of modern civilization on the nervous system.’’ George Miller Beard, American Nervousness, With Its Causes and Consequences (1881), available at http://condor.depaul.edu/\~history/webresources/usprimary/Beard.htm. 30. Wolfgang Schivelbusch, The Railway Journey: The Industrialization of Time and Space in the Nineteenth Century (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1987). 31. Don Tapscott, The Digital Economy: Promise and Peril in the Age of Networked Intelligence (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997), 71. 32. Ludwig Siegele, ‘‘How about Now?’’ (survey), The Economist, February 2, 2002, p. 3.