materials, energy, and toxicity impacts of a product during its production, use, and disposal. One counterintuitive outcome of this method’s application is the finding that although natural materials are commonly believed to be more environmentally friendly than artificial or man-made ones, the picture is more complicated than that. Yes, a product incorporating one kilogram of wood causes fewer emissions than the same product made with a kilogram of plastics. But once the paint needed to preserve the wood, or sawing losses, are factored in, it can turn out it takes about ten times as much wood as plastic to make some products. And while plastics can often be recycled, wood cannot. As we saw with information technology, energy consumption has often been underestimated in measuring a product’s environmental impact: A coffee machine, for example, uses three hundred kilowatt-hours of electricity during its lifetime; this is equivalent to the amount of energy generated from sixty kilograms of oil. It sometimes turns out to be better to use materials that have a high environmental load per kilogram to manufacture, if it means energy use can be reduced during their life of operation. This is particularly true in transport equipment, in which less weight means less fuel consumption. The designers and researchers at PRe´ insist that environmentally sound materials do not exist; environmentally friendly design approaches do. A designer can influence a product’s lifetime by making it more durable from a technical point of view or by making it upgradeable in a functional sense—for example, by enabling the latest chip to be installed in an existing computer or washing machine. Most products could be recycled, but only a few will be, because only products that are easy to disassemble and yield a decent return when one does so will be chosen for recycling. Designers increase the chance that a product is recycled by optimizing its assembly to that end. Increased product lifetimes also make a difference— but not automatically a good one. When a group of Dutch designers called Eternally Yours investigated the issue, it discovered that designing a product to last a long time does more harm than good if the product is energyinefficient.<sup>21</sup> ## Small Actions, Big Effects For product designers, the lesson is that small actions can have big effects. In many industries, measures to integrate environmental considerations