29, 2003, available at http://www.forbes.com/2003/08/29/cx\_da\_0829topnews\_print .html; Ackman is reporting information he spotted in the American Journal of Public Health and the American Journal of Health Promotion. 56. Janine Benyus, Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature (New York: Morrow, 1997). ## 4 Locality 1. Janine Benyus, Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature (New York: Morrow, 1997), 294. 2. Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point (New York: Little Brown, 2000). For an excellent discussion of the relationship between knowledge and locality, see also John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid, The Social Life of Information (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press, 2000). 3. A lot of business activity in the United States is already moving to smaller cities with names like Omaha, Des Moines, Fargo, and Columbus. The retail sector—for whom ‘‘location, location, location’’ is a mantra—is leaving New York en masse. Today, none of America’s top-twenty retail firms are headquartered there, and the number of Fortune 500 firms headquartered there is down to 39 from 140 in 1955. Helping companies decide where to go is a business in itself. Forbes even offers its readers, via its website (http://infosite.promosis.com/iedc/#), access to a ‘‘corporate relocation calculator’’: ‘‘a faster, smarter way to make expansion and relocation decisions’’ that ‘‘offers instant access to relocation hotspots.’’ The location-finding service lists ‘‘relocation hotspots’’ that are described in relation to population, income, labor, and quality-of-life statistics. 4. Stephen Graham and Simon Marvin, Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities, and the Urban Condition (London: Routledge, 2001). Graham also leads a research group called GURU (Global Urban Research Unit, http://www.ncl.ac.uk/guru/home.htm) at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne (England). 5. Philip Kotler, Marketing Places: Attracting Investment, Industry and Tourism to Cities, States and Nations (New York: Free Press, 1993). For a European perspective on place marketing, see Seppo K. Rainisto, ‘‘Success Factors of Place Marketing: A Study of Place Marketing Practices in Northern Europe and the United States’’ (D.Sci. diss., Helsinki University of Technology, Espoo, Finland, 2003, available at http://lib.hut .fi/Diss/2003/isbn9512266849/). 6. Landry and coauthor Marc Pachter refer in their analysis of place marketing to a ‘‘cultural turn.’’ Economically, they argue, value derives increasingly from symbolic and cultural knowledge. Any good or service is less based on its physical presence