into product development have resulted in substantial positive achievements. Europe leads the way internationally: Countries such as Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, Austria, and Sweden are front-runners in impact assessment, design method development, and eco-design education. Their efforts contributed to an overall reduction of carbon dioxide emissions from EU manufacturing of over 11 percent between 1985 and 2000.<sup>22</sup> Internationally, some large multinationals now address the issue of environmental product design in a comprehensive way, particularly in the fields of electrical and electronic goods, motor vehicles, and packaging. These firms have responded to a variety of drivers and now pay as much attention to environmental and social aspects related to their products, from a life cycle perspective, as they once did to economic and market aspects only. ## Weighty Factors Three factors throw a shadow over this otherwise positive picture. The first is that industry is changing, but too slowly relative to overall economic growth. During that same period in which carbon dioxide emissions were reduced, manufacturing production as a whole rose by 31 percent—with the result that industrial production still accounts for a considerable share of pollution. Much-maligned global corporations are less of a problem than small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), for whom eco-design continues to play a very small role. A second brake on progress is inadequate information diffusion. A lot of potentially weight-reducing research goes unreported. Environmental design information tends to be scattered and fragmented, and many ecodesign tools and data that could help us remain hidden from view and underused. Kathalys, a research group in Holland, turns ecological footprints into design action points by measuring pressure on the environment in terms of everyday activities in the home—such as taking a shower. Taking just one shower in a top-of-the-range cubicle, Kathalys has discovered, consumes as much as thirty-five kilojoule-pounds in energy and two hundred liters of water. Kathalys is testing a mist shower that, combined with water and heat recycling, reduces those numbers tenfold, to five megajoulepounds of heat and twenty liters of water per person. These numbers are impressive, but too few people know about them. I live less than an hour away from the Kathalys offices, for example; I have met the gifted and dedicated people there on numerous occasions, and I am known to