7. Henry Plummer, ‘‘The Poetics of Light,’’ Architecture þ Urbanism (AþU) (December 1987 suppl.), 7. 8. An excellent bibliography and useful links for Bergson’s ideas are available in the entry on Bergson in Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia, at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Henri\_Bergson. For the best explanation of Cassirer’s theory that man has created his own universe of symbolic meaning that structures and shapes his perception of reality, see Ernst Cassirer, An Essay on Man: An Introduction to a Philosophy of Human Culture (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1944). 9. David Winnicott, review of The Nonhuman Environment in Normal Development and in Schizophrenia, International Journal of Psychoanalysis 44 (1983), 237–238. 10. ‘‘Business Computing: Delete the Workers,’’ The Economist, September 21, 2004, p. 68. 11. According to The Economist, days lost to stress, depression, and anxiety increased from 6.5 million in 1995 to 13.4 million in 2001–2002. ‘‘Stress: Never a Dull Moment,’’ The Economist, August 28, 2004, p. 29. 12. Philip Inman, ‘‘Flying High in the Face of Logic,’’ Guardian (U.K.), August 28, 2004, p. 17. 13. Lucy Suchman, Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human-Machine Communication (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987). 14. As the architecture critic Deyan Sudjic so eloquently wrote in 100 Mile City, the TWA terminal was obsolete before it even opened. ‘‘It was designed for fleets of propeller-driven Lockheed Constellations, but by the time it opened, the first jets, the Comets and Boeing 707s, were in use, and the building had to be encrusted with jet-blast deflectors.’’ Deyan Sudjic, 100 Mile City (London: Harper Collins, 1993). 15. Bernard Tschumi, ‘‘Introduction,’’ in The State of Architecture at the Beginning of the 21st Century, ed. Bernard Tschumi (New York: Monacelli, 2004). Tschumi’s book provides a useful review of how today’s leading architects and theorists perceive the challenges of this period. 16. Scho¨n made a remarkable contribution to our understanding of professional knowledge and its application. The best review of his work can be found in Mark K. Smith, ‘‘Donald Scho¨n: Learning, Reflection and Change,’’ The Encyclopedia of Informal Education (2001, last updated 2004), available at www.infed.org/thinkers/ et-schon.htm. 17. Rem Koolhaas, in Rem Koolhaas, Sanford Kwinter, and Sze Tsung Leong, Rem Koolhaas: Conversations with Students (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996).