18. Information about prices of models was obtained from the Howard Models website (http://www.howardmodels.com/supplies/onlineorderform.htm). 19. Paul Mijksenaar, designer of Schiphol’s signage system, describes his work as way-finding design, not sign design. As Schiphol’s space bloats and the flows of people swell, Mijksenaar is keen to increase the number of human guides in the airport. 20. A research center at the University of Utrecht studies the behavior of visitors to urban nodes and network cities from a time-spatial perspective and uses state-ofthe-art geomatic data sources and other research tools in the search for ways to improve accessibility and place quality. 21. Ben van Berkel, quoted in John Thackara, ‘‘Deep Planning: Ben van Berkle and Caroline Bos talk to John Thackara,’’ Domus (October 2002). 22. Ibid. For its project to develop a pier in Genoa, Italy, UN Studio transformed a twenty-three-thousand-square-mile harbor pier into a three-dimensional piazza. The design uses time-based planning represented diagrammatically as a circle of experience. Programs in the piazza are organized clockwise around activities clustered on the basis of views, time of day, and time of year. Coffee can be consumed in the morning sun with a view toward the sea; midday shopping offers shadow; evenings are spent watching the sunset. 23. Malcolm McCullough, Digital Ground: Architecture, Pervasive Computing, and Environmental Knowing (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2004). 24. In his best-seller The Work of Nations, Robert Reich predicted that we would all become ‘‘symbolic analysts.’’ The concept was so successful that Reich ended up as Bill Clinton’s first secretary of labor. Robert Reich, The Work of Nations: Preparing Ourselves for 21st Century Capitalism (London: Addison-Wesley, 1991). 25. ‘‘Manifesto for Agile Software Development,’’ available on the manifesto’s website (http://www.agilemanifesto.org). ## 6 Conviviality 1. Tom Healy and Sylvain Cote, The Well-Being of Nations: The Role of Human and Social Capital (Paris: Center for Educational Research and Development, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2001), 41. 2. Health care spending percentages cited here are from Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), Office of the Actuary, ‘‘2003 Expected to Mark First Slowdown in Health Care Cost Growth in Six Years’’ (press release, February 11, 2004, available at http://www.cms.hhs.gov/media/press/release.asp?Counter=961). 3. The World Health Organization published the first comparative analysis of the world’s health systems in 2000. Using five performance indicators to measure health