have an interest in their work. But I did not hear about, still less see their book, Vision on Sustainable Product Innovation, until eighteen months after its publication—some three years after they started to produce the shower.<sup>23</sup> The third factor holding back eco-design is our slow transition to wholesystems thinking. Switching to misty showers will not of itself resolve our underlying problems, which are systemic. As the authors of Natural Capitalism explain, living systems have been in existence for three and a half billion years; human systems, such as agriculture, began more recently, about thirty thousand years ago; but industrial systems are new—two hundred years old or less—and have affected human and natural systems in dramatic and unforeseen ways. ‘‘What is happening is not by intention,’’ Hawken, Lovins, and Lovins explain, ‘‘so we can put aside the theory that there are ‘bad’ people that we can get rid of to make everything OK. The fact is that the rate of loss [to the environment’s capacity to sustain the economy] is a systemic problem inherent in assumptions that have only recently begun to be questioned.’’<sup>24</sup> The good news is that enlightening system models and frameworks are being developed and disseminated around the world. They have names such as Triple Bottom Line, Five Capitals Model, and Twelve Features of a Sustainable Society. One of the whole-systems frameworks introduced to give us a better grasp of the bigger picture is called The Natural Step (TNS) Framework. TNS is based on an all-embracing definition of the conditions that must apply in any sustainable society. These conditions, known as system conditions, and delineated by an international network of scientists, describe a sustainable society in which nature is not subject to systematically increasing concentrations of substances extracted from the Earth’s crust, concentrations of substances produced by society, or degradation by physical means. In this society, human needs are met worldwide. TNS is one among several all-encompassing frameworks within which several principles of sustainability and lightness are pretty much agreed upon: <sup>m</sup> Minimize the waste of matter and energy. <sup>m</sup> Reduce the movement and distribution of goods. <sup>m</sup> Use more people and less matter. These principles are easy enough to state, but their implementation requires us to redesign industrial and societal systems that deliver material