## 7 Learning 1. Ivan Illich, Deschooling Society (Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1976). 2. Ken Ducatel and James P. Gavigan, Employment and Employability in 2010 Europe (Seville, Spain: Institute of Prospective Technological Studies, Joint Research Center, Commission of the European Community, 2000). 3. Caroline Nevejan, Synchroon|Asynchroon: Onderwijsvernieuwing in de informatiesamenleving (Synchronous|Asynchronous: Educational Renewal in the Information Society) (Amsterdam: Hogeschool van Amsterdam, 2003). See also Hogeschool van Amsterdam (Amsterdam University of Professional Education), ed., Project Leren Leren en Kennismethodiek (The Learning to Learn and Knowledge Methods Project) (Amsterdam: Hogeschool van Amsterdam, 1999). 4. The researcher I met, Sally Brown, had used the research to publish a book: Sally Brown and Angela Glasner, eds., Assessment Matters in Higher Education: Choosing and Using Diverse Approaches (London: Taylor and Francis, 1999). 5. David Hargreaves, The Mosaic of Learning: Schools and Teachers for the Next Century (London: Demos, 1994). 6. Howard Gardner and T. Hatch, ‘‘Multiple Intelligences Go to School: Educational Implications of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences,’’ Educational Researcher 18, no. 8 (1989), 4–9. For an excellent summary of Gardner’s wide-ranging work, see Mark K. Smith, ‘‘Howard Gardner and Multiple Intelligences,’’ The Encyclopedia of Informal Education (2002, last updated 2004), available at http://www.infed.org/thinkers/ gardner.htm. 7. Titus Alexander, Family Learning (London: Demos, 1997). 8. Ducatel and Gavigan, Employment and Employability in 2010 Europe. 9. Brian Ruttenbur and Ginger Spickler, eLearning: The Engine of the Knowledge Economy (Memphis, Tenn.: Morgan Keegan, 2000). 10. Ibid. 11. Jerry Wind and David Reibstein, ‘‘Just-in-Time Education: Learning in a Global Information Age,’’ available at http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/articles.cfm? catid=3&articleid=236. 12. The World Education Market, the world’s first global trade fair for education, was established in 1999 and took place annually until 2003. As this book went to press, the website (http://www.wemex.com) was not online. 13. UNext attracted such investors as Michael Milken, the financier, and Larry Ellison, chief executive officer of Oracle Corporation. Among its higher-education partners supplying course content were Carnegie Mellon, Columbia, and Stanford Universities, the University of Chicago, and the London School of Economics and