## 23. Ibid. 24. Charles Hampden-Turner, ‘‘Perspectives on Management in the Americas,’’ in Regional Encyclopedia of Business and Management, vol. 1: Management in the Americas, ed. M. Warner (London: Thomson Learning), 94–108. 25. John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid, The Social Life of Information (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press, 2000), 224. 26. Linda Anderson, ‘‘Corporate Learning—New Learning Models under Scrutiny,’’ Financial Times, March 22, 2004, available at http://news.ft.com/servlet/Content Server?pagename=FT.com/StoryFT/SpecialFullStory&c=StoryFT&cid=1079419779518 &p=1079419779922. 27. For a startling account of the scale of the information overload that afflicts technical professionals, see William Horton, Designing and Writing Online Documentation (New York: Wiley, 1994). 28. For an excellent review of Illich’s work on deschooling, learning webs, and the disabling effect of professions, see Mark K. Smith, ‘‘Ivan Illich: Deschooling, Conviviality and the Possibilities for Informal Education and Lifelong Learning,’’ The Encyclopedia of Informal Education (2001, last updated 2004), available at http://www .infed.org/thinkers/et-illic.htm. 29. Hargreaves, The Mosaic of Learning, 43. 30. Tom Bentley, Learning beyond the Classroom: Education for a Changing World (London: Routledge/Demos, 1998). 31. Research cited in Nevejan, Synchroon|Asynchroon, 30. 32. e-Learning Centre, ‘‘Learning by e-mail,’’ in e-Learning Center’s Guide to e-Learning, available at http://www.e-learningcentre.co.uk/guide2elearning/2-8/2-8-6 .htm. 33. Time redesign, in the form of more flexible schedules, has started to emerge in some real-world schools. Thomas Telford, one of the highest-performing public schools in the United Kingdom, also has the longest school day in that country— between 31 and 35 hours a week, compared to a U.K. national average of 23.5. According to the Design Council, which has studied the case, these longer hours are less chopped up and predetermined than is usual in the British system. Each day is divided into two sessions, morning and afternoon. Staggered lunch and breakfast breaks limit congestion and disruption. A pupil will spend the whole morning on a subject, usually in the same classroom, but with a number of different teachers who work in a team. Hilary Cottam, ed., Changing Behaviors (London: Design Council, 2001). 34. John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid, Universities in the Digital Age (Palo Alto, Calif.: Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, 1995), 17.