necessities—food, clothing, shelter, mobility—to us, not to mention the cultural systems that shape our attitudes and expectations.<sup>25</sup> So systems are important. The trouble is that because it’s seldom obvious who should look after them, nobody does. One way to persuade society to value, and therefore look after, its systems is to reframe them as forms of capital. Jonathon Porritt, director of Britain’s Forum for the Future, tells policymakers, industrialists, and educators that five types of capital enable us to deliver goods and services we need to sustain and improve the quality of our lives: natural, human, social, manufactured, and financial capital.<sup>26</sup> Big capitalist companies already follow a whole-systems approach. They tend naturally to think in terms of product life cycles, not of discrete objects, and some are enthusiastic users of resource efficiency measurement tools and techniques. They routinely measure costs of products from the extraction of the materials used to produce the products through to their ultimate disposal. Most large organizations are well aware that in a whole-systems context, design is important because it can change the processes behind products and services, as well as the resources used to make them, use them, and dispose of them. Resource efficiency brings not only ecological, but also economic, benefit to an enterprise,<sup>27</sup> and many companies have been won over to the proposition that because avoidable waste is avoidable cost, improved resource productivity increases profit.<sup>28</sup> It’s because a product or service redesigned to use less matter or energy costs less to deliver that ‘‘market-based environmentalism’’ has caught the business imagination.<sup>29</sup> John Elkington, a British advisor to many international companies, says the evolution of sustainable corporations is ‘‘not further along than aviation was when Wilbur and Orville were still running their cycle shop’’—but he nonetheless anticipates ‘‘explosive’’ growth in sustainability experimentation in the coming years.<sup>30</sup> ## Big Picture, Small Steps The sustainability challenge is a design issue. Eighty percent of a product, service, or system’s environmental impact is determined at the design stage.<sup>31</sup> If it is true that we are using the Earth’s resources faster than we replace them, then design can help reverse this trend by changing the processes behind products, as well as the resources used to make them and