## 9 Smartness 1. The subject matter of biomimetics is known by several names: bionics, biogenesis, biomimicry, and others. This chapter draws on Ed van Hinte’s reports of the ‘‘Smart Materials and Systems’’ seminars organized in 1997 and 1998 at the Netherlands Design Institute, with the help of Julian Vincent. Vincent, who leads the Centre for Biomimetic and Natural Technologies at Bath University in the United Kingdom, says the concept describes ‘‘taking ideas from nature and implementing them in another technology such as engineering, design, computing, etc. The concept is very old (the Chinese wanted to make artificial silk 3,000 years ago; Democritus (460–370 BCE) also said it was absurd for men to vaunt their superiority over the animals when, in matters of great importance, it was they who were our teachers: the spider for weaving and mending; the swallow for architecture; the swan and the nightingale for singing. (The last animal is recounted in Bruce Chatwin’s book The Songlines.) But the implementation is gathering momentum only recently because the science base can cope with the advanced techniques and our civilization is in ever increasing need of sympathetic technology.’’ Centre for Biomimetics, ‘‘What Is Biomimetics?’’ available on the Centre’s website at http://www.bath.ac.uk/mech-eng// biomimetics/about.htm. 2. Janine Benyus, Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature (New York: Morrow, 1997), chap. 1. 3. Ibid. 4. Paola Antonelli, Mutant Materials in Contemporary Design (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1995). 5. Ezio Manzini, The Material of Invention (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996). This key text on ‘‘the relationship between technical evolution and design culture’’ was the product of an inquiry among Italian designers into the possibilities, limits, and design implications of new materials. 6. Julian Vincent, ‘‘Biomimetics,’’ in Smart Materials: Human-Machine Interaction, ed. Gert Staal and Anne Voshol (Amsterdam: Netherlands Design Institute, 1997), 7–23. 7. Ibid. 8. ‘‘Achieving these goals,’’ says a PARC statement, ‘‘will require a novel synthesis of technologies from the fields of active structural control, MEMS [micro-electromechanical systems], smart materials, and distributed computation to create intelligent surfaces and materials that not only sense, reason about, and interact with their environment, but that can fundamentally alter both their own behavior and the behavior of other objects in their vicinity.’’ ‘‘MEMS/Smart Matter Research at PARC,’’ available on the PARC website at http://www2.parc.com/spl/projects/smart-matter/. 9. Ed van Hinte, Marc Neelan, Jacques Vink, and Piet Vollaard, Smart Architecture (Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, 2003). The outcome of a research project by the Smart