use them. This is how a commitment to sustainability drives innovation. When organizations put design at the heart of product and service development, they are triggered to ask fundamental questions about what they make, how they make it, and who for.<sup>32</sup> End-to-end system integration closes energy and matter loops. Design thinking, in combination with Internetenabled networks and wireless communications, can reshape whole production processes, even the entire logic and structure of an industry. Design has achieved critical mass in many industries—if not cultural visibility—because it looks at ways to make products less wasteful of materials, less polluting, and easier to recycle. If the so-called green design approach (better known in the United States as ‘‘design for the environment’’) has a limitation, it is that it intervenes at the ‘‘end of the pipe.’’ It modifies individual products or services but does not transform the industrial process as a whole. ## Use, Not Own Structural changes to whole systems, in the way markets are organized, in the way our transport infrastructures are organized and used, and in the way we work and live, are the hardest changes to effect. But just such changes in these areas are already under way. The shift to a service-based economy is one of the most important features of this transition. Think of your mobile phone. You may have paid fifty dollars for the handset—or maybe you got it free. Either way, you probably pay hundreds of dollars for calls and services each year—and those, to all intents and purposes, are immaterial in the sense that you do not need to purchase or use a new device each time you make a call. Many of us already lease, rather than purchase, a device as part of a service contract—a car, a refrigerator, an answering machine, a photocopier. In so doing, we purchase performance—moving, cooling, message taking, or copying—rather than the product itself. Companies are finding, today, that by switching from simply selling a product to selling the optimal performance of a product, they obtain significant financial rewards through, among other things, increasing resource productivity.<sup>33</sup> The trend is to supply enabling platforms rather than stand-alone devices. Power tools are another example. The average consumer power tool is used for ten minutes in its entire life—but it takes hundreds of times its