Benyus, Janine. Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature. New York: Morrow, 1997. Beukers, Adriaan, and Ed van Hinte. Lightness: The Inevitable Renaissance of Minimum Energy Structures. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, 1998. Brand, Stewart. How Buildings Learn—What Happens after They Are Built. New York: Penguin, 1994. Calvino, Italo. Six Memos for the Next Millennium. London: Vintage, 1996. Carroll, John M. Making Use: Scenario-Based Design of Human-Computer Interactions. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2003. Ceppi, Giulio, Analia Cervini, and Juan Keyser. Mobile Embodiments: New Convergences in Mobile Telephony. Ivrea, Italy: Interaction Design Institute Ivrea, 2004. Dinkler, Soke, and Christoph Brockhaus, eds. Connected Cities: Processes of Art in the Urban Network. Ostfildern-Ruit, Germany: Hatje Cantz, 1999. Duffy, Francis. Architectural Knowledge. London: Spon, 1998. Dupuy, Jean-Pierre. Medicine and Power: A Tribute to Ivan Illich (Paris: Centre National de Recherche Scientifique [CNRS], 2003. Dyson, Esther. Release 2.0: A Design for Living in the Digital Age. New York: Bantam Dell, 1997. Elbek, Uffe, ed. KaosPilot A–Z. Aarhus, Denmark: KaosPilots, 2004. Ferna´ndez-Galiano, Luis. Fire and Memory: On Architecture and Energy. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000. Gladwell, Malcolm. The Tipping Point. New York: Little Brown, 2000. Goldberg, Ken, ed. The Robot in the Garden: Telerobotics and Telepistemology in the Age of the Internet. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000. Gombrich, E. H. The Sense of Order. London: Phaidon, 1979. Goonatilake, Susantha. Toward a Global Science: Mining Civilizational Knowledge. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1998. Gray, John. Straw Dogs: Thoughts on Humans and Animals. London: Granta, 2002. Hajer, Maarten, and Arnold Reijndorp. In Search of New Public Domain: Analysis and Strategy. Rotterdam: Netherlands Architecture Institute, 2001. Hawken, Paul, Amory B. Lovins, and L. Hunter Lovins. Natural Capitalism: The Next Industrial Revolution. London: Earthscan, 1999. Himanen, Pekka. The Hacker Ethic, and the Spirit of the Information Age. New York: Random House, 2001.