Holloway, Richard. Looking in the Distance: The Human Search for Meaning. Edinburgh: Canongate, 2004. Hunt, Tristram. Building Jersusalem: The Rise and Fall of the Victorian City. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2004. Illich, Ivan. Deschooling Society. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1976. Illich, Ivan. Energy and Equity. London: Calder and Boyars, 1974. Je´gou, Franc¸ois, and Ezio Manzini. Sustainable Everyday: A Catalogue of Promising Solutions. Milan: Edizione Ambiente, 2004. La´szlo´ Baraba´si, Albert. Linked: The New Science of Networks. New York: Perseus, 2002. Laurel, Brenda. Utopian Entrepreneur. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001. Lessig, Lawrence. The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World. New York: Random House, 2001. Levine, Robert. A Geography of Time: The Temporal Misadventures of a Social Psychologist. New York: Basic Books, 1997. Lietar, Bernard. The Future of Money. London: Century, 2001. Manguel, Alberto. A History of Reading. London: Harper Collins, 1996. Mast, Gregory, ed. Film Theory and Criticism. 5th ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998. McCullough, Malcolm. Abstracting Craft. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996. Mulgan, Geoff. Connexity: How to Live in a Connected World. London: Chatto and Windus, 1997. Orr, David. Ecological Literacy: Education and the Transition to a Postmodern World. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992. P.M. (pseudonym). Bolo Bolo. New York: Autonomedia, 1995. Rheingold, Howard. Smart Mobs: The Next Social Revolution. Cambridge, Mass.: Perseus, 2003. Rifkin, Jeremy. Time Wars: The Primary Conflict in Human History. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1989. Ross, Andrew. Strange Weather: Culture, Science and Technology in the Age of Limits. London: Verso, 1991. Roszak, Theodore, Mary E. Gomes, and Allen D. Kanner, eds. Ecopsychology. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1995. Schechner, Richard. Performance Studies: An Introduction. London: Routledge, 2002.