Alakeson, Vidhaya, ed. Making the Net Work: Sustainable Development in a Digital Society. London: Forum for the Future/Xeris, 2003. Alexander, Christopher, Sara Ishikawa, and Murray Silverstein. A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977. Alexander, Titus. Family Learning. London: Demos, 1997. Antonelli, Paola. Mutant Materials. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1996. Antonelli, Paola. Workspheres: Design and Contemporary Work Styles. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2001. Bakker, Conny, ed. Smart Materials. Amsterdam: Netherlands Design Institute, 1997. Barba, Eugenio. The Paper Canoe: A Guide to Theatre Anthropology. London: Routledge, 1999. Barley, Nick, ed. Breathing Cities: The Architecture of Movement. Basel, Boston, and Berlin: Birkhauser, 2000. Bauman, Zygmunt. Liquid Modernity. Cambridge, England: Polity, 2000. Beolchi, Luciano, ed. Telemedicine Glossary. Brussels: European Commission, 2003. Bergson, Henri. Duration and Simultaneity. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965. Berners-Lee, Tim. Weaving the Web: The Original Design and Ultimate Destiny of the World Wide Web. New York: Harper Collins, 1999. Birkenshaw, Julian, and Peter Hagstrom, eds. The Flexible Firm: Capability Management in Network Organizations. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. Boekraad, Hughes, ed. The New Academy: Papers for the Barcelona Symposium. Breda, The Netherlands: Academy St. Joost, 1997. Bonsiepe, Gui. Interface: An Approach to Design. Maastricht: Jan van Eyck Academy, 1998.