Boutinet, Jean-Pierre. Anthropologie du Projet. Paris: PUF, 2003. Bradburne, James. Collecting Interaction: Digital Craft and the Museum of the Twenty-First Century. Unpublished paper, Museum of Applied Arts Frankfurt, 2000. Bradburne, James. Digital Craft. Unpublished paper, Museum of Applied Arts Frankfurt, 2000. Braddock, S. E., and Marie O’Mahony. Techno-Textiles: Revolutionary Fabrics for Fashion and Design. London: Thames and Hudson, 1998. Brand, Jan, Ritsaert ten Cate, Akki Colenbrander, and Catelijne de Muijnk. The Art Academy of the 21st Century. Bedum, The Netherlands: Profiel, 1999. Brand, Stewart. How Buildings Learn—What Happens after They Are Built. New York: Penguin, 1994. Brand, Stewart. The Clock of the Long Now: Time and Responsibility. London: Phoenix, 2000. Brezet, Han, Philip Vergragt, and Tom van der Horst, eds. Vision on Sustainable Product Innovation. Amsterdam: BIS Publishers, 2001. Brickwood, Cathy, ed. New Media Culture in Europe. Amsterdam: De Balie, 1999. Capra, Fritjof. The Web of Life. New York: Random House, 1996. Castells, Manuel. The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture. 2nd ed. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 2000. Ceppi, Giulio, and Michele Zini, eds. Children, Spaces, Relationships: Metaproject for an Environment for Young Children. Milan: Domus Academy, 1998. Changeux, Jean-Pierre, and Paul Ricoeur. Ce qui nous fait penser: Le nature et le regle (What Makes Us Think: Nature and Law). Paris: Odile Jacob, 2000. Chion, Michel. Audio-Vision. New York: Columbia University Press, 1994. Cohen, Daniel. Our Modern Times: The New Nature of Capitalism in the Information Age. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2003. Cooper, Alan. The Inmates Are Running the Asylum. Indianapolis: SAMS (Macmillan Computer Publishing), 1999. Corbin, Alain. Time, Desire and Horror: Towards a History of the Senses. Cambridge, England: Polity, 1995. Cottam, Hilary, and Charles Leadbeater. Health: Co-creating Services. London: Design Council, 2004. Croall, Jonathan. LETS Act Locally: The Growth of Local Exchange Trading Systems. London: Gulbenkian, 1997.