own weight to manufacture such an object. Why own one, if I can get ahold of one when I need it? A product-service system provides me with access to the products, tools, opportunities, and capabilities I need to get the job done—namely, power tools for me to use, but not own. Service design is about arranging things so that people who need things done are connected to other people and equipment that get things done— on an as- and when-needed basis. The technical term, which comes from the logistics industry, is ‘‘dynamic resource allocation in real time.’’ Agricultural cooperatives that purchase tractors and sell their use-time to associates are well-known examples, but once one starts looking, examples spring up everywhere: a home delivery service for detergents in Italy, a mobile laboratory for industrial users of lubricants in Germany, dozens of carsharing schemes, an organic vegetable subscription system in Holland.<sup>34</sup> Industrial ecologists Franc¸ois Je´gou and Ezio Manzini found enough examples to fill a book, Sustainable Everyday: A Catalogue of Promising Solutions,<sup>35</sup> which is filled with novel daily life services that they discovered around the world. These are ‘‘planning activities whose objective is a system,’’ Manzini told me. Hundreds of services suitable for a resource-limited, complex, and fluid world are being developed by grassroots innovators: those that enable people to take care of other people, work, study, move around, find food, eat, and share equipment. Examples of extended homes and cohousing are emerging in many countries, for example. The integration of private and common space is enabling the creation of communities of people who choose to live together on the basis of shared facilities such as kitchens, laundries, do-it-yourself workrooms, children’s play areas, guest rooms, gardens, and garden tools. In Hong Kong, the majority of recent buildings have been constructed to incorporate this kind of sharing. A wide range of neighborhood multiservice centers has been opened in various cities: a bookshop that houses a bar and cultural center (Tikkun, Milan), a bakery that offers space for the preparation and refrigeration of food (Cottage Baker, Rugby, England), a grocery shop that offers meetings and study courses (Nature Ride, Milan).<sup>36</sup> My favorite example of a light product-service system is telephone voice mail services. When my wife and I first moved in together, we discovered that we owned, between us, seven stand-alone telephone answering machines. Only one of these actually worked; the rest were awaiting repair