Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention. New York: Harper, 1996. Culshaw, B. Smart Structures and Materials. London: Artech House, 1965. Cusveller, Sjoerd, Oene Dijk, and Kirsten Schipper. Remaking NL: Cityscape, Landscape, Infrastructure. Amsterdam: S@M, 2001. Davidson, Robyn, ed. The Picador Book of Journeys. London: Pan Macmillan, 2000. Davis, Mike. Beyond Bladerunner: Urban Control and the Ecology of Fear. New York: New Press, 1993. de Kerckhove, Derrick. The Skin of Culture: Investigating the New Electronic Reality. Toronto: Somerville House, 1995. de Landa, Manuel. A Thousand Years of Nonlinear History. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1997. DiBona, Chris, Sam Ockman, and Mark Stone, eds. Open Sources: Voices from the Open Source Revolution. Sebastopol, Calif.: O’Reilly, 1999. Dinkler, Soke, and Christoph Brockhaus, eds. Connected Cities: Processes of Art in the Urban Network. Ostfildern-Ruit, Germany: Hatje Cantz Verlag, 1999. Dourish, Paul. Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001. Downs, Anthony. Still Stuck in Traffic: Coping with Peak-Hour Traffic Congestion. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2004. Ducatel, Ken, and James P. Gavigan. Employment and Employability in 2010 Europe. Seville: Institute of Prospective Technological Studies, Joint Research Centre, Commission of the European Community, 2000. Dudek, Mark. Kindergarten Architecture: Space for the Imagination. London: Chapman and Hall, 1996. Dunbar, Robin. Grooming, Gossip, and the Evolution of Language. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1997. Dunne, Anthony, and Fiona Raby. Design Noir: The Secret Life of Electronic Objects. London: August/Birkha¨user, 2001. Dupuy, Jean-Pierre. Medicine and Power: A Tribute to Ivan Illich. Paris: Ecole Polytechnique, Centre National de Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), 2003. Ehrlich, Paul. New World, New Mind. London: Paladin, 1991. Ferry, Luc. The New Ecological Order. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.