Florida, Richard. The Rise of the Creative Class: And How It’s Transforming Work, Leisure, Community, and Everyday Life. New York: Perseus Books, 2002. Flusser, Vilem. The Shape of Things: A Philosophy of Design. London: Reaktion, 1999. Forseba¨ck, Lennart. Case Studies of the Information Society and Sustainable Development. Brussels: European Commission Information Society Directorate General, 2000. Forsyth, Richard. Machine Learning. London: Chapman and Hall, 1989. Gandhi, Mukesh V., and Brian S. Thompson. Smart Materials and Structures. London: Chapman and Hall, 1990. Gardner, Howard. The Unschooled Mind: How Children Think and How Schools Should Teach. New York: Basic Books, 1993. Graham, Stephen, and Simon Marvin. Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities, and the Urban Condition. London: Routledge, 2001. Gray, Alasdair. Lanark: A Life in Four Books. Glasgow: Canongate, 1985. Gray, Charles Hable, ed. The Cyborg Handbook. London: Routledge, 1995. Griffiths, Jay. Pip-Pip: A Sideways Look at Time. London: Flamingo, 2000. Hall, Edward T. The Silent Language. New York: Doubleday, 1959. Hamilton, Clive. Growth Fetish. London: Pluto, 2004. Hampden-Turner, Charles, and Fons Trompenaars. Mastering the Infinite Game: How East Asian Values Are Transforming Business Practices. London: Capstone, 1997. Hargreaves, David. The Mosaic of Learning: Schools and Teachers for the Next Century. London: Demos, 1994. Heppell, Stephen. Schools in the Learning Age. London: Campaign for Learning, 2000. Herz, J. C. Joystick Nation: How Videogames Gobbled Our Money, Won Our Hearts, and Rewired Our Minds. London: Abacus, 1997. Hillis, W. Daniel. The Pattern on the Stone. New York: Basic Books, 1999. Hillman, Mayer, and Stephen Plowden. Speed Control and Transport Policy. London: Policy Studies Institute, 1996. Hilty, Lorenz M., and T. F. Ruddy. Resource Productivity in the Information Age. Chapter 3 in Indicators of Sustainable Development, edited by Olli Hietanen. Helsinki: Finnish Society for Future Studies, 2002. Hofmeester, Kay, ed. Presence: New Media for Older People. Amsterdam: Netherlands Design Institute, 1999.