Holland, John H. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1975. Horton, William. Designing and Writing Online Documentation. New York: Wiley, 1994. Huizinga, Johan. Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in Culture. Boston: Beacon Press, 1955. Hussey, Andrew. The Game of War: The Life and Death of Guy Debord. London: Cape, 2001. Hutton, Will, and Anthony Giddens, eds. On the Edge: Living with Global Capitalism. London: Vintage, 1999. Illich, Ivan. Tools for Conviviality. London: Calder and Boyars, 1973. Information Society Technology Advisory Group (ISTAG). Scenarios for Ambient Intelligence in 2010. Seville, Spain: Institute for Prospective Technological Studies, 2001. Irving, Robert. Being and Circumstance: Notes towards a Conditional Art. San Francisco: Lapis with the Pace Gallery, 1988. Johnson, Robert R. User-Centered Technology: A Rhetorical Theory. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1998. Johnston, Peter, ed. Information Societies Technologies Conference. Helsinki: European Commission, 2000. Jones, John Chris. Softecnica. In Design after Modernism: Beyond the Object in Design, edited by John Thackara, 216–226. London: Thames and Hudson, 1987. Kafai, Yasmin B., and Mitch Resnick. Construction in Practice: Designing, Thinking, Learning in a Digital World. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1996. Kelly, Kevin. Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems, and the Economic World. New York: Perseus, 1995. Kennedy, Margrit. Interest and Inflation Free Money. Sydney: Social Entrepreneurial Ventures Asia, 1995. Krausse, Joachim, and Claude Lichtenstein, eds. Your Private Sky: R. Buckminster Fuller and The Art of Design Science. London: Mu¨ller/Birkha¨user Verlag, 1999. Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980. Landauer, Thomas K. The Trouble with Computers: Usefulness, Usability, and Productivity. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996. Latour, Bruno, and Catherine Porter. Aramis: Or the Love of Technology. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996.