Laurel, Brenda. Computers as Theatre. New York: Addison-Wesley, 1991. Laurel, Brenda, ed. Design Research: Methods and Perspectives. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2003. Lave, Jean, and Etienne Wenger. Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991. Lawrence, Eleanor, ed. Henderson’s Dictionary of Biological Terms. 11th ed. London: Longman, 1995. Maas, Winy. Five Minute City: Architecture and (Im)mobility. Rotterdam: Episode, 2003. Maas, Winy, and Jacob van Rijs. FARMAX: Excursions on Density. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, 1998. Mamet, David. Three Uses of the Knife: On the Nature and Purpose of Drama. New York: Vintage, 1998. Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001. Manzini, Ezio. Artefatti: Verso una nuova ecologia dell’ambiente artificiale (Artifacts: Toward a New Ecology of the Artificial Environment). Milan: Edizioni Domus Academy, 1990 (published in French and Spanish). Manzini, Ezio. HK Lab. Hong Kong: Portefaix Map, 2002. Manzini, Ezio. The Material of Invention. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996. Manzini, Ezio. Product-Service Systems and Sustainability. Paris: United Nations Environment Programme, 2002. Manzini, Ezio. Solution Oriented Partnership: How to Design Industrialised Sustainable Solutions. Cranfield, England: Cranfield University Press, 2004. Manzini, Ezio, and Marco Susani. The Solid Side. Naarden, The Netherlands: V þ K, 1995. Manzini, Ezio, and Carlo Vezzoli. Product-Service Systems and Sustainability: Opportunities for Sustainable Solutions. Paris: United Nations Education Programme, 2003. Maxmin, James, and Shoshana Zuboff. The Support Economy. New York: Viking, 2002. McCullough, Malcolm. Abstracting Craft. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996. McCullough, Malcolm. Digital Ground. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2004. McNeill, J. R., and William H. McNeill. The Human Web: A Bird’s Eye View of World History. New York: Norton, 2003. Millar, Jeremy, and Michiel Schwarz, eds. Speed: Visions of an Accelerated Age. London: Photographers’ Gallery, 1998.