Mitchell, William J. The Reconfigured Eye: Visual Truth in the Post-photographic Era. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992. Miyake, Riiche, and John Thackara, eds. T-Zone. Brussels: Europalia, 1990. Mok, Clement. Designing Business. San Jose, Calif.: Adobe, 1996. Mulder, Arjen. Levende systemen: reis naar het einde van het informatietidperk (Living Systems: Travels to the End of the Information Age). Amsterdam: Van Gennep, 2002. Mulder, Arjen, and Jacqueline Tellinga. L’Europe a\` Grande Vitesse (High-Speed Europe). Rotterdam: Netherlands Architecture Institute, 1996. Nevejan, Caroline. Synchroon-asynchroon: Onderwijsvernieuwing in de informatiesamenleving (Synchronous-Asynchronous: Educational Renewal in the Information Society). Amsterdam: Hogeschool van Amsterdam, 2003. Norman, Donald A. Things That Make Us Smart: Defending Human Attributes in the Age of the Machine. New York: Addison-Wesley, 1993. Normann, Richard. Reframing Business. London: Wiley, 2003. Norretranders, Tor. The User Illusion: Cutting Consciousness Down to Size. New York: Viking, 1998. Papanek, Victor. Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change. New York: Random House, 1972. Phillips, Adam. The Beast in the Nursery. London: Pantheon, 1998. Polanyi, Michael. Personal Knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958. Rifkin, Jeremy. The Age of Access. London: Penguin, 2000. Rifkin, Jeremy. The End of Work: The Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of the Post-market Era. New York: Putnam, 1995. Roberts, Paul. Images: The Piano Music of Claude Debussy. New York: Amadeus, 1996. Sachs, Wolfgang. The Development Dictionary: A Guide to Knowledge as Power. London: Zed, 1992. Sachs, Wolfgang. Global Ecology: A New Arena of Political Conflict. London: Zed, 1993. Sahlins, Marshall. Stone Age Economics. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1972. Schivelbusch, Wolfgang. The Railway Journey: The Industrialization of Time and Space in the Nineteenth Century. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1987. Scho¨n, Donald. The Reflective Practitioner—How Professionals Think. New York: Basic Books, 1983.