Schor, Juliet B. The Overspent American: Upscaling, Downshifting, and the New Consumer. New York: Basic Books, 1998. Schwarz, Michiel. Holland schept ruimte: Het Nederlands paviljoen op de wereldtentoonstelling EXPO 2000 te Hannover (Holland Makes Space: The Dutch Pavilion at Expo 2000 in Hannover). Blaricum/Den Haag: V þ K, 1999. Seelig, Thomas, Urs Stahel, and Margin Joeggi, eds. Trade: Commodities, Communication and Consciousness. Zurich: Scalo, 2001. Simon, Herbert. The Sciences of the Artificial. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996. Smith, Mark K. Online Encyclopedia of Informal Education. Available at http://www .infed.org/association/b-assoc.htm. 2002. Soja, Edward W. Postmodern Geographies: The Reassertion of Space in Critical Social Theory. London: Verso, 1989. Sontag, Susan. Regarding the Pain of Others. London: Hamish Hamilton, 2003. Sorkin, Michael, and Sharon Zukin, eds. After the World Trade Center: Rethinking New York City. New York: Routledge, 2002. Sudjic, Deyan. The 100 Mile City. London: Harper Collins, 1993. Svanaes, Dag. Understanding Interactivity: Steps to a Phenomenology of Human-Computer Interaction. Trondheim, Norway: Computer Science Department, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 2000. Thackara, John. Lost in Space: A Traveller’s Tale. Haarlem, The Netherlands: De Grafische Haarlem, 1994. Thackara, John. Winners! How Today’s Successful Companies Innovate by Design. London: Gower, 1999. Thackara, John, ed. Design after Modernism: Beyond the Object in Design. London: Thames and Hudson, 1987. Tukker, Arnold, Peter Eder, and Erick Haag. Ecodesign: The European State of the Art. Seville, Spain: Institute for Prospective Technological Studies, 2000. Uricchio, William. Media, Simultaneity, Convergence: Culture and Technology in an Age of Intermediality. Utrecht, The Netherlands: Universiteit Utrecht, 1997. van Assche, Christine, ed. Sonic Process. Barcelona: Actar, 2002. van Hinte, Ed. Eternally Yours: Visions on Product Endurance. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, 1997. van Hinte, Ed. Smart Design. Amsterdam: Netherlands Design Institute, 1999.