in a tangled heap of boxes and wires. One of them had been inoperative for seven years.<sup>37</sup> Flemming Heden, a researcher with Telia, a telecommunications company in Sweden, has compared the impact of owning such machines—that is, the effects produced by their manufacture, distribution, ownership, power consumption, maintenance, and disposal—to that of using an online answering service. Examining such factors as power consumption and contribution to the greenhouse effect, Heden calculated that using the online service has between one hundred and eight hundred times less impact on the environment than employing an answering machine for the same purpose. The savings in power consumption alone achieved annually by the seven hundred thousand or so customers in Sweden who subscribe to just one such service are equivalent to that required to heat two thousand houses with electricity for a year. If the five hundred thousand remaining Swedes who still have an old-style answering machine were to subscribe to an online service, it would reduce carbon dioxide emissions by ten thousand tonnes a year.<sup>38</sup> Or take digital photography. The various branches of analog photography—the businesses that develop and print photographic film and paper, and radiography in the spheres of medical and dental care—are responsible, between them, for thirty million square meters of ‘‘developed surface’’ each year—an area the size of Belgium. Printing hard copies in Belgium involves chemical industries whose collective environmental impact is immense. Problems include the leakage into the atmosphere of gases that affect the climate and toxic waste that includes harmful mercury, silver compounds, and chromium. The industries concerned have invested heavily in recycling, waste processing, and the development of closed systems. But digitization is far more effective as an antidote to all this waste. For the local government of Stockholm alone, digitization of radiography means producing 230,000 square meters less of X-ray film, 100,000 liters less of developer, and 120,000 liters less of fixer.<sup>39</sup> Now if you’re in some kind of ‘‘thing’’ business, such as vacuum cleaners, or chairs, or buildings—don’t panic. The knowledge and expertise you have now is still needed. We still need products in product-service systems. But the designers of those products will have to learn new tricks, so that the products they design can be deployed differently than we have been accustomed to. Chris Pacione has already done so. He did not set out to be the designer of a wireless product-service system. On the contrary: This cofounder of