market—namely, us—so if we change, they’ll change. The reason is that we do not yearn for lighter ways of living most of our collectively wasteful behaviors are hidden from view. So we persist in our wasteful ways. Many heavy actions that I take, for example, seem trivial in themselves: leaving the light on, printing out an e-mail, eating a plate of Kenyan beans. It’s the accumulation of such tiny acts that weighs heavily on the planet. A relationship, or flow, or accumulation, or change, is by its nature invisible. An important new task of design is to make these behaviors and changes within systems intelligible. We need new ways to understand the morphology of systems—their dynamics, their ‘‘intelligence’’: how they work, what stimulates them, how and why they change. I was outraged to be told recently that in Amsterdam I put 563 kilograms of trash onto the street for collection each year. This was clearly a slander: All I do is put a couple of black bags on the street once or twice a week. They weigh only 5 kilos (I put paper and bottles in their own banks for recycling), and they don’t pile up in a huge heap; they disappear. And that’s part of the problem. My bags disappear from view, but not from the big picture. So how might we make aggregate heaviness visible? The science fiction writer Bruce Sterling once challenged the Doors of Perception conference (a biannual event for designers that I run) to imagine what it would be like if carbon dioxide were red, and our wasteful emissions turned the sky to the color of blood, or if we had the eco-equivalent of a Geiger counter and sensors that would click, eerily, whenever we left the tap on. The conference’s audience visibly squirmed as the idea sank in. We ignore environmental phenomena, or take them for granted, in much the same way that we take our bodies for granted. We don’t think about them until they go wrong—and then we demand instant action from the person in charge. As we saw just now with BodyMedia, devices strapped to the body will constantly monitor its vital signs: What would it mean to monitor our planet’s virtual signs in such a way? Many affective representations of complex phenomena have been developed in recent times. Physicists have illustrated quarks. Biologists have mapped the genome. Doctors have described immune systems in the body and among communities. Network designers have mapped communication flows in buildings. Managers have charted the locations of expertise in their organizations. But these representations have been made and used mainly by and among specialists as objects of research—not as the basis