for feedback and sense-and-respond behavior by wider groups of people. We need to foster ecological and systems literacies. Changing attitudes is not just about enhancing perceptions. There are also psychological factors to contend with. One reason we don’t see the bigger picture is that we don’t want to: It’s so grim. On the wall behind me, as I write, is a newspaper cutting with the headline ‘‘Life on the Planet under Threat.’’ The story begins, ‘‘The human race has only one or perhaps two generations to rescue itself.’’ Now you’d think this would be a frontpage story, but the editor of the Guardian chose to run it on page 13 under ‘‘International News.’’<sup>42</sup> And I can’t say I blame him. We have been bombarded for years by a stream of ghastly forecasts and warnings about the environment. Eco-trends always seem to be getting worse; our prospects on the planet always seem to be dire. And it’s all our fault. But eco-guilt doesn’t sell newspapers, and being told that a planet-wide calamity is one’s fault is a splendid reason for turning straight to the sports pages. It’s also demotivating to be confronted by a task that seems too hard. I well remember the first time a scientist told me about ‘‘factor 20.’’ Factor 20 refers to the idea that in order to achieve a balance of energy and matter consumption, with rising living standards and growing population calculated in, we need to improve the efficiency with which we use matter and energy by a factor of twenty times within one or two generations. Now the number twenty is not scientifically provable; the correct number may turn out to be four, or eight, or eighty. The actual factor numbers are best treated as parables. What they signify is that we need to effect a radical change in the way we live on the planet. When I heard that we have to change things by a factor of twenty, I thought: ‘‘Well that’s it. The game’s up. We’re finished.’’<sup>43</sup> In fact, radical change is already under way. It’s just not visible. We’ve embarked on an operation compared by Ezio Manzini to ‘‘changing the engines of an aircraft while in flight.’’ ‘‘It may appear a difficult task,’’ understates Manzini, ‘‘but consider this: during two centuries of innovation, until now, we have reduced the role of labour in production by even larger proportions. We have done it before.’’<sup>44</sup> Hawkens and his coauthors, in Natural Capitalism, are resolutely confident, too. They state that ‘‘90 to 95 percent reductions in material and energy flows are possible in developed nations without diminishing the quality of the services people want.’’<sup>45</sup> Attitudes are changing: People do think it’s doable. The Australian economist Clive Hamilton, who writes powerfully about the emptiness of