affluence in his book Growth Fetish, has uncovered research that shows that despite high and sustained levels of economic growth in the West over a period of fifty years, ‘‘four fifths of Americans believe they consume far more than they need to.’’<sup>46</sup> The richest people in the world say they are miserable, that it’s not worth it, and that they’d like to change. ## From End of Pipe to Whole of Life Among the multiple interacting cycles of change now under way are incremental improvements to present products; this is the so-called end-of-pipe approach to eco-design. A second cycle involves the radical redesign of products and services in which an element is transformed, even though the model stays the same: Putting hydrogen power plants into private cars is an example of this. A third cycle involves the development of productservice systems that replace those in old models: Car-sharing schemes enabled by the Global Positioning System (GPS) are a good example of this. A fourth cycle involves the redesign of entire spatial, agricultural, and industrial systems to meet the goal of a fully sustainable society. The radical decentralization of production—in food, goods, and care—that has already begun is an example of such a systemic change. These four change cycles operate at different timescales, but they influence each other. Much of our physical infrastructure needs to be replaced, for example, and a missed opportunity now can delay important change for decades. The average life span of what economists call ‘‘climate-relevant capital stock’’—such as heating and ventilating systems—runs into many years: Electrical appliances such as office equipment and consumer and household goods should last five to twenty years (although, as we have seen, actual life cycles are often shorter). Residential heating and cooling systems last ten to twenty years. Cars, too, ten to twenty; trucks and buses, ten to twenty-five; commercial heating and cooling systems, ten to thirty; industrial production facilities, ten to forty; power plant electricity transmission, thirty to fifty; and transport and urban infrastructure, forty to two hundred. ## Losing Weight, Gaining Lightness ‘‘If you want to build a ship, don’t divide the work and give orders; teach them to yearn for the vast and endless sea.’’<sup>47</sup> The French aviator