and writer Antoine Saint-Exupe´ry got it right. More than rational argument, and more than persuasive or scary representations, are required for the idea of lightness to ‘‘take’’ in our collective imagination. Although we have been culturally and economically entrenched in a particular way of doing things, the ‘‘jump’’ to renewables, and to a light, sustainable economy, is the result of a cultural, not a technological, transformation. One indication of cultural change is the success of books like Natural Capitalism and the speed with which industry, government, and education are embracing whole-system models such as The Natural Step. These seismic changes in mindset are making the jump from the ecological fringe into mainstream thinking. One of the best codifications of a lightness-based industrial culture was made by the architect William McDonough following a commission by the organizers of the 2000 World’s Fair in Hannover, Germany. At one of the epicenters of global capitalism, what have come to be known as the Hannover Principles were adopted without major controversy: 1. Insist on rights of humanity and nature to coexist in a healthy, supportive, diverse, and sustainable condition. 2. Recognize interdependence The elements of human design interact with and depend upon the natural world, with broad and diverse implications at every scale. Expand design considerations to recognizing even distant effects. 3. Respect relationships between spirit and matter Consider all aspects of human settlement including community, dwelling, industry and trade in terms of existing and evolving connections between spiritual and material consciousness. 4. Accept responsibility for the consequences of design decisions upon human wellbeing, the viability of natural systems, and their right to coexist. 5. Create safe objects of long-term value Do not burden future generations with requirements for maintenance of vigilant administration of potential danger due to the careless creation of products, processes, or standards. 6. Eliminate the concept of waste Evaluate and optimize the full life cycle of products and processes, to approach the state of natural systems, in which there is no waste. 7. Rely on natural energy flows Human designs should, like the living world, derive their creative forces from perpetual solar income. Incorporate the energy efficiently and safely for responsible use. 8. Understand the limitations of design No human creation lasts forever, and design does not solve all problems. Those who create and plan should practice humility in the face of nature. Treat nature as a model and mentor, not an inconvenience to be evaded or controlled.