9. Seek constant improvement by sharing knowledge Encourage direct and open communication between colleagues, patrons, manufacturers and users to link longterm sustainable considerations with ethical responsibility, and reestablish the integral relationship between natural processes and human activity.<sup>48</sup> The critical issue—for people, organizations, and governments alike—is knowing where we want to be. The imaginary, an alternative cultural vision, is vital in shaping expectations and driving transformational change. Shared visions act as forces for innovation, and what designers can do— what we can all do—is imagine some situation or condition that does not yet exist but describe it in sufficient detail that it appears to be a desirable new version of the real world. We’ve done it before and can do it again. The last quarter of the nineteenth century was seething with enticing possibilities. The social historian William Uricchio has investigated the ways that nineteenth-century technology ‘‘simultaneously gave form to, and was shaped by, conceptions of space, time and event which defined the culture of modernity.’’<sup>49</sup> Early variations of the telegraph and telephone reinforced an intense cultural interest in speed and simultaneity. Film, together with the telephone and phonograph, extended our perception of events and locations beyond their physical and temporal bounds. ‘‘Global simultaneity, or something close to it, was finally achieved,’’ says Uricchio. ‘‘Popular and scientific culture embraced the notion of speed and celebrated the ever diminishing interval between transmission and reception.’’<sup>50</sup> For Uricchio, this cultural shift, at the dawn of modernity, explains the ignorance of the past, and disinterest in the present, that we suffer from today. ‘‘The filters of the future will be in our heads, not at the end of pipes,’’ agree Bill McDonough, author of ‘‘The Hannover Principles.’’<sup>51</sup> Frames of meaning cannot be changed at will or by passing laws. Shaking off our culture’s mechanical conception of the world, the idea of controllability, and our all-round anthropocentrism will be especially difficult. Writes Theodore Roszak: ‘‘Ecology, as the study of interconnectedness, has a psychological dimension—the transition from egocentrism, to ecocentrism. Copernicus took us out of the centre of the solar system; we now need to take ourselves out of the centre of the biosphere.’’<sup>52</sup> Lightness is not a new idea. I’ve been inspired to stick with lightness, as a peg upon which to hang my other themes, by a book two decades old: Italo Calvino’s Six Memos for a New Millennium. One of Calvino’s essays therein,