Questioning speed and acceleration raises interesting design and innovation questions. Should we continue to design only to make things faster? Is selective slowness consistent with growth and innovation? How might faster information help us live more lightly on the planet? ## A-Forces Many of the problems that unnerve us have less to do with speed than with acceleration. Graphs everywhere seem to be heading off the chart. In the economy, for example, it took from the beginning of human history to the year 1900 to develop a world economy that produced six hundred billion dollars in output. Today, the world economy grows by that amount every two years.<sup>4</sup> In my lifetime, energy production has more than tripled, and economic output has risen by a factor of five. Cultural evolution has also accelerated. In his book Consilience, the biologist Edward O. Wilson plots the evolution of artifacts since the controlled use of fire 450,000 years ago. According to Wilson, the brain of modern Homo sapiens was anatomically fully formed by no later than 100,000 years before the present. From that time forward, material culture at first evolved slowly, later expanded, and then exploded. It passed from a handful of stone and bone tools at the beginning of the interval, to agricultural fields and villages at the 90 percent mark, and then—in a virtual eye blink—to prodigiously elaborate technologies. Marvels Wilson: ‘‘Cultural evolution has followed an exponential trajectory.’’<sup>5</sup> It took centuries for information about the smelting of ore to cross a single continent—and bring about the Iron Age. During the time of sailing ships, it took years for knowledge and technologies to spread around the world. Subsequently, as Dee W. Hoch, founder of Visa, points out, with the telegraph and telephone it became possible to deliver information point to point, simultaneously.<sup>6</sup> Radio, television, and satellite increased the informational footprint—so that by the time man landed on the moon, half the world’s population could witness the fact a second later. The push toward simultaneity continues in today’s artifacts: Computer processing speeds and storage have both increased over a millionfold in a couple of decades, and the Internet has transformed the dynamics of information distribution within a few years. Travel speeds have plummeted at similar rates. It took the Pilgrim fathers sixty-six days to sail from England to America in 1660, bringing news from