the old country with them. The Concorde could do the same journey in four hours: two hundred times faster. In France, the division of the country into departments was based on how far a man could travel on a horse in a single day. Back in 1867, the journey from Paris to Marseille took sixteen hours; today, I do the journey in three hours and a bit by the Train Grande Vitesse (TGV). Netscape founder Jim Clark proclaimed these trends as the ‘‘law of continuous acceleration.’’<sup>7</sup> But acceleration is a trend, not a law. The pace of life has indeed quickened remorselessly all our lives—but that need not continue. One reason to change gear is that speed is not free. As the environmentalist Wolfgang Sachs points out, the victory against distance and duration carries a heavy cost. The conquest of space and time requires what he calls ‘‘the mobilisation of nature.’’<sup>8</sup> Fuels and vehicles, roads and runways, electricity and electronic equipment, satellites and relay stations call for a gigantic flow of energy and materials. As we go faster, we use a disproportionately growing amount of energy to beat friction and air resistance. An average car consumes five liters of gasoline at eighty kilometers per hour but needs four times the energy—and hence four times the fuel—to go twice as fast. An increase in speed from two hundred to three hundred kilometers per hour caused the French TGV trains that I take to Marseille to consume not just 50 percent more energy, but 100 percent more. ‘‘In general,’’ says Sachs, ‘‘the more speed outdoes natural time-scales, the more environmental resources have to be expended. Incremental gains in ecoefficiency will never cancel out the basic law which governs the physics of speed.’’<sup>9</sup> ## Ecologies of Speed and Time ‘‘Thank heaven, literally, for the moon,’’ says the economist Susan George. ‘‘If it weren’t there, supplying the gravity to slow down the earth’s rotation, our days would last only about four hours, with constant gale-force winds. Nature doesn’t work on the principle that faster is better.’’<sup>10</sup> Industrial society, unfortunately, does work on that principle. As a consequence, it weighs heavily upon nature. As we saw in chapter 1, its metabolism has reached a velocity and intensity at which the ecosystems it depends upon are thrown into disorder. The time scales of modernity have collided with the time scales that governed life on Earth in premodern times. Every year, our industrial systems