burn as much fossil fuel as the Earth has stored up in a period of nearly a million years. At this rate, we’ll use up all of the planet’s fossil fuel reserves within the equivalent of a second in geological time. The acceleration of the speed of human population growth means that in a single human lifetime, the Earth may lose half of its living species, species that it took tens of millions of years for evolution to create through the process of speciation.<sup>11</sup> The collision between industrial and biological time is most evident in agriculture. ‘‘It is the same story over and over again,’’ says Sachs; ‘‘natural rhythms of growth and maturation are considered much too slow by the industrial and post-industrial mind, and an enormous amount of resources and ingenuity are deployed to squeeze out more output in shorter periods of time.’’<sup>12</sup> Cows, chickens, rice, or wheat are selected, bred, chemically treated, and increasingly genetically modified, in order to accelerate their yield. But the imposition of industrial time on natural rhythms is achieved at a heavy price. Animals are kept in appalling conditions, disease spreads, pollution advances, soils degenerate, species diversity is narrowed, and evolution is not given enough time to adapt. A host of ecological problems in the area of agriculture derive from the fact that the rhythms of nature are displaced by the demands of a higher-speed economy. Another break with natural speed came with the invention of powered vehicles—and in particular, the railroad. From the time of Caesar to that of Napoleon, there had not been much progress in speed. It was only when fossil energy reserves deep under the surface of the Earth were tapped, in order to obtain fuel for the propulsion of vehicles, that the gates to the new age were thrown open. The combustion engine made possible a transformation of the Earth’s treasures into vehicle speed. The mission of successive armies of transport technologies was nothing else than the reduction and gradual abolition of duration and distance. With the arrival of the railroad, the speed of engines supplanted the speed of bodies, and vehicular space gradually settled upon natural space. This radical break inaugurated the age of acceleration. ## From Event Time to Clock Time Lewis Mumford declared in 1934 that ‘‘the clock, not the steam engine, is the key machine of the industrial age.’’<sup>13</sup> Before the clock was invented we lived time, but we were not regulated by it. We were regulated by nature