when deciding when to begin and end activities. We would work until a task was finished, or until the sun went down. This was the era of event time: We started and ended events when the time was right for them. Time did not run in a straight line from now into the future; different kinds of time came and went with the seasons. The transition to a clock-based system began, in Europe at least, at the end of the Middle Ages, when monks invented clocks in order to structure prayer times.<sup>14</sup> Tradesman and mechanics adopted these clocks and took them into the cities. In the beginning each city ran on an independent clock and hence had its ‘‘own time.’’ Mechanical timepieces have always been used not only to mark the passage of time, but also to dictate the scheduling of activities; they regulate the speed of action and therefore the pace of society. ‘‘Contemporary ideas about promptness would have been incomprehensible to the vast majority of our predecessors,’’ concludes Robert Levine in his book A Geography of Time.<sup>15</sup> The Greeks, Levine explains, had two words for time: chronos and kairos. Chronos means absolute time: linear, chronological, and quantifiable. Kairos, however, means qualitative time—the time of opportunity, chance, and mischance. If you go to bed because the clock says 10:30, you are adhering to a chronological time system. If you go to sleep because you’re tired, you are following kairological or event time. We are all born with a sense of event time. Before they shifted to a more clock-based way of doing things, people listened to their bodies to tell them when to do things. Babies, so much in touch with their internal needs, are perfect examples of humans tuned to kairological time. The clash between personal time flow (getting food, going home) and the public time flow (standing in a queue) is experienced as disturbing. People have to continuously adjust their personal time (kairos, event time) to the public time (chronos, clock time). Public time flows are based on other people, services, or processes that have their own timing.<sup>16</sup> Excessive social speed degrades social quality. The religious calendar, interestingly, incorporated long periods of slowness, of waiting, such as Advent and Lent. The costs of speed are not just environmental. We also pay a social and personal price. Remember Henry David Thoreau’s famous dictum, ‘‘we don’t ride on the railroad, it rides on us’’?<sup>17</sup> For one thing, we work longer hours in a speed society. The more the speed, the less the time. The U.S.