According to the psychologist David Winnicott, the loss of temporality engendered by modern life is also a feature of psychotic and deprived individuals who have lost the ability to connect the past with the present. The bridging of the present into the past, and into the future, says Winnicott, is a crucial dimension of psychic integration and health. By scrambling our mind-and-body clocks, speed society creates the preconditions for psychosis.<sup>24</sup> Sociability, too, suffers at speed. ‘‘A rapid pace of life virtually requires a disregard of strangers,’’ laments Levine.<sup>25</sup> Some cultures are less well placed to resist than others. The English language, for example, has no word with a positive connotation to describe lingering on the street; we have at our disposal only negative words like ‘‘loitering.’’ Italians, on the other hand, speak of dolce farniente, which, loosely translated, means ‘‘sweet doing nothing’’—a nonactivity that is highly treasured in some cultures as a productive and creative force. The Kabyle people in Algeria, the sociologist Pierre Bourdieu discovered, despise any semblance of haste in their social affairs and refer to the clock as ‘‘the devil’s mill.’’<sup>26</sup> For the Kelantese people of the Malay Peninsula, an emphasis on slowness is deeply embedded in their beliefs about right and wrong, and haste is considered a breach of ethics. ‘‘At the core of this ethical code,’’ writes Levine, ‘‘is a willingness to take the time for social obligations, for visiting and paying respects to friends, relatives and neighbours.’’<sup>27</sup> Critiques of speed by writers like Robert Levine and Jeremy Rifkin follow a long tradition. Complaints about speed occur throughout the modern age. In a book about the first industrial age cities in England, Building Jerusalem, the historian Tristram Hunt gives dozens of examples of writers complaining about speed. ‘‘How men are hurried here,’’ wrote Thomas Carlyle of London in 1843; ‘‘how they are hunted and terrifically chased into double-quick speed, so that in self-defence they must not stop to look at one another.’’ Alexis de Tocqueville described ‘‘crowds hurrying this way and that, their looks preoccupied and their appearance sombre and harsh.’’<sup>28</sup> In 1881, George Beard published American Nervousness, in which he introduced the term ‘‘neurasthenia’’ to describe a new mental illness caused by the increased tempo of life made possible by the telegraph, railroads, and steam power.<sup>29</sup> Beard deplored the fact that a businessmen could conduct one hundred times more transactions in a given period than could his eighteenth-century predecessor. Other nineteenth-century medical experts