also warned that the acceleration of life, the use of the telephone, and the ‘‘annihilation of space and time’’ experienced by early train travelers would cause ‘‘serious mental degeneration.’’<sup>30</sup> In the 1930s, according to Hunt, Byron referred to London as a ‘‘Babylon,’’ a chaotic labyrinth of the jabbering and the jostling. All this sounds quaint today. But the fact remains that we have been talking about the negative impacts of speed for nearly two hundred years—but have not taken effective remedial action. ## From Clock Time to Real Time Time scarcity has always been a feature of industrial life, but the Internet has ratcheted up the pressure. Clock time is being supplanted by Internetenabled ‘‘real time.’’ The probable author of this term, at least in a business context, is Don Tapscott. Tapscott began discussing the real-time enterprise in his 1992 book Paradigm Shift and fully developed the idea in The Digital Economy. He wrote in 1995 that ‘‘the new economy is a real time economy. Commerce becomes electronic as business transactions and communications occur at the speed of light rather than the post office. The new enterprise is a real time enterprise—continuously and immediately adjusting to changing business conditions.’’<sup>31</sup> The growth of networked communications has accelerated the emergence of an always-on, 24/7 society whose premise is that if anything can happen anytime, it should happen now. The drive toward real time has its origins in attempts by large companies to integrate their global systems in space and time. They are wiring up digital nervous systems that connect everything involved in their operations: information technology (IT) systems, factories, and employees, as well as suppliers, customers, and products. These processes of interconnection have names like customer relationship management (CRM), enterprise resource management (ERM), and supply chain integration (SCI). As Ludwig Siegele wrote in The Economist in 2002, these companies are collecting data from any point in space or time where a customer ‘‘touches’’ a company— such as a store, a call center, or a website; their aim is to develop ‘‘dashboards’’ that will use these disparate data feeds to measure key indicators, compare their performance against goals, and alert managers if a deviation becomes large enough to warrant action. ‘‘Some of the world’s biggest companies want to convert their worldwide information flows into a vast