spread-sheet—creating, not a new economy, but a ‘now economy,’ ’’ reported Siegele.<sup>32</sup> When Siegele talked to Gary Reiner, chief information officer of General Electric, he was told that the company’s most important initiative was to digitize and integrate as much of its business information as possible. I remain intrigued, but also troubled, by the idea of GE’s prototype global dashboards. The idea is troubling because it exemplifies the kind of highaltitude thinking that is divorced from the reality on the ground and therefore blind to social and environmental consequences. Vivek Ranadive, author of The Power of Now,<sup>33</sup> says that to become real time, not only must companies have an overarching spreadsheet that connects everything they do; they also need tools that can help them easily change ‘‘macros.’’ Managers confronted by rows and rows of columns need an intuitive overview of the information they really care about. Ranadive dreams of what he calls the ‘‘event-driven firm.’’ Running such a company, he says, ‘‘will be rather like running an IT system today: Machines monitor the business, solve problems by themselves, as far as possible, and alert managers when something is amiss.’’ Ranadive calls this ‘‘management by exception.’’<sup>34</sup> Real time will not necessarily be quality time. There are serious downsides to the real-time economy aspired to by firms like GE. Those of us charged with tending to the system will experience increased pressure and time compression. Real time also means low control—and is seldom free. A FedEx delivery carries with it the implied command: Act now! We lose autonomy as technology strives to render us, through its devices, always-on. Nokia reckons (and will presumably make it happen) that 70 percent of all teenagers will be in always-on mode by 2010. As I write, 60 percent of mobile workers already carry technologies that offer instant response by voice and hourly response by e-mail (mobile phones, personal digital assistants [PDAs], wearables, etc.). According to writer Danielle Gobert, an electronic performance support system (EPSS) is ‘‘an electronic environment available to and easily accessible by employees that is structured to provide on-line access to all information to permit them to do their jobs with minimal intervention by others.’’<sup>35</sup> It started with emergency workers and doctors, spread to FedEx and pizza delivery boys—but why should it stop there? The always-on schoolchild is only a matter of time. Real time also threatens to erode insight and understanding in research and innovation. Always on means no time to reflect critically on the bigger