famous for his obsession with (admittedly high-tech) sailing boats. Destinations too will now sell you the opportunity to be quiet and reflective; the market for spas and retreats is booming.<sup>40</sup> Agri-tourism is growing fast in popularity, and one-fifth of all travelers say they prefer to travel in an ecologically sound way (i.e., to practice eco-tourism).<sup>41</sup> Some transport designers are exploring forms of motion that are not tied into perpetual acceleration. Michael Douglas, an Australian designer, believes tramways are a great way to move slowly in a rich context. ‘‘Tramways curiously run against the grain of industrial logic,’’ he says. ‘‘Travelling back and forth, day in and day out, tramways help us encounter and learn about small things of value whilst participating in the larger choreography of a city’s metabolism.’’ Many tram systems were eliminated from cities during years of car-oriented urban planning since the 1950s, but they are now coming back. Douglas, in a project called Tramjatra, based in Melbourne and Kolkota, celebrates their cultural, as well as functional, value. ‘‘In our enthusiasm for electronic technologies, it’s too easy to neglect the value of networks like tramways which already exist,’’ he says. ‘‘Tramways facilitate a way of knowing that is embedded in the dynamic time and place of its situation. We need to pursue design practices which weave themselves through the social fabric without damaging it.’’<sup>42</sup> Some transport planners regard Kolkota as a paragon among cities because such a high proportion of its citizens walk to and from work. It’s a great test bed for the study of pedestrian flow and human behavioral factors. For transport ecologist John Whitelegg, ‘‘Kolkota is still very much the weather vane or ‘canary in the cage’ of world transport. It is one of the finest examples in the world of an accessible city. All of the recent rhetoric about creating livable cities or sustainable cities in Europe and North America is nothing compared to the reality of Calcutta which can provide thousands of everyday destinations for its 14 million citizens within walking and rickshaw distances that can be covered in less than half an hour.’’<sup>43</sup> Compared to Kolkota’s trams and pedestrians, today’s high-speed train (HST) is a marvel of speedy travel—but also of profligate resource consumption. Fast trains are transforming the experience of space and time of thirteen million travelers who already use them each year—and of citizens who live in places where the trains deign to stop. Enormous infrastructure projects are under way, but we are only now beginning to reflect on the cultural and social consequences of it all and whether they are desirable.