To fill this gap, however belatedly, the High Speed Network Platform, an association of fifteen European regions, and Urban Unlimited, a planning firm, asked me in 2004 to organize a cultural-expert workshop on the theme ‘‘quality time.’’ I gathered together a dozen international cultural experts to help answer the question, What does it mean to design for fast and slow speeds in a city or town about to be transformed by the arrival of the high-speed train? ## Fast Trains, Slow Food The aim was to develop project ideas for services and situations that connect people, cultural resources, and places in new combinations. Food, for some reason, dominated our discussions of quality time. Slow Food has grown into a large-scale international movement, with over sixty thousand members in all five continents.<sup>44</sup> Debra Solomon, an artist-chef based in Amsterdam, persuaded our group that slow food and quality time are linked in cities everywhere. Solomon herself had just returned from working with dumpling vendors in Nanjing, China, and street food sellers in Bangalore, India. Systems for the distribution of organic and seasonal slow food are emerging everywhere, it turned out—even in the speediest cities. Organic produce, products of certified origin, and fresh, natural, seasonal produce are becoming easier to find throughout all metropolitan areas. Often these are accompanied by attempts—parallel to the ones seen in logistics—to make the whole line of production and distribution more visible. Some organic fruit and vegetable home delivery organizations (e.g., Odin in Holland, Aarstiderne in Denmark, and Le Campanier in Paris; a similar service is provided by Handan Organic Vegetables in China) connect the producer directly to the end user, providing a delivery service for seasonal fruit and vegetables. Subscribers receive a weekly crate of fruit and vegetables, the contents of which vary according to the season and what has actually been harvested. A particularly interesting collaboration network enables Bombay Lunch Delivery in Bombay. This initiative organizes the daily distribution of thousands of home-cooked meals produced by the wives of employees in offices throughout the city. The success of the service is due to the organization of its underlying structure. A network of ‘‘meal porters’’ (the dabbawallah) acts as a link between the wives who cook the meals and their husbands working in the offices; each pays a monthly subscription for the service