## The Nemawashi Factor Modern organizations need to learn quickly about changes in their core technologies and also about shifts in their environments. Fast perception —being quick on the uptake—is vital. But when it comes to action, different tempos can apply. As my friend Kayoko Ota once told me, the Japanese refer to the creation of trust through time as nemawashi. Originally a horticultural word that means ‘‘to turn the roots’’ prior to replanting—or, by implication, ‘‘laying the groundwork’’—nemawashi has come to mean the process by which groups in Japan develop the shared understanding without which nothing much gets done.<sup>51</sup> This matters to businesspeople in Japan because if trust has been established between people, it takes less effort to reach a consensus in regard to any issue. As I show in chapter 6, on conviviality, dialogue and encounter are the inescapable basis of trust in our relationships with one another, and technology-enabled disintermediation can support but not supplant that time-based fact. I’m not sure nemawashi is uniquely Japanese; many recent surveys report that stress and unhappiness have increased among office workers in the West during the same years that ‘‘disintermediation’’ and other forms of automation have been on the increase. Time is a key issue for the information society—but perpetual acceleration is not a given. The accelerated innovation of new tools is of diminished importance if the quality of relationships among the people who use them is where the real value resides. Trust accrues through time and is built during encounter and interaction between people; it cannot be digitized, and it cannot be rushed. ‘‘People will only pay for what is scarce, personal, customized, tangible, nonreproducible,’’ says Esther Dyson, one of the wisest of the Internet gurus; ‘‘intellectual value is often simply the presence of other people, specific ones, interacting casually or formally or both. The key success factors are presence, time, attention . . . what you sell is interaction with your company.’’<sup>52</sup> Social capital takes time to grow. Local knowledge cannot be imported from somewhere else in a Boeing 747. ## From Velocity to Virtuosity: Design Principles for Speed Acceleration weighs us down. Always on means seldom free. But the design challenge now is not to design slow systems to replace fast ones. ‘‘Braking’’