measures, such as reducing speed on highways from 120 to 90 kilometers per hour, or reducing the beats in music from ninety-eight beats per minute to sixty, simply substitute one inflexible regime of control for another. A return to ‘‘natural’’ time is not an option. The coming of computers and networks has seen to that. We have filled the world with complex systems that won’t function without clocks and schedules. It’s too late, now, to get rid of them. We have to be smarter and more flexible than that. A combination of natural and machine time is feasible if we imagine technical systems as an infrastructure that we use, but are not controlled by. Jeremy Rifkin, in Time Wars, anticipates a variegated ‘‘temporal spectrum’’ with empathetic rhythms on one pole and power rhythms at the other. ‘‘Those aligning themselves with the power time frame are committed to the values of efficiency and speed that characterize the ‘time is money’ dogma of the modern industrial age. Supporters of the empathetic time frame argue against these artificial time frames and seek to redirect human consciousness towards a more empathetic union with the rhythms of nature.’’<sup>53</sup> We cannot delete technology from the world, but it is within our powers to reverse-engineer the spatialization of time and to separate time, speed, and distance. One way is to change the word ‘‘faster’’ to ‘‘closer’’ in our design briefs for cities and transport systems. In chapter 3, I show how wireless communications, in combination with modern logistics systems, make it possible to reduce the distance between people who need things and people who can meet those needs. Dynamic resource allocation—in which the resource may be a power drill or a drill sergeant—is the basis for a speedtime situation better adapted to the rhythms of individuals. The design challenge is not to slow everything down, but to enable situations that support an infinite variety of fast and slow moves—at a rhythm dictated by us, not by the system. Ivan Illich described the speed issue as a prison, out of which there is no exit, when it’s presented as an either/or choice: ‘‘We discuss fast and slow, endurable and destructive speed. We fantasise about becoming ‘slowbies.’ We speak of the good life as a slow life. But it’s not about being fast versus being slow. It’s about being Here, being Now, being—and that is the English word—Quick. You know what the word ‘quickening’ meant: the first kick of a baby in the belly of a woman. ‘Quickening’ meant: coming alive, quick. We might be already be-