yond the age of speed by having moved into the age of—and I say the word with a certain trembling—‘real time.’ The move toward real-time is one way out of the world of speed.’’<sup>54</sup> Slowness does not have to be a drag on innovation. Products and services that incorporate selective slowness, and that are consistent with economic growth and continued technical innovation, are already being developed. ## Slow Wash A project by Whirlpool exemplifies multiple-speed design. Few industries are as competitive and no-nonsense as the white-goods industry, with its do-alike and look-alike refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, and the like. But Whirlpool Europe’s ambitious design director, Richard Eisermann, was determined to rethink the clothes-washing process as a whole, including aspects of its ‘‘social speed.’’ In Project F, the notion of washing as a social event is emphasized, and a notion of ‘‘clean’’ has emerged that involves more than just hygiene or a process for eliminating dirt. ‘‘Clean’’ is linked to a feeling of well-being. ‘‘We all feel the need to slow down sometimes, to tune into natural rhythms, connect more fully with our actions, add quality to our experiences,’’ Eisermann told me. ‘‘When we spend time over a task, it shows. If we take things slowly, and step outside set schedules and routines to seek independent cycles, we find continuity.’’<sup>55</sup> Project F is informed by insights into new ways of living explored by Francesco Morace, a Milan-based researcher. Morace is fascinated by ‘‘the new domesticity.’’ His investigation into the changing social contexts in which we wash clothes began with an open exploration of the washing process and of new relationships among products, spaces, and humans involved in it: ‘‘Container þ Water þ Detergent þ Agitation ¼ Clean.’’ Teams of designers then proposed scenarios for every aspect of the process. Tactile, organic forms, inspired by the body, emulated the softness of human touch. Nanotechnology was exploited in semitransparent, iconic shapes to provide a ‘‘waterless approach to washing.’’ And hydroponic purification of water was coupled with fuel cell technology to provide a ‘‘slow wash’’ approach called BioLogic, based on natural principles of regeneration and efficiency. Nature transforms sunlight, carbon dioxide,