water, and nutrients into action: plant germination, growth, and the production of oxygen. It is a slow, steady process, but it is auto-regenerative and chemically efficient. Morace explained that ‘‘BioLogic is a design that embodies a sense of care. Being based on cyclical principles, it grants the necessary time for system regeneration while keeping harmful by-products to a minimum.’’<sup>56</sup> BioLogic uses phitodepuration (a technique to clean used waters, which are first separated according to their different origin, that relies on aquatic and earthly plants—and time—rather than on strong chemicals and speedy but energy-guzzling electromechanical processes) with hydroponic plants to renew wash water and fuel cells for power. A self-contained receptacle containing clothes is low to the ground and emphasizes the ‘‘garden effect’’: One tends to one’s wash as one would tend to one’s garden. Instead of a single wash drum, the wash load is distributed to a number of wash pods, allowing for continuous, overlapping cycles. Loads of various sizes can be simultaneously accommodated, and washing can take place as the need arises. A pod may be easily removed, loaded, and replaced at any time. Rather than remaining an isolated event in a more or less anonymous box, washing recaptures its lost significance and becomes part of an ongoing process that can take place anyplace in the home. In this way, BioLogic creates space, rather than just occupying it. The sound of gently flowing water, the scent of the plants, and the glow of lights: All make for a product experienced through the senses and emotions. ## Fluid Time Another project, Fluid Time, is an infrastructure to enable multiple speeds in a variety of services. Most of us pass many hours a week waiting for things to happen: waiting to see the doctor, waiting for a bus to arrive, or waiting for a package to be delivered. Waiting occurs when our personal time schedules do not coincide with the schedules of the people and services with whom and with which we interact. Because both people and services are in constant flux, precise appointment times are not the most useful means of coordination. When people are provided with continuously updated time information about a service or appointment, the activity of waiting becomes more tolerable. With accurate time information,