people can adjust their behavior accordingly and take control of how they wish to spend their time. The unpredictable nature of events requires a more flexible system of time than the published schedule. Fluid Time, which was conceived by Michael Kieslinger at Interaction Design Institute Ivrea, in Italy, explores the creation of a wireless-based service structure that links people to dynamic, personalized time information about public services and private appointments.<sup>57</sup> Using the capacity of pervasive computing networks to deliver real-time information to remote locations, the service delivers accurate time information where and when people need it. The project investigates a new way of interacting with time; instead of arranging appointments in reference to the clock, Fluid Time users flexibly arrange and adjust their appointments by coordinating their own schedules with the availability of the services they are seeking. By connecting people to critical time-based information, the service supports flexible time planning according to personal needs. By accessing data in real time, the system delivers accurate information about when and where a desired service might be available. Accurate, dynamic information has a dramatic advantage over traditional static schedules. A system that accesses information in real time should be able to deliver accurate information about dynamic services. Fluid Time works with the unpredictable nature of events, constantly updating users with the most recent, most accurate time information on the availability of services such as transportation, delivery, or health. Relevant, personalized information is an important characteristic of the service. Users should not have to search through dozens of train schedules if they are only interested in a single line. Similarly, they should receive truly personalized information about their doctor’s appointments, dry cleaning, and other services. As companies compete for the attention of their customers, they are discovering that more information is not necessarily better. People need information that is relevant to their unique situation. New technologies such as 3G and Bluetooth enable the delivery of such demandresponsive, location-sensitive information. The potential markets for Fluid Time–type platforms is enormous. To take just one example: A better time regime is a key factor in the modernization of costly public services, which account for up to 65 percent of the economy in industrialized countries. A 2004 survey by Britain’s National Health