## Tempo Design Music has always helped us find a balance between fast and slow, event time and clock time, up time and down time. Ragtime, the English writer Charles Leadbeater reminds us, marked the start of the acceleration of music to match the acceleration of industry: ‘‘jazz was followed by boogiewoogie, rock and roll, disco, punk, techno and house—the latter racing along at 200 beats a minute.’’<sup>61</sup> We make music as a response to tempo— but also to regulate tempo. The introduction of the metronome into music marked the first clash between technology and culture around the issue of speed. A young colleague of Ivan Illich, Matthias Rieger, discovered that in preindustrial times, musical tempo was provoked by the setting—a special event, a place, a type of work or action. Work songs were related to the rhythm of the work; the tempo of dance music to the acoustic of the place and, of course, to the mood of the dancers and musicians. Tempo indication began to be used only in the early years of the seventeenth century. Composers started to use Italian time words like adagio (‘‘at ease’’), allegro (‘‘cheerful’’), or presto (‘‘quick’’). These time words did not, at that point, refer to an externally prescribed, measured time that could be expressed by units per minute. Although the metronome became common in the early nineteenth century, other nontechnical ways to give hints for the right tempo persisted: One was the use of the musician’s pulse as a measure—a method first mentioned in the sixteenth century by an Italian monk named Zaccini. The metronome itself, which was invented in 1812 by the Dutch technician Nicolaus Winkler, shocked Beethoven when he listened to the first performances of his music that followed his metronome indications. ‘‘He tried to change [the prescribed settings] several times,’’ says Rieger, ‘‘but finally—and he was not the only composer—he came to the conclusion that the usage of measured tempo made no sense in music.’’<sup>62</sup> Rieger’s account of the tension between externally measured tempo and instinctual tempo then shifts from Beethoven to belly dancing and a story about a young drummer (who narrates the story), his teacher Ali, and a belly dancer called Abla: ‘‘This is very interesting,’’ Ali said to me with a sly smile. ‘‘Come on, take your drum and let us try to reflect on the concept of ‘speed’ with the help of Abla. Take your drum and just play a simple rhythm. Abla will dance with you. See if you can get