## Why Mobility Matters Modern mobility comes with a price, but the price tag is seldom visible, and we seldom pay it—or not directly. Its costs are hidden. Not only is transport expensive in time and money to the user, but it involves such external costs as accidents, traffic congestion, air pollution, climate change, noise, and hidden infrastructure costs. In Europe, these add up to more than 6 percent of gross domestic product (GDP).<sup>1</sup> As global systems, air, rail, and road travel are greedy in their use of space, matter, and energy. The city of Los Angeles, for example, which is owned by the car, is a city of paved surfaces. The surface area of its road network, at 1,400 square kilometers, is far greater than that of its city center, at 880 square kilometers. Air travel is just as bad.<sup>2</sup> London’s Heathrow Airport, the world’s busiest in terms of international passengers, covers twelve hundred hectares, an area four times the size of London’s Square Mile financial center.<sup>3</sup> It’s a moot point whether either of these plots of land is productive in a sustainability sense, but at least the money people seem to need far less space to do their thing. There is no international agreement on how to measure the matter and energy burden imposed by aviation, but a clever organization called CLiPP (Climate Protection Partnership), which sells ‘‘climate tickets,’’ reckons we should all pay roughly 6.5 euros (8 dollars) per hour flown in order to fund projects that foster the use of renewable energies or more efficient uses of energy.<sup>4</sup> Aircraft manufacturers have promised to halve pollution from their aircraft by 2010—but air traffic as a whole will probably triple by then, meaning that the environmental impact of aviation will rise 50 percent.<sup>5</sup> In Europe, where five hundred million passengers fly a year, and there are already twenty-eight thousand flights each day during the peak season, fewer than 8 percent of Europeans have ever been in an aircraft.<sup>6</sup> Traffic growth seems bound to overwhelm any per-passenger resource efficiency gains the industry might achieve. One hundred years since the first manned flight, roughly four hundred commercial flights operate each day in India. That sounds like a lot, but in the United States, with one-fourth of India’s population, there are forty thousand flights a day. If India were to emulate the U.S. economy, as its leaders say they intend to do, today’s four hundred flights would rise fourhundred-fold to one hundred sixty thousand a day. Promoters of low-cost