air travel in India are salivating at that prospect, but environmentalists pray that far fewer of the 5.5 million Indians who now take the train each year will take to the skies as the economy grows. Eurocontrol estimates, conservatively in this context, that air passenger numbers will double by 2015.<sup>7</sup> Predict-and-provide thinking drives plans for new airports and more planes. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (better known as NASA) has developed scenarios under which the number of aircraft departures in the United States would increase—from today’s thirty-seven million (including general aviation) to five hundred million a year.<sup>8</sup> Does that sound sustainable? We Europeans are proud of our high-speed trains and believe them to be far more environmentally friendly than aircraft. But we’re wrong. Highspeed trains are not a light alternative. A total of forty-eight kilograms (about a hundred pounds) of solid primary resources is needed for one passenger to travel one hundred kilometers by Germany’s high-speed train. Life-cycle researchers at Martin Luther University used materials flow analysis and life cycle analysis to study the construction, use, and disposal of the system’s rail infrastructure. They measured everything: the running costs of train retrofitting factories, the gasoline used by passengers getting to the station, even the provision of drinking water. They added these to numbers for the carbon dioxide emissions, cumulative energy demand, and so on to derive a ‘‘material input per service unit,’’ or MIPS, for train service. The energy demands of the traction process—actually moving the train—dominate the system’s life cycle, but the construction of tunnels and heating rail track points during winter also impose a significant cost.<sup>9</sup> Cars do more environmental and social damage than air and train combined. In 1950 there were 60 million of them in the world; by 2000, when I started writing this book, their number had grown to 535 million.<sup>10</sup> We are now traveling 50 percent more than we did twenty years ago as a result. The average German citizen now drives fifteen thousand kilometers a year; in 1950, she covered just two thousand kilometers. But few car owners have a choice in the matter. Much of this travel involves commuting and work-related travel that we cannot avoid. The time costs are severe. One hour of mobility a day over a working year of 220 days adds up to a vacation missed of five to six weeks. Add in the money you have to earn to do this commuting and the costs are higher.