‘‘Time is money, we are told, and increasing mobility is a way of saving time,’’ says economist John Whitelegg, ‘‘but how successful are modern transport systems at saving time?’’ If air travel, or commuting by car, is any guide, the answer appears to be: not very.<sup>11</sup> In fact, the faster we go the less time we feel we have. Intrigued by Ivan Illich’s time analyses in the 1970s, the German sociologist D. Seifried coined the term ‘‘social speed’’ to signify the average speed of a vehicle (and its passengers) after all sorts of hidden time costs are factored in. So in addition to ‘‘getting to the airport’’ time—and waiting time once you get there—Seifried reminds us about the time spent earning the money to go on the journey in the first place. Some urban designers have introduced the concept of time planning to take account of these hidden costs of travel. Air travel purists, wedded to the fantasy that air travel denotes fast and efficient mobility, face worse disillusion ahead. London’s Gatwick Airport has developed a forty-million-dollar airport theme park whose target is one million people a year—‘‘travelers’’ whose only destination is the airport itself. Only a small proportion of the growth in car use during the past fifty years has come from people transferring to the roads from public transport. According to a British expert, Mayer Hillman of the Policy Studies Institute, for every passenger mile ‘‘lost’’ by public transport because of people’s moving to transport by car, twenty-five car user miles are added by geographically spread patterns of activity: urban sprawl, distributed production, modern logistics, taking children to distant schools. Says Hillman, ‘‘Car-based journeys cannot be replaced by public transport, however much money is thrown at it. Rail travel, for example, accounts for only 1 percent of all journeys in the United Kingdom. If we are to minimize the ecological depredations of excessive fuel use, we have to end the ‘further, faster’ culture. The transport sector should receive less money, not more.’’<sup>12</sup> As we saw in chapter 2, despite the perpetual expansion of time-saving travel, many of us feel more pressured by the lack of time than before. ‘‘We may travel at greater speeds, but we work, eat, sleep, and play in much the same proportions as before. We simply do these things farther apart from one another,’’ explains John Whitelegg.<sup>13</sup> Spending time on distance, we travel billions of miles by train and plane for our work, and more again on vacation. Everyday shopping is highly transport intensive: Travel-