ing to shop usually takes far longer than doing it. On average, a Stockholm family saves two and a half hours for every delivery of groceries made by teleshopping—that’s ten hours a month for the average family.<sup>14</sup> Predict-and-provide planning persists in part because its negative consequences have not been seen or felt. From the crest of a hill on that stretch of the Languedocienne motorway I was traveling in France, I could see about three thousand trucks. But they were the visible part of a much bigger flow of traffic: Thirty thousand trucks pass along that road every day. The volume of goods transported by road between Spain and Portugal and the rest of Europe, I later discovered, had more than tripled during the ten years before I made that trip.<sup>15</sup> The volume of this vast flow is expected to grow as new EU member countries in Eastern Europe, and those of the Maghreb Region of Northern Africa, are plugged into the supply web. A similar pattern is found around the globe. Throughout the world, but on roads that I could not see from that hill, 244 million containers are moving around, or standing in yards, or waiting to be delivered, at any one time. If all these containers were placed end to end, the line would stretch to the moon and back eight times.<sup>16</sup> Their contents account for about 90 percent of the world’s traded cargo by value.<sup>17</sup> In other words, 85 percent of all the goods and materials in the world are not in factories or shops, but moving, or waiting to move—on the road, in the air, or on the sea.<sup>18</sup> Moving all this stuff around is a huge industry in its own right. Business logistics costs in the United States amount to more than 10 percent of GDP.<sup>19</sup> Oil companies are criticized for waste, but they are but one set of actors in a mobility industry that employs armies of planners and consultants, transport engineers and road builders, vehicle designers and car manufacturers, and myriad small firms making everything from gas cans and crash barriers to road signs and the sandwiches sold at gas stations. Millions of people are employed in hotels, airports, and railway stations. Mobility is probably the world’s largest market for high-tech equipment and software, too: Logistical networks, of the kind that enable the flow of goods that I saw on the Languedocienne, could not exist without the Internet. Logistics is the nerves and blood vessels of today’s overweight economy. In industries ranging from electronic components, consumer electronics, mobile phones, personal computers, and pharmaceuticals to fashion, food, and cars, logistics capability can make the difference between success and