failure. The average car contains ten thousand different parts, for example, and bad logistics in regard to the production of those parts can mean expensive products sitting idle for up to one hundred days in a field. Parts manufacturers are working hard to reduce that idle time, but their task is complicated: At Ford’s Toronto plant, which produces fifteen hundred Windstar minivans a day, logistics company TPG orchestrates eight hundred deliveries a day from three hundred different parts makers. Parts are loaded onto trucks at the point of supply in prearranged sequences in order to speed unloading at the assembly line. Loads arrive at twelve different points along the assembly line without ever being more than ten minutes late. It takes two hundred computer-wielding operations planners to orchestrate the ballet.<sup>20</sup> The more the movement, the less the waste. Many firms aspire to build ‘‘only to order’’ (OTO), rather than guess what will be in demand and then supply it from accumulated stocks. Obsolescence—products’ becoming unsellable before they reach the market—can account for 40 percent of inventory carrying costs. Eighty percent of toy sales, for example, occur in a period of just forty-five days, the Christmas period, so a lot of work goes into improving the visibility of inventory throughout the supply chain.<sup>21</sup> A popular metaphor is that of a retail ‘‘glass pipeline’’ that affords an enterprise total visibility of products: the ability to identify, in real time, where inventory is and how much of it exists. This kind of visibility is expensive: It takes major investments in systems for enterprise resource planning, transportation and warehouse management, tagging, tracking, tracing, and communications technologies to improve visibility and, ideally, control and responsiveness. The use of radio frequency (RF) tags and the Internet is significantly improving supply chain management. Taken together, RF tags and software agents are revolutionizing inventory control in manufacturing and distribution. Transponders on product packages can communicate with devices in factories or warehouses, enabling companies to know precisely where things are in space at any given time. Organizations such as Daimler-Chrysler and Southwest Airlines are using early versions of intelligent agents to cut logistics costs still further. Logistics is the incarnation of real and virtual worlds combined. In logistics, information technology, data, and stuff are as one. Companies that once ran fleets of trucks now run fleets of information systems, too. Companies like FedEx, United Parcel Service (UPS), and Deutsche Post World