of mobility is unsustainable. That assertion is not just the opinion of green activists. A recent report by twelve global automotive and energy companies concluded that if today’s mobility trends continue, the social, economic, and environmental costs worldwide will be unacceptably high.<sup>30</sup> Historical data suggest that, throughout the world, personal income and traffic volume grow in tandem. The average North American earned \$9,600 and traveled 12,000 kilometers in 1960; by 1990, both per capita income and traffic volume had roughly doubled.<sup>31</sup> Another way to measure mobility is in terms of distance traveled per passenger. The average distance traveled by each of the Earth’s inhabitants in 1950 was 1,334 passenger kilometers—equivalent to a daily commute of 3.6 kilometers per person. By 2000, that number had grown to 4,781 kilometers per year, or more than 13 kilometers per person per day. If the world does get steadily richer, and mobility rises continuously pro rata, traffic volume in North America will rise to 58,000 passenger kilometers per person per year by 2050.<sup>32</sup> The travel time budget is typically between 1.0 and 1.5 hours per person per day in a wide variety of economic, social, and geographic settings. The difference is that the resident of an African village will spend much of that time walking, whereas by 2050, if nothing changes, I will often be sitting in a high-speed train. The average North American will spend most of her 1.1 hours of travel time in 2050 in a car—much as she does now.<sup>33</sup> These trends look impossible to change until one remembers that everyday mobility is a recent phenomenon. We have been commuting, driving to shops, or traveling on business or on vacation only for the last hundred years. There is no evidence that long-distance mobility is a basic human instinct. I return to this important point later. ## Design Strategy 2: Mobility Substitution An alternative to predict and provide, mobility substitution, once seemed promising. Many of us thought that so-called telepresence—traveling on highways of the mind—could replace the highways of traffic jams, pollution, and road rage. The arguments seemed persuasive during the 1990s: Matter is more expensive than energy; energy is more expensive than information; it is almost infinitely cheaper to move information than people or things; so why not fly less and communicate more? Why go in person when you can e-mail, or call, or videoconference? Nicholas Negroponte, founder of MIT’s Media Lab, immortalized this approach as ‘‘atoms to