room that blends physical with virtual objects that can be manipulated. A tracker, composed of markers worn on the body, is used to record the position of the users. One company developed 3-D whole-body scanners that took hundreds of thousands of measurements of the human body in just a few seconds. In Europe, a project called Populate planned to develop a service, using this technology, in which likenesses of people—avatars—would represent people in ‘‘inhabited information spaces.’’ The idea was that your humanoid avatars would be captured in avatar booths, similar to the way you can get your passport photo taken in booths in railway stations today. Having digitized your whole body, you would be able to send it out onto the Internet on your behalf, where it would meet and hang out with other avatars. The project was nicknamed ‘‘Immortality ’R Us’’ by fellow researchers. Hiroshi Ishii at MIT’s Media Lab is a leading critic of ‘‘being there’’–ness as a strategic aim of telcos. Ishii points out that the human eye has something like forty million receptors in it. Many millions more receptors are to be found in our ears, up our noses, in our skin, and on our tongues. (There are dense clusters of receptors elsewhere on the body, too—but this book has a family readership, so I will not dwell on those.) Even if you could capture the smells, sounds, tastes, and feel of a place, digitize them, and send them down a wire, you’d still never get near the sensation of ‘‘being there.’’ Why? Because we humans are not so dumb. Our minds and our bodies are one intelligence. ## Tele-Hugs Won’t Do It ‘‘Most of what we experience, we can never tell each other about,’’ says the Danish science writer Tor Norretranders. ‘‘During any given second, we consciously process only sixteen of the eleven million bits of information that our senses pass on to our brains [see table 3.1]. Subliminal perception—perception that occurs without conscious awareness—is not an anomaly, but the norm. Most of what we perceive in the world comes not from conscious observation, but from a continuous process of unconscious scanning, our senses having been censored so that our lives can flow more easily. In other words, the conscious part of us receives much less information than the unconscious part of us. We experience millions of bits a second but can tell each other about only a few dozen.’’ Humans, says