Table 3.1 Information flow in sensory systems and conscious perception
<table><tr><td>Sensory system</td><td>Total bandwidth (bits/s)</td><td>Conscious bandwidth (bits/s)</td></tr><tr><td>Eyes</td><td>10,000,000</td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td>Ears</td><td>100,000</td><td>30</td></tr><tr><td>Skin</td><td>1,000,000</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Taste</td><td>1,000</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Smell</td><td>100,000</td><td>1</td></tr></table> Source: Tor Norretranders, The User Illusion: Cutting Consciousness Down to Size (New York: Viking, 1998). Norretranders, are designed for a much richer existence than processing a dribble of data from a computer screen. There is far too little information, he concludes, in the so-called information age.<sup>34</sup> ‘‘Consciousness is our shallowest sensation,’’ concurs the philosopher John Gray. ‘‘Being embodied is our nature as earth-born creatures.’’<sup>35</sup> The danger in our infatuation with digital communication is that we feel compelled to reduce all human knowledge and experience to symbolic form. As a result, we undervalue the knowledge and experience that we have by virtue of having bodies. Hubert Dreyfus, another philosopher, puts it more poetically: ‘‘Telepresence is an oxymoron. Tele-hugs won’t do it.’’<sup>36</sup> When we persist in trying to substitute virtual experiences for embodied ones, we end up with the worst of both worlds. Digitization speeds the flow of data, but impoverishes our lived experience. Face-to-face communication is not the only type of communication that counts. The telephone, after all, is a form of virtual realty—and it’s a powerful medium that delivers a satisfactory sense of connection to billions of people everyday: POTS, they call it in the trade—or ‘‘plain old telephone service’’—and POTS has been a workable mobility substitute for three generations now. But like the Internet, although it substitutes for some mobility, it stimulates a lot more. There are more interesting tasks for design than the use of brute bandwidth to achieve ‘‘being there’’ verisimilitude. The communication quality of cyberspace can be enhanced by artful and indirect means. In a project called The Poetics of Telepresence, British designers Tony Dunne and Fiona Raby looked at the potential fusing of physical and telematic space. They