were inspired by the social science of proxemics, which looks at how different spatial relationships—standing close, standing apart, eavesdropping— change the tenor of the ways we communicate. Dunne and Raby asked themselves, why should videoconferencing always be face to face? and developed alternative scenarios. Dunne and Raby asked, why limit contact to speech, or sight? Why not use radio to trigger heat devices remotely? In one such scenario, each person sits inside a box in which the weather of the other person’s country is represented. Temperature is highly evocative of the body: To re-create an intimate atmosphere of copresence with another body, why not make the area one is occupying warm? I particularly like their idea of a ‘‘hot air’’ button on my telephone that would enable me to politely let the person at the other end know she or he is talking nonsense. Big telcos tend to emphasize ‘‘purposive’’ communication. The result is all those ghastly television advertisements that feature dynamic businesspeople making deals over mobile telephones. But in addition to the subliminal consciousness described by Norretranders, a lot of important social communication is informal and happens by chance. Just as in the brain, intense activity takes place in liminal parts of the cortex that researchers barely understand but know are important, so too in offices, space designers now perceive the water cooler or coffee machine to be about as important as the boardroom or personal desk as a communication nexus. Wondering why similar serendipitous spaces could not also be enabled in cyberspace, Dunne and Raby came up with telecommunications moments that allow people to ‘‘bump into’’ other people in distant spaces. Design researchers have looked at other aspects of indirect and lowbandwidth, but nonetheless valuable, communication. During face-to-face communication, our body acts as a medium that transforms our internal emotions into external signals: actions, expressions, gestures, postures, attitudes, and voice intonation. Other physiological manifestations such as blood pressure, heart rate, and pupillary responses also work more than we realize—but mainly in proximity through direct physical contact or special monitoring devices. In a project called Faraway, designers at the Interaction Design Institute Ivrea in Italy looked at long-distance communication between loved ones who are physically distant, but emotionally close. The idea was to increase the sense of presence of a loved person across