Digital playgrounds are another situation in which we will tolerate impoverished forms of presence. We are willing to pay theme park operators a dollar a minute so that we can experience sophisticated simulations. This market (plus the military) is a major source of support for presence researchers around the world. These researchers are testing a wide array of different devices for interacting with virtual worlds: computerized clothing that recognizes physical gestures as commands; systems that track the movements of the body; trackballs and joysticks that allow movement of perspective; devices that allow interaction with 3-D objects such as a bat, wand, and glove; feedback devices that use force, pressure, or vibration; and remote-operation systems that translate human movements into the control of machinery. Today’s head-mounted displays are bulky and have low levels of resolution, but developers promise that before too long, tiny microlasers will scan pictures directly onto the retina of the eye, thereby enabling us to see detailed virtual worlds with the comfort of sunglasses and the clarity of natural vision.<sup>39</sup> So-called fakespace systems will themselves be augmented by temperature, touch, pneumatics, trackballs with ‘‘contextual motor feedback,’’ and various olfactory interfaces. A displaced temperature-sensing system, which Dunne and Raby dreamed about in 1998, is currently being built. It enables you to feel the temperature of a remote location—real or unreal—as if you were there. With socalled haptic interface devices, a user can also feel the motion, shape, resistance, and surface texture of simulated objects. Telerobotic manipulators, which incorporate actuation, sensor, and control technologies, permit us to achieve dextrous manipulation in remote or hazardous environments. A company called Cyrano Sciences claims to be able to digitize smell.<sup>40</sup> And acoustigraphic environments now combine 3-D sound systems with stereoscopic head-mounted displays. Ambient and localized sounds are coordinated with graphical representations and with the movements of the participant. You hear the sounds of traffic in the distance and wind rustling the leaves of nearby trees. You listen to each fish tell a tale as it swims through a musical stream. As computing suffuses everything around us, a new relationship is emerging between the real and the virtual, the artificial and the natural, the mental and the material.<sup>41</sup> But many design questions about the qualities we need to make the new hybridity work remain unanswered. Judith Donath, for example, who leads the Sociable Media Group at MIT’s Media