Lab, counsels that technology that mediates our interaction with other people—chat rooms, e-mail, videoconferencing, etc.—still restricts the range of social cues that act as social glue and guide our behavior.<sup>42</sup> At the Doors of Perception office in Amsterdam, for example, eight of us work in two connected rooms. We have a great team that works really well together. What did not work well was a relationship a while back that we had with a writer working from home a few miles away. He was an excellent writer—a high-tech, PowerBook-toting, mobile-always-on nomad. We, of course, were excellent clients. But somehow, things between us did not ‘‘click.’’ Despite endless phone calls and e-mails, we did not build up a momentum of understanding during a six-month editorial project. And the reason? He was not there, with us, in the office. That’s all. No amount of immersive virtual environments or multisensory interfaces would have helped us click. Another approach to mobility substitution emphasizes the decentralization of production: Send the acorn, not the tree. My favorite example concerns drinks. The weight of beer and other drinks, especially mineral water, trucked from one rich nation to another is a huge part of the freight flood that threatens to overwhelm us. But first Coca-Cola, and now a boom in microbreweries,<sup>43</sup> demonstrate a radically lighter approach: Export the recipe, and sometimes the production equipment, but source raw material, and distribute, locally. ## Design Strategy 3: From Faster to Closer Those of us who were enthralled by the potential of the Internet in its early years once hoped that teleshopping would replace trips to the mall, that air travel would give way to teleconferencing, and that digital transmission would replace the physical delivery of books and videos. Each has happened to a certain degree—but with technology serving as additions to, not replacements for, other kinds of mobility. The Internet has increased transport intensity in the economy as a whole more than it has displaced individual acts of movement. It continues to stimulate more mobility than it replaces in much the same way that roads built to relieve congestion often end up increasing traffic. Rhetorics of a ‘‘weightless’’ economy, the ‘‘death of distance,’’ and the ‘‘displacement of matter by mind’’ sound ridiculous, in retrospect. There is an alternative. The speed-obsessed com-