‘‘load balancing’’—even though the loads in question, packets of information, don’t actually weigh anything in real-world terms. Choosing a nearby country will usually result in a faster transmission. Firms optimize the delivery of data to customers by storing lumps of popular and heavy data in caches sprinkled around the world. Akamai, a cache-and-carry market leader, maintains eleven thousand such caches in sixty-two countries. By monitoring demand for each item downloaded and making more copies available in its caches when demand rises and fewer when demand falls, Akamai’s network can help to smooth out huge fluctuations in traffic. Other companies have not given up on distributed computing. Kontiki’s approach, for example, combines Akamai’s cache-and-carry approach with smart file sharing similar to that in the system invented by Napster: Users’ own computers, anywhere on the Internet, are employed as caches so that recently accessed content can be delivered quickly when needed to other users nearby on the network. The light-speed crisis favors specialized distributed processors doing their work on location—the network’s example of sending the acorn, not the tree. While investigating the subject of distributed computing, I received a flyer for a report called Colocation: A TeleGeography Guide to Power and Space. The explosion of global networks, opened markets, evolving information transmission methods, and competing information carriers has introduced a new problem: Where should the multitude of new carriers and content providers interconnect their networks? The book promised to identify and evaluate 350 ‘‘colo sites’’ in fifty cities around the world.<sup>46</sup> The cover price of the report was \$1,795—so I cannot tell you where they are—but I am able to conclude that colo sites are the information equivalent of the intersections between road and rail networks, inelegantly named ‘‘transferiums’’ in some countries, which—like airports—are now being developed as destinations in their own right. Where the Internet actually is, is in cities. Anthony Townsend, an urban planner at the Taub Urban Research Center at New York University, says that just as cities are often railway or shipping hubs, they are also the logical places to put network hubs and servers, the powerful computers that store and distribute data.<sup>47</sup> Cities are already vast information storage and retrieval systems in which different districts are organized by activity or social group. A mobile Internet device can become a way to probe local information resources. Distance between two points is one thing (and even