that matters, according to Gilder)<sup>48</sup>—but where those points are still matters a lot. Says Townsend, ‘‘mobile devices reassert geography on the internet.’’<sup>49</sup> ## The Law of Locality People and information want to be closer. When planning where to put capacity, network designers are guided by the law of locality; this law states that network traffic is at least 80 percent local, 95 percent continental, and only 5 percent intercontinental. Between 1997 and 1999, for example, 30 percent of all U.S. Internet traffic never crossed the national infrastructure but stayed within a local metropolitan network.<sup>50</sup> Someone should have mentioned the law of locality to investors before they dumped some seventy billion dollars into projects for long-haul Internet infrastructure. Only a tiny fraction of these costly fibers are currently ‘‘lit’’—as little as 3 percent by some estimates.<sup>51</sup> According to the research firm Probe Research, only 14 percent of the fiber-optic cable laid across the Atlantic to support Internet traffic may ever be needed. This is not the ‘‘death of distance’’ that the companies who laid the fiber had in mind. The assumption driving the money spent on this long-haul infrastructure was that the need for more capacity on the Internet would grow exponentially through the widespread adoption of bandwidthsucking applications such as virtual private networks and videoconferencing. The enduring popularity of the telephone is proof that high-value connectivity is not bandwidth-dependent. At the height of Napster’s popularity, in 2000, the service was using about 5 percent of the available network capacity in the United States—but no other Internet-based service has ever come near that level of usage. High-capacity networks are a fabulous technology chasing applications that do not yet exist—and may never exist. The designers of computer chips use another design rule that we can learn from: ‘‘The less the space, the more the room.’’ In silicon, the trade-off between speed and heat generated improves dramatically as size diminishes: Small transistors run faster, cooler, and cheaper. Hence the development of the so-called processor-in-memory (PIM)—an integrated circuit that contains both memory and logic on the same chip. Savings of energy and speed efficiencies operate at all scales of network topology. By using a