decentralized architecture, Napster saved six hundred million dollars in storage costs and over six million dollars per month in bandwidth expenses, according to Bear Stearns analysts Chris Kwak and Robert Fagin.<sup>52</sup> No single software application hosts all the critical data in a particular company. No single media outlet produces all the good news analysis. And no network operator controls all the access points or all the users. When our systems take advantage of the power of the network the gains usually make business sense. This design principle—‘‘the less the space, the more the room’’—is nowhere better demonstrated than in the human brain. Edward O. Wilson describes the brain’s custardlike mass as ‘‘an intricately-wired system of a hundred billion nerve cells, each a few millionths of a metre wide, and connected to other nerve cells by hundreds of thousands of endings. It comprises the equivalent of one hundred billion squids linked together. Overall the human brain is the most complicated thing in the known universe—known, that is, to itself.’’<sup>53</sup> Information transfer, Wilson explains, is improved when neuron circuits, filling specialized functions, are placed together in clusters. Examples of such clusters so far identified by neurobiologists are sensory relay stations, integrative centers, memory modules, and emotional control centers. ‘‘The ideal brain case is spherical, or close to it,’’ Wilson says. ‘‘One compelling reason is that a sphere has the smallest surface relative to volume of any geometric form—and hence provides the least access to its vulnerable interior. Another reason is that a sphere allows more circuits to be placed close together. The average length of circuits can thus be minimised, raising the speed of transmission while lowering the energy cost for their construction and maintenance.’’<sup>54</sup> ## Conclusion: Imagined Geographies Increases in mobility have a negative impact on the environment, deplete resources, are inefficient, and wear us out. Modern mobility even makes us fat. Cities in which people drive to work, school, and the food court contribute significantly to obesity.<sup>55</sup> We seem to be locked into a vicious cycle in which increased mobility both causes and is driven by geographically spread patterns of activity. In planning for mobility, we don’t even consider pedestrian time as an alternative: People walking around in a city don’t get counted as travelers. Bizarrely, nonmotorized forms of mobility