four or five thousand species of bacteria in a pinch of ordinary soil—most of them, species we don’t yet have a name for, still less an understanding of how we might need them.’’<sup>1</sup> Social contexts, too, are more complicated the closer you look. The kind of design that focuses on the shape of buildings or that draws thick lines across maps with a felt-tip pen, reconfiguring whole neighborhoods at a stroke, is not well-suited for local situations. The lesson is that design for locality is not about a return to simplicity; it involves dealing with more complexity, not less. Locality matters not just as a place to sell things, but as a medium of innovation. Social contexts, for example, determine the ease with which new ideas, trends, and social behavior spread through populations. ‘‘Once you understand that context matters,’’ writes Malcolm Gladwell, ‘‘you realize that specific and relatively small elements in the environment can serve as Tipping Points.’’<sup>2</sup> Disregard for context is one of the main reasons, for me, why the new economy failed. Dot-commers promoted ‘‘anytime, anywhere’’ over and above the here and now—and we didn’t buy it. As I explained in chapter 3, globalization brought with it numerous assertions that economic power is less and less rooted in a place. Distance is dead, geography is obsolete, the pundits declared. They argued that sophisticated distribution and logistics systems, computer-integrated manufacturing and design, and direct marketing have changed what it means to design, produce, distribute, or sell a product or service. Investor pressure to reduce costs, more or less regardless of the consequences, increased pressure on companies to move production around constantly in search of low-cost materials and cheap labor.<sup>3</sup> As the distance between the producers of products or services and their users grew as a result, activities that used to be centralized downtown were steadily dispersed. Two geographers, Stephen Graham and Simon Marvin, described this phenomenon as ‘‘splintering urbanism.’’<sup>4</sup> Many cities, persuaded that they were now in competition with one another, embraced the concept of marketing. Some started to think of themselves as brands. At first, many were persuaded that snappy communications were the key to success; these places spent lavishly on logos, slogans, and corporate identities. Many of these campaigns were banal— ‘‘Glasgow’s Miles Better,’’ ‘‘EuroLille,’’ and the like—but advertising and design consultants did good business peddling these surface treatments, which persist to this day. According to Philip Kotler, a marketing professor,