some 10 percent of business-to-business advertising—a vast amount—is now spent on place marketing.<sup>5</sup> Much of this money is spent badly. There’s a big difference between selling soap and making sense of a locality—but many place marketers don’t get it. The promotional literature they produce for clients tends to be backward-looking and sentimental; it represents places as culturally homogeneous—even when they’re not and don’t want to be. Charles Landry, director of Comedia, one of the first consulting firms to take a multidimensional approach to place development, reckons that 85 percent of place brochures have a heritage or pastoral theme on their cover: people in historic costume, knights in armor, gentle country peasants, local fisherfolk enjoying a pipe at dusk with their dog on the quayside.<sup>6</sup> ‘‘Identity has become a commodity,’’ he says; ‘‘diversity or distinctiveness are edited out, and a predictable bland mix of facilities and attractions is promoted for every area.’’<sup>7</sup> Some of the people running cities now realize that communication campaigns will not work unless they are accompanied by genuine improvements to the product. The features that really matter to inward investors, it turns out, are the local economic and political situation, the availability of financial incentives, the particular location and physical communications, telecommunications infrastructures, the quality of the labor force in the area, and the availability of education and training to upgrade it. Cities are also looking afresh at the quality of life they can offer incoming workers and their families and have begun to emphasize the natural environment and local cultural activity as important competitive assets. ## Societies of the Spectacle ‘‘I believe that a desirable future depends on our deliberately choosing a life of action, over a life of consumption. Rather than maintaining a lifestyle which only allows to produce and consume—a style of life which is merely a way station on the road to the depletion and pollution of the environment—the future depends upon our choice of institutions which support a life of action.’’<sup>8</sup> That was Ivan Illich, in 1973. Thirty years ahead of the rest of us, Illich argued for the creation of convivial and productive situations and localities—including our cities. A sustainable city, Illich foresaw, has to be a working city, a city of encounter and interaction—not