people for the sacrifice of their old neighborhood to progress and creativity. Several traditional features from old Roppongi had been retained, I was told, including a Japanese garden, a Buddhist temple, and a children’s park. When I visited Roppongi Hills, these human-scale traces of old Tokyo proved elusively hard to find, hidden among the development’s two hundred shops, seventy-five restaurants, and a zillion square feet of office space and apartments. But at the top of the tower, spiritual compensation awaited: the Mori Art Museum (MAM). A who’s who of the global art establishment—including Nicholas Serota from the Tate Gallery in London, Glenn Lowry from the New York Museum of Modern Art, and David Elliot, MAM’s British director—had joined this lavishly funded enterprise. The museum opened with a biting and critical look at the modern society that begat it. The show was called ‘‘Happiness: A Survival Guide for Art and Life.’’ Only people with a ‘‘community passport’’ were admitted to this Xanadu of art-as-happiness. The passport, curiously, closely resembled a credit card. ‘‘Tourism—human circulation considered as consumption—is fundamentally nothing more than the leisure of going to see what has become banal.’’<sup>10</sup> Guy Debord wrote that more than forty years ago, in The Society of the Spectacle. He would not have warmed to Roppongi Hills. In much the same way that tourism kills the toured, too much culture-as-spectacle dilutes diversity and desolates its host environment. Cultural ‘‘attractions’’ are like genetically modified food: bland, tasteless, and a threat to the ecosystem. ## Tasteless Creatives Best-selling author Richard Florida calls them ‘‘the creative class.’’ Former U.S. Labor Secretary Robert Reich called them ‘‘symbolic analysts.’’ Management guru Peter Drucker dubbed them ‘‘knowledge workers.’’ British policymakers talk about the ‘‘cultural industries.’’ Whatever the term for them, there’s a lot of them about—30 percent of the U.S. workforce, by Florida’s reckoning. A new survey of boom towns in North America attributes these cities’ success to the presence of the creative class—public relations specialists, communication analysts, advertising sales agents, and the like. I have an instinctive aversion to the concept of a creative class, mainly because of the implication that anyone who is not a ‘‘creative’’ is not, well,