creative. The survey is probably most useful as a checklist of places the rest of us uncreatives—who do ‘‘routine commoditized tasks’’—can avoid like the plague.<sup>11</sup> This is not to deny that the economic case for the creative industries is strong. After all, designing spectacles is big business, and tourism is a huge one. One trade fair and exhibition, called Exp, announced itself as ‘‘The Event That Defines the Experience Industry.’’ For bewildered first-time visitors, Exp conveniently divided its global industry into four domains: corporate visitor centers, retail, casinos, and museums. Exp promised to show visitors ‘‘how to gain a greater share of your guest’s discretionary time and disposable income’’; how to ‘‘destroy the myth that great experience need [sic] huge budgets’’; and ‘‘how to surf the generational shift.’’ The website for the exhibition did not mention a session on how to speak English, but so-called experience designers (in Europe, they tend to be called ‘‘interaction designers’’), undeterred, flocked to Exp.<sup>12</sup> In some places, sport is replacing culture as an attractor in urban regeneration. Paris, in its bid for the 2012 Olympics, says the role that investment in sports infrastructures plays in the Games of the twenty-first century will be ‘‘comparable to that played by industrialisation at the end of the 19th century.’’ Claude Be´be´ar, chairman of the Paris Olympic Committee, does not think of sport as kicking a ball around a field. He thinks about twentymillion-dollar sponsorships and about the well-being of those who provide the spectacle. His plans for a sporty Paris, celebrated in a lavish and immense book, feature a boulevard dedicated to sport, bordered with hotels to lodge journalists, an international media center, a superdome, and the Olympic pool. Private road lanes, of the kind Stalin pioneered in Moscow, and a travel time of twelve minutes from bed to track are promised for athletes and officials. If the bed-to-track journey proves too taxing, an electronic games and Internet center will be provided to ‘‘help athletes relax and get in touch with the outside world.’’<sup>13</sup> ## It’s Alive Thankfully, there are alternative ways to animate a locality. The world of live performance remains resolutely opposed to the society of the spectacle. Theater people understand that what matters most in a postspectacular setting is activity and interaction. Tony Graham, Director of the Unicorn