Futures models the geography of the knowledge economy in terms of the demand and supply of skills at the regional and subregional levels.<sup>16</sup> As a design criterion, territorial capital means that successful cities need to be complex, heavily linked, and diverse. For the writer Will Hutton, just as local knowledge and information was key 150 years ago, when there were eighty different steps in the button-making industry, so, too, complex local knowledge and linkages are key today if you are a software, media, care, or educational enterprise.<sup>17</sup> This picture confronts smaller localities with a dilemma. They cannot easily offer the same density and complexity of knowledge skills that a large metropolis can. The metropolitan centers have their own problems, it is true, but they will always win on diversity, which is a key to evolutionary success. So how are the smaller ones to compete? ## Chain Gangs The answer lies in webs, chains, and networks of cities and regions. By aggregating their hard and soft assets, collective cities—multicentered cities—can match the array of functions and resources of the metropolitan centers while still (in theory) delivering superior social quality. The ability of small cities to offer a context that supports intimacy and encounter— what the French call la vie associative—is where small-city webs will win out over the big centers. Multicity networks are not a new idea. They date back to the thirteenth century when, in the Hansa League, more than seventy merchant cities collaborated for their common good in order to control exports and imports over a wide swath of Europe. A powerful network of trading partners, with its own accounting system and shared vocabulary, the Hansa League became one of the major economic forces of the Middle Ages. At one stage it controlled much of Scandinavia, the Baltic states, northern Germany, and Poland—and outposts can be found even today as far away as Scotland and the Basque Country.<sup>18</sup> Hanze Expo, the League’s modern incarnation, links the Baltic Rim—St. Petersburg, Tallinn, Riga, Rostock—to northern Germany and Holland. One part of this link, Estonia, has pronounced itself to be the Hong Kong of the Baltic. Architects and spatial planners started thinking about clusters in the 1960s. The eminent architect Christopher Alexander first argued in the