1960s that in designing on a large scale, ‘‘we must look at the links, the interactions, and the patterns.’’<sup>19</sup> Networks are important because they are a means of building and enriching social capital. I discuss social capital, as something we might design, in chapter 6, but my point here is that the living links that connect people and localities help social capital accumulate. Urban planners need to pay as much attention to social networks as soft infrastructure as they do now to the hard infrastructures of roads and railways.<sup>20</sup> For networked, multicentered localities to succeed, different kinds of territorial and social capital need to be linked by a combination of physical and informational networks. This integration of hard and soft factors is complex. For one thing, planners and policymakers have been joined by a variety of new players in a game they used to play on their own. Privatized network industries, such as railway companies, airports, electricity suppliers, and telecommunications operators, all want a say in planning discussions. So, too, do citizens. With growing confidence and sophistication, citizen groups are demanding that social agendas—such as social inclusion or environmental sustainability—be factored into planning processes. A nonprofit technology organization called The Open Planning Project (TOPP) argues that information about public places is as important a public good as the physical places themselves. TOPP advocates a free, distributed, and open geographic information infrastructure and is developing new ways to enhance the ability of all citizens to engage in meaningful dialogue about their environment. One of TOPP’s projects, a collaborative weblog called DigitalEarth.org, is conceived as a shared public online space for talking about the environmental information infrastructure. The site includes technology and tools to help citizens deploy geographic data, environmental models, and visualizations.<sup>21</sup> The spread of open planning is a profound challenge to planning and design professionals. They are torn between the increasing complexity of the systems they have to deal with and the demand that people be put first. The complexity of the new multiscalar, network-based groups of cities, combined with constant acceleration of the factors influencing their development, demands a more dynamic approach, and new tools, from designers. The Dutch architecture firm MVRDV (the letters stand for the names of its partners) has developed a family of software programs called