The Regionmaker as one way to help designers of cities and regions cope with the new demands.<sup>22</sup> ‘‘We keep getting asked to make ‘visions’ for cities and regions,’’ Winy Maas, a principal of the firm, told me, ‘‘but we want to base these on real data, not just our imagination.’’ The design challenge, for Maas, is to represent complex data about regions and cities visually, in order to provide a space in which the different actors now involved can explore options together.<sup>23</sup> The Regionmaker, developed by MVRDV initially for a project called RhineRuhrCity,<sup>24</sup> orchestrates a variety of existing information sources and flows—demographic data or outputs from geographical information systems (GIS) (or geomatics, as they are also called). The Regionmaker supports maps, study charts, and access to databases; imports and exports images and video feeds from helicopters or satellites; connects to the Internet; and uses computer-aided design (CAD) drawings. Maas and his colleagues plan to add to the system information on the movement of people, goods, and information. A housing subroutine will develop scenarios for optimal housing designs. A calculator will optimize natural light in built spaces. A function mixer will propose optimal mixtures of activities according to economic, social, or cultural criteria. The long-term aim is for the system to become a decision support environment in a more proactive and critical sense. ‘‘We could add an Evaluator, or an Evolver that can suggest criticism of the input we make,’’ speculates Maas.<sup>25</sup> Deciding who gets to use these new tools is itself a design action. The principle of open planning is that nonspecialized actors and stakeholders are involved in the creation process, not simply as yes-no responders to precooked proposals. MVRDV’s system has the potential to enable municipalities, citizen groups, and planners to ‘‘compose’’ an optimized mixed neighborhood—but they have to be invited to do so and shown how. All of this takes commitment and time. Multicentered places, as a response by smaller localities to the magnetic power of big centers, are cropping up in many regions of the world. In India, for example, P. V. Indiresan, a noted innovator of new concepts for rural development, has taken MVRDV’s network thinking several steps further. He is developing plans for ‘‘virtual cities’’ among clusters of India’s seven hundred thousand rural villages.<sup>26</sup> Special rural development zones (SRDZs) will be connected in a loop by a sixty- to eighty-kilometer-long circular road and state-of-the art communications via wireless local-loop com-