munications. In these connected communities, a central market might be located in one village, a hospital in another, an industry in a third, and so on—to form a distributed economic web combining real and virtual elements. ## Mediascapes In his book Digital Ground, writer Malcolm McCullough explores the ways that communication technologies modify our perception and use of space. The high-rise building was made possible by elevators and, less obviously, by the telephone (which enabled a large organization to occupy several floors efficiently).<sup>27</sup> Could the mobile phone have an impact of similar magnitude on the functioning of social networks and, thence, on the ways we think about and inhabit localities? Wireless access to the Internet increasingly renders the whole city—not just its buildings, equipment, and furniture—an interface.<sup>28</sup> Many large companies perceive locality to be the next big thing. For industry, ‘‘location’’ denotes a new opportunity to display and sell things. But as is so often the case, artists and design researchers are way ahead of them in the originality of their thinking and experimentation. Researchers at the Interaction Design Institute Ivrea in Italy, for example, think the mobile phone can function as a kind of remote control that activates interfaces in our surroundings in urban and public space. You head for a bus stop knowing that your bus will arrive in four minutes. Once there, you summon up your personal Web page on one of the bus stop’s display panels. ( J. C. Decaux and Viacom Outdoors manage tens of millions of such urban surfaces: They can run the infrastructure.) Or why not use the printers in automated teller machines (ATMs) to print out copies of text messages sent to your mobile phone? Among more than forty scenarios for using the phone in conjunction with public space developed by the Ivrea team is Sonic Hub, a street bench that doubles as a private communication space. When a person is called, he can sit down on a Sonic Hub bench and continue his call through the bench speaker system, rather than through the phone.<sup>29</sup> Another unexpected application of mediascapes by media artists is called collaborative mapping. This is what takes place when GPS devices track the routes users take—and the information is shared or collectively developed.