Handsets allow users to ‘‘geo-mark’’ a location and then send details to other people, who then can use their own handsets’ positioning capabilities to go to that spot. A wealth of data about places lies in the heads and lives of ordinary people—but it is not accessible knowledge. In experiments called wireless graffiti, augmented-reality technologies connect locations, people, media, and objects to unlock the ‘‘living memory’’ of a place. In one experiment in Amsterdam organized by the Waag Society, people walked around the city carrying devices, and the system plotted their routes. Amsterdam Real Time, as the experiment was called, was a joint venture with the city’s municipal archives, which looks after the city’s historical documents, including old maps. The long-term potential of the Waag installation lies in overlaying different movement patterns on one another and in being alerted, as one wanders round, to a historically interesting episode. Public physical spaces become ‘‘containers’’ for traces of fragmentary personal histories.<sup>30</sup> Digital graffiti or wireless graffiti have the potential, in time, to be attached to any object on Earth with an accuracy of a meter of less. Such a scenario—dubbed WorldBoard by Jim Spohrer, an Apple researcher—is about putting information in places or, to be precise, associating information with a place so that people perceive that place as if they were really there. ‘‘This is in some senses bigger than the world wide web,’’ says Spohrer, ‘‘because it allows cyberspace, the digital world of bits, to overlay and register with real space, the analogue world of atoms.’’ Spohrer describes WorldBoard as ‘‘a proposed planetary augmented reality system that facilitates innovative ways of associating information with places. Its short-term goal is to allow users to post messages on any of the six faces of every cubic meter (a hundred billion billion cubic meters) of space humans might go on this planet.’’<sup>31</sup> The idea intrigues a lot of people, but it is not entirely clear, as yet, to what questions digital graffiti might be an answer. To date, the enabling technologies described here have been used mostly for tracking parolees and FedEx packages. In Europe and the United States, navigation systems in cars are popular. And in Hong Kong, a matchmaking service connects singles in the same neighborhood whose dating profiles match.<sup>32</sup> Other social uses of user-generated locational content include marking a picnic spot or a meeting place at a music festival. Business uses include a construction site manager’s indicating where a consignment of materials should be unloaded.