At most industry presentations on technology of this type that I’ve ever been to, someone demonstrates a restaurant review service that enables reviews contributed by previous customers to be accessed by somebody outside the restaurant who is wondering whether to eat there. Many designers and media artists are convinced that there must be more to collaborative mapping than having lunch. In Europe, a concerted attempt to innovate imaginative location-based services was made by more than a hundred research institutions that participated during the late 1990s in projects that explored the notion of ‘‘territory as interface’’—new forms of social communication in homes, museums, streets, cafes, cars, and schools.<sup>33</sup> Research and design teams divided into two groups. One, dubbed ‘‘Connected Community,’’ looked at new interfaces and interaction paradigms aimed at the broad population. These included ‘‘computer support for real life’’: thinking of ways of augmenting everyday activity rather than replacing it with a synthetic virtual one. Projects with the theme ‘‘territory as interface’’ considered the whole territory of the com munity as interface and thus the relationship between real physical spaces and augmented ones. Researchers looked at ways to enable active participation, to make it just as easy for people to create and leave traces of information as it is to access that information on the Web. A second group of projects, under the rubric ‘‘Inhabited Information Spaces,’’ looked at ways to design and populate virtual environments in which ‘‘digital crowds’’ could gather to participate in art and entertainment or to learn things. Scenarios involved broadcast television linked to interactive local content; new sensorial tools for children to use to tell stories and share experiences; wireless devices for connecting children and parents; wearable agents; interest-based physical navigation devices; public information systems around a city; techniques to map and visualize information flows in a community; interfaces for specific users; avatar-inhabited television; way finding; exploration and social interaction within information spaces; and new forms of social interaction such as collective memories and oral-digital storytelling. Roger Coleman, who develops new service ideas for seniors at the Royal College of Art in London, draws a parallel with architecture: We know that the way you design buildings affects the relationships people have within them. The way they relate to each other, and the shape of physical space, affects the shape of relationships. Information has the same kind of potential in reverse. This opens up a new dimension of design—the aesthetics of relationships.