centers—but left most of America, which was harder and more expensive to reach, in the dark. Recognizing that electrification was critical to their economic development, thousands of communities that were not large or profitable enough to attract private power companies created their own electric utilities. As Jim Baller, a U.S. expert on municipal wireless, has noted: ‘‘Most of these communities found that they could provide for their own needs better and at far lower cost than the private sector could or was willing to do.’’ Today, approximately two thousand public power systems continue to exist and thrive in the United States, providing, says Baller, significantly better service at substantially lower prices than investor-owned utilities provide.<sup>38</sup> Many municipalities are considering providing free broadband communication access in much the same way that they provide free roads and town squares. Brussels, for example, has deployed twenty hotspots as part of a larger project to bring broadband access to the entire city. (Some policymakers in Belgium want to make train travel free, too.) New York City Council has also embarked on a sweeping change in the way the city buys and utilizes telecommunications services on the principle that high-quality wireless communications have become one of the ways people evaluate the technical quality of a city’s infrastructures. Even tiny Bhutan, a kingdom in the Himalayas, has completed a pilot project to use wireless and Internetbased voice telephony technologies to deliver communications services to rural areas.<sup>39</sup> According to the group Wireless Commons, ‘‘A global wireless network is within our grasp.’’ Wireless Commons has been founded to accelerate the spread of community-based, unlicensed wireless broadband initiatives. The group says that low-cost wireless networking equipment, which can operate in unlicensed bands of the spectrum, bridges one of the few remaining gaps in universal communication: ‘‘Suddenly, ordinary people have the means to create a network independent of any physical constraint except distance.’’<sup>40</sup> (Esme Vos, editor of MuniWireless.com, a website that provides reports on municipal wireless and broadband projects, says it can cost a town of four thousand people as little as twenty thousand dollars to deploy a wireless network.) ‘‘Technical problems are the least of our worries,’’ says Wireless Commons; ‘‘the business, political and social issues are the real challenges facing community networks.’’ Hardware and software vendors need to understand the business rationale for implementing open technical solutions. Politicians need to understand why universal ac-