## Preface H<sub>uman-Computer</sub> <sub>Interaction</sub> <sub>(HCI)</sub> <sub>has</sub> <sub>been</sub> <sub>a</sub> <sub>focal</sub> <sub>area</sub> <sub>for</sub> <sub>innovative</sub> <sub>multi-</sub> disciplinary computing research and development for the past 25 years. At the dawn of a new millennium, we should ask where the HCI project is going; what critical technical challenges and opportunities will define HCI research and development work beyond the year 2001; what approaches will sustain and enhance the vitality and effectiveness of HCI in this new era; and how HCI will be different from and similar to what it is today. These questions can be addressed both in the broad view and with respect to specific subdomains within HCI. In spring 1998, Jonathan Grudin, editor of ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, and Tom Moran, editor of Human-Computer Interaction, suggested a coordinated special issue project celebrating “Human-Computer Interaction in the New Millennium.” Because I serve on both editorial boards—and probably because I was unable to attend this meeting—I was asked to coordinate the project. In late spring, an initial call for papers was circulated for the Transactions. About 50 research groups expressed initial interest, and in the end, 30 papers were submitted for the January 1999 deadline. Thirteen associate editors of the Transactions, Joelle Coutaz, Paul Dourish, Wayne Gray, Jim Hollan, Scott Hudson, Hiroshi Ishii, Robert Jacob, Sirkka Jarvenpaa, Allan MacLean, Brad Myers, Bonnie Nardi, Randy Pausch, and I, helped to manage the review process. The result was a double special issue of the Transactions in March and June 2000. The ten papers from that double special issue are included in this book, with some revision to make them briefer and more accessible to a larger audience. In February 1999, the Human-Computer Interaction Consortium held a workshop on research visions and directions for the new millennium. A special issue of the Human-Computer Interactions was organized from the papers presented at this workshop. It was edited by Wendy Kellogg, Clayton Lewis, and Peter Polson. The five papers from that special issue are also included here. Human-Computer Interactions has a tradition of presenting rather lengthy and comprehensive papers. I thank this group of authors in particular for heroic revision efforts. In some cases, excellent papers were cut to less than half their original length, with their excellence preserved! I think both journal special issue projects were highly successful. But journal projects are always limited by what papers are submitted. To help balance content, I solicited 14 papers in addition to the 15 special issue papers from the two journals. Frankly, however, even 29 papers cannot begin to cover the scope of humancomputer interaction. I thank this group of authors for writing to my half-baked specifications with such creativity and good nature. Many experts from throughout the human-computer interaction community served as referees. The energy and insight that can be marshaled for projects like this is awesome. I tried to collate all the names: Gregory Abowd, Phil Agre, Erik Altmann, Izak Benbasat, Steve Benford, Gary Bishop, Susanne Bodker, Alan Borning, Amy Bruckman, Michael Byrne, Tom Carey, Chris Dede, Matthias Denecke, Andrew Dillon, Stephanie Doane, Paul Dourish, Keith Edwards, Thomas Erickson, Carolanne Fisher, Ken Fishkin, Edward Fox, George Furnas, Craig Ganoe, Bill Gaver, Nancy Green, Saul Greenburg, Christine Halverson, Beverly Harrison, Rex Hartson, Bill Hefley, Austin Henderson, Ken Hinckley, Andrew Howes, Scott Hudson, Hiroshi Ishii, Robin Jeffries, Bonnie John, Simon Kaplan, John Karat, David Kasik, Irvin Katz, Wendy Kellogg, David Kirsh, Brian Kleiner, Joseph Konstan, Clayton Lewis, Edwin Li, Kee Yong Lim, Scott MacKenzie, Gloria Mark, Jon May, David Millen, Michael Muller, Brad Myers, Beth Mynatt, William Newman, Jakob Nielsen, Dan Olsen, Gary Olson, Judith Olson, Sharon Oviatt, Leysia Palen, Jeff Pierce, Peter Polson, Blaine Price, Naren Ramakrishnan, David Redmiles, Paul Resnick, John Richards, Frank Ritter, Jeremy Roschelle, Mary Beth Rosson, Angela Sasse, Michael Schoelles, Doug Schuler, Abigail Sellen, Chris Shaw, Ben Shneiderman, Simon Buckingham Shum, Philip J. Smith, Lucy Suchman, Niels Taatgen, Desney Tan, Loren Terveen, John Thomas, Elaine G. Toms, Brygg Ullmer, Robert Virzi, Alex Waibel, Dieter Wallach, Wayne Ward, Colin Ware, Greg Welch, Alan Wexelblatt, Steve Whittaker, Terry Winograd, Richard Young. I hope the efforts of all those who were involved in trying to take stock of where we are and to ponder where we are going will benefit them and the whole HCI community as we take our first steps into the future. John M. Carroll Department of Computer Science Center for Human-Computer Interaction Virginia Tech