# Contributors Gregory D. Abowd is an associate professor in the College of Computing and a member of the GVU Center and Broadband Institute at Georgia Tech. His research focuses on HCI and software engineering aspects of ubiquitous computing. He founded the Future Computing Environments Group within the College of Computing and is responsible for building living laboratories for ubiquitous computing experimentation in the classroom and the home. He is co-author of Human-Computer Interaction (Prentice-Hall, 1998). Mark S. Ackerman is associate professor of Information and Computer Science at the University of California, Irvine. He has published on computer-supported cooperative work, collaborative information access, virtual communities, organizational memory, hypermedia, and other human-computer interaction topics. Ernesto G. Arias is professor of Urban and Regional Planning in the College of Architecture and Planning, courtesy professor of Computer Science, faculty fellow of the Institute of Cognitive Science, and associate director of the Center for Life-Long Learning & Design at the University of Colorado. His research interests include the roles of information technology in face-to-face and distributed interactions in the human processes of planning, design, and learning. His HCI work focuses on developing systems that support design as the resolution of “ill-structured and ill-behaved” problems, whose nature is defined by change and the involvement of multiple stakeholders. He has published in various disciplines ranging from design, planning, and policy to computer science, environmental psychology, and operations research. Philip Barnard is a cognitive psychologist with an interest in theories of mental architecture and their application to the kinds of complex tasks characteristic of HCI. He also applies the same work on mental architecture in research on human emotion and psychopathologies, such as depression and schizophrenia. He is on the scientific staff of the Medical Research Council’s Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit in Cambridge, UK. Gordon D. Baxter is currently working as a researcher in the Department of Psychology at the University of York in the UK, having previously spent several years in systems development in industry. He is part of the Interdisciplinary Research Collaboration, which is investigating the dependability of computer-based systems (www. DIRC.org.uk). In particular, he is interested in the ways that aspects of timeliness affect human-machine interaction in such systems. He is a chartered engineer and a member of the British Computer Society. Josh Bers is a software developer in the Speech and Language Processing Department of BBN Technologies. He has designed and developed many speech and multimodal interfaces. Prior to joining BBN he received a masters degree from the Media Lab at MIT. His interests include conversational interfaces, distributed software design, and methods for text understanding. Suresh K. Bhavnani specializes in computational design and human-computer interaction with a research focus on the identification, acquisition, and performance of efficient strategies to use in complex computer systems. He is assistant professor at the School of Information, University of Michigan. Michael Bieber is associate professor of Information Systems at the New Jersey Institute of Technology, where he co-directs the Collaborative Hypermedia Research Lab and teaches in the distance learning program. He is active in hypermedia, relationship management, WWW, virtual community, and asynchronous learning networks research. Andrew Carra is a consultant and software engineer for Parlano, Inc., in Chicago. He studied at the Center for Highly Interactive Computing in Education at the University of Michigan from 1997 to 2000. His current interests include pen-based computing, wireless networking, immersive interfaces, and computer security. John M. Carroll is professor of Computer Science, Education, and Psychology, and director of the Center for Human-Computer Interaction at Virginia Tech. His research interests include methods and theory in human-computer interaction, particularly as applied to networking tools for collaborative learning and problem-solving. His most recent books are Minimalism beyond “The Nurnberg Funnel” (MIT Press, 1998) and Making Use: Scenario-Based Design of Human-Computer Interactions (MIT Press, 2000). George Chin is a senior research scientist at Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratory. Prior to joining Battelle, he studied at the Center for Human-Computer Interaction at Virginia Tech. His research has focused on the areas of participatory design, ethnographic methods, computer-supported collaborative work, computer-supported collaborative learning, problem-solving environments, and human-computer interaction. Phil Cohen received his B.A. in mathematics from Cornell University and his M.Sc. and Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Toronto. Dr. Cohen is currently a professor and co-director of the Center for Human-Computer Communication in the Department of Computer Science at the Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and Technology. His research interests include multimodal interaction, multiagent systems, dialogue, natural language processing, and theories of collaboration and communication. Cohen was president of the Association for Computational Linguistics in 1999 and is a fellow of the American Association for Artificial Intelligence. Andrew Dillon is associate professor of Information Science and of Informatics at Indiana University, where he directs the IU Program in HCI. He conducts research on human response to information technology, the emotional and affective dimensions of acceptance, and the design of information architectures that support learning. He has published more than 80 papers on his work and serves on several editorial boards, including International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, Interacting with Computers, and the Journal of Digital Information. David Duce is a professor of Computing at Oxford Brookes University, where he leads the Distributed Systems Research Group. His research interests include Web graphics, distributed cooperative visualization, and applications of formal techniques in human computer interaction. David Duke is a lecturer in Computer Science at the University of Bath, UK. Over the last ten years his work has spanned formal methods, standards for distributed multimedia, information visualization, and human-computer interaction. He currently holds an Advanced Research Fellowship funded by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council. Lisbeth Duncan is an associate technical fellow in the Mathematics and Computing Technology Division of The Boeing Company in Seattle, Washington. She has worked in research and development there for the past 15 years, focusing on natural language processing and human-computer interface design. She has authored and co-authored several papers and technical reports on Boeing’s work in these areas. Hal Eden is a research associate in the Department of Computer Science, a member of the Institute of Cognitive Science, and associate director of the Center for Life-Long Learning & Design at the University of Colorado at Boulder. His current research interests center on the creation of co-present group interfaces supporting collaboration, learning, and social creativity. He has worked and directed several projects focused on combining social and technical elements that enable and encourage learning and the creation of community. Thomas Erickson is a research staff member at the IBM T.J. Watson Research Center in New York, where he works on designing systems that support networkmediated group interaction. An interaction designer and researcher, his approach to systems design is shaped by work in sociology, rhetoric, architecture, and urban design. He has contributed to the design of many products and authored numerous publications on topics ranging from personal electronic notebooks and information retrieval systems to pattern languages and virtual community. David Ferro is senior manager of e-Business Operations at Iomega Corporation in Roy, Utah. Prior to Iomega he worked in natural language understanding at Unisys Corporation. His interests include participatory HCI and the engineering culture. He received his Ph.D. in the Social Study of Science and Technology from Virginia Tech. Gerhard Fischer is professor of Computer Science, fellow of the Institute of Cognitive Science, and director of the Center for Lifelong Learning & Design at the University of Colorado at Boulder. His research includes new conceptual frameworks and new media for learning, working, and collaboration; human-computer interaction; cognitive science; artificial intelligence; software design; and domain-oriented design environments. Over the last 20 years, he has directed research projects and published extensively in these areas. Jerry Fjermestad is an associate professor in the School of Management at NJIT. He received his B.A. in Chemistry from Pacific Lutheran University, an M.S. in Operations Research from Polytechnic University, an M.B.A in Operations Management from Iona College, and an M.B.A. and Ph.D. from Rutgers University in Management Information Systems. His current research interests are in collaborative technology, decision support systems, data warehousing, electronic commerce, and enterprise information systems. George W. Furnas is a professor at the School of Information and in the College of Engineering at the University of Michigan. He was formerly director of Computer Graphics and Interactive Media research at Bell Communications Research. A principal focus of his research has been in human computer interaction, specializing in areas related to information access and visualization, but he has also published work in multivariate statistics and graphical reasoning. Andrew Gorman is a senior research assistant in the Department of Computer Science, a member of the Institute of Cognitive Science, and member of the Center for Lifelong Learning & Design at the University of Colorado at Boulder. His research interests include computer-supported cooperation, human-computer interaction, cognitive science, and user modeling. He has more than ten years’ experience developing large-scale information systems for industry and is now applying his system design expertise to the area of collaborative knowledge management systems. Will Hill is a technology consultant at AT&T Shannon Labs, where his research interests include data-mining of public preferences, information visualization, and novel input devices. Prior to joining AT&T, he conducted human interface research at Bellcore, MCC, and Northwestern University. Starr Roxanne Hiltz is distinguished professor of Computer and Information Science at New Jersey Institute of Technology, where she also directs the Ph.D. program in Information Systems. She does research on applications and the social impact of computer technology, publishing widely in journals such as JMIS, MISQ, Communications of the ACM, and Management Science. Her research interests currently include group support systems, asynchronous learning networks, and pervasive computing. James Hollan is professor of Cognitive Science at the University of California, San Diego. He has served as director of the Human Interface Laboratory at MCC, director of the Computer Graphics and Interactive Media Research Group at Bellcore, and chair of the Computer Science Department at the University of New Mexico. His research focuses on human-computer interaction and information visualization. In collaboration with Edwin Hutchins and David Kirsh, he established the Distributed Cognition and Human Computer Interaction Laboratory at UCSD. Thomas Holzman is senior human factors engineering consultant at NCR Corporation and adjunct professor of Instructional Technology at Georgia State University. He has also served in NCR’s Corporate Technology organization as director of Cognitive Engineering. His research and development activities have focused on the way that media and human-computer interaction parameters influence the effectiveness and attractiveness of user interfaces, computer-based instruction, and electronic performance support systems. Scott E. Hudson is associate professor of Human Computer Interaction in the HCI Institute at Carnegie Mellon, where he serves as the director of the HCII Ph.D. program. He has been the general and program chair for the ACM UIST conference, currently serves as an associate editor for ACM Transactions on CHI, and has published more than 70 papers. His research interests cover a wide range of topics in user interface software and technology. Edwin Hutchins is professor of Cognitive Science at the University of California, San Diego. He studies cognition in naturally occurring, culturally constituted settings using an approach called distributed cognition. Trained as a cognitive anthropologist, he has studied litigation in Melanesia, traditional Micronesian navigation, modern navigation, and automation in airliners. His book Cognition in the Wild (MIT Press, 1996) is a classic in cognitive science. Hiroshi Ishii is an associate professor at the MIT Media Lab, where he founded and directs the Tangible Media Group. Prior to MIT, he led a CSCW research group at the NTT Human Interface Laboratories and was a visiting assistant professor at the University of Toronto. He is active in the research fields of human-computer interaction and computer-supported cooperative work, and he has been an associate editor of ACM TOCHI and TOIS. Bonnie E. John is an associate professor in the Human-Computer Interaction Institute and Department of Psychology at Carnegie Mellon University. She was a founding member of the HCI Institute and serves as the director of its professional Masters Program in HCI. She was a founding associate editor for the ACM Transaction on CHI and is a member of the National Research Council’s Committee on Human Factors. Her research involves engineering models of human behavior, usability evaluation methods, and the relationship between usability and software architecture. Gary Jones is a lecturer in cognitive psychology at the University of Derby (UK). His research interests focus on the computational modeling of different aspects of development, primarily what develops in children’s thinking and how children acquire language. Jones is also on the board of the Society for the Study of Artificial Intelligence and Behaviour (AISB). Wendy A. Kellogg is manager of Social Computing at IBM’s T.J. Watson Research Center. Her current work involves designing and studying systems for supporting computer-mediated communication in groups and organizations that mesh with social processes. She is author of numerous papers in the field of human-computer interaction and was co-editor in 2000 of a special issue of Human-Computer Interaction entitled “New Agendas for Human-Computer Interaction.” She recently served as technical program co-chair for ACM’s DIS 2000 (Designing Interactive Systems) conference and as general co-chair for ACM’s CSCW 2000 (Computer-Supported Cooperative Work) conference. David Kirsh is associate professor of Cognitive Science at the University of California, San Diego. He was originally trained in the philosophy of mind and logic at Oxford and spent several years in the AI Lab at MIT before coming to UCSD, where he has been working on theories of embodied activity, cognitive engineering, and how to better design highly interactive environments. He has published in journals in artificial intelligence, philosophy, cognitive science, and architecture. Shin’ichi Konomi is a research fellow at the Center for LifeLong Learning and Design at the University of Colorado, Boulder. Previously he was a research scientist at the German National Research Center for Information Technology (GMD-IPSI) in Darmstadt, working in the AMBIENTE division. His research has been in the areas of ubiquitous and mobile computing, augmented reality, computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW), and cooperative information bases. Joseph Krajcik is professor of Science Education at the University of Michigan and a co-director of the Center for Highly Interactive Computing in Education. He works with science teachers to re-engineer classrooms so that students engage in solving authentic, meaningful problems through inquiry and the use of learning technologies. A major aspect of his work involves the design of curriculum materials and computing tools that support inquiry. James Landay is assistant professor of Computer Science at the University of California, Berkeley. His Ph.D. dissertation was the first to demonstrate the use of sketching in user interface design tools. He has published extensively in the area of user interfaces, including articles on user interface design and evaluation tools, gesture recognition, pen-based user interfaces, mobile computing, and visual languages. Jim Larson is the author of several books and articles, including Interactive Software-Tools for Building Interactive User Interfaces (Yourdon Press, 1992). Larson is manager of Advanced Human Input/Output at the Intel Architecture Labs and is chairman of the W3C Voice Browser Working Group, which is standardizing VoiceXML and related voice application languages. He is an adjunct professor at Oregon Graduate Institute and Portland State University. Henry Lieberman is a research scientist at the Media Laboratory of MIT in the Software Agents group. Prior to that, he held the same position at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab. His interests are in the intersection of artificial intelligence and the human interface. He holds a doctoral-equivalent degree from the University of Paris VI and was a visiting professor there. He recently edited a book, Your Wish Is My Command: Programming by Example (Morgan Kaufmann, 2001), showing how computers can learn new behavior by watching the user demonstrate procedures on concrete examples and constructing generalized programs. Jon May is a cognitive psychologist who has been researching the role that psychological theory can play in interface design since the late 1980s. His other research interests include cognition and emotion, reasoning, and complex task performance. He is a lecturer in Psychology at the University of Sheffield, UK. Ken Maxwell is a cofounder of Stick Networks Inc. (www.sticknetworks.com), where he solves human factors problems involving wireless connected services. He has worked in a variety of human factors areas for more than 15 years. Prior to Stick Networks he designed and tested human-computer interfaces for Tandem Computers and Compaq Computers. He was an associate faculty member of the Human Performance Institute at the University of Texas at Arlington. He worked on cockpit automation and information display technologies while working for General Dynamics. Kevin L. Mills is a senior research scientist at the National Institute of Standards and Technology, where his research interests include evaluating and improving the performance and robustness of distributed software systems. Dr. Mills also serves as Adjunct Professor of Software Engineering at George Mason University, where he teaches graduate courses in software design, distributed systems, and data communications. Christian Müller-Tomfelde is a research scientist at GMD-IPSI’s division “AMBIENTE-Workspaces of the Future” in Darmstadt, Germany. Before joining GMD in 1997, he worked at the Center for Art and Media Technology (ZKM) in Karlsruhe in the area of interactive and virtual room acoustics. At GMD-IPSI, he worked especially on the design and realization of the roomware components of the first and the second generation. He is active in the fields of human-computer interaction, auditory display, computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW), and the disappearing computer. Brad Myers is a senior research scientist in the Human-Computer Interaction Institute in the School of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University. He is the author or editor of over 200 publications, and he is on the editorial board of five journals. He has been a consultant on user interface design and implementation to about 40 companies. Elizabeth D. Mynatt is an assistant professor in the College of Computing and the associate director of the GVU Center at the Georgia Institute of Technology. There she directs the Everyday Computing Laboratory, examining the HCI implications of the continuous presence of computation in everyday life. Previously she was on the research staff at Xerox PARC. Dr. Mynatt received her Ph.D. in Computer Science from Georgia Tech in 1995. Bonnie A. Nardi is a research scientist in the Bioscience Information Solutions Department at Agilent Laboratories in Palo Alto, California. She is conducting ethnographic studies of molecular biologists to understand their information needs. She is the author of A Small Matter of Programming: Perspectives on End User Computing (MIT Press, 1993), Context and Consciousness: Activity Theory and Human Computer Interaction (MIT Press, 1996), and coauthor of Information Ecologies: Using Technology with Heart (MIT Press, 1999). Dennis C. Neale is a human factors engineer who recently worked as an evaluation specialist for the Center for Human-Computer Interaction at Virginia Tech. He is currently pursuing a doctorate degree in Industrial and Systems Engineering at Virginia Tech. His current research interests include usability engineering, collaborative systems, and video-mediated communication. Gary M. Olson is Paul M. Fitts professor of Human-Computer Interaction in the School of Information at the University of Michigan. He is also a professor in the Department of Psychology. His principal research interest for the past decade has been what kinds of tools and processes can enable people to work together who are not geographically collocated. Judith S. Olson is Richard W. Pew professor of Human-Computer Interaction in the School of Information at the University of Michigan. She is also a professor in the Michigan Business School and the Department of Psychology. Her principal research interest is in the nature of group work and the design of technology to support it, especially for groups with distributed members. Sharon Oviatt is professor of Computer Science and co-director of the Center for Human-Computer Communication at the Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology. Her current research focuses on human-computer interaction, spoken language and multimodal interfaces, and mobile and highly interactive systems. She is an active member of the international HCI and speech communities, has published more than 70 scientific articles, and has served on numerous government advisory panels, editorial boards, and program committees. Her work is featured in recent special issues of Communications for the ACM, Human-Computer Interaction, and IEEE Multimedia. Randy Pausch is professor of Computer Science, Human-Computer Interaction, and Design at Carnegie Mellon, where he is the co-director of the Entertainment Technology Center (ETC). He was a National Science Foundation Presidential Young Investigator and a Lilly Foundation Teaching fellow. In 1995, he spent a sabbatical with the Walt Disney Imagineering Virtual Reality Studio, and he currently consults with Imagineering on interactive theme park attractions, particularly for the “DisneyQuest” virtual-reality-based theme park. Chris Quintana is an assistant research scientist in the School of Education and College of Engineering at the University of Michigan. Dr. Quintana works at the Center for Highly Interactive Computing in Education. His research interests include the application of human-computer interaction, software engineering, and information visualization principles to the design of educational technology. Paul Resnick is an associate professor at the University of Michigan School of Information, where he coordinates the Community Information Corps. His research focuses on recommender systems, reputation systems, and other ways that information systems can contribute to social capital. Frank E. Ritter joined Penn State in 1999 to help found a new interdisciplinary School of Information Sciences and Technology. He is also an associate professor of Psychology. He is interested in the interaction of cognitive models and HCI and is on the board of the UK’s Society for the Study of AI and Simulation of Behaviour (AISB) and a member of the editorial board of Human Factors. Mary Beth Rosson is associate professor of Computer Science and fellow of the Center for Human-Computer Interaction at Virginia Tech, where she is working in the areas of human-computer interaction, computer-supported cooperative work, and usability engineering. She recently co-authored a book with John Carroll, Usability Engineering: Scenario-Based Development of Human-Computer Interaction (Morgan Kaufmann, forthcoming). Eric Scharff is a Ph.D. student studying computer science at the University of Colorado at Boulder. His research interests include collaborative technologies, open source software, open systems, human-computer interaction, and multimedia systems. He has created numerous software systems that enhance the way we collaborate using computers. Jean Scholtz is a computer science researcher at the National Institute of Standards and Technology, where her research interests are in evaluation of interactive systems. She is currently on detail to the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), where she manages the Information Management Program and ubiquitous computing efforts. Douglas Schuler has been working at the intersection of technology and society for nearly 20 years. Doug believes that positive social change is possible and that technology could play a role in promoting it. He is a cofounder of the Seattle Community Network and is currently a member of the faculty at the Evergreen State College in Olympia, Washington, and program director for the Public Sphere Project for Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility. Ben Shneiderman is a professor in the Department of Computer Science at the University of Maryland at College Park, founding director (1983–2000) of the Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory, and member of the Institutes for Advanced Computer Studies & for Systems Research. Dr. Shneiderman is the author of Software Psychology: Human Factors in Computer and Information Systems (Little, Brown, 1980) and Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction, now in its third edition (Addison-Wesley, 1998). Elliot Soloway is a professor in the College of Engineering, the School of Information, and the School of Education at the University of Michigan, and is cofounder of the Center for Highly-Interactive Computing in Education, a multidisciplinary project aimed at developing standards-based, inquiry-driven, technology-pervasive curriculum for K–12. Norbert A. Streitz is the manager of the research division of AMBIENTE-Workspaces of the Future, which he founded in 1997 at the Integrated Publication and Information Systems Institute of the German National Research Center for Information Technology in Darmstadt, after serving as deputy director of GMD-IPSI for six years. He also teaches in the Computer Science Department of the Technical University Darmstadt. Before joining GMD in 1987, he was an assistant professor at the Technical University in Aachen in the area of human factors and cognitive psychology. His research has focused on human-computer interaction, hypermedia, CSCW, ubiquitous computing, augmented reality, cooperative buildings, and roomware. He is also chair of the Steering Group of the European proactive initiative “The Disappearing Computer” (www. disappearing-computer.net). Bernhard Suhm is a senior scientist in the Speech and Language Processing Group at BBN Technologies, a Verizon company, where he develops methods for evaluating telephone user interfaces, and he consults call-centers on redesigning and speechenabling IVRs. He also leads research and development of advanced audio mining and natural language-processing technologies. Prior to joining BBN Technologies, he worked for five years at Carnegie Mellon University, conducting research on speech-to-speech translation and multimodal error correction. He has published in the areas of speech recognition and multimodal interfaces, including Multimodal Error Correction for Speech User Interfaces (Shaker, Germany, 1999). Dr. Suhm holds a Ph.D. in Computer Science from Karlsruhe University, Germany. Alistair Sutcliffe is professor of Systems Engineering at the Department of Computation, University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, and director of the Centre for Human Computer Interface Design. His research interests in HCI cover usability engineering methods and tools for multimedia and virtual reality, design of information searching and safety critical user interfaces, evaluation methods, theories of interaction, and knowledge representation. His software engineering research includes work on component engineering, requirements engineering, and the design of complex socio-technical systems. Peter Tandler is a research scientist responsible for software development in the AMBIENTE division of the Integrated Publication and Information Systems Institute of the German National Research Center for Information Technology. His research interests are computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW), humancomputer interaction, and integrated work environments, with a focus on software architectures for interactive roomware environments. Loren Terveen received a Ph.D. in Computer Science from the University of Texas at Austin in 1991 and has been a research scientist at AT&T Laboratories since then. His general research area is human-computer interaction, with specific interests in recommender systems and online communities. Murray Turoff is distinguished professor of Computer and Information Science at the New Jersey Institute of Technology. He has recently assumed the acting chair for the new Department of Information Systems in the new college of Computing Sciences at NJIT. Dr. Turoff is noted for his work on the design of applications of computer-mediated communications systems, having developed the first such group communication system in 1969. Currently he is working on collaborative knowledge bases for use by professional and learning communities. Brygg Ullmer is a final-year Ph.D. student and IBM Media Lab Fellow at the MIT Media Lab, where he studies with Professor Hiroshi Ishii in the Tangible Media Group. He has held summer research positions at Interval Research and Sony CSL. His research interests include user interfaces for information infrastructure and biological systems, as well as rapid physical and functional prototyping. John Vergo is the manager of the User Experience Research group at the IBM T.J. Watson Research Center in Hawthorne, New York. His research interests include human-computer interaction, user-centered design methods, multimodal user interfaces, e-commerce user experiences, speech recognition, natural language understanding, scientific visualization, 3D graphics, and software development methods. He has a B.S. in mathematics and psychology from the University at Albany and an M.S. in computer science from Polytechnic University. Kim J. Vicente is professor of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, Biomaterials & Biomedical Engineering, Computer Science, and Electrical & Computer Engineering at the University of Toronto, where he is also founding director of the Cognitive Engineering Laboratory. He has authored more than 135 refereed publications, as well as Cognitive Work Analysis: Toward Safe, Productive, and Healthy Computer-Based Work (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1999). Steve Whittaker is a senior research scientist at AT&T Labs, Florham Park, New Jersey, where he works in the Human Computer Interface Department. He has researched various aspects of computer-supported cooperative work, with a particular focus on how theories of human interaction can be used to inform the design of computer-mediated communication systems. He is the author of more than 60 refereed publications. Brian Whitworth is an assistant professor in the Department of Computer and Information Science at New Jersey Institute of Technology. After completing two degrees, one in mathematics and one in psychology, he did a masters thesis in neuro-psychology on the implications of split-brain research for the concept of self. He was senior Army psychologist in the New Zealand Army, where he moved into computing, developing operational software and simulations, and working in liaison with the Australian, Singapore, and Malaysian Army War Game Centers. For the last ten years he has studied distributed electronic groups, completing an IS doctorate on Generating Agreement in Computer-Mediated Groups. His interests are cognition and computer-human interaction, and designing systems to enable group interaction and virtual communities. Terry Winograd is professor of Computer Science at Stanford University, where he directs the program in Human-Computer Interaction. His current research is on the design of interactive information spaces. He has written and edited books on natural language understanding and interaction design, including Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for Design (Addison-Wesley, 1987) and Bringing Design to Software (Addison-Wesley, 1996). Lizhong Wu is a senior staff scientist at HNC Software Inc. He has 20 years of research and development experience in multimedia signal processing, machine learning, and natural language processing. Dr. Wu has authored and coauthored more than 50 technical articles and book chapters, and he is a regular reviewer of several international conferences and journals, an active technical member of the IEEE Neural Network Signal Processing Committee, and a member of IEEE and ACM associations. He was a Program and Organizing Committee member of International Symposium on Intelligent Data Engineering and Learning. Prior to joining HNC, Dr. Wu held positions at Oregon Graduate Institute, Nonlinear Prediction Systems, and Cambridge University. He obtained his Ph.D. in Information Engineering from Cambridge University in 1992 and his M.S. and B.S. in Electrical Engineering from South China University of Science and Technology in 1986 and 1983. Richard M. Young is professor of Cognitive Science at the University of Hertfordshire, UK, where he has been since 1997 after spending many years at the Medical Research Council’s Applied Psychology Unit in Cambridge, UK. His research interests are in cognitive modeling and its applications to human-computer interaction and in the use of cognitive architectures in understanding human cognition. He is on the editorial boards of Human-Computer Interaction and Cognitive Science Quarterly and is a past chair of the Society for the Study of Artificial Intelligence and Simulation of Behaviour (AISB).