# CHAPTER II OXFORD-CARLYLE AND RUSKIN I. "Where is the Battle?" WILLIAM MORRIS's father, a partner in a Quaker firm of bill and discount brokers, made his wealth from mines. His holding of 272 £1 shares in the Devon Great Consols (controlling copper and tin mines in the South-West) suddenly boomed: and they did not stop booming until they had realized a sum approaching £200,000. When he died, in Morris's boyhood, his death made no difference to the prosperity of his family. Regularly the handsome dividends came in to the rural village of Walthamstow, on the edge of Epping Forest, bringing with them nothing to indicate the miseries at the bottom of the cramped and ill-ventilated shafts from which they had their source. At the age of twenty-one William Morris came into his own share-at the rate of £900 a year. Morris's father was exceptionally lucky, his rise to affluence was hardly arduous. He did not provide those texts for industry and prudent enterprise to qualify him for inclusion in Samuel Smiles's gallery of exponents of “Self-help". But his son's upbringing, far from factory, mine or mill, was much the same as that of tens of thousands of others who were to become pillars of the Victorian middle class during Britain's age of industrial supremacy. For some reason, William Morris did not run true to type. Perhaps his upbringing was too comfortable for a child with a most active imagination and practical, inquisitive temper-his head filled with stories of heroic actions, great conflicts against overmastering odds, hard adventures and sacrifices. J.W. Mackail in his biography of Morris mentions a story of a schoolboy rebellion at Marlborough, of which Morris was one of the leaders, and which resulted in his withdrawal from the school to study under a private tutor. By the time he reached Oxford, he was certainly inclined towards rebellion.¹ A good account of these early years is preserved in the recollection of Canon Dixon and of his close friend, Edward Burne-Jones. He and his small circle of friends lived a strenuous, imaginative and intellectual life, isolated from the general run of university activities. Oxford was still preoccupied by the discussions which had been aroused, twenty years before, by the “Oxford Movement", and had been more recently inflamed by Newman's “return" to the Catholic Church. Morris and Burne-Jones were swept into the same current. Canon Dixon recalled: "At this time, Morris was an aristocrat, and a High Churchman. His manners and tastes and sympathies were all aristocratic. His countenance was beautiful in features and expression, particularly in the expression of purity. Occasionally it had a melancholy look. He had a finely cut mouth, the short upper lip adding greatly to the purity of expression. I have a vivid recollection of the splendid beauty of his presence at this time. ,92 Burne-Jones, writing to a friend in 1854, drew a similar picture-but with a significant qualification: he could not quite fit him to the perfect model of the young romantic genius: "He is full of enthusiasm for things holy and beautiful and true, and, what is rarest, of the most exquisite perception and judgement in them. For myself, he has tinged my whole inner being with the beauty of his own, and I know not a single gift for which I owe such gratitude to Heaven as his friendship. If it were not for his boisterous mad outbursts and freaks, which break the romance he sheds around him-at least to me-he would be a perfect hero."³ That was the trouble. If it were not for this damned cheerfulness, he would have seemed set fair to become a Canon, Judge, or minor romantic poet. The attraction of medievalism and Catholicism were in no sense an impulse originating with Morris and his circle. The tide had long been set in that direction: or rather, this may be seen as part of the reaction to the tide of utilitarianism. Revolutionary and reactionary alike were caught in the same current. Disraeli and Lord John Manners, the Tory Young Englanders, dreamt of feudal ideals taking shape in the form of an alliance between the aristocracy and the proletariat (the inheritors of the peasantry) in opposition to the manufacturers and speculators. Staunch "Tory" Radicals, like Richard Oastler, cherished the same illusions in their horror at the naked exploitation and self-interest of industrial capitalism. At Oxford Morris and Burne-Jones admired The Heir of Redclyffe, whose hero was an embodiment of saintly, chivalric honour in a sordid and commercial world, and Kenelm Digby's romanticized pictures of noble and knightly virtue.¹ Malory, Froissart, legends, ballads and chronicles of medieval Europe-all heightened the sense of contrast between the world of the imagination and the world of Fact. Catholicism, and its near cousin, the Oxford Movement, fed the same emotions. On the one hand was the complacent evangelicalism of Morris's childhood memories: on the other, the saintly renunciation of the world practised by Pusey-and the attractions of ritual and plainsong, with their historical associations. In a world which had no use for the human spirit, Catholicism appeared to offer a spiritual refuge free from the taint of commerce. It was during this early period of revulsion against utilitarianism that Morris and Burne-Jones first formed the idea of founding a sacred order or Brotherhood on medieval lines —a small group of friends, celibate, dedicated to the purity of art and religion and to the service of the things of the spirit in a world given over to Mammon. The idea was first mooted even before they had any acquaintance with the more famous "Brotherhood", the Pre-Raphaelites. Edward Burne-Jones, a pale witty, self-effacing youth, at this time (unlike Morris) inclined to dramatize his own emotions, mentioned the project in a half-flippant way in May, 1853, to his friend Cormell Price at Birmingham: "I have set my heart on our founding a Brotherhood. Learn Sir Galahad by heart. He is to be the patron of our Order. I have enlisted one in the project up here, heart and soul. The enlisted "one"was soon the moving spirit. In mid-1854 Burne-Jones was writing to the same friend that he longed to be back at Oxford "with Morris and his glorious little company of martyrs".² Morris was debating seriously the idea of devoting his fortune to the foundation of a monastery. The aim of the Brotherhood was summed up in Burne-Jones's words, as a“Crusade and Holy Warfare against the age".³ But how was this "Holy Warfare"to be fought? Indeed, where was the battleground? Many young men of the middle classes whose aspirations for a life with finer ends than the amassing of wealth and social position had not been utterly crushed, felt at this time a desire to do battle with the forces around them: but their aspirations drained away into the sands of hopelessness as they faced the immovable facade of Victorian society."Yet is my feeling rather to ask, where is the battle?", wrote Arthur Hugh Clough in a long poem published several years before: and, finding no answer, the feeling recedes into disillusion: Let us get on as well as we can, and do the thing we are fit for; Every one for himself, and the common success for us all, and Thankful, if not for our own, why then for the triumph of others, Get along, each as we can, and do the things we are meant for." Here, faced by: “... the whole great wicked artificial civilised fabric— All its unfinished houses, lots for sale, and railway out-works—"1 where was the chosen battlefield? For Morris, it did not long seem to be in a return to purer religion. Religion of all varieties was deeply compromised by the same evils. Gradually, aided partly by the Christian Socialism of Kingsley and Maurice and the hostility to Rome of John Ruskin, but mostly by his own warm and concrete response to the world about him which prevented him from becoming, like nearly all his contemporaries-Christian and atheist alike-enmeshed in the abstract "doubts, disputes, distractions, fears", and ceaseless searching of conscience of his time, the emotional lure of High Anglicanism began to fade. In May, 1855, Cormell Price noted solemnly: "Our Monastery will come to nought, I'm afraid... Morris has become questionable in doctrinal points, and Ted {Burne-Jones] is too Catholic to be ordained. He and Morris diverge more and more in views though not in friendship. And from this time onwards the divergence was to increase. But, when Cormell Price was writing this note, a decision of vital importance was already being formed in the minds of both friends. In the summer of 1855 they were in France together, visiting the cathedrals of Amiens, Beauvais, and Chartres. From Chartres, Burne-Jones recalls, they— resolved definitely that we would begin a life of art, and put off our decision no longer-he should be an architect and I a painter. It was a resolve only needing final conclusion; we were bent on the road for the whole past year, and after that night's talk we never hesitated more. That was the most memorable night of my life."1 The battlefield had been found. ## II. Medievalism and Thomas Carlyle The banner of the Romantic Revolt was passing from the literary to the visual and architectural arts. Indeed, by the late 1860s, when Morris was writing The Earthly Paradise it seemed to him that literature was no more than a skirmish on the edge of the main battlefield. Poetry could withdraw into a world of its own: and the poets could shut out the philistines by refusing to read their work. But architecture it was impossible to ignore. Everywhere, at every turning, Morris and his friends were confronted with the degradation of the human spirit at the hands of industrial capitalism-in the railway stations, slum quarters and bogo-Gothic buildings of Victorian prosperity and in those hybrid monstrosities of architecture, Egyptian, classical and utilitarian by turns, against which the Catholic architect, Pugin, had for some years been writing in protest. The young architects of the 1850s were already deeply involved in the medieval revival, and this was indeed a congenial climate to Morris, who had felt the lure of the Middle Ages since his boyhood. In l850, the cult of the medieval had already revealed itself in various forms. Appearing, both in literature and architecture, in the latter half of the eighteenth century, the fascination with the "Gothic" was rarely more than a freak of aristocratic decadence-the attraction of the bizarre, the "barbarous", and the grotesque, in reaction against the sophistications of eighteenth-century society. Later, Keats enriched his poetry with medieval associations, not so much from any close interest in the thought or society of the Middle Ages, as from the desire to heighten the illusion of his art, and to give his fantasy-world a strange and colourful habitation. We have seen that Morris spent his adolescence surrounded, as if by a palpable atmosphere, by the sense of the mystery and interest of the life of past times. This powerful historical imagination which never died in him, which-rather-became disciplined and deepened during a lifetime of study, was perhaps his greatest single intellectual strength. In his youth, this faculty was quickened to intensity by his growing hatred of his own civilization, and, in common with other great romantics, the contemplation of the past brought with it a sense of nostalgia and loss: "... the plaintive numbers flow For old, unhappy, far-off things, And battles long ago." Heroism, beauty, high endeavour, love-all overthrown, and all contrasting with the tawdry present-these were the reflections aroused by the contemplation of the past. But, as the nineteenth century advanced, a new content was being infused into the cult of medievalism. Increased scholarship added daily to the knowledge of medieval times. For Morris, the most important result of the new scholarship was in the reconstruction of a picture of the Middle Ages, neither as a grotesque nor as a faery world, but as a real community of human beings-an organic pre-capitalist community with values and an art of its own, sharply contrasted with those of Victorian England. However much this reconstruction may have been modified by twentieth-century scholars, it was an influence of the very first importance in liberating Morris's mind from the categories of bourgeois thought. In this reconstructed world, Morris found a place, not to which he could retreat, but in which he could stand and look upon his own age with the eyes of a stranger or visitor, judging his own time by standards other than its own. And the two men who most influenced him in effecting this liberation were Thomas Carlyle and John Ruskin. Carlyle's Past and Present was published in 1843, and read by Morris and Burne-Jones during their years at Oxford. The whole book is a blistering Old Testament attack on the morality of industrial capitalism, contrasted with an idealized picture of life in the monastery of St. Edmunsbury in the twelfth century. Carlyle's books, with their perverse, ejaculatory, repetitive and arrogant style, find few readers to-day. Consistency is not among his merits: pretentious mysticism, white-hot moral indignation, pious mumbo-jumbo, lie side by side. But his writings are among the greatest quarries of ideas in the first half of the nineteenth century, shot through with occasional gleams of the profoundest revolutionary insight. Carlyle was essentially a negative critic. In his political conclusions he was not only reactionary, but actively malignant-jeering at the Chartist leader, Ernest Jones, in prisonletting fall his denunciations on the heads of Owenites, Chartists and industrialists alike: "All this dire misery, therefore: all this of our poor Workhouse Workmen, of our Chartisms, Trades-strikes, Corn-Laws, Toryisms, and the general breakdown of Laissez-faire in these days,-may we not regard it as a voice from the dumb bosom of Nature, saying to us: ‘Behold! Supply-and-demand is not the one Law of Nature; Cashpayment is not the sole nexus of man with man,-how far from it! Deep, far deeper than Supply-and-demand, are Laws, Obligations sacred as Man's Life itself: these also, if you will continue to do work, you shall now learn and obey.' His position was closely akin to that brilliantly characterized by Marx and Engels in the Communist Manifesto as"Feudal Socialism": "Half lamentation, half lampoon; half echo of the past, half menace, of the future; at times, by its bitter, witty and incisive criticism, striking the bourgeoisie to the very heart's core, but always ludicrous in its effect, through total incapacity to comprehend the march of modern history ... What they upbraid the bourgeoisie with is not so much that it creates a proletariat, as that it creates a revolutionary proletariat." But it was within the social dialectic of this time that progressive human feelings might keep company in the same man with reactionary thought. The same current is found to run not only in Thomas Carlyle, but in such men as Richard Oastler. The Manchester School of political economists was now in almost sole possession of the field: under the shiboleths of laissez-faire, Free Trade, freedom from all restraint, the Railway Age was being pressed forward. If it brought misery in its wake-that was unfortunate. But if this advance were necessary for commercial prosperity, it was argued, then it must in the end bring prosperity for the “nation": —Hard Times once again. If reason and economics taught this philosophy, then men like Carlyle and Oastler, were tempted to cast reason and economics aside, to appeal to the heart, to "Obligations sacred as Man's Life itseif. But when these Obligations came to be described, they often took on the colour of feudal obligations and relationships: relationships which, however severe and binding, at least appeared as human relationships, relations between men, and not between man and an impersonal labour-market. It is in Carlyle's disgust at the reduction by capitalism of all human values to cash values that his greatness lies: it is this which exercised most influence over Morris, and-while it ran underground awhile-found full and constant expression in his later years. It is the perpetual refrain of Past and Present: "Cash-payment never was, or could expect for a few years be, the union-bond of man to man. Cash never yet paid one man fully his deserts to another; nor could it, nor can it, now or henceforth to the end of the world."1 Work and Wages-these Carlyle put forward as the "largest of .questions" in his time, and while his positive proposals are either feudal nonsense or too paltry to do more than scratch the surface of the problem, his denunciation of the "cashnexus"won a response from Marx, and remained indelibly printed upon William Morris's consciousness. Years afterwards, in his Socialist lectures, he refers again and again to capitalism as this “so-called society", and reiterates that a “society" based upon cash and self-interest is not a society at all, but a state of war. This all-important idea he learnt, in his Oxford days, directly from Carlyle: "We call it a Society; and go about professing openly the totallest separation, isolation. Our life is not a mutual helpfulness; but rather, cloaked under due laws-of-war, named‘fair competition' and so forth, it is a mutual hostility. We have profoundly forgotten everywhere that Cash-payment is not the sole relation of human beings. . ."2 And, all the while, Carlyle stressed the contrast between capitalist society and the feudal obligations and relations of the monks of St. Edmundsbury to point his moral-a contrast from which Morris was only too ready to learn. ## WILLIAM MORRIS One other doctrine of Carlyle was profoundly important to Morris-his constant emphasis on the value of work-that labour is the root of life. “All work, even cotton-spinning is noble; work is alone noble".1 “All true Work is sacred; in all true Work, were it but true hand-labour, there is something of divineness."2 "A man perfects himself by working. Foul jungles are cleared away, fair seed-fields rise instead, and stately cities; and withal the man himself first ceases to be a jungle, and foul unwholesome desert thereby... The man is now a man. This teaching, of the dignity of all labour, Morris learnt to practise in his own life. It formed one of his first bonds of sympathy and understanding with the working class. But Carlyle saw labour as a religious sacrament; he was not concerned with art. And it was from John Ruskin that Morris gained a new outlook on the role of creative satisfaction in labour. ## III. John Ruskin To the end of his life, Morris looked back to Ruskin with gratitude. Ruskin was the "Master": and though Morris, the pupil, in the end left him far behind, he was always quick to acknowledge his great debt. In his article of 1894,How I Became a Socialist, Morris recalled: "Before the uprising of modern Socialism almost all intelligent people either were, or professed themselves to be, quite contented with the civilisation of this century... This was the Whig frame of mind, natural to the modern prosperous middle-class men. . . "But besides these contented ones there were others who were not really contented, but had a vague sentiment of repulsion to the triumph of civilisation, but were coerced into silence by the measureless power of Whiggery. Lastly, there were a few who were in open rebellion against the said Whiggery-a few, say two, Carlyle and Ruskin. The latter, before my days of practical Socialism, was my master towards the ideal aforesaid, and, looking backward, I cannot help saying, how deadly dull the world would have been twenty years ago but for Ruskin! It was through him that I learnt to give form to my discontent, which I must say was not by any means vague. Apart from the desire to produce beautiful things, the leading passion of my life has been and is hatred of modern civilisation." On another occasion in his later years, when a speaker at an Art Congress in Edinburgh referred slightingly to Ruskin, Morris declared: "That's all nonsense. Why, man, Ruskin has made Art possible for us!" When Morris went up to Oxford, Ruskin's Modern Painters and The Seven Lamps of Architecture had already been published. Canon Dixon recalled: "It was when... Burne-Jones and he got at Ruskin, that strong direction was given to a true vocation... Morris would often read Ruskin aloud. He had a mighty singing voice, and chanted rather than read those weltering oceans of eloquence as they have never been given before or since, it is most certain. The description of the Slave Ship, or of Turner's skies, with the burden,'Has Claude given this?' were declaimed by him in a manner that made them seem as if they had been written for no end but that he should hurl them in thunder on the head of the base criminal who had never seen what Turner saw in the sky."2 But it was Ruskin's The Stones of Venice, the second and third volumes of which were published in the year after Morris went up to Oxford, that gave Morris a theory of art and society which was to influence all his later thought. Ruskin's interest in art was essentially moral: and in the moral inter-relation between art and society. He was not, of course, the first nineteenth-century critic to assert that the arts had a moral function although he was the first to give the visual arts this special prominence. It was generally held that the arts had some didactic, or even utilitarian, task to perform. But between the generally held view and Ruskin's view there was the difference that lies between the words “moralizing" and "moral". The Victorian critics were content that art should moralize, should point a moral congenial to established society: and, in his weaker moments, Ruskin fell as deeply into this error as any other. But, at his best, Ruskin sought to treat the arts as the expression of the whole moral being of the artist, and-through him-of the quality of life of the society in which the artist lived. Great art, said Ruskin, "compasses and calls forth the entire human spirit", and should the art of a period be poor, it was an unfailing indication of the poverty of life of the people; while, in their turn, the poverty or health of the arts effect the quality of life. His criticism is made up of a continual passage from life to art, and from art to life. He was, like Carlyle, a man of deep but fitful insight (“Of Ruskin Morris said that he would write the most profound truths and forget them five minutes later"), and while the moments of insight lasted he had the courage to follow his thought'to a conclusion. Such a moment was reached in the sixth chapter of the second volume of The Stones of Venice, when the mists of Victorian sentimentality parted and he saw directly the Great Lie at the heart of capitalist society: "We manufacture everything...except men.""From the time at which he wrote this chapter... those ethical and political considerations have never been absent from his criticism of art; and, in my opinion, it is just this part of his work, fairly begun in ‘The Nature of Gothic'... which has had the most enduring and beneficial effect on his contemporaries, and will have through them on succeeding generations". So wrote Morris in 1892, when he printed this chapter, "The Nature of Gothic", separately at the Kelmscott Press. And he added: "To my mind... in future days it will be considered as one of the very few necessary and inevitable utterances of the century." In "The Nature of Gothic"Ruskin set himself the task of analysing the main characteristics-and, more than this, the essential character-of Gothic architecture. The first characteristic he singled out as "Savageness or Rudeness", and the sections dealing with this are the ones which impressed themselves upon Morris's mind. The rough, irregular character of the stonework of late medieval buildings, Ruskin declared, can only be understood by considering the nature of the craftsmen who built them. Every man, Ruskin asserted, has creative powers slumbering within him. Moreover, the act of self-realization in labour was, for Ruskin, no mere luxury. Like Carlyle, he believed that through labour man achieved his own humanity: but with Ruskin there was this difference —the labour must be creative labour, summoning up the intellectual and moral-and not only physical and mechanical -powers of the labourer. This led him to a direct contrast between medieval and nineteenth-century society: working creature, you cannot make a tool. Let him but begin to imagine, to think, to try to do anything worth doing; and the engineturned precision is lost at once. Out come all his roughness, all his dulness, all his incapability; shame upon shame, failure upon failure, pause after pause: but out comes the whole majesty of him also. . ."1 The very precision of the products of the modern engineering industry were-Ruskin asserted-the visible indications of the slavery of the modern worker; "all those accurate mouldings, and perfect polishings, and unerring adjustments of the seasoned wood and tempered steel"upon which Victorian society so prided itself were the marks of the murder of the human soul by the exclusion of the worker's moral and intellectual faculties. By contrast, in medieval times, "There might be more freedom in England, though her feudal Lord's lightest words were worth men's lives, and though the blood of the vexed husbandman dropped in the furrows of her fields, than there is while the animation of her multitudes is sent like fuel to feed the factory smoke, and the strength of them is given daily to be wasted into the fineness of a web, or racked into the exactness of a line. "And, on the other hand, go forth again to gaze upon the old cathedral front, where you have smiled so often at the fantastic ignorance of the old sculptors; examine once more those ugly goblins, and formless monsters, and stern statues, anatomiless and rigid; but do not mock at them, for they are signs of the life and liberty of every workman who struck the stone; a freedom of thought, and rank in scale of being, such as no laws, no charters, no charities can secure; but which it must be the first aim of all Europe at this day to regain for her children." Ruskin was not the first to notice or to protest against "this degradation of the operative into a machine": but he was the first to declare that men's "pleasure in the work by which they make their bread"³ lay at the very foundations of society, and to relate this to his whole criticism of the arts. Moreover, he went on to declare, in a passage that may have had an incalculable influence on Morris's future career, that the separation of manual and intellectual labour was equally destructive of both: "We are always in these days endeavouring to separate the two; we want one man to be always thinking, and another to be always working, and we call one a gentleman and the other an operative; whereas the workman ought often to be thinking, and the thinker often to be working, and both should be gentlemen, in the best sense. As it is, we make both ungentle, the one envying, the other despising, his brother; and the mass of society is made up of morbid thinkers, and miserable workers... It would be well if all of us were good handicraftsmen in some kind, and the dishonour of manual labour done away with altogether... In each several profession, no master should be too proud to do its hardest work. The painter should grind his own colours; the architect work in the mason's yard with his men; the mastermanufacturer be himself a more skilled operative than any man in his mills; and the distinction between one man and another be only in experience and skill, and the authority and wealth which these must naturally and justly obtain."1 In this passage may, perhaps, be found the germ of the Morris Firm. In the next decade-as we shall see-Ruskin turned his attention more and more to political economy and questions of social morality, and took several further impetuous zig-zag steps in the direction of a revolutionary understanding of capitalist society. For all his moral courage and indignation, his eyes were fixèd longingly upon the craftsmanship of precapitalist modes of production. In his negative criticisms, however, he was in his time without rival— crumbs of life; so that all the piece of intelligence that is left in a man is not enough to make a pin, or a nail, but exhausts itself in making the point or the head of a nail."1 William Morris read this and discussed it excitedly with Edward Burne-Jones in 1853.In 1883 he was reading excitedly once again, and wrote at the top of a sheet of notes: “It is not only the labour that is divided, subdivided, and portioned out betwixt divers men: it is the man himself who is cut up, and metamorphosised into the automatic spring of an exclusive operation “K arl Marx."2 And the sheet continues with notes from Chapter XIV of the First Volume of Marx's Capital, “Division of Labour and Manufacture". Repeatedly, when reading this chapter, Morris must have felt the hand of Ruskin on his shoulder: "The knowledge, the judgement, and the will, which,though in ever so small a degree, are practised by the independent peasant or handicraftsman... these faculties are now required only for the workshop as a whole. Intelligence in production expands in one direction, because it vanishes in many others. What is lost by the detail labourers, is concentrated in the capital that employs them."3 ## And, in another part: "Within the capitalist system all methods for raising the social productiveness of labour are brought about at the cost of the individual labourer; all means for the development of production transform themselves into means of domination over, and exploitation of, the producers; they mutilate the labourer into a fragment·of a man, degrade him to the level of an appendage of a machine, destroy every remnant of charm in his work, and turn it into a hated toil; they estrange from him the intellectual potentialities of the labour-process in the same proportion as science is incorporated in it as an independent power; they distort the conditions under which he works, subject him during the labour-process to a despotism the more hateful for its meanness; they transform his life-time into working-time, and drag his wife and child beneath the wheels of the Juggernaut of capital. But all methods for the production of surplus-value are at the same time methods of accumulation... of capital. Accumulation of wealth at one pole is, therefore, at the same time accumulation of misery, agony of toil, slavery, ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, at the opposite. . ."1 "It is not the place, here", Marx wrote, "to go on to show how division of labour siezes upon, not only the economical, but every other sphere of society, and everywhere lays the foundation of that all engrossing system of specialising and sorting men, that development in a man of one single faculty at the expense of all other faculties, which caused A. Ferguson, the master of Adam Smith, to exclaim: 'We make a nation of Helots, and have no free citizens.’ 2 What Marx did not have place nor time to develop at this point was subsequently to be a central preoccupation of Morris's thought. ## CHAPTER III ## ROSSETTI AND THE PRE-RAPHAELITES ## I. “My work is the embodiment of dreams. . ." AT the time when he was reading Carlyle and Ruskin, Morris had very little first-hand experience of working people, of their conditions of life and labour. Of the life of the workers he had a vague but continual guilty apprehension. But his knowledge (and hatred) of capitalism in the 1850s was derived not from contact with the sources of exploitation, but from the squalor and anarchy which he passed through in London and the great towns: from the degradation of its architecture: and from the sham and hypocrisy prevading its manners and thought. In their influence upon Morris in the fifties, Ruskin's writings were perhaps of greatest importance in helping towards his choice of art as the central battleground in the “Holy Warfare against the age." For “politics"-the intrigues and shadow-boxing of the two great political parties—he was already forming a contemptuous indifference, which was nourished by Carlyle's scorn of democratic fetishes, and Dickens's ridicule of Parliament. He was attracted by (and learnt something from) the“Christian Socialism" of Charles Kingsley and F.D. Maurice. But when, early in 1856, he came under the influence of the engaging and arresting personality of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, these ideas were left to mature in the back of his mind. In July, 1856, he was writing to his friend, Cormell Price: "I can't enter into politico-social subjects with any interest, for on the whole I see that things are in a muddle, and I have no power or vocation to set them right in ever so little a degree. My work is the embodiment of dreams in one form or another. . . In one sense, this letter reveals that Morris was aware of the severity of the disease from which society was suffering: he put forward no petty quack remedies: the immensity of the problem left him helpless. In another it reveals the weak point in his vision at this time."Things are in a muddle"—can it be an accident that almost the identical phrase-“It's aw a muddle", “Fro'first to last, a muddle!"—is the refrain of the sentimentalized workingman, Stephen Blackpool, whose central position in the structure of Dickens's Hard Times destroys the artistic integrity of the novel, and blunts the edge of its attack? Hard Times appeared in 1854, and Morris -already an admirer of Dickens-was certain not to have passed it by. And Blackpool-and, above all, this very phrase, “a muddle"—serves in the novel to obscure the one fact which Dickens could never bring himself to look in the face-the fact of the class struggle, the irreconcilable interests of the employers and the employed. In the 1850s, however, Morris abandoned the effort to analyse the cause for his "hatred of civilisation", and surrendered to the over-mastering attractions of“romance". For it was just at this time that he came under the influence of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, and-through him-met the members and associates of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. This “Brotherhood" was a high-sounding name adopted by a small circle of young artists (and would-be artists) determined to raise the banner of revolt against the academic art of their time, but incoherent in their ideas, and ill-assorted in their talents. The name itself was derived from the banter of fellow art-students, who thought that the reverence paid by John Everett Millais and William Holman Hunt to the religious art of the early Italian Renaissance was exaggerated and ludicrous. The “Brotherhood" had been founded in 1848, to give a sense of mystery, dedication, formality, to the group, when thev met in each others'rooms and studios for earnest discussion. Of its seven original members, three were of especial prominence-the two very young professional painters, with marked abilities, Hunt and Millais: and Rossetti himself, the brilliant London-born son of an Italian refugee. Rossetti's younger brother, William Michael, was another member (critic and recorder of the Brotherhood, since he had no talent as a painter), and his sister, Christina Rossetti the poet, was a close associate. Ford Madox Brown, the painter—a few years older than the others-was welcomed as an unofficial associate, while John Ruskin came to the aid of the Brotherhood when they were hard-pressed by outraged critics, and adopted a position of qualified patronage. In 1849 and 1850 Millais, Hunt and Rossetti exhibited paintings adorned with the mystic initials, "P.R.B.", which aroused both attention and rage in academic circles: and in 1850 a paper named The Germ was published, which lasted for only four numbers, and whose contents were written almost entirely by members of the Brotherhood or their associates. The fame of the Brotherhood had reached Morris and Burne-Jones at Oxford, through the storm of critical controversy, and through Ruskin's defence of their work. The rumour of revolt within the visual arts excited their interest: when they found a copy of The Germ they read it with enthusiasm, and they made it their business to view any paintings by the group which they could find. In January, 1856 (when the original Brotherhood was already breaking up), Burne-Jones contacted Rossetti at the Great Ormond Street Working Men's College which the Christian Socialist, F.D. Maurice, had helped to found, and at which both Rossetti and Ruskin gave lectures and tuition. He fell completely under Rossetti's spell: and was flattered to find at a subsequent meeting that Rossetti was taking a close interest in the Oxford and Cambridge Magazine. Burne-Jones recalled: "He received me very courteously, and asked much about Morris, one or two of whose poems he knew already, and I think that was our principal subject of talk, for he seemed much interested about him. He showed me many designs for pictures; they tossed about everywhere in the room: the floor at the end was covered with them and with books... I stayed long and watched him at work, not knowing till many a day afterwards that this was a thing he greatly hated, and when, for shame, I could stay no longer, I went away, having carefully concealed from him the desire I had to be a painter.' Even after the passage of years, Burne-Jones could still recall with excitement the spell which Rossetti's studio cast upon him. Here-after all the youthful conversations at Oxford, the awed discussions with Morris of this new, revolutionary, movement in art of which they had read in the pages of their master, Ruskin, and the visits they had made to see the pictures of members of the Brotherhood-here at last he seemed to have stepped directly into the presence of Art itself, and-what is more-Art treated him familiarly and courteously, and had even noticed the work of his best friend. Rossetti, on his side, was flattered by the attention he received, for the “great" man was himself still in his late twenties: and, no doubt, he was not so disturbed to be watched at his work as Burne-Jones later came to fear. Indeed only a few days later he was writing to his friend, Allingham: "That notice in the Oxford and Cambridge Magazine was the most gratifying thing by far that ever happened to me-being unmistakeably genuine... It turns out to be by a certain youthful Jones, who was in London the other day, and whom... I have now met. One of the nicest young fellows in-Dreamland. For there most of the writers in that miraculous piece of literature seem to be. Surely this cometh in some wise of the Germ. . ."2 Morris, by now articled to G.E. Street, the architect (where he met his life-long friend, Philip Webb), but still with one foot in the university, was the next to be introduced to the shrine of Art. Burne-Jones, indeed, was now worshipping at it almost daily, having thrown over his Oxford degree and moved to London to dedicate his life to painting. Here Morris joined him on many weekends in the early summer, and they basked together in Rossetti's patronage: "Our Sundays were very peaceful days... often spent by Morris reading aloud the Morte d'Arthur while I worked, and often Rossetti would join us in the afternoon, and it became clear that he cared to be with us."1 "We fell under the influence of Rossetti", Morris recalled in 1892,² “perhaps I even more than Burne-Jones,³ and he did us a great deal of good." It was the only time in his life that Morris was completely-and almost uncritically-swept off his feet by another personality. Rossetti was most decisive: Keats was the climax of romantic poetry: the course of poetry was now nearly run, and the next Keats must be a painter. In fact, every man ought to be a painter. Within a matter of weeks, architecture was abandoned. In July, 1856, Morris was writing to a friend (in the same letter in which he declared that “my work is the embodiment of dreams"): "I have seen Rossetti twice since I saw the last of you; spent almost a whole day with him the last time, last Monday... Rossetti says I ought to paint, he says I shall be able; now as he is a very great man, and speaks with authority and not as the scribes, I must try.. . ## 1 Memorials, I, p. 133. ## 2 Works, Vol. XXI, p. xxxi. It is difficult to believe this, in view of the tone of adulation in some of Burne-Jones's private letters and recollections, e.g. “One autumn evening Gabriel and I were alone, and... we were chatting together-and he to me was as Pope or Emperor-it was so nice, for when he loved man or woman they knew it and it was happy; and it was just then that a note came from —— to say that he would come in a few minutes to fetch us to dine to meet this and that... Gabriel ... rang the bell and asked the man when the next train for Euston started for London, and a cab was got and we were in the train for Euston when —— came. It was ten o'clock when we got to Euston Hotel, and we.. . were back in Oxford by nine [the next morning]... I thought, 'this man could lead armies and destroy empires if he liked; how good it is to be with him'" (Memorials, I, p. 167). "I shall have enough to do, if I actually master this art of painting: I dare scarcely think failure possible at times, and yet I know in my mind that my chances are slender; I am glad that I am compelled to try anyhow: I was slipping off into a kind of small (very small) Palace of Art.. ."1 By August he was sharing a studio in London with Burne-Jones, who wrote: "Topsy and I live together in the quaintest room in all London, hung with brasses of old knights and drawings of Albert Durer. We know Rossetti now as a daily friend, and we know Browning too, who is the greatest poet alive, and we know Arthur Hughes, and Woolner, and Madox Brown... Topsy will be a painter, he works hard, is prepared to wait twenty years, loves art more and more every day. He has written several poems, exceedingly dramatic—the Brownings, I hear, have spoken very highly of one that was read to them; Rossetti thinks one called ‘Rapunzel' is equal to Tennyson... The 'Mag.'is going to smash-let it go! the world is not converted and never will be."2 ## Rossetti continued to drum into the two lads his gospel: "If any man has any poetry in him, he should paint, for it has all been said and written, and they have scarcely begun to paint."3 And-while Morris was learning to do it—he could be useful in other ways: for Rossetti had not overlooked the fact that his protégé had money, and this enabled him to extend the range of his good-natured patronage.“Yesterday", Ford Madox Brown noted in his diary for August 24th, 1856,"Rossetti brought his ardent admirer Morris of Oxford, who bought my little Hayfield for £40."4 In the next two years, if the Palace of Art was evacuated, Morris set up in real style in a Gothic castle in Bohemia. The studio at Red Lion Square was furnished with enormous “intensely medieval furniture", including a huge settle surmounted with three great cupboards, on the panels of which Rossetti painted scenes from Dante and Malory. Morris, working to master the art of painting, became noticeably mnore variable in mood-at some times hilarious, at others taciturn and morose, at others flying into uncontrollable rages. In 1857 the famous descent of the artists and amateurs on Oxford was made, in order to paint murals on the walls of the Oxford Union. Rossetti took with him a mixed bag of friends and protégés, and they set to work to paint with distemper on a ground of whitewash on damp mortar scenes out of Malory. Morris's picture was entitled "How Sir Palomydes loved La Belle Iseult, with exceeding great love out of measure, and how she loved not him again but rather Sir Tristram". The remaining members of the Oxford “Brotherhood" were enlisted to help in the execution of the work. Dixon, the fledgling Canon, took a hand, while C.J. Faulkner —now an Oxford Fellow and Mathematics Tutor—“comes out tremendously strong on the roof with all kinds of quaint beasts and birds".1 They sat for each other as models, and Cormell Price noted in his diary for October 18th, 1857, "Stood for Top for two hours in a dalmatic".² Morris's head was “always fit for Lancelot or Tristram",³ while his (now portly) figure, with legs straddled like Henry VIII, served to decorate angles in the roof. “For the purposes of our drawing we often needed armour", recalled Burne-Jones: I was working high up at my picture, I heard a strange bellowing in the building, and turning round... saw an unwonted sight. The basinet was being tried on, but the visor, for some reason would not lift, and I saw Morris embedded in iron, dancing with rage and roaring inside. The mail coat came in due time, and was so satisfactory to its designer that the first day it came he chose to dine in it. It became him well; he looked very splendid."1 The story of the armour is one among many humorous anecdotes of Morris at Oxford. He was now known by his friends as “Topsy", partly in honour of his mop of matted hair, partly after the character in Uncle Tom's Cabin. One of his associates recalled him as being, at this time, "a shrt, very square-built, spectacled man with a head that appeared too big from the length and thickness of his dark, matted locks. His movements were jerky and full of humour, for Morris was an excellent mimic... He was very shy, and had a way of shifting his legs and twiddling with his watch-chain which gave him somewhat of a grotesque appearance. He was the essence of good-nature, and stood chaff with extra-ordinary tolerance." In the circle of enthusiasts, he was the butt of their laughter. His painting was amateurish-the figures fourteen feet high, their legs hidden by sun-flowers, above which great heads and shoulders appeared. Rossetti told him his Iseult was ugly, and sent him back to“nature"to make sketches of a local b lle. The wary mother refused to allow Morris to draw her daughter, and onhis return, disconsolate, he was confronted by some rhymes: "Poor Topsy has gone to make a sketch of Miss Lipscombe. But he can't draw the head, and don't know where the hips come." When painting the roof, he was covered from head to foothair, beard, and clothes-in paint. "My good man, can you tell me the subject of these pictures?" enquired one officious don, examining the work in progress: "Morris turned suddenly on the don, glaring at him through his tempera-splashed spectacles. Morte d'Arthur he shouted, and mounting a ladder, he vanished into the chaos of the roof scaffolding. The next day Rossetti received from the don a complaint as to the rudeness of his workmen. The stories of Morris's hatred of any formal or fashionable social intercourse are many. Day and night, he lived with the stain of paint on his hands, the dreams of Malory in his head. "Morris went to Jones's on Sunday night", noted the sister of Cormell Price in her diary, "and his hair was so long and he looked so wild that the servants who opened the door would not let him in, thinking he was a burglar." This Oxford adventure was the culminating period of Morris's youthful revolt. In these dizzy weeks, surrounded by other young enthusiasts, he came nearest to bringing to life his dream-world in the heart of Victorian England. During these weeks several of his best early poems were written, in a medieval volume with a large clasp. A hilarious and eccentric undergraduate, with scarlet hair, who flaunted revolutionary, atheist and republican convictions, became one of the circle: his name was Swinburne. Rossetti discovered the beautiful Jane Burden, with her deep mystic eyes, shapely neck, and plenitude of dark hair, who was to become William Morris's wife. The co-operative work at the Union, under the inspiration of the master-artist, Rossetti, seemed to give a new reality to the idea of ‘Brotherhood": in such a manner (it seemed) the frescoes on some stately church might have been painted in Italy during the early Renaissance. Nineteen-year-old Val Prinsep, aspiring to become a painter, who was one of the circle, could still recall fifty years later the“singular charm" of the adventure. The medieval dream was built into their everyday life. Like other such cliques a special slang, private jokes and allusions, were cultivated. Every lodging was a“crib", all beautiful women were “stunners"."For a man not to know the difference between a basinet and a salade was shameful". They asserted the same artistic doctrines: “in all art there was to be an abundance of pattern". Above all, underlying their high spirits and affectations, there was a tremendous senseof dedication to art, an earnest passion to achieve something worthy of the beauty of past times, despite the commercialism and philistinism of their age. "I can still picture to myself the little dining-room at that ‘delightful crib'"; recalled Val Prinsep: "I can recall the animated discussions on Art subjects that weheld there. I can hear Rossetti from his sofa interrupting us, and saying: "'It's all very well talking, but if I could paint like ——', mentioning a painter, who was then the most popular artist of the day, 'why, by Jove, I should do it.' "I can see Morris stop aghast in his stumping backwards and forwards, as was his wont, and Ned look up from his drawing, and crying a pained, 'Oh, Gabriel', and then bursting forth in a roar of laughter at the idea of 'our Gabriel' being anything but what he was. Then Morris recovers himself and chuckles, ‘What a lark!'"1 ## II. The Pre-Raphaelites-and the "Soonset Floosh" That these years of discipleship to Rossetti were ones of high-spirited revolt-Bohemian, enthusiastic, iconoclastic—is clear enough. Analysis of the nature of this revolt is more difficult. If we consider the aims of the original Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood (which was already dissolving when Morris and Burne-Jones met Rossetti) we meet with a good deal of confusion. Hunt and William Michael Rossetti attempted to write the history of the movement in later life, and they by no means agreed on the original objectives of the Brotherhood, nor even on the course of events. Certainly, all who took part in its early stages believed that they were in revolt against the academic art of the time. Several of the group came from impoverished professional or lower middle-class backgrounds: like Keats, they found the need to fight to gain entry and recognition in artistic circles, and, like Keats, they resented the tradition of deference to aristocratic taste which had by no means been ousted by the mid-century. The Royal Academy (to their minds) represented the bastion of reaction in the visual arts, and William Morris, in 1891, still regarded the Pre-Raphaelite movement as“a really audacious attempt: a definite revolt against the Academical Art which brooded over all the Schools of civilized Europe at the time. . ." "One must look upon it as a portion of the general revolt against Academicism in Literature as well as in Art", continued Morris."In Literature the revolt had taken place much earlier..."1 And, in truth, the movement started with a strong literary influence. The painters influenced by the great romantic poets, sought to discard the cold conventions of a mechanical “grand manner", and to return to the direct observation of nature. F.G. Stephens, one of the original Brotherhood, wrote in The Germ: "The Public are taught to look with delight upon murky old masters, with dismally demonaic trees, and dull waters of lead, colourless and like ice, upon rocks that make geologists wonder, their angles are so impossible, their fractures are so new... so it is that the world is taught to think of nature, as seen through other men's eyes, without any reference to its original powers of perception. . ."2 Holman Hunt, more than fifty years later, reconstructed a conversation with Millais in the early days, when the two young painters decided to challenge the stylized manners of the Schools: "Let us go on a bold track... It is simply fuller Nature that we want... Why should the several parts of the composition be always opposed in pyramids? Why should the highest light be always on the principal figure? Why make one corner of the picture always in shade? For what reason is the sky in a daylight picture as black as night?"1 So far, so good-but overshadowing the “return to Nature" of the romantic literary tradition there was the particular influence of the poems of John Keats. The discovery of Keats's poems had nourished the adolescent revolt of both Hunt and Rossetti. Hunt's first picture exhibited at the Academy was The Eve of St. Agnes: the first avowedly Pre-Raphaelite painting of Millais was taken from Isabella, and Rossetti's first important poem, The Blessed Damozel, was written as a heavenly complement to the same poem. The desire to make their painting the medium for the expression of more intimate and personal feelings than were capable of expression in the conventional “grand manner" was thus, in its early stages, coloured by the attractions of Keats's imaginative "realms of gold": Many years later William Michael Rossetti sought to find a formula which reconciled both the "return to Nature" and the lure of “romance"— "the predominant conception of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood," he wrote, was "that an artist, whether painter or writer, ought to be bent upon defining and expressing his own personal thoughts, and that these ought to be based upon a direct study of Nature.' But John Ruskin, in the letter to The Times in 1851 in which he came to the defence of the Brotherhood (placing, admittedly, his own interpretation on their aims, rather than that of Hunt or Rossetti) emphasized quite different points: "They intend to return to early days in one point only-that.. . they will draw either what they see, or what they suppose might have been the actual facts of the scene they desire to represent, irrespective of any conventional rules of picture-making: and they have chosen their unfortunate though not inaccurate name because all artists did this before Raphael's time and after Raphael's time did not do this, but sought to paint fair pictures rather than represent stern facts. . ." The representation of“stern facts" and the expression of the artist's“own personal thoughts"need not necessarily be opposed. But the two phrases indicate the contradictory nature of Pre-Raphaelite aims.“"Truth to Nature" proved to be one of the most deceptive slogans of any artistic movement in history. The Pre-Raphaelite painters devoted exceptional pains to copying the external appearances of reality. They took each other (and each other's friends) for models, and posed in strange costumes and in stranger attitudes. William Morris, raging inside a basinet, is only one piece of vociferous testimony among many to the literal enthusiasm with which the group of painters adopted their fallacypainting each vein and mottle on a leaf, painting the coat of a sheep hair by hair, or tethering a calf in the studio-in the belief that by so doing they were approaching closer to the portrayal of reality. But the very last impression that is given by the majority of Pre-Raphaelite paintings is that they are engaged in any serious way with the exploration of contemporary experience. The painters understood perfectly well that “Truth to Nature"pushed to its extreme would become mere copywork naturalism. In fact, they took themes for their painting which varied like the two extremes of Victorian poetry. At both extremes they were subject to a strong literary inspiration. In the first siage of the movement, Keats, Dante and the Bible, provided most of the texts. In the second stage-of Morris, Burne-Jones and Rossetti-Malory supplanted these, and Morris's first full-scale picture (commissioned for Thomas Plint, a Leeds stockbroker) was entitled “Sir Tristram after his illness, in the garden of King Mark's Palace, recognized by the dog he had given to Iseult". One of Burne-Jones's earliest paintings (also commissioned for Plint) was taken from Rossetti's poem, The Blessed Damozel: "I have chosen The Blessed Damozel for my year's work. In the first picture I shall make a man walking in the street of a great city, full of all kinds of happy life; children, such as he will never have, and lovers walking, and ladies leaning from windows all down great lengths of street leading to the city walls; and there the gates are wide open, letting in a space of green field and cornfield in harvest; and all round his head a great rain of swirling Autumn leaves blowing from a little walled graveyard. "And in the other picture I shall make lovely Heaven, where the lady stands at the edge of the garden and leans over, trying to count a thick flight of little souls in bright flames, and the garden of Heaven full of flowers on every side of her and of lovers who have met again. Oh dear, I dare say it will turn out something awful."1 And at the other extreme, something equally awful, if not even more grisly, was perpetrated by members of the movement-their attempt to fit into their laborious backgrounds dramatic scenes from contemporary life. Just as remote idealized beauty-La Belle Iseult and Guenevere and the Blessed Damozel-provided the first source, so Vice provided the second. Hunt hit rock-bottom with The Awakened Conscience, whose scene is “one of those maison damnées which the wealth of a seducer has furnished for the luxury of a woman who has sold herself and her soul to him". The Seducer is portrayed with one hand striking the keys of the piano, and with the other arm embracing the Victim of his Passions, who stands "her wide eyes straining on vacancy as if seeing Hell open, the trinkets on her hands driven into the flesh and the fingers intertwined with a spasmodic power".² But. while Rossetti also tried his hand at Vice, the original intention of the Brotherhood had been to treat contemporary reality in other aspects as well. An article in The Germ entitled“Modern Giants"declared that we miss “the poetry of the things about us": "our railways, factories, mines, roaring cities, steam vessels and the endless novelties and wonders produced every day; which if they were found only in the One Thousand and One Nights, or in any poem classical or romantic, would be gloried over without end; for as the majority of us know not a bit more about them, but merely their names, we keep up the same mystery, the main thing required for the surprise of the imagination."1 "Truth to Nature.""Stern facts.""Flight of little souls in bright flames."“Maisons damnées.""Mystery—the main thing required for the surprise of the imagination." Perhaps the last phrase provides the best clue in this Babel. Once again, we are forced to return to the conflict voiced in the poems and letters of John Keats. But, in the minds of these young artists, the sense of opposition between the world of “romance" and that of everyday experience has reached a further stage. Reality, the world where "men sit and hear each other groan", is presented as Vice: an attempt to represent the truth of suffering, which is tarnished by the sentimental moralizing from which even Dickens did not escape. This impoverished sentimentalizing was based, in the last analysis, upon a refusal (or inability) really to look the facts of capitalist exploitation and class conflict in the face. Ruskin himself admitted, he had “"naturally a great dread of subjects altogether painful". As for railways, factories, mines -these remained subjects for Art only so long as they remained to the artist a "mystery", miraculous magic powers summoned into being by genii. Once the “mystery" was penetrated, they revealed themselves to the artist only as squalid scenes of suffering, exploitation and money-making, drained of all the aspirations transfigured in the world of “romance". Rossetti, indeed, tried his hand at Vice (in his long uncompleted painting, Found) but, finding it uncongenial, he had dedicated himself to the other extreme of “romance" when Morris and Burne-Jones came under his influence. The Pre-Raphaelite doctrine of "Truth to Nature" finds a marked parallel in the concrete, richly ornamental language of Keats's Eve of St. Agnes (a poem bound to exert a special attraction on a painter, with its splendid colour-imagery), and in the matter-of-fact realistic details which Tennyson embroidered into Mariana: "The rusted nails fell from the knots That held the pear to the gable-wall. . ." or the colourful visual detail of the Lady of Shallott: “All in the blue unclouded weather Thick-jewell'd shone the saddle-leather, The helmet and the helmet feather Burn'd like one burning flame together, As he rode down to Čamelot. . ." Browning, and, later, Morris, employed similar realistic devices in their poems on medieval themes in order to evoke their romantic dream in concrete terms and with the semblance of life. In Burne-Jones's paintings from Malory, in Rossetti's early paintings from Dante, and in Morris's own painting of Guenevere, minutely naturalistic detail-of costume, rich ornament, and hangings-was used to like effect. But the impression left by the pictures is not one of realism. Rather, Keats's world of “poesy" and“romance" appears to have lost its last root-holds in the soil of contemporary experience, and to be becoming emaciated, sapless, and drooping. We are no longer conscious (as we are in Keats's greatest work) of the real sense of conflict between rich aspiration and drab reality, and of the struggle to reconcile the two. Rather, the extreme of“romance"(like that of Vice) seems always tainted by the evasion of life. At their worst, Pre-Raphaelite versions of Keats or the Bible or Malory were (like the worst of Tennyson's Idylls) little more than the projection of the impoverished sensibility of the Victorians into a medieval setting, with conventional Victorian gentlemen and ladies dressed up in fancy costume. At their best, they were remote and ethereal, saturated with a yearning for values lost to the world, and whose impossibility of realization was accentuated rather than relieved by the naturalistic detail of the painting. This version of contemporary experience was directly related to the concept of “Beauty"which Rossetti and his friends had taken over, perhaps unconsciously, from Keats: or which, it may be, they had reached independently from the pressure of a similar hatred of their times. Victorian society (they held) was inimical to all "Beauty", and to the end of his life Morris maintained that the true artist at work within capitalist society must always be forced to "Look back!" In 1891 he delivered a lecture on"The English Pre-Raphaelites" in which he came to the defence of Burne-Jones and Rossetti on this very point, in terms which throw some light back upon his views as a young man: "I must just say one word about the fact that both Rossetti and Burne-Jones have very little to do with representing the scenes of ordinary modern life as they go on before your eyes. One has often heard that brought against the 'Romantic' artists, as a shortcoming. Now, quite plainly, I must say that I think it is a shortcoming. But is the shortcoming due to the individual artist, or is it due to the public at large? for my part I think the latter. When an artist has really a very keen sense of beauty, I venture to think that he can not literally represent an event that takes place in modern life. He must add something or other to qualify or soften the ugliness and sordidness of the surroundings of life in our generation. That is not only the case with pictures ... it is the case also in literature... The difficulty is even greater, perhaps, for the painter. In painting, you cannot get so far away from the facts as you can in literature... By all means, if anyone is really moved by the spirit to treat modern subjects, let him do so... but ... I don't think he has a right, under the circumstances and considering the evasions he is absolutely bound to make, to lay any blame on his brother artist who turns back again to the life of past times; or, who, shall we rather sav. since his imagination must have some garb or another, naturally takes the raiment of some period in which the surroundings of life were not ugly but beautiful."1 "My work is the embodiment of dreams..." The tone of the remark is almost aggressive-damn Gradgrind's age, with all its “practical" men, its cant of progress, its hypocrisies and its ugliness! Morris, in the years of Rossetti's greatest influence upon him, placed himself firmly in the etherialized extreme of Pre-Raphaelite "romance". It was, perhaps, here that the most positive aspect of the movement was to be found."Why is it", asked Thomas Dixon, a working-man from Sunderland, writing to William Michael Rossetti about The Germ, So it seemed to many other men and women, dissatisfied with the poverty of their lives, and finding their sense of loss reflected in these canvasses, their yearning for something finer, more “ideal". It was as if the human spirit was being driven to more and more remote regions, but was still struggling to keep alive. As Burne-Jones once declared: "The more materialistic Science becomes, the more angels shall I paint." But angels frightened no one-least of all Mr. Gradgrind. Of all the contradictory vicissitudes of the Pre-Raphaelite movement, none was more curious or unexpected to the artists than the assortment of patrons which they collected around them. In their early days, none of the dwindling stream of aristocratic patronage was diverted towards them: indeed, when Millais (before he turned renegade, and entered the portals of the Academy) had dared to intrude democratic sentiments and realistic detail into his Christ in the House of His Parents, the critics met him with an outburst of fury. The Times, calling the picture "plainly revolting", continued: "To attempt to associate the Holy Family with the meanest details of a carpenter's shop, with no conceivable omission of misery, of dirt and even disease, all finished with the same loathesome minuteness, is disgusting." But the dissenting middle class had less fastidious sensibilities, and in the later years of Victoria's reign, Millais's picture was to become a favourite in the Sunday school and the Bible class. Something similar can be found in the adoption of Rossetti and his friends by such patrons as Marshall, a Leeds millionaire: MacCracken, a Liverpool shipping-magnate: and Thomas Plint, the Leeds stock-broker. Although several patrons of this kind were said to have a weather-eye open towards successful financial speculation, this certainly was not the main motivation of Plint. We are indebted (once again) to Val Prinsep for a glimpse of Plint, visiting Rossetti in his studio: Rossetti was stung to fury, and despite the abject penitence of the Dissenting stock-broker, refused to sell him the.painting. Plint was able to impose more easily on the impoverished Ford Madox Brown, buying his Work on the condition that he introduced into it both Carlyle and Kingsley, and changed “one of the four fashionable young ladies into a quiet, earnest, holy-looking one, with a book or two and tracts".² Plint, dying at thirty-nine, left pictures which fetched the sum of £18,000 at a Leeds sale in 1862. His obituaries commended his high reputation on the stock exchange, his life spent in the service of religion and benevolence, and his selection of Hymns and Sacred Poetry.³ Whatever qualities Thomas Plint may have had (and no doubt he was both well-intentioned and enlightened) he can hardly have seemed to the young Morris and Burne-Jones-when he came forward as their first patron-to have been fitted to take a seat at the Round Table or to shake a lance in the jousts at Camelot. But Plint (and his like) were important and neglected characters in what one critic has termed“The Pre-Raphaelite Tragedy". First, he helps us to understand the gathering cynicism of Rossetti, who despised his patrons while at the same time he was forced to meet their tastes. Later, Plint's successors were to lead Morris, also, to an understanding of the inadequacy of the Firm in the “Holy Warfare" with the age-although with altogether different results. Second, Plint points to the nature of the "tragedy" itself. Romanticism, when "hope" had perished, when revolt no longer grappled with the enemy but evaded it in a world of "romance", when aspiration no longer summoned forward the future but yearned for the past, was no longer a source of fear to the enemy. It might be ignored, or jeered at as "effeminate". More dangerous, it could be courted as an ally. It could provide a "soonset floosh". This was the tragedy of Pre-Raphaelitism, beside which the differences and defections of the Brotherhood sink into unimportance. At the end of his life, Rossetti dismissed the early mysteries of the Brotherhood as“the mere affectations of a parcel of boys", and so showed himself wiser than both Holman Hunt and his own brother who were to treat the origins of the affair with such solemnity. But Rossetti did not deny the earnestness of the revolt itself. "What you call the movement was serious enough," he told Hall Caine, "but the banding together under the title was all a joke. We had at that time a phenomenal antipathy to the Academy, and in sheer love of being outlawed signed our pictures with the well-known initials."1 The element of tragedy in the movement comes from the very devotion and ambition of this original revolt, which yet never succeeded in moving into serious engagement with the enemy. In their lives and, often, in their occasional sketches, Rossetti, Madox Brown, and Burne-Jones showed abilities, humour, and a quality of self-criticism which was rarely present in their more studied canvasses. The reason (in the case of Burne-Jones in particular) must partly be found in the conditions of work which they imposed upon themselves. The fire of their original conceptions became lost in the desert of interminable copywork from which their paintings were assembled. But the greater reason lies in the extravagance of their ambition. In their youth, they looked upon success in the esteem of fashionable circles with contempt. They refused all compromise with the Academy, and Millais was damned when he capitulated. Rossetti, indeed, showed a dislike of exhibiting before the public which recalls the letters of Keats. They thought of themselves as revolutionaries, who intended to bring back a world of feeling and meaning to the visual arts-irony or critical restraint were targets set far too low. They sought to create great Art with their backs turned on the world."Dream" is not an affectation: it is a precise description of the character of the movement. They desired to paint Visions: but the result was “dream", a world of compensation, in which the frustrations and repressions, both personal and social, of their lives found release. Great art is not made of such stuff: and, while many minor works of permanent value were painted in the process, the major "masterpieces" of the Pre-Raphaelites remain as testimony to this truth.