# Universal Design Creating Inclusive Environments Edward Steinfeld Jordana L. Maisel This book is printed on acid-free paper. Copyright © 2012 by Edward Steinfeld and Jordana L. Maisel. All rights reserved. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. Published simultaneously in Canada. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 201-748-6011, fax 201-748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions. Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data: Steinfeld, Edward. Universal design : creating inclusive environments / Edward Steinfeld, Jordana L. Maisel p. cm. Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-0-470-39913-2 (cloth); 978-1-118-16680-2 (ebk.); 978-1-118-16681-9 (ebk.); 978-1-118-16845-5 (ebk.); 978-1-118-16846-2 (ebk.); 978-1-118-16847-9 (ebk.) 1. Universal design. I. Maisel, Jordana L.. II. Title. NA2547.S742012 729—dc23 2011028935 Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 ## Contents Foreword .. xi Preface... Acknowledgements. .xvii CHAPTER 1: Barriers and their Social Meaning . Design as Evolution Barriers as a Universal Experience .3 Barriers in Intellectual Life. 4 Social Functions of Space ..8 Socio-spatial Order... ..12 Origins of Universal Design.. ..15 Summary ..24 Review Topics ..24 References. ..24 CHAPTER 2: Defining Universal Design... .27 Introduction.. ..27 Emergence of Universal Design . ..27 Definition. ..28 Origins .. ..30 Modernism and the Modernist Style... .31 Critiques of Modernist Style .... ..3 Return to Human-Centered Design ... ..34 Summary ..42 Review Topics.. ...42 References.... ...42 CHAPTER 3: The New Demographics...... .45 Demography for Universal Design .... ..45 Uses of Demography in Design... ...48 Beneficiaries of Universal Design. ..49 Demography: Points to Remember .. ...60 Summary . ..62 Review Topics.. ..63 References... ..63 CHAPTER 4: Practicing Universal Design... ...67 Introduction..... ...67 Universal Design as Innovation. ...67 Tools for Increasing Adoption ... ..70 Introducing Universal Design to Practice ..... ...82 Improving Practice.... ..86 Summary ..... ...91 Review Topics.. ...91 References... ..92 CHAPTER 5: Design for Human Performance ......... ..95 Introduction.... ....95 Anthropometry ..96 Biomechanics.... .103 Perception ...... .108 Cognition.... .119 Summary ... .129 Review Topis.... ..132 References.. ..132 CHAPTER 6: Design For Health and Wellness...... .137 Introduction. 137 What are Health and Wellness? 139 Injury Protection . 140 Disease Prevention. 142 Low-Resource Settings. 147 Mental Health 149 Health Impact Assessments. .152 Designing for Health and Wellness Guidelines. 152 Summary .153 Review Topics 153 References. 153 CHAPTER 7: Design for Social Participation.. 159 Introduction.. .159 Social Construction Theory 160 Interpersonal Interaction 163 Access to Resources. 167 Segregation and Clustering 172 Design Participation .. 177 Summary 181 Review Topics. 185 References... 185 CHAPTER 8: Public Accommodations... 187 Introduction.. 187 The Purpose of Accessible Design. 188 Universal Design Strategies ... .197 The Future .213 Summary 214 Review Topics. .220 References. 220 CHAPTER 9: Housing..... 223 Evolution of Accessible Housing Policy.. 223 Community-Based Rehabilitation and Special-Purpose Housing 236 Neighborhood Context. .238 Summary 242 Review Topics. .243 References.. .244 CHAPTER 10: Home Modifications.. 245 Danise Levine Introduction.. 245 Target Populations . .246 Purpose of Home Modifications. .248 Common Needs and Solutions.. 253 Home Assessments... .261 Barriers to Service Delivery. .263 Policy.... 265 Knowledge Needs 268 Summary. .269 Review Topics. 270 References... .271 CHAPTER 11: Universal Design and the Interior Environment.. ..275 Mary Jane Carroll Introduction. .275 Wayfinding. .276 Acoustics. .279 Lighting.. 282 Color. 287 Furnishings. .292 Floor Coverings 299 Summary .302 Review Topics .304 References... .304 CHAPTER 12: Product Design.. 307 Heamchand Subryan Introduction.... ..307 Assistive Technology ..310 Knowledge Translation Problem.. ...312 Changing Marketplace .. ...316 Smarter Products .. ..321 Case Studies. ..327 Summary ... ..334 Review Topics. .335 References. ..335 CHAPTER 13: Public Transportation and Universal Design .... ..339 Introduction. ..339 Background... ..339 Access to Public Transportation .. ..340 Components of Public Transportation Systems .. ..342 Progress around the World..... ..362 Summary. ..363 Review Topics. ..364 References... ...365 INDEX .369 ## Foreword This superb and well-illustrated book is intended not only for design students but for all who care about how we access, use, and enjoy the environment. Universal design differs significantly from what we have known in the United States through the language and litigation on accessibility in that it sets a paradigm of design excellence benefitting all users. The authors observe that barriers are part of our lives and deeply rooted in our artistic and social consciousness. Although usability, in a general sense, has been a part of design since the origins of civilization, crafting the built environment to reduce the undesirable impact of real and metaphorical barriers in order to facilitate social participation is a relatively new field of study, with roots in the civil rights movement and efforts to achieve social justice. Its impact is directly proportional to the degree we experience limitations in independence and social participation. Thus it is no wonder that this movement started among people with disabilities, whose engagement in society was restricted by artificial barriers in every aspect of their lives. But, attentiveness to civil rights drives design to benefit the many, not just the few. The lessons learned apply to design at a much broader level where achieving these goals for all is much more complex than simply complying with accessibility laws. The fundamental importance of the field is demonstrated by the fact that creative designers have thought about these ideas for a long time although they may not have articulated them. The authors note the example of the Guggenheim Museum in New York City, constructed before there were accessibility codes. Frank Lloyd Wright's vision for the building was nothing less than making art itself easier to access and more enjoyable for all museum visitors. We have moved beyond the historical base and original delineation of universal design, which Ron Mace originally defined as the design of products and environments usable by all without the need for special accommodations. The authors propose a new definition, "a process that enables and empowers a diverse population by improving human performance, health and wellness and social participation." This new perspective supports an explicit relationship to sustainable design and active living, two more established progressive design initiatives. The emphasis on these two issues is a recurrent theme in the book and their importance is reflected in emerging design practices. For example, conferences held by the AIA New York Chapter under the banners of Fit-City and Fit-Nation have stressed the adoption of universal design to insure that sustainable and walkable cities and communities enable all to benefit from a healthier lifestyle and more physical activity. This new definition also eschews an overly utopian perspective by putting the emphasis on the process rather than an idealistic but long-range goal Of paramount importance are the ethical and pragmatic responsibilities design professionals share when designing towns, urban centers, buildings, and products for increasingly diverse social communities. Making the necessary adjustments to address demography and the cultural possibilities of a pluralist society is not a question of tweaking existing formulations, but starting fresh, recognizing that the stress of contemporary life can be mitigated by design that places a high priority on meeting the physical, psychological, and social needs of all citizens. The authors, an architect and an urban planner, identify a clear need for an interdisciplinary and evidencebased perspective that goes beyond traditional silo-oriented education and professional practice. Design that is "human-centered" transcends this segmentation by focusing attention on the needs that are common to us all. In fact, economic and demographic factors intersect in ways that require multidisciplinary initiatives, universal in outlook and inclusive in intent. In particular, the aging of our societies demands that the current economic downturn should not be used as an excuse for poor design and indifference. In fact, if we do not implement universal design now, the economic burden of an aging society will be even greater in the future. The authors and contributors to the book are colleagues at the Center for Inclusive Design and Environmental Access (IDeA Center), which is a leading center for research and development in universal design in North America. They stress the importance of developing a "community of practice" in universal design that will educate, enhance, and empower a new generation of thought leaders in both academia and practice. They also argue for improved communications and pedagogy, illustrating efforts in this country and abroad, to make universal design a more central focus of design education, both in professional schools and through continuing education. Universal design education must focus on innovation and creative problem-solving. It can be clearly demonstrated that the incorporation of universal design attributes makes projects more sustainable, more durable, and more valuable. But, to accomplish these objectives, it is not merely a question of enhancing prior definitions of accessibility, but re-thinking how design can be beneficial for the long term. The book builds upon the foundation formed by seven well-established Principles of Universal Design through the formulation of the Goals of Universal Design. These Goals clarify outcomes for practice and tie those outcomes to existing knowledge bases. The authors review the literature on human performance, health and wellness, and social participation to identify key evidencebased guidelines for design practice. They also provide hundreds of examples of universal design from all the design disciplines. One of the most interesting current efforts described in the book is the initiative to develop voluntary performance standards and a certification system for universal design modeled after similar successful efforts in the field of sustainable design. This effort can serve as the focus for the development of a community of practice, creating connections across design disciplines, between researchers and practitioners, and between the professional community and academia. Whether in product design, building systems or public infrastructure, to advance the field of universal design it is crucial to both identify best practices and, as the authors put it "document the benefits of universal design solutions." This extraordinary book does both well in language accessible to both student and seasoned professional.