# Preface The fi eld of universal design represents a convergence of several threads of design practice with a focus on usefulness. Since the origins of the design professions, theorists have acknowledged that usefulness is a critical factor in the success of any design, be it a city plan, a building or a sign. But, in the history of design, usefulness is rarely the central focus of attention in the design professions. Even during the early twentieth century when the phrase “form follows function” was uttered frequently by leading architects, there was more attention given to “form” than “function.” Most architects who adopted that credo were concerned more with the concept of “integrity” of form, e.g. expressing function, than they were with actually making buildings more useful for the people who lived in them. What about the people who did not live in them? People without decent housing, people with disabilities who could not enter most buildings, people isolated in institutions, factory workers, middle class housewives, children, refugees, etc.? Few design professionals thought about them unless they got a good commission to design a large institutional building or housing project for the “poor or unfortunate.” Even then, the focus was more on pleasing the client or glorifying themselves than on the welfare of the inhabitants. Remember Howard Roark, the prototype for the late twentieth century architect? The new century demands that we start thinking differently. For the last twenty years, we have witnessed the transformation of sustainable or “green” design, re-invented by a few “idealists” in the late 1950s, into a mainstream endeavor. This movement is the fi rst example of design for all of us because it puts the focus on protecting the natural world in which we all have a stake. Notwithstanding the importance of protecting the environment, we have to ask whether protecting people is not just as important. If protection of people had been the focus of design from the origins of the discipline, we believe we would naturally have practiced sustainable design early on, simply because it was good for species survival. There are three major trends that are operating together to change design culture. First, a diverse, consumer oriented culture on a global scale is emerging, starting with the high-income countries but spreading rapidly everywhere. This culture puts greater value on personal development and values difference rather than avoiding it. Those who participate in this culture are much better informed about their options and willing to change and be changed, in other words, to engage in transformative processes. Second, due to biomedical science and public health the world is aging rapidly. In the developing world, the older population is increasing even more rapidly than in the developed world. An interest in preserving quality of life during old age is increasingly driving decisions of all kinds. Third, economic forces are demanding higher standards of usefulness. Sustainability (eliminating waste) and better information are making performance more important in purchasing decisions by individuals and organizations. The concept of universal design emerged through the disability rights movement, an example of the fi rst trend above. Early experience with the concept has led leaders in the fi eld to expand beyond those origins and to identify connections with design for aging, social sustainability and user centered design. At the same time, other proponents of design to improve people’s lives are recognizing the value of the universal design paradigm. Thus, in writing this book we decided to avoid looking backward and look forward instead. We investigated how universal design could evolve and become more central to design thinking in the mainstream, with an admiring eye to how that happened with sustainable design. There are differences, of course. One can easily measure and quantify the benefi ts of sustainable design but we do not yet have all the tools we need to do the same with universal design. The cost of not paying attention to the environment is demonstrated clearly every day all around us—more pollution, less fi sh, higher fuel costs, etc. The cost of not practicing universal design is not as easy to perceive right now. One has to parse through statistics and learn how to look at things from the perspective of others. However, as with sustainable design, once we change our perspective and learn how to see the evidence, the future becomes clear. We believe we are close to a watershed moment. Whether they know the term or not, the work of leading architects and design fi rms refl ects the adoption of universal design concepts. Innovation in design practices occurs because good designers pay attention to what is going on around them. They may not necessarily label what they do, but they do it nevertheless. While writing this book, we also were completing an educational project that involved visits to other design schools and discussions with their faculty about how to bring universal design ideas to their curricula. One of the faculty members we consulted with listened a while and a look of awakening appeared on her face. She said, “We are already doing this! We just don’t call it that.” And it was true. As we speak the world is changing and we change to adapt to it, some faster than others. This book provides a cohesive yet open-ended view of the fi eld with a futures perspective. It is said that good education is subversive; one of our major goals is to provide a tool for change. The book is organized into three basic parts. The fi rst part establishes a foundation and rationale for the universal design paradigm. This includes an essay on the concept of barrier, a chapter defi ning universal design as we see it evolving and one on the practice of universal design. The third chapter in the fi rst section utilizes demography to demonstrate the trends that will drive the adoption of the concept. The second part of the book gives a summary of the three underlying knowledge bases for universal design practice. These are design for human performance, design for health and wellness, and design for social participation. The last part of the book provides summaries of practices in universal design across a broad range of topics. There are chapters on public accommodations, housing, home modifi cations, interior design, product design, and transportation. This structure is amenable for use as a textbook in a course on universal design, or, across several courses. It is also amenable for use in courses focusing on different disciplines using the fi rst two parts in their entirety as the core material and one or more from the last part as an introduction to a more in depth examination of the discipline. For the instructor, we have prepared review topics in each chapter but there is also an instructor’s guide available online from the publisher with supplementary materials, including quiz questions, sample assignments, and suggested media. In summary, this book was developed to lead the way rather than refl ect back upon what has already happened. We hope it will inspire others to bring their own wisdom and insights to the developing community of practice in this fi eld because, as the reader will see, the development of this design paradigm will lead in many new directions and there is room for everyone. In particular, we hope it will lead to the evolution of universal design as an inclusive paradigm where all proponents of design to improve the quality of life for every citizen of the planet can fi nd an intellectual home. Universal design is a search for design strategies that bring benefi ts for all. —THE AUTHORS