# Acknowledgements The authors are indebted to several colleagues who contributed signifi cantly to the production of this book. Danise Levine, Heamchand Subryan, and Mary Jane Carroll each wrote a chapter in the book. Jonathan White and Heamchand Subryan found, compiled, created, and managed the fi gures and graphics. Susan Hunter conducted much of the demographic research and developed many of the insights included in Chapter 3. We are also grateful to Victor Paquet for critically reviewing a preliminary draft of Chapter 5. Beth Tauke and Scott Danford have engaged with us in constant and creative dialogue on the defi nition of universal design, strategies for teaching, and examples of practice. We must acknowledge all the leaders of the universal design movement throughout the world. Our interaction with them over the last 20 years was instrumental in forming the ideas presented in this book and we are indebted to this band of committed individuals for embracing an idea well before it was mainstream and investing their time and energy in building the foundation of a global initiative. The development of this book was partly supported by the Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center on Universal Design in the Built Environment, a center of excellence grant provided by the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR). We thank NIDRR for funding the Center for Inclusive Design and Environmental Access (IDeA Center) generously for the last 12 years and recognizing the importance of dissemination and education as a critically important adjunct to research and development activities.