# Introduction to Volume 2

This volume begins with the Russian Revolution, which transformed a nation that was oppressed by a czar and a self-serving aristocratic class into an unprecedented society of centralized planning and Communist Party rule. The ideals of the revolution spread across Europe even as they were undermined by actual events in what became the Soviet Union.

After Germany's defeat in World War I, three nations—France, Great Britain, and the United States, the leading Allied victors—emerged as the world's Great Powers. All had strong economies before the war and expected to improve their economic competitiveness, now that the war had ended.

The ambition of the Great Powers was to shape a better world in the wake of Germany's defeat, but the alliance among them soon began to disintegrate. Woodrow Wilson, the American president, proposed Fourteen Points for the reconstruction of Europe which urged the creation of an international body that would encompass the principles of collective security and prevent another destructive world conflict. Known as the League of Nations, it was formulated and subscribed to at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919. However, the U.S. Congress did not ratify the necessary treaties or support United States participation in the League. Adopting an isolationist position, the Republicandominated Congress effectively ensured that the United States would have a diminished influence on future European affairs.

Although Germany faced severe economic dislocation at the end of the war, by 1924, the United States had stepped in with short-term loans that helped the Germans restore their economy to prewar strength and beyond. Of all the nations in Europe, Germany most actively embraced mass-production as the best strategy for economic development. In France, the government continued to support French supremacy in the production of luxury goods, while in Britain, which had once been the industrial powerhouse of the world, many British factories were hesitant to install sophisticated machinery, apply efficiency methods of organization, or adopt a machine aesthetic for the design of their products.

Other countries in Europe were in a lesser position to exploit the economic potential of massproduction than France, Britain, and Germany. Following the war's end, the Hapsburg monarchy collapsed, resulting in the formation of the successor states of Austria, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia, and the distribution of the rest of its territories to already existing nations—a process that seriously destabilized East and Central Europe. By 1923, Poland had emerged once again as an independent nation after several treaties had mandated the redrawing of its borders. However, the economies of all these countries were predominantly agricultural or were otherwise based on the extraction of resources. Only Czechoslovakia was able to develop a balanced economy.

In the north, Finland became independent of Russia after the Bolsheviks came to power in 1917, and along with her Scandinavian neighbors—Denmark, Sweden, and Norway—sought to establish a culture that was firmly based on an equitable use of resources for a predominantly middle-class population. This endured until Russia invaded Finland in 1939. Smaller European countries such as Belgium, the Netherlands, and Switzerland also fostered domestic growth for a middle-class market. Throughout the 192os and early 193os Spain experienced nearly continuous political turmoil, which led to the Spanish Civil War. It began in 1936, resulted in the dictatorship of General Francisco Franco, and served as a staging ground for World War

II. The Portuguese government was equally unstable until António de Oliveira Salazar assumed the role of dictator in 1926. Like the Scandinavians, none of these countries was in a position to build a major industrial economy, although many of them had one or several prominent manufacturers who embraced the machine and the tenets of mass-production.

Thus modernity was a spotty enterprise in Europe during the 192os and 193os. Germany, the defeated power, embraced it more enthusiastically and aggressively than did any other country except the United States, therefore setting an example of how design could contribute to the making of a modern nation. German innovations in design such as the manufacture of furniture from tubular steel, the modern workingclass housing estates, and the New Typography of Jan Tschichold were adopted cautiously and sporadically across Europe and faced greater overall resistance than enthusiasm. While the association of modernity with German revitalization was problematic for some countries, the new German design and architecture were also seen by many as a direct threat to traditional values, whether the preservation of a pronounced class structure as was the case in countries like France, Austria, and Britain, or else the nostalgic retention of styles and iconography that had strong nationalist connotations.

The United States was hit hard by the Great Depression that followed from the crash of the American stock market in 1929. Though the 193os were difficult for many Americans, as they were for people in Europe, industrial designers sought to create a language of product streamlining to bring the American populace out of the doldrums and create an optimistic atmosphere that would encourage more consumption.

During the period covered in this volume, a handful of countries controlled the lives of millions of people in their colonies. Though colonialism had been integrated into the world order in the late 19th century, it was celebrated in the first part of the 2oth with large colonial exhibitions in Britain and France. Much of

Africa was under colonial rule during this period as were parts of Asia including India. The same was true for large sections of the Middle East as a consequence of the Ottoman Empire's collapse after World War I and the subsequent occupation of parts of its former territory by Britain and France.

In Asia, China slowly began to engage with a culture of modernity, particularly in Shanghai, which became a model for how modern Western ideas could be adapted to an Asian population that aspired to embrace them. Japan continued its ambition to become a modern secular society as well as Asia's foremost colonial power. With its invasion of Manchuria in 1931, Japan initiated an expansionist phase that led to war with China in 1937, its attack on the United States at the end of 1941, and a subsequent war with a host of Allied forces in the Pacific theater.

Latin American nations were trading actively with Europe until World War I cut off channels of communication. This led to various degrees of import substitution and an opportunity for the United States to expand its business activities throughout the region. Modernity for the Latin Americans was refracted through the sensibilities of the region's financial and cultural elites for whom France was a more potent model to emulate than Germany or the United States.

In Europe, Benito Mussolini came to power in 1922. Coupled with the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia and Lenin's early ambition to spread communism to other European countries, Mussolini's dictatorship in Italy and the rise of the Nazi Party in Germany posed a challenge to the idealistic peace plans of the League of Nations and created uneasiness among Europe's democracies. This uneasiness grew in the 193os when the Nazis under Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany, facing off against the Soviet Union in the Spanish Civil War. The German Army then began to march eastward where it occupied Austria and Czechoslovakia in 1938 and Poland in 1939. Hitler signed a peace pact with the Soviet Union in 1939 but betrayed it when the German Army invaded that country in 1941. Once a number of allied countries declared war on Germany and World War II began, Germany continued her European conquests and attacks on Great Britain until her final defeat in 1945. Italy and Japan were also defeated, thus preparing for a post-war world of nations that aspired for the first time to a state of global unity and universal human rights even as colonialism still persisted in some parts of the world.