## Preface to Third Edition

As the Earth has made more than 5,000 rotations since The Sciences of the Artificial was last revised, in 1981, it is time to ask what changes in our understanding of the world call for changes in the text.

Of particular relevance is the recent vigorous eruption of interest in complexity and complex systems. In the previous editions of this book I commented only briefly on the relation between general ideas about complexity and the particular hierarchic form of complexity with which the book is chiefly concerned. I now introduce a new chapter to remedy this deficit. It will appear that the devotees of complexity (among whom I count myself) are a rather motley crew, not at all unified in our views on reductionism. Various among us favor quite different tools for analyzing complexity and speak nowadays of "chaos," "adaptive systems," and "genetic algorithms." In the new chapter 7, "Alternative Views of Complexity'' ("The Architecture of Complexity" having become chapter 8), I sort out these themes and draw out the implications of artificiality and hierarchy for complexity.

Most of the remaining changes in this third edition aim at updating the text. In particular, I have taken account of important advances that have been made since 1981 in cognitive psychology (chapters 3 and 4) and the science of design (chapters 5 and 6). It is gratifying that continuing rapid progress in both of these domains has called for numerous new references that record the advances, while at the same time confirm and extend the book's basic theses about the artificial sciences. Changes in emphases in chapter 2 reflect progress in my thinking about the respective roles of organizations and markets in economic systems.

This edition, like its predecessors, is dedicated to my friend of half a lifetime, Allen Newell but now, alas, to his memory. His final book, Unified Theories of Cognition, provides a powerful agenda for advancing our understanding of intelligent systems.

I am grateful to my assistant, Janet Hilf, both for protecting the time I have needed to carry out this revision and for assisting in innumerable ways in getting the manuscript ready for publication. At the MIT Press, Deborah Cantor-Adams applied a discerning editorial pencil to the manuscript and made communication with the Press a pleasant part of the process. To her, also, I am very grateful.

In addition to those others whose help, counsel, and friendship I acknowledged in the preface to the earlier editions, I want to single out some colleagues whose ideas have been especially relevant to the new themes treated here. These include Anders Ericsson, with whom I explored the theory and practice of protocol analysis; Pat Langley, Gary Bradshaw, and Jan Zytkow, my co-investigators of the processes of scientific discovery; Yuichiro Anzai, Fernand Gobet, Yumi Iwasaki, Deepak Kulkarni, Jill Larkin, Jean-Louis Le Moigne, Anthony Leonardo, Yulin Qin, Howard Richman, Weimin Shen, Jim Staszewski, Hermina Tabachneck, Guojung Zhang, and Xinming Zhu. In truth, I don't know where to end the list or how to avoid serious gaps in it, so I will simply express my deep thanks to all of my friends and collaborators, both the mentioned and the unmentioned.

In the first chapter I propose that the goal of science is to make the wonderful and the complex understandable and simple but not less wonderful. I will be pleased if readers find that I have achieved a bit of that in this third edition of The Sciences of the Artificial.

HERBERT A. SIMON PITTSBURGH, PENNSYLVANIA JANUARY 1, 1996

## Preface to Second Edition

This work takes the shape of fugues, whose subject and counter subject were first uttered in lectures on the opposite sides of a continent and the two ends of a decade but are now woven together as the alternating chapters of the whole.

The invitation to deliver the Karl Taylor Compton lectures at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the spring of 1968 provided me with a welcome opportunity to make explicit and to develop at some length a thesis that has been central to much of my research, at first in organization theory, later in economics and management science, and most recently in psychology.

In 1980 another invitation, this one to deliver the H. Rowan Gaither lectures at the University of California, Berkeley, permitted me to amend and expand this thesis and to apply it to several additional fields.

The thesis is that certain phenomena are "artificial" in a very specific sense: they are as they are only because of a system's being moulded, by goals or purposes, to the environment in which it lives. If natural phenomena have an air of "necessity" about them in their subservience to natural law, artificial phenomena have an air of "contingency" in their malleability by environment.

The contingency of artificial phenomena has always created doubts as to whether they fall properly within the compass of science. Sometimes these doubts refer to the goal-directed character of artificial systems and the consequent difficulty of disentangling prescription from description. This seems to me not to be the real difficulty. The genuine problem is to show how empirical propositions can be made at all about systems that, given different circumstances, might be quite other than they are.

Almost as soon as I began research on administrative organizations, some forty years ago, I encountered the problem of artificiality in almost its pure form:

. . . administration is not unlike play-acting. The task of the good actor is to know and play his role, although different roles may differ greatly in content. The effectiveness of the performance will depend on the effectiveness of the play and the effectiveness with which it is played. The effectiveness of the administrative process will vary with the effectiveness of the organization and the effectiveness with which its members play their parts. [Administrative Behavior, p. 252]

How then could one construct a theory of administration that would contain more than the normative rules of good acting? In particular, how could one construct an empirical theory? My writing on administration, particularly in Administrative Behavior and part IV of Models of Man, has sought to answer those questions by showing that the empirical content of the phenomena, the necessity that rises above the contingencies, stems from the inabilities of the behavioral system to adapt perfectly to its environment from the limits of rationality, as I have called them.

As research took me into other areas, it became evident that the problem of artificiality was not peculiar to administration and organizations but that it infected a far wider range of subjects. Economics, since it postulated rationality in economic man, made him the supremely skillful actor, whose behavior could reveal something of the requirements the environment placed on him but nothing about his own cognitive makeup. But the difficulty must then extend beyond economics into all those parts of psychology concerned with rational behavior thinking, problem solving, learning.

Finally, I thought I began to see in the problem of artificiality an explanation of the difficulty that has been experienced in filling engineering and other professions with empirical and theoretical substance distinct from the substance of their supporting sciences. Engineering, medicine, business, architecture, and painting are concerned not with the necessary but with the contingent not with how things are but with how they might be in short, with design. The possibility of creating a science or sciences of design is exactly as great as the possibility of creating any science of the artificial. The two possibilities stand or fall together.

These essays then attempt to explain how a science of the artificial is possible and to illustrate its nature. I have taken as my main examples the

fields of economics (chapter 2), the psychology of cognition (chapters 3 and 4), and planning and engineering design (chapters 5 and 6). Since Karl Compton was a distinguished engineering educator as well as a distinguished scientist, I thought it not inappropriate to apply my conclusions about design to the question of reconstructing the engineering curriculum (chapter 5). Similarly Rowan Gaither's strong interest in the uses of systems analysis in public policy formation is reflected especially in chapter 6.

The reader will discover in the course of the discussion that artificiality is interesting principally when it concerns complex systems that live in complex environments. The topics of artificiality and complexity are inextricably interwoven. For this reason I have included in this volume (chapter 8) an earlier essay, "The Architecture of Complexity," which develops at length some ideas about complexity that I could touch on only briefly in my lectures. The essay appeared originally in the December 1962 Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society.

I have tried to acknowledge some specific debts to others in footnotes at appropriate points in the text. I owe a much more general debt to Allen Newell, whose partner I have been in a very large part of my work for more than two decades and to whom I have dedicated this volume. If there are parts of my thesis with which he disagrees, they are probably wrong; but he cannot evade a major share of responsibility for the rest.

Many ideas, particularly in the third and fourth chapters had their origins in work that my late colleague, Lee W. Gregg, and I did together; and other colleagues, as well as numerous present and former graduate students, have left their fingerprints on various pages of the text. Among the latter I want to mention specifically L. Stephen Coles, Edward A. Feigenbaum, John Grason, Pat Langley, Robert K. Lindsay, David Neves, Ross Quillian, Laurent Siklóssy, Donald S. Williams, and Thomas G. Williams, whose work is particularly relevant to the topics discussed here.

Previous versions of chapter 8 incorporated valuable suggestions and data contributed by George W. Corner, Richard H. Meier, John R. Platt, Andrew Schoene, Warren Weaver, and William Wise.

A large part of the psychological research reported in this book was supported by the Public Health Service Research Grant MH-07722 from the National Institute of Mental Health, and some of the research on

design reported in the fifth and sixth chapters, by the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the Office of the Secretary of Defense (SD-146). These grants, as well as support from the Carnegie Corporation, the Ford Foundation, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, have enabled us at Carnegie-Mellon to pursue for over two decades a many-pronged exploration aimed at deepening our understanding of artificial phenomena.

Finally, I am grateful to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and to the University of California, Berkeley, for the opportunity to prepare and present these lectures and for the occasion to become better acquainted with the research in the sciences of the artificial going forward on these two stimulating campuses.

I want to thank both institutions also for agreeing to the publication of these lectures in this unified form, The Compton lectures comprise chapters 1, 3, and 5, and the Gaither lectures, chapters 2, 4, and 6. Since the first edition of this book (The MIT Press, 1969) has been well received, I have limited the changes in chapters 1, 3, 5, and 8 to the correction of blatant errors, the updating of a few facts, and the addition of some transitional paragraphs.