explains why. Resemblance in behavior of systems without identity of the inner systems is particularly feasible if the aspects in which we are interested arise out of the organization of the parts, independently of all but a few properties of the individual components. Thus for many purposes we may be interested in only such characteristics of a material as its tensile and compressive strength. We may be profoundly unconcerned about its chemical properties, or even whether it is wood or iron.

The motor control patent cited earlier illustrates this abstraction to organizational properties. The invention consisted of a ''combination" of "reversing means," of "field weakening means," that is to say, of components specified in terms of their functioning in the organized whole. How many ways are there of reversing a motor, or of weakening its field strength? We can simulate the system described in the patent claims in many ways without reproducing even approximately the actual physical device that is depicted. With a small additional step of abstraction, the patent claims could be restated to encompass mechanical as well as electrical devices. I suppose that any undergraduate engineer at Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon University, or MIT could design a mechanical system embodying reversibility and variable starting torque so as to simulate the system of the patent.

## The Computer As Artifact

No artifact devised by man is so convenient for this kind of functional description as a digital computer. It is truly protean, for almost the only ones of its properties that are detectable in its behavior (when it is operating properly!) are the organizational properties. The speed with which it performs it basic operations may allow us to infer a little about its physical components and their natural laws; speed data, for example, would allow us to rule out certain kinds of "slow" components. For the rest, almost no interesting statement that one can make about an operating computer bears any particular relation to the specific nature of the hardware. A computer is an organization of elementary functional components in which, to a high approximation, only the function

performed by those components is relevant to the behavior of the whole system.<sup>14</sup>

## Computers As Abstract Objects

This highly abstractive quality of computers makes it easy to introduce mathematics into the study of their theory and has led some to the erroneous conclusion that, as a computer science emerges, it will necessarily be a mathematical rather than an empirical science. Let me take up these two points in turn: the relevance of mathematics to computers and the possibility of studying computers empirically.

Some important theorizing, initiated by John von Neumann, has been done on the topic of computer reliability. The question is how to build a reliable system from unreliable parts. Notice that this is not posed as a question of physics or physical engineering. The components engineer is assumed to have done his best, but the parts are still unreliable! We can cope with the unreliability only by our manner of organizing them.

To turn this into a meaningful problem, we have to say a little more about the nature of the unreliable parts. Here we are aided by the knowledge that any computer can be assembled out of a small array of simple, basic elements. For instance, we may take as our primitives the so-called Pitts-McCulloch neurons. As their name implies, these components were devised in analogy to the supposed anatomical and functional characteristics of neurons in the brain, but they are highly abstracted. They are formally isomorphic with the simplest kinds of switching circuits "and" "or," and "not'' circuits. We postulate, now, that we are to build a system from such elements and that each elementary part has a specified probability of functioning correctly. The problem is to arrange the elements and their interconnections in such a way that the complete system will perform reliably.

The important point for our present discussion is that the parts could as well be neurons as relays, as well relays as transistors. The natural laws governing relays are very well known, while the natural laws governing

neurons are known most imperfectly. But that does not matter, for all that is relevant for the theory is that the components have the specified level of unreliability and be interconnected in the specified way.

This example shows that the possibility of building a mathematical theory of a system or of simulating that system does not depend on having an adequate micro theory of the natural laws that govern the system components. Such a micro theory might indeed be simply irrelevant.

## Computers As Empirical Objects

We turn next to the feasibility of an empirical science of computers as distinct from the solid-state physics or physiology of their componentry.<sup>15</sup> As a matter of empirical fact almost all of the computers that have been designed have certain common organizational features. They almost all can be decomposed into an active processor (Babbage's "Mill") and a memory (Babbage's "Store") in combination with input and output devices. (Some of the larger systems, somewhat in the manner of colonial algae, are assemblages of smaller systems having some or all of these components. But perhaps I may oversimplify for the moment.) They are all capable of storing symbols (program) that can be interpreted by a program-control component and executed. Almost all have exceedingly limited capacity for simultaneous, parallel activity they are basically one-thing-at-a-time systems. Symbols generally have to be moved from the larger memory components into the central processor before they can be acted upon. The systems are capable of only simple basic actions: recoding symbols, storing symbols, copying symbols, moving symbols, erasing symbols, and comparing symbols.

Since there are now many such devices in the world, and since the properties that describe them also appear to be shared by the human central nervous system, nothing prevents us from developing a natural history of them. We can study them as we would rabbits or chipmunks and discover how they behave under different patterns of environmental stimulation. Insofar as their behavior reflects largely the broad functional

characteristics we have described, and is independent of details of their hardware, we can build a general but empirical theory of them.

The research that was done to design computer time-sharing systems is a good example of the study of computer behavior as an empirical phenomenon. Only fragments of theory were available to guide the design of a time-sharing system or to predict how a system of a specified design would actually behave in an environment of users who placed their several demands upon it. Most actual designs turned out initially to exhibit serious deficiencies, and most predictions of performance were startlingly inaccurate.

Under these circumstances the main route open to the development and improvement of time-sharing systems was to build them and see how they behaved. And this is what was done. They were built, modified, and improved in successive stages. Perhaps theory could have anticipated these experiments and made them unnecessary. In fact it didn't, and I don't know anyone intimately acquainted with these exceedingly complex systems who has very specific ideas as to how it might have done so. To understand them, the systems had to be constructed, and their behavior observed.<sup>16</sup>

In a similar vein computer programs designed to play games or to discover proofs for mathematical theorems spend their lives in exceedingly large and complex task environments. Even when the programs themselves are only moderately large and intricate (compared, say, with the monitor and operating systems of large computers), too little is known about their task environments to permit accurate prediction of how well they will perform, how selectively they will be able to search for problem solutions.

Here again theoretical analysis must be accompanied by large amounts of experimental work. A growing literature reporting these experiments is beginning to give us precise knowledge about the degree of heuristic power of particular heuristic devices in reducing the size of the problem spaces that must be searched. In theorem proving, for example, there has