To deal with these phenomena, psychology employs the concept of aspiration level. Aspirations have many dimensions: one can have aspirations for pleasant work, love, good food, travel, and many other things. For each dimension, expectations of the attainable define an aspiration level that is compared with the current level of achievement. If achievements exceed aspirations, satisfaction is recorded as positive; if aspirations exceed achievements, there is dissatisfaction. There is no simple mechanism for comparison between dimensions. In general a large gain along one dimension is required to compensate for a small loss along another hence the system's net satisfactions are history-dependent and it is difficult for people to balance compensatory offsets.

Aspiration levels provide a computational mechanism for satisficing. An alternative satisfices if it meets aspirations along all dimensions. If no such alternative is found, search is undertaken for new alternatives. Meanwhile, aspirations along one or more dimensions drift down gradually until a satisfactory new alternative is found or some existing alternative satisfices. A theory of choice employing these mechanisms acknowledges the limits on human computation and fits our empirical observations of human decision making far better than the utility maximization theory.<sup>6</sup>

## Markets and Organizations

Economics has been concerned less with individual consumers or business firms than with larger artificial systems: the economy and its major components, markets. Markets aim to coordinate the decisions and behavior of multitudes of economic actors to guarantee that the quantity of brussels sprouts shipped to market bears some reasonable relation to the quantity that consumers will buy and eat, and that the price at which brussels sprouts can be sold bears a reasonable relation to the cost of producing them. Any society that is not a subsistence economy, but has

substantial specialization and division of labor, needs mechanisms to perform this coordinative function.

Markets are only one, however, among the spectrum of mechanisms of coordination on which any society relies. For some purposes, central planning based on statistics provides the basis for coordinating behavior patterns. Highway planning, for example, relies on estimates of road usage that reflect statistically stable patterns of driving behavior. For other purposes, bargaining and negotiation may be used to coordinate individual behaviors, for instance, to secure wage agreements between employers and unions or to form legislative majorities. For still other coordinative functions, societies employ hierarchic organizations business, governmental and educational with lines of formal authority running from top to bottom and networks of communications lacing through the structure. Finally, for making certain important decisions and for selecting persons to occupy positions of public authority, societies employ a wide variety of balloting procedures.

Although all of these coordinating techniques can be found somewhere in almost any society, their mix and applications vary tremendously from one nation or culture to another.<sup>7</sup> We ordinarily describe capitalist societies as depending mostly on markets for coordination and socialist societies as depending mostly on hierarchic organizations and planning, but this is a gross oversimplification, for it ignores the uses of voting in democratic societies of either kind, and it ignores the great importance of large organizations in modern "market" societies.

The economic units in capitalist societies are mostly business firms, which are themselves hierarchic organizations, some of enormous size, that make almost negligible use of markets in their internal functioning. Roughly eighty percent of the human economic activity in the American economy, usually regarded as almost the epitome of a "market" economy, takes place in the internal environments of business and other organizations and not in the external, between-organization environments of markets.<sup>8</sup> To avoid misunderstanding, it would be appropriate to call such

a society an organization-&-market economy; for in order to give an account of it we have to pay as much attention to organizations as to markets.

## The Invisible Hand

In examining the processes of social coordination, economics has given top billing sometimes almost exclusive billing to the market mechanism. It is indeed a remarkable mechanism which under many circumstances can bring it about that the producing, consuming, buying and selling behaviors of enormous numbers of people, each responding only to personal selfish interests, allocate resources so as to clear markets do in fact nearly balance the production with the consumption of brussels sprouts and all the other commodities the economy produces and uses.

Only relatively weak conditions need be satisfied to bring about such an equilibrium. Achieving it mainly requires that prices drop in the face of an excess supply, and that quantities produced decline when prices are lowered or when inventories mount. Any number of dynamic systems can be formulated that have these properties, and these systems will seek equilibrium and oscillate stably around it over a wide range of conditions.

There have been many recent laboratory experiments on market behavior, sometimes with human subjects, sometimes with computer programs as simulated subjects.<sup>9</sup> Experimental markets in which the simulated traders are "stupid" sellers, knowing only a minimum price below which they should not sell, and "stupid" buyers, knowing only a maximum price above which they should not buy move toward equilibrium almost as rapidly as markets whose agents are rational in the classical sense.<sup>10</sup>

## Markets and Optimality

These findings undermine the much stronger claims that are made for the price mechanism by contemporary neoclassical economics. Claims that it does more than merely clear markets require the strong assumptions of perfect competition and of maximization of

profit or utility by the economic actors. With these assumptions, but not without them, the market equilibrium can be shown to be optimal in the sense that it could not be altered so as to make everyone simultaneously better off. These are the familiar propositions of Pareto optimality of competitive equilibrium that have been formalized so elegantly by Arrow, Debreu, Hurwicz, and others.<sup>11</sup>

The optimality theorems stretch credibility, so far as real-world markets are concerned, because they require substantive rationality of the kinds we found implausible in our examination of the theory of the firm. Markets populated by consumers and producers who satisfice instead of optimizing do not meet the conditions on which the theorems rest. But the experimental data on simulated markets show that market clearing, the only property of markets for which there is solid empirical evidence, can be achieved without the optimizing assumptions, hence also without claiming that markets do produce a Pareto optimum. As Samuel Johnson said of the dancing dog, "The marvel is not that it dances well, but that it dances at all "the marvel is not that markets optimize (they don't) but that they often clear.

## Order Without a Planner

We have become accustomed to the idea that a natural system like the human body or an ecosystem regulates itself. This is in fact a favorite theme of the current discussion of complexity which we will take up in later chapters. We explain the regulation by feedback loops rather than a central planning and directing body. But somehow, untutored intuitions about self-regulation without central direction do not carry over to the artificial systems of human society. I retain vivid memories of the astonishment and disbelief expressed by the architecture students to whom I taught urban land economics many years ago when I pointed to medieval cities as marvelously patterned systems that had mostly just "grown" in response to myriads of individual human decisions. To my students a pattern implied a planner in whose mind it had been conceived and by whose hand it had been implemented. The idea that a city could acquire its pattern as naturally as a snowflake was

foreign to them. They reacted to it as many Christian fundamentalists responded to Darwin: no design without a Designer!

Marxist fundamentalists reacted in a similar way when, after World War I, they undertook to construct the new socialist economies of eastern Europe. It took them some thirty years to realize that markets and prices might play a constructive role in socialist economies and might even have important advantages over central planning as tools for the allocation of resources. My sometime teacher, Oscar Lange, was one of the pioneers who carried this heretical notion to Poland after the Second World War and risked his career and his life for the idea.

With the collapse of the Eastern European economies around 1990 the simple faith in central planning was replaced in some influential minds by an equally simple faith in markets. The collapse taught that modern economies cannot function well without smoothly operating markets. The poor performance of these economies since the collapse has taught that they also cannot function well without effective organizations.

If we focus on the equilibrating functions of markets and put aside the illusions of Pareto optimality, market processes commend themselves primarily because they avoid placing on a central planning mechanism a burden of calculation that such a mechanism, however well buttressed by the largest computers, could not sustain. Markets appear to conserve information and calculation by assigning decisions to actors who can make them on the basis of information that is available to them locally that is, without knowing much about the rest of the economy apart from the prices and properties of the goods they are purchasing and the costs of the goods they are producing.

No one has characterized market mechanisms better than Friederich von Hayek who, in the decades after World War II, was their leading interpreter and defender. His defense did not rest primarily upon the supposed optimum attained by them but rather upon the limits of the inner environment the computational limits of human beings:<sup>12</sup>

The most significant fact about this system is the economy of knowledge with which it operates, or how little the individual participants need to know in order to be able to take the right action.