cifics of that system be relevant to his behavior, beyond placing bounds on the possible.

## The Limits on Performance

Let us undertake to state in positive fashion just what we think these bounds and limits are, as revealed by behavior in problem situations like this one. In doing so, we shall draw upon both experimental evidence and evidence derived from computer simulations of human performance. The evidence refers to a variety of cognitive tasks, ranging from relatively complex ones (crypt arithmetic, chess, theorem proving), through an intermediate one (concept attainment), to simple ones that have been favorites of the psychological laboratory (rote verbal learning, short-term memory span). It is important that with this great variety of performance only a small number of limits on the adaptability of the inner system reveal themselves and these are essentially the same limits over all the tasks. Thus the statement of what these limits are purports to provide a single, consistent explanation of human performance over this whole range of heterogeneous task environments.

## Limits on Speed of Concept Attainment

Extensive psychological research has been carried out on concept attainment within the following general paradigm.<sup>6</sup> The stimuli are a set of cards bearing simple geometric designs that vary, from card to card, along a number of dimensions: shape (square, triangle, circle), color, size, position of figure on card, and so on. A "concept" is defined extensionally by some set of cards the cards that are instances of that concept. The concept is defined intensionally by a property that all the instances have in common but that is not possessed by any of the remaining cards.

Examples of concepts are "yellow" or "square" (simple concepts), "green triangle" or "large, red" (conjunctive concepts), ''small or yellow" (disjunctive concept), and so on.

In our discussion here I shall refer to experiments using an N-dimensional stimulus, with two possible values on each dimension, and with a single relevant dimension (simple concepts). On each trial an instance (positive or negative) is presented to the subject, who responds "Positive" or "Negative" and is reinforced by "Right" or "Wrong," as the case may be. In typical experiments of this kind, the subject's behavior is reported in terms of number of trials or number of erroneous responses before an error-free performance is attained. Some, but not all, experiments ask the subject also to report periodically the intensional concept (if any) being used as a basis for the responses.

The situation is so simple that, as in the crypt arithmetic problem, we can estimate a priori how many trials, on the average, a subject should need to discover the intended concept provided that the subject used the most efficient discovery strategy. On each trial, regardless of response, the subject can determine from the experimenters reinforcement whether the stimulus was actually an instance of the concept or not. If it was an instance, the subject knows that one of the attribute values of the stimulus its color, size, shape, for example defines the concept. If it was not an instance, the subject knows that the complement of one of its attribute values defines the concept. In either case each trial rules out half of the possible simple concepts; and in a random sequence of stimuli each new stimulus rules out, on the average, approximately half of the concepts not previously eliminated. Hence the average number of trials required to find the right concept will vary with the logarithm of the number of dimensions in the stimulus.

If sufficient time were allowed for each trial (a minute, say, to be generous), and if the subject were provided with paper and pencil, any subject of normal intelligence could be taught to follow this most efficient strategy and would do so without much difficulty. As these experiments are actually run, subjects are not instructed in an efficient strategy, are not provided with paper and pencil, and take only a short time typically four seconds, say to respond to each successive stimulus. They also use

many more trials to discover the correct concept than the number calculated from the efficient strategy. Although the experiment has not, to my knowledge, been run, it is fairly certain that, even with training, a subject who was required to respond in four seconds and not allowed paper and pencil would be unable to apply the efficient strategy.

What do these experiments tell us about human thinking? First, they tell us that human beings do not always discover for themselves clever strategies that they could readily be taught (watching a chess master play a duffer should also convince us of that). This is hardly a very startling conclusion, although it may be an instructive one. I shall return to it in a moment.

Second, the experiments tell us that human beings do not have sufficient means for storing information in memory to enable them to apply the efficient strategy unless the presentation of stimuli is greatly slowed down or the subjects are permitted external memory aids, or both. Since we know from other evidence that human beings have virtually unlimited semi-permanent storage (as indicated by their ability to continue to store odd facts in memory over most of a lifetime), the bottleneck in the experiment must lie in the small amount of rapid-access storage (so-called short-term memory) available and the time required to move items from the limited short-term store to the large-scale long-term store.<sup>7</sup>

From evidence obtained in other experiments, it has been estimated that only some seven items can be held in the fast, short-term memory and that perhaps as many as five to ten seconds are required to transfer an item from the short-term to the long-term store. To make these statements operational, we shall have to be more precise, presently, about the meaning of "item." For the moment let us assume that a simple concept is an item.

Even without paper and pencil a subject might be expected to apply the efficient strategy if (1) he was instructed in the efficient strategy and

(2) he was allowed twenty or thirty seconds to respond to and process the stimulus on each trial. Since I have not run the experiment, this-assertion stands as a prediction by which the theory may be tested.

Again the outcome may appear obvious to you, if not trivial. If so, I remind you that it is obvious only if you accept my general hypothesis: that in large part human goal-directed behavior simply reflects the shape of the environment in which it takes place; only a gross knowledge of the characteristics of the human information-processing system is needed to predict it. In this experiment the relevant characteristics appear to be (1) the capacity of short-term memory, measured in terms of number of items (or "chunks," as I shall call them); (2) the time required to fixate an item, or chunk, in long-term memory. In the next section I shall inquire as to how consistent these characteristics appear to be over a range of task environments. Before I do so, I want to make a concluding comment about subjects' knowledge of strategies and the effects of training subjects.

That strategies can be learned is hardly a surprising fact, nor that learned strategies can vastly alter performance and enhance its effectiveness. All educational institutions are erected on these premises. Their full implication has not always been drawn by psychologists who conduct experiments in cognition. Insofar as behavior is a function of learned technique rather than "innate" characteristics of the human information-processing system, our knowledge of behavior must be regarded as sociological in nature rather than psychological that is, as revealing what human beings in fact learn when they grow up in a particular social environment. When and how they learn particular things may be a difficult question, but we must not confuse learned strategies with built-in properties of the underlying biological system.

The data that have been gathered, by Bartlett and in our own laboratory, on the crypt arithmetic task illustrate the same point. Different subjects do indeed apply different strategies in that task both the whole range of strategies I sketched in the previous section and others as well. How they learned these, or how they discover them while performing the task, we do not fully know (see chapter 4), although we know that the sophistication of the strategy varies directly with a subject's previous exposure to and comfort with mathematics. But apart from the strategies