the only human characteristic that exhibits itself strongly in the crypt arithmetic task is the limited size of short-term memory. Most of the difficulties the subjects have in executing the more combinatorial strategies (and perhaps their general aversion to these strategies also) stem from the stress that such strategies place on short-term memory. Subjects get into trouble simply because they forget where they are, what assignments they have made previously, and what assumptions are implicit in assignments they have made conditionally. All of these difficulties would necessarily arise in a processor that could hold only a few chunks in short-term memory and that required more time than was available to transfer them to long-term memory.

## The Parameters of Memory Eight Seconds per Chunk

If a few parameters of the sort we have been discussing are the main limits of the inner system that reveal themselves in human cognitive behavior, then it becomes an important task for experimental psychology to estimate the values of these parameters and to determine how variable or constant they are among different subjects and over different tasks.

Apart from some areas of sensory psychology, the typical experimental paradigms in psychology are concerned with hypothesis testing rather than parameter estimating. In the reports of experiments one can find many assertions that a particular parameter value is or is not "significantly different" from another but very little comment on the values themselves. As a matter of fact the pernicious practice is sometimes followed of reporting significance levels, or results of the analysis of variance, without reporting at all the numerical values of the parameters that underlie these inferences.

While I am objecting to publication practices in experimental psychology, I shall add another complaint. Typically little care is taken in choosing measures of behavior that are the most relevant to theory. Thus in learning experiments "rate of learning" is reported, almost indifferently, in terms of "number of trials to criterion," "total number of errors," "total time to criterion," and perhaps other measures as well. Specifically the practice of reporting learning rates in terms of trials rather than time, prevalent through the first half of this century, and almost up to the

present time, not only hid from view the remarkable constancy of the parameter I am about to discuss but also led to much meaningless dispute over "one-trial" versus "incremental" learning.<sup>8</sup>

Ebbinghaus knew better. In his classic experiments on learning nonsense syllables, with himself as subject, he recorded both the number of repetitions and the amount of time required to learn sequences of syllables of different length. If you take the trouble to calculate it, you find that the time per syllable in his experiments works out to about ten to twelve seconds.<sup>9</sup>

I see no point in computing the figure to two decimal places or even to one. The constancy here is a constancy to an order of magnitude, or perhaps to a factor of two more nearly comparable to the constancy of the daily temperature, which in most places stays between 263° and 333° Kelvin, than to the constancy of the speed of light. There is no reason to be disdainful of a constancy to a factor of two. Newton's original estimates of the speed of sound contained a fudge factor of 30 per cent (eliminated only a hundred years later), and today some of the newer physical "constants" for elementary particles are even more vague. Beneath any approximate, even very rough, constancy, we can usually expect to find a genuine parameter whose value can be defined accurately once we know what conditions we must control during measurement.

If the constancy simply reflected a parameter of Ebbinghausalbeit one that held steady over several years it would be more interesting to biography than psychology. But that is not the case. When we examine some of the Hull-Hovland experiments of the 1930s, as reported, for ex-

ample, in Carl Hovland's chapter in S. S. Stevens's Handbook, we find again (after we calculate them, for trials are reported instead of times) times in the neighborhood of ten or fifteen seconds for college sophomores to fixate nonsense syllables of low meaningfulness by the serial anticipation method. When the drum speed increases (say from four seconds per syllable to two seconds per syllable), the number of trials to criterion increase proportionately, but the total learning time remains essentially constant.

There is a great deal of gold in these hills. If past nonsense-syllable experiments are re-examined from this point of view, many are revealed where the basic learning parameter is in the neighborhood of fifteen seconds per syllable. You can make the calculation yourself from the experiments reported, for example in J. A. McGeoch's Psychology of Human Learning. B. R. Bugelski, however, seems to have been the first to make this parameter constancy a matter of public record and to have run experiments with the direct aim of establishing it.<sup>10</sup>

I have tried not to exaggerate how constant is "constant." On the other hand, efforts to purify the parameter measurement have hardly begun. We do know about several variables that have a major effect on the value, and we have a theoretical explanation of these effects that thus far has held up well.

We know that meaningfulness is a variable of great importance. Nonsense syllables of high association value and unrelated one-syllable words are learned in about one-third the time required for nonsense syllables of low association value. Continuous prose is learned in about one-third the time per word required for sequences of unrelated words. (We can get the latter figure also from Ebbinghaus' experiments in memorizing Doll Juan. The times per symbol are roughly 10 percent of the corresponding times for nonsense syllables.)

We know that similarity particularly similarity among stimuli has an effect on the fixation parameter somewhat less than the effect of meaningfulness, and we can also estimate its magnitude on theoretical grounds.

The theory that has been most successful in explaining these and other phenomena reported in the literature on rote verbal learning is an informationprocessing theory, programmed as a computer simulation of human behavior, dubbed EPAM.<sup>11</sup> Since EPAM has been reported at length in the literature, I shall not discuss it here, except for one point that is relevant to our analysis. The EPAM theory gives us a basis for understanding what a "chunk" is. A chunk is a maximal familiar substructure of the stimulus. Thus a nonsense syllable like "QUV" consists of the chunks "Q," "U," "V,''; but the word "CAT" consists of a single chunk, since it is a highly familiar unit. EPAM postulates constancy in the time required to fixate a chunk. Empirically the constant appears to be about eight seconds per chunk, or perhaps a little more. Virtually all the quantitative predictions that EPAM makes about the effects of meaningfulness, familiarity, and similarity upon learning speed follow from this conception of the chunk and of the constancy of the time required to fixate a single chunk.

In fixation of new information, EPAM first adds new branches to its discrimination net then adds information to images at terminal nodes of the branches. There is growing evidence that the eight seconds for fixation in longterm memory is required only for expanding the net, and that information can be added in a second or two to locations (variable-places) in images that are already present in an expert's long-term memory. Such images are called retrieval structures or templates. We will return to this point in discussing expert memory. EPAM's architecture and memory processes are described in H. B. Richman, J. J. Staszewski and H. A. Simon, "Simulation of Expert Memory Using EPAM IV," Psychological Review, 102 (1995):305 330.

## The Parameters of Memory Seven Chunks, or Is It Two?

The second limiting property of the inner system that shows up again and again in learning and problem-solving experiments is the amount of

information that can be held in short-term memory. Here again the relevant unit appears to be the chunk, where this term has exactly the same meaning as in the definition of the fixation constant.

Attention was attracted to this parameter, known previously from digit span, numerosity-judging, and discrimination tasks, by George Miller's justly celebrated paper on "The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two."<sup>12</sup> It is no longer as plausible as it was when he wrote his paper that a single parameter is involved in the three kinds of task, rather than three different parameters: we shall consider here only tasks of the digit-span variety. Today we would express the parameter as the amount of information that can be rehearsed in about two seconds, which is, in fact, about seven syllables or short words.

The facts that appear to emerge from recent experiments on short-term memory are these. If asked to read a string of digits or letters and simply to repeat them back, a subject can generally perform correctly on strings up to seven or even ten items in length. If almost any other task, however simple, is interposed between the subject's hearing the items and repeating them, the number retained drops to two. From their familiarity in daily life we could dub these numbers the "telephone directory constants." We can generally retain seven numbers from directory to phone if we are not interrupted in any way not even by our own thoughts.

Where experiments appear to show that more than two chunks are retained across an interruption, the phenomena can almost always be explained parsimoniously by mechanisms we have already discussed in the previous section. In some of these experiments the explanation as already pointed out by Milleris that the subject recodes the stimulus into a smaller number of chunks before storing it in short-term memory. If ten items can be recoded as two chunks, then ten items can be retained. In the other experiments where "too much" appears to be retained in short-term memory, the times allowed the subjects permit them in fact to fixate the excess of items in long-term memory. For experts who have acquired retrieval structures or templates in their domain of expertise into which the new information can be inserted, these times can be quite short a second or two per item.