I do not wish to expand some pioneering experiments into a comprehensive theory of semantics. The point of these examples is that they show that the kind of memory structure that has been postulated, for other reasons, to explain human behavior in simpler cognitive tasks is suitable for explaining how linguistic strings might be represented internally, how other kinds of stimuli might be similarly represented, and how the communalities in representation the use of hierarchically organized list structures for both may explain how language and "meanings" come together in the human head.

There is no contradiction, then, between the thesis that a human being possesses, at birth, a competence for acquiring and using language and the thesis that language is the most artificial, hence also the most human of all human constructions. The former thesis is an assertion that there is an inner environment and that it does place limits on the kinds of information processing of which the organism is capable. The structure of language reveals these limits; and these limits in turn account for such commonality as exists among the Babel of human tongues.

The latter thesis, of the artificiality of language, is an assertion that the limits on adaptation, on possible languages, imposed by the inner environment are very broad limits on organization, not very specific limits on syntax. Moreover, according to the thesis, they are limits imposed not only on language but also on every other mode of representing internally experience received through stimuli from outside.

Such a view of the relation of language and thinking puts a new cast on the "Whorfian" hypothesis that stating it in over strong form only the expressible is thinkable. If the view is valid, it would be as correct to say. "Only the thinkable is expressible "a view that, I suppose, Kant would have found quite congenial.

## Conclusion

The thesis with which I began this chapter was the following:

Human beings viewed as behaving systems, are quite simple. The apparent complexity of our behavior over time is largely a reflection of the complexity of the environment in which we find ourselves.

That hypothesis was based in turn on the thesis of the first chapter: that behavior is adapted to goals, hence is artificial, hence reveals only those characteristics of the behaving system that limit the adaptation.

To illustrate how we have begun to test these theses and at the same time to build up a theory of the simple principles that underlie human behavior, I have surveyed some of the evidence from a range of human performances, particularly those that have been studied in the psychological laboratory.

The behavior of human subjects in solving crypt arithmetic problems, in attaining concepts, in memorizing, in holding information in short-term memory, in processing visual stimuli, and in performing tasks that use natural languages provides strong support for these theses. The artificiality hence variability of human behavior hardly calls for evidence beyond our observation of everyday life. The experiments are therefore mostly significant in what they show about the broad commonalities in organizations of the human information-processing system as it engages in different tasks.

The evidence is overwhelming that the system is basically serial in its operation: that it can process only a few symbols at a time and that the symbols being processed must be held in special, limited memory structures whose content can be changed rapidly. The most striking limits on subjects' capacities to employ efficient strategies arise from the very small capacity of the short-term memory structure (seven chunks) and from the relatively long time (eight seconds) required to transfer a chunk of information from short-term to long-term memory.

The claim that the human cognitive system is basically serial has been challenged in recent years by advocates of neural nets and parallel connectionist models of the nervous system. I would make the following cautionary observations. Although there is clearly a lot of parallelism in the sensory organs (especially eyes and ears), after stimuli have been recognized seriality is enforced by the small capacity of the short-term memory that is employed in the subsequent stages of processing. There is also a moderate degree of parallelism in the processing of motor signals, but again, only after the initial signals have passed through the STM bottleneck. Third, seriality of processing at the symbolic level, the level with which we are concerned here, says nothing, one way or the other, about

the extent of seriality or parallelism in the neural implementation of the symbolic processing at the next level below. (By an ironic reverse twist, parallel connectionist networks are routinely simulated by programs run on serial computers of standard von Neumann architecture.)

Finally, a large part of the discernible parallel neural activity in the brain may well consist only in passive maintenance of memory, the active processes being largely localized and serial. (Evidence now coming from magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] of the brain is consistent with this view.) The speeds at which people can perform cognitive tasks and the usual limits on the numbers of tasks they can perform concurrently do not provide much evidence for (or need for) parallel processing capacity. Until connectionism has demonstrated, which it has not yet done, that complex thinking and problem-solving processes can be modeled as well with parallel connectionist architectures as they have been with serial architectures, and that the experimentally observed limits on concurrent cognitive activity can be represented in the connectionist models, the case for massive parallelism outside the sensory functions remains dubious.

When we turn from tasks that exercise mainly the short-term memory and serialprocessing capabilities of the central nervous system to tasks that involve retrieval of stored information, we encounter new limits of adaptation, and through these limits we acquire new information about the organization of mind and brain. Studies of visual perception and of tasks requiring use of natural language show with growing clarity that memory is indeed organized in associative fashion, but that the "associations" have the properties of what, in the computer trade, are usually called "list structures." I have indicated briefly what those properties are, and more will be said about them in the next chapter.

These are the sorts of generalizations about human thinking that are emerging from the experimental evidence. They are simple things, just as our hypothesis led us to expect. Moreover, though the picture will continue to be enlarged and clarified, we should not expect it to become essentially more complex. Only human pride argues that the apparent intricacies of our path stem from a quite different source than the intricacy of the ant's path.

One of the curious consequences of my approach of my thesis is that I have said almost nothing about physiology. But the mind is usually

thought to be located in the brain. I have discussed the organization of the mind without saying anything about the structure of the brain.

The main reason for this disembodiment of mind is of course the thesis that I have just been discussing. The difference between the hardware of a computer and the "hardware" of the brain has not prevented computers from simulating a wide spectrum of kinds of human thinking just because both computer and brain, when engaged in thought, are adaptive systems, seeking to mold themselves to the shape of the task environment.

It would be unfortunate if this conclusion were altered to read that neurophysiology has nothing to contribute to the explanation of human behavior. That would be of course a ridiculous doctrine. But our analysis of the artificial leads us to a particular view of the form that the physiological explanation of behavior must take. Neurophysiology is the study of the inner environment of the adaptive system called Homo sapiens. It is to physiology that we must turn for an explanation of the limits of adaptation: Why is short-term memory limited to seven chunks; what is the physiological structure that corresponds to a "chunk"; what goes on during the eight seconds that a chunk is being fixated; how are associational structures realized in the brain?

As our knowledge increases, the relation between physiological and informationprocessing explanations will become just like the relation between quantummechanical and physiological explanations in biology (or the relation between solid-state physics and programming explanations in computer science). They constitute two linked levels of explanation with (in the case before us) the limiting properties of the inner system showing up at the interface between them.

Finally, we may expect also that, as we link information-processing psychology to physiology on the inner side, we shall also be linking psychology to the general theory of search through large combinatorial spaces on the outer side the side of the task environment. But that is the topic of my fifth chapter, for the theory of design is that general theory of search. Before we take up that topic we must say more about how the large bodies of information used by designers are stored in the human mind and accessed.