## 4

## Remembering and Learning: Memory As Environment for Thought

In developing the proposition in chapter 3 that human thought processes are simple, the cards were perhaps stacked by the examples selected to illustrate the thesis. A task like $\begin{array} { r } { D O N A L D + G E R A L D = R O B E R T } \end{array}$ is difficult enough for an intelligent adult, but it does not call on much information stored in one's memory. The solver must know the numbers, how to add and subtract them, and perhaps a few facts about parity, but that is about all. Contrast this with the task of driving a taxi in Pittsburgh or in the East Bay. No amount of intelligence will take the cab driver from here to there unless he has stored in memory an enormous amount of information about the names of streets, their locations, and mutual intersections. (The street index of my Pittsburgh atlas contains about 8,500 entries.) If this information is available in memory, however, choosing a route probably does not call for a very complex strategy.<sup>1</sup>

The hypothesis that human thought processes are simple emerged from the information-processing research of the 1950s and 1960s. Most of that research employed puzzle like tasks, similar to the crypt arithmetic problems and concept attainment tasks discussed in the last chapter, which could be performed without great dependence on memory or skills previously learned. Additional examples are the Missionaries and Cannibals puzzle, the Tower of Hanoi puzzle, and problems of logical inference, all of which have been studied extensively in the psychological laboratory

and support the picture of human thinking that was drawn in the last chapter.

It is reasonable that research on human thinking should begin with relatively content less tasks of these kinds but not that it should end there. And so in recent decades research in both cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence has been turning more and more to semantically rich domains domains that have substantial, meaningful content, where skillful performance calls upon large amounts of specialized knowledge retrieved from memory. Does human thinking still look simple in such domains?

In pursuing this question, we shall be interested especially in high-level performance of the kinds of tasks that confront professionals in their everyday work or college students who are preparing for professional practice. Among the professional-level domains that have been studied fairly extensively in the laboratory, and hence some of whose parameters are known, are chess playing, making medical diagnoses, solving college physics problems, and discovering regularities in empirical data. We will use these and others as examples.

Except for chess playing, long-term memory played only a modest role in performance of the tasks examined in chapter 3. The simplicity we discovered there was largely a simplicity of process (only a few basic symbol manipulating processes had to be postulated to account for the behavior) and a simplicity of the architecture of the mind (its seriality and its limited short-term memory). A few parameters, especially the chunk capacity of STM and the storage time for new chunks in LTM, played a dominant role in fixing the limits of the system's performance.

As we move to semantically rich domains, new questions of simplicity and complexity arise. Does the richness of the contents of long-term memory imply complexity of structure, or can that richness be accommodated by the simple organizations of list structures that were described briefly in chapter 3? Is a higher level of complexity required for programs that exploit these large stores of memory, or are the same processes in evidence as those that account for problem solving in the puzzle like tasks of chapter 3? Do the learning programs required to store new data and processes in long-term memory introduce new levels of complexity? We will see that the evidence from studies of human performance and from

its simulation by computer generally supports the hypothesis of simplicity. More memory does not necessarily mean more complexity.

## Semantically Rich Domains

There is a certain arbitrariness in drawing the boundary between inner and outer environments of artificial systems. In our discussion of economic behavior in chapter 2, we might well have considered the business firm's cost function to be part of the inner environment. Instead we abstracted the decision-making process from the production technology and regarded only the limits on rational calculation as inner constraints on adaptivity. The cost function was treated, along with the demand function, as part of the outer environment to which the firm was seeking to adapt.

We can adopt a similar viewpoint toward the human problem solver, whose basic tool for solving problems is a small repertory of information processes of the sorts described in the last chapter. This processor operates on an outer environment that has two major components: the "real world," sensed through eye, ear, and touch, and acted upon by leg, hand, and tongue, and a large store of (correct and incorrect) information about that world, held in long-term memory and retrievable by recognition or by association. When the processor is solving puzzle like problems, the memory plays a limited role. The structure of the problem rather than the organization of memory steers the problem-solving search. When it is solving problems in semantically rich domains, a large part of the problem-solving search takes place in long-term memory and is guided by information discovered in that memory. Hence an explanation of problem solving in such domains must rest on an adequate theory of memory.

## Long-Term Memory

Certain facts about human long-term memory (LTM) were set forth in the last chapter. It is of essentially unlimited size no one appears ever to have been able to fill his memory to overflowing, although in senility new items cannot be stored. About eight seconds are required to store a new chunk in LTM, except when an expert has an already stored template with which the chunk can be associated, in which case only a second or

two is required."<sup>2</sup> A rather shorter time (a few hundred milliseconds to a couple of seconds) is needed to retrieve information previously stored. The memory is usually described as "associative" because of the way in which one thought retrieved from it leads to another. Information is stored in linked list structures.

In terms of our present-day knowledge of LTM, we can extend this description a bit. We can think of the memory as a large encyclopedia or library, the information stored by topics (nodes), liberally cross-referenced (associational links), and with an elaborate index (recognition capability) that gives direct access through multiple entries to the topics. Long-term memory operates like a second environment, parallel to the environment sensed through eyes and ears, through which the problem solver can search and to whose contents he can respond.

Medical diagnosis is a semantically rich domain that has now been investigated extensively, with the aims both of understanding the diagnostic processes used by physicians and of building systems for diagnosis by computer. The thickness of medical textbooks and reference books attests to the large volume of information that is required for accurate diagnosis. When the diagnostic strategies of physicians are studied, two kinds of processes are prominent in their thinking-aloud protocols: processes of direct recognition, where presence of a symptom leads almost immediately to hypothesizing a disease that might be its cause, and processes of search quite like those identified in the simpler problemsolving tasks that were described in chapter 3.<sup>3</sup> The diagnosis generally proceeds from symptoms to hypothesized disease entities, to tests for resolving doubts and weeding out alternatives, to new symptoms, and so on. Thus the search is conducted alternately in each of two environments: the physician's mental library of medical knowledge and the patient's body. Information gleaned from one environment is used to guide the next step of search in the other.