## Intuition

What about the sudden flashes of ''intuition" that sometimes allow the expert to arrive immediately at the answer that the novice can find (if at all) only after protracted search? (I put "intuition" in quotes to emphasize that it is a label for a process, not an explanation of it.) Intuition is a genuine enough phenomenon which can be explained rather simply: most intuitive leaps are acts of recognition. Let me illustrate this with the game of chess.

In chapter 3 I described the remarkable ability of chess masters and grandmasters to reproduce chess positions almost faultlessly after seeing them for five or ten seconds. This performance was reconciled with the known limits of short-term memory by observing that for the chess master a position from a game does not consist of 25 isolated pieces but of five or six chunks, each one a familiar configuration that may be a template of a dozen pieces or a smaller chunk consisting of two to five or more related pieces. Since we can estimate, at least roughly, the amount of variety in chess positions from well-played games, we can also estimate the number of familiar chunks that must be stored in the master's long-term memory to make his performance possible. Several different methods of estimation all lead to numbers of the general magnitude of 50,000. We need not take the exact number seriously, but it is interesting that it is of the same order of magnitude as the natural language recognition vocabulary of a college-educated reader.<sup>4</sup>

Hence we can say that one part of the grandmaster's chess skill resides in the 50,000 chunks stored in memory, and in the index (in the form of a structure of feature tests) that allows him to recognize any one of these chunks on the chess board and to access the information in long-term memory that is associated with it. The information associated with familiar patterns may include knowledge about what to do when the pattern is encountered. Thus the experienced chess player who recognizes the feature called an open file thinks immediately of the possibility of moving a rook to that file. The move may or may not be the best one, but it is one that should be considered whenever an open file is present. The expert

recognizes not only the situation in which he finds himself, but also what action might be appropriate for dealing with it.

A feature-testing system capable of discriminating among 50,000 different items might make its discriminations quite rapidly. Even if each test were dichotomous, which they probably are not, only about 16 tests would have to be performed to achieve each recognition. (The game of "twenty questions" is based on the fact that 20 dichotomous tests will discriminate among a million items.) If each test required 10 milliseconds, the whole process could be performed in less than 200 milliseconds well within the time limits of human recognition capabilities.

When playing a "rapid transit" game, at ten seconds a move, or fifty opponents simultaneously, going rapidly from one board to the next, a chess master is operating mostly "intuitively," that is, by recognizing board features and the moves that they suggest. The master will not play as well as in a tournament, where about three minutes, on the average, can be devoted to each move, but nonetheless will play relatively strong chess. A person's skill may decline from grandmaster level to the level of a master, or from master to expert, but it will by no means vanish. Hence recognition capabilities, and the information associated with the patterns that can be recognized, constitute a very large component of chess skill.<sup>5</sup>

## How Much Information?

The amount of information stored by chess masters appears to be roughly consonant with the amount of information that professionals in other

domains possess although only the roughest measures of these quantities are available. At first it might appear unlikely that disciplines as disparate as chess, medicine, mathematics, and chemistry should call on memory stores of comparable size. But their comparability says little about the nature of the domains. No one knows everything there is to know about chess, medicine, chemistry, or any other serious domain. Here, as elsewhere, man must be the measure of skill. A professional's knowledge is adequate when he or she knows about as much as other professionals in the same discipline. What places an upper limit on professional knowledge is the amount of time that can be devoted to acquiring and maintaining it some fraction of a human waking lifetime.

From what is known about the rates at which people can store new information in long-term memory, 50,000 chunks is not an unconscionable amount of knowledge to acquire in a decade, say, of professional training. Of course 50,000 chunks is an underestimate of what the chess master (or other professional) knows, but even if we raise the estimate by one or two orders of magnitude, that much information could probably be acquired in a decade. If it takes thirty seconds of attention to store a new chunk in long-term memory (8 seconds for initial acquisition, say, plus 22 seconds to overlearn for permanent retention), then ten years of intensive study at 1,500 hours per year (about four hours per day) could produce a memory store of 1.8 million chunks. Even a dedicated professional who worked around the clock with a minimum of daydreaming would be unlikely to learn more than that, for a substantial part of the time would probably be spent not in learning but in practicing what had already been learned.

In a couple of domains where the matter has been studied, we do know that even the most talented people require approximately a decade to reach top professional proficiency. Except for Bobby Fisher and Judit Polgar, who reached grandmaster status in nine years and some months from the time they first began to play chess, there is no record of anyone achieving that level in less than a decade. Unless we except Mozart, there is no record of a composer producing first-rate music before he had completed a decade of serious study and practice; and even in the case of Mozart the music that he composed between the seventh and tenth years

after he began writing is notable as Mozart juvenalia rather than the music of a "grandmaster."<sup>6</sup>

When a domain reaches a point where the knowledge for skillful professional practice cannot be acquired in a decade, more or less, then several adaptive developments are likely to occur. Specialization will usually increase (as it has, for example, in medicine), and practitioners will make increasing use of books and other external reference aids in their work.

Architecture is a good example of a domain where much of the information a professional requires is stored in reference works, such as catalogues of available building materials, equipment, and components, and official building codes. No architect expects to keep all of this in his head or to design without frequent resort to these information sources. In fact architecture can almost be taken as a prototype for the process of design in a semantically rich task domain. The emerging design is itself incorporated in a set of external memory structures: sketches, floor plans, drawings of utility systems, and so on. At each stage in the design process, the partial design reflected in these documents serves as a major stimulus for suggesting to the designer what he should attend to next. This direction to new sub goals permits in turn new information to be extracted from memory and reference sources and another step to be taken toward the development of the design.<sup>7</sup> I will have a little more to say about this cycle of design activities, and its implications for style, in the next chapter.

It should not be supposed that every advance in human knowledge increases the amount of information that has to be mastered by professionals. On the contrary, some of the most important progress in science is the discovery and testing of powerful new theories that allow large numbers of facts to be subsumed under a few general principles. There is a constant competition between the elaboration of knowledge and its compression into more parsimonious form by theories. Hence it is not safe to say that the professional chemist must learn more today than a half century ago, before the general laws of quantum mechanics were announced.