instructions, while ISAAC has to discover a match between the things mentioned in the problem statement and the schemas and physical laws it has stored in memory. A more sophisticated understanding system would combine these two capabilities. One component of the system (corresponding to UNDERSTAND) would generate state representations when confronted with new problem domains and would store these as sets of schemas. The other component (corresponding to ISAAC) would endeavor to use representations already stored to interpret new problems presented to it.

However primitive the existing understanding programs may be, they do provide a set of basic mechanisms, a theory, to explain how human beings are able to grasp problems, both in new domains about which they have no knowledge and in domains about which they have a greater or lesser amount of previous semantic knowledge. The two particular systems I have described are members of a growing family of such programs that explicate the processes of understanding in an ever-widening collection of tasks. Some of these systems are concerned with relatively ill-defined tasks. For example, there has been some research on the processes that may be used for understanding children's tales or newspaper stories. Unlike the problem-solving tasks discussed here, where it is easy to test whether the system has understood the problem or not (i.e., whether it has constructed a representation that the problem solver can use to find an answer), the tests of whether a story has been "understood" are ambiguous. In the latter tasks understanding can be achieved to various degrees and various depths.

The understanding programs provide us with additional insights about visual imagery, a topic discussed in chapter 3. The state descriptions produced by UNDERSTAND and the element schemas and problem schemas of ISAAC are excellent examples of the kinds of symbolic structures proposed in that previous discussion as mental images. As a matter of fact Novak has written a subsidiary program, as part of ISAAC, that produces from the problem schema it has constructed an actual (if simple) drawing of the problem situation that can be displayed on a cathode-ray tube.

## Size and Simplicity

The problem-understanding programs take information from the world outside (in these cases in the form of natural-language text) and transform

it into knowledge that is stored in long-term memory as list structures or procedures. When memory has acquired a photograph, highly fragmentary and often fogged, of the external world, the problem-solving processes can carry out some of their work on this internal world instead of the outside one. This is advantageous whenever it is costly to gain access to the information in the external world.

As more knowledge is acquired about more subjects, the memory store grows, essentially without limit. Regardless of the size reached by the memory, however, it continues to be constructed of the same basic components, to be organized and indexed according to the same principles, and to be operated upon by processes having the same basic form. We may say that the system becomes more complex because it grows in size, or we may say that it remains simple since its fundamental structure does not change.

We could make exactly the same comments if we were discussing the simplicity or complexity of the Library of Congress. As the number of books increases from thousands to millions to tens of millions, the number of miles of shelves required to hold them increases correspondingly. So does the number of cards in the catalogue. But in terms of the library's architecture, the growth, however impressive, can hardly be characterized as a growth in complexity. As I shall argue in chapter 8, the transition from a single-cell to a multi cell organism represents a step upward in complexity; increase in the weight of a steer or in the population of a colony of algae does not.

Human beings carry around in their heads knowledge of many domains and often even expertness in several. To the extent that the domains are distinct, as they often are, their multiplicity contributes nothing to the complexity of operating in any one of them. Studying a Greek textbook in the library is made no more difficult (and no easier) by the fact that the library also contains books on Latin, Sanskrit, and classical Chinese.

Human memory is best regarded as an extension (sometimes a large extension) of the environment in which human thought processes take place and not as an increment in the complexity of these processes. What is remarkable about the whole architecture is precisely the fact that memory enables the system to operate effectively in a wide array of different task domains using the same basic equipment that it employs to

understand and solve Tea Ceremony problems or simple statics problems in physics.

## Learning

The external environments of thought, both the real world and long-term memory, undergo continual change. In memory the change is adaptive. It updates the knowledge about the real world and adds new knowledge. It adds new procedures that contribute to the skills in particular task domains and improves existing procedures. A scientific theory of human thinking must take account of this process of change in the contents of memory.

If the human cognitive system is truly simple, that simplicity can only be revealed by discovering the invariants that underlie change. Among these invariants are the basic parameters of memory (parameters of the inner environment) and the general search and control processes described in chapter 3. In addition to these we may look for a basic set of processes that bring about the adaptation of long-term memory that we call learning. We may hypothesize that these learning processes are the unmoved movers that can account for the change processes in a simple and invariant way.

Learning is any change in a system that produces a more or less permanent change in its capacity for adapting to its environment. Understanding systems, especially systems capable of understanding problems in new task domains, are learning systems. So is EPAM, the system described in chapter 3 that simulates human rote verbal learning. So is Siklóssy's system, also described in that chapter, for simulating first-language learning.

Any multicomponent system can be improved in a large number of ways. Nor is there any single kind of change in the human cognitive system to which the term ''learning" applies exclusively. However, the multiplicity of forms of learning need not bewilder us, for they are reducible to a few fundamental species, corresponding to the main components of the cognitive system.

Along one dimension we can distinguish between acquiring information (stored data structures) and acquiring skills (stored procedures). The

UNDERSTAND program illustrates both. The state descriptions that UNDERSTAND builds constitute new knowledge, the operators, new skills. To these categories we can add the learning of new perceptual discriminations, as exemplified by EPAM. Motor skills, although based partly on the kinds of learning already enumerated, probably also have additional components.

It is too early in the development of research on learning to attempt an exhaustive taxonomy of the kinds of learning processes that will be required to account for all the sorts of learning of which the human organism is capable, but there is reason to believe that human learning of most kinds can be explained within the framework of the symbol-processing system we have been describing.

## Learning with Understanding

Every teacher knows that there is a profound difference between a student learning a lesson by rote and learning it with understanding, or meaningfully. When something has been learned by rote, it can be regurgitated more or less literally, but it cannot be used as a cognitive tool. Laboratory experiments have shown that material can usually be learned more rapidly with understanding than by rote, is retained over longer periods of time, and can be transfered better to new tasks.<sup>11</sup>

In spite of the great pragmatic importance of the distinction between rote and meaningful learning, the difference between them is not thoroughly understood in information processing terms. Partly it is a matter of indexing: meaningful material is indexed in such a way that it can be accessed readily when it is relevant. Partly it is a matter of redundancy: meaningful material is stored redundantly, so that if any fraction of it is forgotten, it can be reconstructed from the remainder. Partly it is a matter of representation: meaningful material is stored in the form of procedures rather than "passive" data, or if stored as data, it is represented in such a way that general problem-solving processes and other procedures can readily make use of it. All of these are aspects of understanding and meaningfulness that need further exploration.