## 5

## The Science of Design: Creating the Artificial

Historically and traditionally, it has been the task of the science disciplines to teach about natural things: how they are and how they work. It has been the task of engineering schools to teach about artificial things: how to make artifacts that have desired properties and how to design.

Engineers are not the only professional designers. Everyone designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones. The intellectual activity that produces material artifacts is no different fundamentally from the one that prescribes remedies for a sick patient or the one that devises a new sales plan for a company or a social welfare policy for a state. Design, so construed, is the core of all professional training; it is the principal mark that distinguishes the professions from the sciences. Schools of engineering, as well as schools of architecture, business, education, law, and medicine, are all centrally concerned with the process of design.

In view of the key role of design in professional activity, it is ironic that in this century the natural sciences almost drove the sciences of the artificial from professional school curricula, a development that peaked about two or three decades after the Second World War. Engineering schools gradually became schools of physics and mathematics; medical schools became schools of biological science; business schools became schools of finite mathematics. The use of adjectives like "applied" concealed, but did not change, the fact. It simply meant that in the professional schools those topics were selected from mathematics and the natural sciences for emphasis which were thought to be most nearly relevant to professional practice. It did not mean that design continued to be taught, as distinguished from analysis.

The movement toward natural science and away from the sciences of the artificial proceeded further and faster in engineering, business, and medicine than in the other professional fields I have mentioned, though it has by no means been absent from schools of law, journalism, and library science. The stronger universities were more deeply affected than the weaker, and the graduate programs more than the undergraduate. During that time few doctoral dissertations in first-rate professional schools dealt with genuine design problems, as distinguished from problems in solid-state physics or stochastic processes. I have to make partial exceptions for reasons I shall mention of dissertations in computer science and management science, and there were undoubtedly some others, for example, in chemical engineering.

Such a universal phenomenon must have had a basic cause. It did have a very obvious one. As professional schools, including the independent engineering schools, were more and more absorbed into the general culture of the university, they hankered after academic respectability. In terms of the prevailing norms, academic respectability calls for subject matter that is intellectually tough, analytic, formalizable, and teachable. In the past much, if not most, of what we knew about design and about the artificial sciences was intellectually soft, intuitive, informal, and cook-booky. Why would anyone in a university stoop to teach or learn about designing machines or planning market strategies when he could concern himself with solid-state physics? The answer has been clear: he usually wouldn't.

The damage to professional competence caused by the loss of design from professional curricula gradually gained recognition in engineering and medicine and to a lesser extent in business. Some schools did not think it a problem (and a few still do not), because they regarded schools of applied science as a superior alternative to the trade schools of the past. If that were the choice, we could agree.<sup>1</sup> But neither alternative is

satisfactory. The older kind of professional school did not know how to educate for professional design at an intellectual level appropriate to a university; the newer kind of school nearly abdicated responsibility for training in the core professional skill. Thus we were faced with a problem of devising a professional school that could attain two objectives simultaneously: education in both artificial and natural science at a high intellectual level. This too is a problem of design organizational design.

The kernel of the problem lies in the phrase "artificial science." The previous chapters have shown that a science of artificial phenomena is always in imminent danger of dissolving and vanishing. The peculiar properties of the artifact lie on the thin interface between the natural laws within it and the natural laws without. What can we say about it? What is there to study besides the boundary sciences those that govern the means and the task environment?

The artificial world is centered precisely on this interface between the inner and outer environments; it is concerned with attaining goals by adapting the former to the latter. The proper study of those who are concerned with the artificial is the way in which that adaptation of means to environments is brought about and central to that is the process of design itself. The professional schools can reassume their professional responsibilities just to the degree that they discover and teach a science of design, a body of intellectually tough, analytic, partly formalizable, partly empirical, teachable doctrine about the design process.

It is the thesis of this chapter that such a science of design not only is possible but also has been emerging since the mid-1970s. In fact, it is fair to say that the first edition of this book, published in 1969, was influential in its development, serving as a call to action and outlining the form that the action could take. At Carnegie Mellon University, one of the first engineering schools to move toward research on the process of design, the

## (footnote continued from previous page)

search; that all courses of instruction may be examined carefully to see where training in details has been unduly emphasized at the expense of the more powerful training in all-embracing fundamental principles.

Notice that President Compton's emphasis was on "fundamental" an emphasis as sound today as it was in 1930. What is called for is not a departure from the fundamental but an inclusion in the curriculum of the fundamental in engineering along with the fundamental in natural science. That was not possible in 1930; but it is possible today.

initial step was to form a Design Research Center, about 1975. The Center (since 1985 called the ''Engineering Design Research Center") facilitated collaboration among the faculty and students undertaking research on the science and practice of design and developed elements of a theory of design that found their way back into the undergraduate and graduate curricula. The Center continues to play an important role in the modernization and strengthening of education and research in design at Carnegie Mellon and elsewhere in the United States.

In substantial part, design theory is aimed at broadening the capabilities of computers to aid design, drawing upon the tools of artificial intelligence and operations research. Hence, research on many aspects of computer-aided design is being pursued with growing intensity in computer science, engineering and architecture departments, and in operations research groups in business schools. The need to make design theory explicit and precise in order to introduce computers into the process has been the key to establishing its academic accept ability its appropriateness for a university. In the remainder of this chapter I will take up some of the topics that need to be incorporated in a theory of design and in instruction in design.

## The Logic of Design: Fixed Alternatives

We must start with some questions of logic.<sup>2</sup> The natural sciences are concerned with how things are. Ordinary systems of logic the standard propositional and predicate calculi, say serve these sciences well. Since the concern of standard logic is with declarative statements, it is well suited for assertions about the world and for inferences from those assertions.

Design, on the other hand, is concerned with how things ought to be, with devising artifacts to attain goals. We might question whether the