cedures for finding good moves in actual board positions in real time, within the computational capacities of real human beings or real computers. The best procedures of this kind that exist today are still those stored in the memories of grandmasters, having the characteristics I described in chapters 3 and 4. But there are now several computer programs that can rather regularly defeat all but a few of the strongest human grandmasters. Even these programs do not possess anything like the chess knowledge of human masters, but succeed by a combination of brute-force computation (sometimes hundreds of millions of variations are analysed) with a good deal of "book" knowledge of opening variations and a reasonably sophisticated criterion function for evaluating positions.

The second topic then for the curriculum in the science of design consists in the efficient computational techniques that are available for actually finding optimum courses of action in real situations, or reasonable approximations to real situations. As I mentioned in chapter 2, that topic has a number of important components today, most of them developed at least to the level of practical application within the past years. These include linear programming theory, dynamic programming, geometric programming, queuing theory, and control theory.

## Finding Satisfactory Actions

The subject of computational techniques need not be limited to optimization. Traditional engineering design methods make much more use of inequalities specifications of satisfactory performance than of maxima and minima. So-called "figures of merit" permit comparison between designs in terms of "better" and "worse" but seldom provide a judgment of "best." For example, I may cite the root-locus methods employed in the design of control systems.

Since there did not seem to be any word in English for decision methods that look for good or satisfactory solutions instead of optimal ones, some years ago I introduced the term "satisficing" to refer to such procedures. Now no one in his right mind will satisfice if he can equally well optimize; no one will settle for good or better if he can have best. But that is not the way the problem usually poses itself in actual design situations.

In chapter 2 I argued that in the real world we usually do not have a choice between satisfactory and optimal solutions, for we only rarely have

a method of finding the optimum. Consider, for example, the well-known combinatorial problem called the traveling salesman problem: given the geographical locations of a set of cities, find the routing that will take a salesman to all the cities with the shortest mileage.<sup>4</sup> For this problem there is a straightforward optimizing algorithm (analogous to the mini max algorithm for chess): try all possible routings, and pick the shortest. But for any considerable number of cities, the algorithm is computationally infeasible (the number of routes through N cities will be N!). Although some ways have been found for cutting down the length of the search, no algorithm has been discovered sufficiently powerful to solve the traveling salesman problem with a tolerable amount of computing for a set of, say, fifty cities.

Rather than keep our salesman at home, we shall prefer of course to find a satisfactory, if not optimal, routing for him. Under most circumstances, common sense will probably arrive at a fairly good route, but an even better one can often be found by one or another of several heuristic methods.

An earmark of all these situations where we satisfice for inability to optimize is that, although the set of available alternatives is "given" in a certain abstract sense (we can define a generator guaranteed to generate all of them eventually), it is not "given" in the only sense that is practically relevant. We cannot within practicable computational limits generate all the admissible alternatives and compare their respective merits. Nor can we recognize the best alternative, even if we are fortunate enough to generate it early, until we have seen all of them. We satisfice by looking for alternatives in such a way that we can generally find an acceptable one after only moderate search.

Now in many satisficing situations, the expected length of search for an alternative meeting specified standards of acceptability depends on how high the standards are set, but it depends hardly at all on the total size of the universe to be searched. The time required for a search through a haystack for a needle sharp enough to sew with depends on the density of distribution of sharp needles but not on the total size of the stack.

Hence, when we use satisficing methods, it often does not matter whether or not the total set of admissible alternatives is "given" by a formal but impracticable algorithm. It often does not even matter how big that set is. For this reason satisficing methods may be extendable to design problems in that broad range where the set of alternatives is not "given" even in the quixotic sense that it is "given" for the traveling salesman problem. Our next task is to examine this possibility.

## The Logic of Design: Finding Alternatives

When we take up the case where the design alternatives are not given in any constructive sense but must be synthesized, we must ask once more whether any new forms of reasoning are involved in the synthesis, or whether again the standard logic of declarative statements is all we need.

In the case of optimization we asked: "Of all possible worlds (those attainable for some admissible values of the action variables), which is the best (yields the highest value of the criterion function)?" As we saw, this is a purely empirical question, calling only for facts and ordinary declarative reasoning to answer it.

In this case, where we are seeking a satisfactory alternative, once we have found a candidate we can ask: "Does this alternative satisfy all the design criteria?" Clearly this is also a factual question and raises no new issues of logic. But how about the process of searching for candidates? What kind of logic is needed for the search?

## Means-Ends Analysis

The condition of any goal-seeking system is that it is connected to the outside environment through two kinds of channels: the afferent, or sensory, channels through which it receives information about the environment and the efferent, or motor, channels through which it acts on the environment.<sup>5</sup> The system must have some means of storing in its memory information about states of the world afferent, or sensory, information

and information about actions efferent, or motor, information. Ability to attain goals depends on building up associations, which may be simple or very complex, between particular changes in states of the world and particular actions that will (reliably or not) bring these changes about. In chapter 4 we described these associations as productions.

Except for a few built-in reflexes, an infant has no basis for correlating its sensory information with its actions. A very important part of its early learning is that particular actions or sequences of actions will bring about particular changes in the state of the sensed world. Until the infant builds up this knowledge, the world of sense and the motor world are two entirely separate, entirely unrelated worlds. Only as it begins to acquire experience as to how elements of the one relate to elements of the other can it act purposefully on the world.

The computer problem-solving program called GPS, designed to model some of the main features of human problem solving, exhibits in stark form how goaldirected action depends on building this kind of bridge between the afferent and the efferent worlds. On the afferent, or sensory, side, GPS must be able to represent desired situations or desired objects as well as the present situation. It must be able also to represent differences between the desired and the present. On the efferent side, GPS must be able to represent actions that change objects or situations. To behave purposefully, GPS must be able to select from time to time those particular actions that are likely to remove the particular differences between desired and present states that the system detects. In the machinery of GPS, this selection is achieved through a table of connections, which associates with each kind of detectable difference those actions that are relevant to reducing that difference. These are its associations, in the form of productions, which relate the afferent to the efferent world. Since reaching a goal generally requires a sequence of actions, and since some attempts may be ineffective, GPS must also have means for detecting the progress it is making (the changes in the differences between the actual and the desired) and for trying alternate paths.

## The Logic of Search

GPS then is a system that searches selectively through a (possibly large) environment in order to discover and assemble sequences of actions that

will lead it from a given situation to a desired situation. What are the rules of logic that govern such a search? Is anything more than standard logic involved? Do we require a modal logic to rationalize the process?

Standard logic would seem to suffice. To represent the relation between the afferent and the efferent worlds, we conceive GPS as moving through a large maze. The nodes of the maze represent situations, described afferently; the paths joining one node to another are the actions, described as motor sequences, that will transform the one situation into the other. At any given moment GPS is always faced with a single question: "What action shall I try next?" Since GPS has some imperfect knowledge about the relations of actions to changes in the situation, this becomes a question of choice under uncertainty of a kind already discussed in a previous section.

It is characteristic of the search for alternatives that the solution, the complete action that constitutes the final design, is built from a sequence of component actions. The enormous size of the space of alternatives arises out of the innumerable ways in which the component actions, which need not be very numerous, can be combined into sequences.

Much is gained by considering the component actions in place of the sequences that constitute complete actions, because the situation when viewed afferently usually factors into components that match at least approximately the component actions derived from an efferent factorization. The reasoning implicit in GPS is that, if a desired situation differs from a present situation by differences $D _ { 1 9 } D _ { 2 9 } . . .$ $\mathrm { ~ \cdot ~ } \mathrm { ~ , ~ } D _ { \mathrm { n } } ,$ and if action $A _ { 1 }$ removes differences of type $D _ { 1 } { \mathrm { . } }$ , action A removes differences of type $D _ { 2 }$ , and so on, then the present situation can be transformed into the desired situation by performing the sequence of actions $A _ { 1 } A _ { 2 } , \ldots A _ { n }$

This reasoning is by no means valid in terms of the rules of standard logic in all possible worlds. Its validity requires some rather strong assumptions about the independence of the effects of the several actions on the several differences. One might say that the reasoning is valid in worlds that are "additive" or "factorable" in a certain sense. (The air of paradox about the cat-dog and needle-thread examples cited earlier arises precisely from the non additivity of the actions in these two cases. The first is, in economists' language, a case of decreasing returns; the second, a case of increasing returns.)