## 6

## Social Planning: Designing the Evolving Artifact

In chapter 5 I surveyed some of the modern tools of design that are used by planners and artificers. Even before most of these tools were available to them, ambitious planners often took whole societies and their environments as systems to be refashioned. Some recorded their utopias in books Plato, Sir Thomas More, Marx. Others sought to realize their plans by social revolution in America, France, Russia, China. Many or most of the large-scale designs have centered on political and economic arrangements, but others have focused on the physical environment river development plans, for example, reaching from ancient Egypt to the Tennessee Valley to the Indus and back to today's Nile.

As we look back on such design efforts and their implementation, and as we contemplate the tasks of design that are posed in the world today, our feelings are very mixed. We are energized by the great power our technological knowledge bestows on us. We are intimidated by the magnitude of the problems it creates or alerts us to. We are sobered by the very limited success and sometimes disastrous failure of past efforts to design on the scale of whole societies. We ask, "If we can go to the Moon, why can't we . . . ?"not expecting an answer, for we know that going to the Moon was a simple task indeed, compared with some others we have set for ourselves, such as creating a humane society or a peaceful world. Wherein lies the difference?

Going to the Moon was a complex matter along only one dimension: it challenged our technological capabilities. Though it was no mean accomplishment, it was achieved in an exceedingly cooperative environment, employing a single new organization, NASA, that was charged with a single, highly operational goal. With enormous resources provided to

it, and operating through well-developed market mechanisms, that organization could draw on the production capabilities and technological sophistication of our whole society. Although several potential side effects of the activity (notably its international political and military significance, and the possibility of technological spinoffs) played a major role in motivating the project, they did not have to enter much into the thoughts of the planners once the goal of placing human beings on the Moon had been set. Moreover these by-product benefits and costs are not what we mean when we say the project was a success. It was a success because people walked on the surface of the Moon. Nor did anyone anticipate what turned out to be one of the more important consequences of these voyages: the vivid new perspective we gained of our place in the universe when we first viewed our own pale, fragile planet from space.

Consider now a quite different example of human design. Some twenty years ago we celebrated the 200th birthday of our nation, and about a decade ago we celebrated the 200th anniversary of the framing of its political constitution. Almost all of us in the free world regard that document as an impressive example of success in human planning. We regard it as a success because the Constitution, much modified and much interpreted, still survives as the framework for our political institutions, and because the society that operates within its framework has provided most of us with a broad range of freedoms and a high level of material comfort.

Both achievements the voyages to the Moon and the survival of the American Constitution are triumphs of bounded rationality. A necessary, though not a sufficient, condition of their success was that they were evaluated against limited objectives. I have already argued that point with respect to NASA. As to the founding fathers it is instructive to examine their own views of their goals, reflected in The Federalist and the surviving records of the constitutional convention.<sup>1</sup> What is striking about these documents is their practical sense and the awareness they exude of the limits of foresight about large human affairs. Most of the framers of the Constitution accepted very restricted objectives for their artifact princi-

pally the preservation of freedom in an orderly society. Moreover they did not postulate a new man to be produced by the new institutions but accepted as one of their design constraints the psychological characteristics of men and women as they knew them, their selfishness as well as their common sense. In their own cautious words (The Federalist, no. 55), ''As there is a degree of depravity in mankind which requires a certain degree of circumspection and distrust, so there are other qualities in human nature which justify a certain portion of esteem and confidence."

These examples illustrate some of the characteristics and complexities of designing artifacts on a societal scale. The success of planning on such a scale may call for modesty and restraint in setting the design objectives and drastic simplification of the real-world situation in representing it for purposes of the design process. Even with restraint and simplification difficult obstacles must usually be surmounted to reach the design objectives. The obstacles and some of the techniques for overcoming them provide the main subject of this chapter.

Our first topic will be problem representation; our second, ways of accommodating to the inadequacies that can be expected in data; our third, how the nature of the client affects planning; our fourth, limits on the planner's time and attention; and our fifth, the ambiguity and conflict of goals in societal planning. These topics, which can be viewed as a budget of obstacles or alternatively as a budget of planning requirements, will suggest to us some additions to the curriculum in design outlined in the last chapter.

## Representing the Design Problem

In the previous chapter representation was discussed mainly in the context of relatively well-structured, middle-sized tasks. Representation problems take on new dimensions where social design is involved.

## Organization As Representation

In 1948 the U.S. government took a bold initiative to restore the postwar economies of the nations of western Europe, the so-called "Marshall Plan," which was implemented through the Economic Cooperation

Administration (ECA).<sup>2</sup> An initial task in carrying out the plan was to shape the ECA organization. The answer to the organizational question depended on how one conceptualized the program. At least six different, and largely contradictory, conceptions were offered for the agency by the persons who were initially recruited to organize and manage it.

Congress had appropriated \$5.3 billion for the first year's operations. Some thought that the task was to screen shopping lists proposed by the European nations to make sure the lists contained what was really "needed" (commodity screening approach). Others thought the task was to determine the "dollar gap" in each nation's balance of payments and to authorize funds to close that gap (balance of trade approach). Others thought that the main task was to build up a strong deliberative institution in Europe, so that the recipient nations could make their own plans for use of the funds and thereby strengthen their collaboration (European cooperation approach). Others thought that decisions should be made primarily through bilateral agreements between the United States and each of the recipient nations (bilateral pledge approach). Others thought that at least the portion of the appropriation that was earmarked for loans (\$1 billion) should be handled on a project basis, each project being evaluated for its soundness as an investment (investment bank approach). Others thought that the ECA should have a policy organ for making broad decisions, then a number of administrative organs for implementing them (policy and administration approach). Each of these representations had some basis in the congressional legislation establishing the ECA.

With a little reflection it is easy to see that very different assistance plans would result from implementing these different approaches, with very different economic and political consequences for the European nations and the United States. Conceptualizing the problem in a particular way implied organizing the agency in a manner consistent with that conceptualization. And different organizations would lead inevitably to the implementation of quite different programs, emphasizing certain goals and subordinating others, even if all the alternative policies were in some general sense consistent with the congressional intent.