with every estimated quantity a measure of its precision. Labeling estimates in this way does not make them more reliable, but it does remind us how hard or soft they are and hence how much trust to place in them.

## Prediction

Data about the future predictions are commonly the weakest points in our armor of fact. Good predictions have two requisites that are often hard to come by. First, they require either a theoretical understanding of the phenomena to be predicted, as a basis for the prediction model, or phenomena that are sufficiently regular that they can simply be extrapolated. Since the latter condition is seldom satisfied by data about human affairs (or even about the weather), our predictions will generally be only as good as our theories.

The second requisite for prediction is having reliable data about the initial conditions the starting point from which the extrapolation is to be made. Systems vary in the extent to which their paths are sensitive to small changes in initial conditions. Weather prediction is difficult in good part because the course of meteorological events is highly sensitive to the details of initial conditions. We have every reason to think that social phenomena are similarly sensitive.

Since the consequences of design lie in the future, it would seem that forecasting is an unavoidable part of every design process. If that is true, it is cause for pessimism about design, for the record in forecasting even such "simple" variables as population is dismal. If there is any way to design without forecasts, we should seize on it.

Consider the much-discussed Club of Rome report, which predicted a twentyfirst century doomsday of overpopulation, resource exhaustion, and famine.<sup>6</sup> Since the specifics of the model used to make the Club of Rome predictions have already been much criticized, I don't have to examine those specifics here. My point is a broader one. The Club of Rome report predicted both too much and too little. It predicted too much, because its specific doomsday dates are not believable, and if believable, would not be important. We do not want to know when disaster is going

to strike but how to avoid it. Without any specific predictions we know that a system with exponential population growth and limited resources will sooner or later come to some bad end. For planning purposes we wish only to have some sense of the time scale of events, to know at least whether we are talking about years, decades, generations, or centuries. For most design purposes that is as much prediction as we need.

The Club of Rome report predicted too little because it emphasized a single possible time path rather than focusing upon alternative futures. The heart of the data problem for design is not forecasting but constructing alternative scenarios for the future and analyzing their sensitivity to errors in the theory and data. What is said here about environmental modeling applies as well to efforts aimed specifically at modeling climate change caused by global warming. Predicting the exact course of global warming is a thankless task. Much more feasible and useful is generating alternative policies which can be introduced at the appropriate times for slowing the warming, mitigating its unfavorable effects and taking advantage of favorable effects.<sup>7</sup>

How can we go about designing an acceptable future for the energy and environmental needs of a society? First, we select some planning horizons: perhaps five years for short-term plans, a generation for middle-term plans, and a century or two for long-term plans. There is no need to construct detailed forecasts for each of these time perspectives. Instead we can concentrate our analytic resources on examining alternative target states for the system for the short, middle, and long run. By a target state I mean upper bounds on the quantities of energy used and pollutants produced. Having chosen a desirable (or acceptable) target state, and having satisfied ourselves that its realizability is not unduly sensitive to unpredictables, we can then turn our attention to constructing paths that lead from the present to that desired future.

Design for distant futures would be wholly impossible if remote events had to be envisioned in detail. What makes such design even conceivable is that we need to know or guess about the future only enough to guide the commitments we must make today. Future contingencies that have no

implications for present commitment have no relevance to design. I will have more to say on this point presently.

## Feedback

Few of the adaptive systems that have been forged by evolution or shaped by man depend on prediction as their main means for coping with the future. Two complementary mechanisms for dealing with changes in the external environment are often far more effective than prediction: homeostatic mechanisms that make the system relatively insensitive to the environment and retrospective feedback adjustment to the environment's variation.

Thus a stock of inventories permits a factory to operate without concern for very short-run fluctuations in product orders. Energy storage in the tissues of a predator enables it to cope with uncertainties in the availability of prey. A modest excess of capacity in electric generating plants avoids the need for precise estimation of peak loads. Homeostatic mechanisms are especially useful for handling short-range fluctuations in the environment, hence for making shortrange prediction unnecessary.

Feedback mechanisms, on the other hand, by continually responding to discrepancies between a system's actual and desired states, adapt it to long-range fluctuations in the environment without forecasting. In whatever directions the environment changes, the feedback adjustment tracks it, with of course some delay.

In domains where some reasonable degree of prediction is possible, a system's adaptation to its environment can usually be improved by combining predictive control with homeostatic and feedback methods. It is well known in control theory, however, that active, feed forward control, using predictions, can throw a system into undamped oscillation unless the control responses are carefully designed to maintain stability. Because of the possible destabilizing effects of taking inaccurate predictive data too seriously, it is sometimes advantageous to omit prediction entirely, relying wholly on feedback, unless the quality of the predictions is high.<sup>8</sup>

## Who is the Client?

It may seem peculiar to ask, "Who is the client?" when speaking of the design of large social systems. The question need not be raised about smaller-scale design tasks, since the answer is built into the definitions of the professional roles of designers. At micro social levels of design it is tacitly assumed that the professional architect, attorney, civil engineer, or physician works for a specified client and that the needs and wishes of the client determine the goals of the professional's work. In this model of professional activity the architect designs a house that meets the living requirements of the client, while the physician plans a course of treatment for the patient's ailments. Although in practice matters are not so simple, this definition of the professional role greatly facilitates the development of technologies for each of the professions, for it means that consequences going beyond the client's goals don't have to enter into the design calculations. The architect need not decide if the funds the client wants to spend for a house would be better spent, from society's standpoint, on housing for lowincome families. The physician need not ask whether society would be better off if the patient were dead.

Thus the traditional definition of the professional's role is highly compatible with bounded rationality, which is most comfortable with problems having clear-cut and limited goals. But as knowledge grows, the role of the professional comes under questioning. Developments in technology give professionals the power to produce larger and broader effects at the same time that they become more clearly aware of the remote consequences of their prescriptions.

In part this complication in the professional's role comes about simply as a direct by-product of the growth of knowledge. Whether through the modification of professional norms or through direct intervention of government, new obligations are placed on the professional to take account of the external effects the consequences beyond the client's concern that are produced by the designs.

These same developments cause the professional to redefine the concept of the client. The psychiatrist working with an individual patient becomes a family counselor. The engineer begins to take into account the environmental impact of new products. Finally, as the society and its central