government take on a wider range of responsibilities, more and more professionals find they no longer serve individual clients but are employed directly by agencies of the state. Almost all of the professions today are undergoing self-examination as they experience the pressures generated by these complications in their roles. Architecture, medicine, and engineering all exhibit the stresses engendered by this process.

## Professional-Client Relations

Architects are especially conflicted for several reasons. First, they have always assigned themselves the dual role of artist and professional, two roles that often make inconsistent demands. As artists they wish to realize esthetic goals that may be quite independent of clients' expressed or understood desires. If a client comports himself as an (idealized) Renaissance patron, there may be no difficulty, for the patron does not impose his views of beauty on the artist. But if the client's approach to building takes a more utilitarian bent, and he is not willing to sacrifice what he conceives as usefulness for what the architect conceives as beauty, then the relation between them may be tainted with mistrust and deception. At best, the architect becomes teacher and advocate, not simple executor of the client's purposes.

I once asked Mies van der Rohe, then my faculty colleague at Illinois Institute of Technology, how he got the opportunity to build the Tugend-hat house a startlingly modern design at the time of its construction. The prospective owner had come to Mies after seeing some of the quite conventional houses he had earlier designed in the Netherlands when he was still an apprentice. ''Wasn't the client shocked," I asked, "when you put before him your glass and metal design?" "Yes," said Mies, viewing the tip of his cigar reflectively, "he wasn't very happy at first. But then we smoked some good cigars, . . . and we drank some glasses of a good Rhein wine, . . . and then he began to like it very much."

A second and increasingly acute problem for architects is that, when they take on the task of designing whole complexes or areas instead of single buildings, their professional training does not provide them with clear design criteria. In city planning, for example, the boundary between the design of physical structures and the design of social systems dissolves almost completely. Since there is little in the knowledge base or portfolio

of techniques of architecture that qualifies the professional to plan such social systems, the approach to the design tends to be highly idiosyncratic, reflecting little that can be described as professional consensus, and even less that can be described as empirically based analytic technique.

In the medical profession the stresses take slightly different forms. The first arises from the resource allocation problem balancing the cost of medical care against its quality. Traditionally patients got such care as they could afford, or as the doctor could afford to provide for them one can look at it either way. Today with indirect channels of payment for most medical services, budget constraints are harder to define and monitor, and ethical choices have to be made explicitly that formerly were made tacitly.

The second stress in the design of medical care and treatments derives from the advance of medical technology, which gives the physician a degree of control over life and death that is vastly greater than in the past. And so the traditional view, which opts unconditionally for life, no longer remains unquestioned. Even harder questions arise with new technical means for modifying genetic processes and for manipulating the mind. In the traditional professional-client relation, the client's needs and wants are given. The environment (including the functioning of the body) is to be adapted to the client's goals, not the goals to the environment. Yet much utopian thought has conceived of change in both directions. Society was to be made more fit for human habitation, but the human inhabitants were also to be modified to make them more fit for society. Today we are deeply conflicted about how far we should go in "improving" human beings involuntarily. The movie The Clockwork Orange states the conflict dramatically by asking whether we are justified in destroying the capability for willful action even to prevent viciousness.

The case of the engineer presents yet another aspect of the problems that growing technical power and growing awareness of remote consequences bring. Most engineering is done within the context of business and governmental organizations. In this environment there is continuing potential for conflict between the decision criteria defined by the profession and those enforced by the organization. In the hypothetical business firms of the pure theory of competition, discussed in chapter 2, organizational criteria would prevail. In the more complex world in which we

actually live, the professional engineers possess substantial discretion to give professional considerations priority over the goals of the organization. If they choose to exercise that discretion, they must decide who the client is. In particular they must decide which of the positive and negative externalities to which the artifacts they are designing will give rise should be incorporated in the design criteria.

## Society As the Client

It may seem obvious that all ambiguities should be resolved by identifying the client with the whole society. That would be a clear-cut solution in a world without conflict of interest or uncertainty in professional judgment. But when conflict and uncertainty are present, it is a solution that abdicates organized social control over professionals and leaves it to them to define social goals and priorities. If some measure of control is to be maintained, the institutions of the society must share with the professional the redefinition of the goals of design.

The client seeks to control professionals not only by defining their goals of design but also by reacting to the plans they propose. It is well known that physicians' patients fail to take much of the medicine that is prescribed for them. Society as client is no more docile than are medical patients. In any planning whose implementation involves a pattern of human behavior, that behavior must be motivated. Knowledge that "it is for your own good" seldom provides adequate motivation.

The members of an organization or a society for whom plans are made are not passive instruments, but are themselves designers who are seeking to use the system to further their own goals. Organization theory deals with this motivational question by examining organizations in terms of the balance between the inducements that are provided to members to perform their organizational roles and the contributions that the members thereby provide to the achievement of organizational goals.<sup>9</sup>

A not dissimilar representation of the social planning process views it as a game between the planners and those whose behavior they seek to influence. The planners make their move (i.e., implement their design),

and those who are affected by it then alter their own behavior to achieve their goals in the changed environment. The gaming aspects of social planning are particularly evident in the domain of economic stabilization policies, where the adaptive response of firms and consumers to monetary and fiscal policies may largely neutralize or negate those policies. The claims of monetarists, and especially of the "rational expectations" theorists, that government is helpless to influence employment levels by using the standard Keynesian tools of monetary and fiscal policy and that attempts to reduce unemployment can only cause inflation, are based on the assumption that public responses to these measures will be strongly and rapidly adaptive.

Except for economics it is still relatively rare for social planning and policy discussions to include in any systematic way the possible "gaming" responses to plans. For example, until quite recently it was common to design new urban transit facilities without envisioning the possible relocations of population within the urban area that would be produced by the new facilities themselves. Yet such effects have been known and observed for half a century. Social planning techniques need to be expanded to encompass them routinely.

## Organizations in Social Design

In introducing the subject of social design, I used the Constitution of the United States as an example. Configuring organizations, whether business corporations, governmental organizations, voluntary societies or others, is one of society's most important design tasks. If we human beings were isolated monads small, hermetically sealed particles that had no mutual relations except occasional elastic collisions we would not have to concern ourselves with the design of organizations. But, contrary to libertarian rhetoric, we are not monads. From birth until death, our ability to reach our goals, even to survive, is tightly linked to our social interactions with others in our society.

The rules imposed upon us by organizations the organizations that employ us and the organizations that govern us restrict our liberties in a variety of ways. But these same organizations provide us with opportunities for reaching goals and attaining freedoms that we could not even

imagine reaching by individual effort. For example, almost everyone who will read these lines has an income that is astronomical by comparison with the world average. If we were to assign a single cause to our good fortune, we would have to attribute it to being born in the right place at the right time: in a society that is able to maintain order (through public organizations), to produce efficiently (largely through business organizations), and to maintain the infrastructure required for high production (again largely through public organizations). We have even discovered, in our society and a modest number of others, how to design organizations, business and governmental, that do not interfere egregiously with our freedoms, including those of speech and thought.

This is not the place to enter into a long disquisition on organizational design, private and public, which has a large literature of its own.<sup>10</sup> But one can hardly pass by governments and business firms in complete silence in a chapter on the design of social structures. A society's organizations are matters not only of specialized professional concern but of broad public concern.

Today, organizations, and especially governmental organizations, have an exceedingly bad press in our society. The terms "politician" and "bureaucrat" are not used as descriptors but as pejoratives. While the events in Oklahoma City surely did not evoke public approval, the general horrified reaction was not to the anti-governmental attitudes that the bombing expressed but to the killings. There is more than a little anarchism (usually phrased as libertarianism) in the current American credo (and for that matter, in our credo since the time of the Founding Fathers).

Organizational design, then, is a matter for urgent attention in any curriculum on social design. Organizations are exceedingly complex systems that share many properties with other complex systems for example, their typically hierarchical structure. Questions of organizational design