will reappear, from time to time, as part of the discussion of complex systems in chapters 7 and 8, below, and especially in connection with the use of hierarchy and "near decomposability" as a basis for specialization.

## Time and Space Horizons for Design

Each of us sits in a long dark hall within a circle of light cast by a small lamp. The lamplight penetrates a few feet up and down the hall, then rapidly attenuates, diluted by the vast darkness of future and past that surrounds it.

We are curious about that darkness. We consult soothsayers and forecasters of the economy and the weather, but we also search backward for our "roots." Some years ago I conducted such a search in the Rheinland villages near Mainz where my paternal ancestors had lived. I found records of grandparents readily enough, and even of great-grandparents and beyond. But before I had gone far scarcely back to the 18th century I came to the edge of the circle of light. Darkness closed in again in the little towns of Ebersheim, Woerstadt, and Partenheim, and I could see no farther back.

History, archaeology, geology, and astronomy provide us with narrow beams that penetrate immense distances down the hallway of the past but illuminate it only fit fully a statesman or philosopher here, a battle there, some hominoid bones buried with pieces of chipped stone, fossils embedded in ancient rock, rumors of a great explosion. We read about the past with immense interest. A few spots caught by the beams take on a vividness and immediacy that capture, for a moment, our attention and our hearts some Greek warriors camped before Troy, a man on a cross, the painted figure of a deer glimpsed by flickering torchlight on the wall of a limestone cave. But mostly the figures are shadowy, and our attention shifts back to the present.

The light dims even more rapidly in the opposite direction, toward the future. Although we are titillated by Sunday Supplement descriptions of a cooling Sun, it is our own mortality, just a few years away, and not the Earth's, with which we are preoccupied. We can empathize with parents and grandparents whom we have known, or of whom we have had first-hand accounts, and in the opposite direction with children and grandchil-

dren. But beyond that circle our concern is more curious and intellectual than emotional. We even find it difficult to define which distant events are the triumphs and which the catastrophes, who the heroes and who the villains.

## Discounting the Future

Thus the events and prospective events that enter into our value systems are all dated, and the importance we attach to them generally drops off sharply with their distance in time. For the creatures of bounded rationality that we are, this is fortunate. If our decisions depended equally upon their remote and their proximate consequences, we could never act but would be forever lost in thought. By applying a heavy discount factor to events, attenuating them with their remoteness in time and space, we reduce our problems of choice to a size commensurate with our limited computing capabilities. We guarantee that, when we integrate outcomes over the future and the world, the integral will converge.

Socio biologists, in their analyses of egoism and altruism, undertake to explain how the forces of evolution would necessarily produce organisms more protective of their offspring and their kin than of unrelated creatures. This evolutionary account does not explain, however, why the concern tends to be so myopic with respect to the future. At least one part of the explanation is that we are unable to think coherently about the remote future, and particularly about the distant consequences of our actions. Our myopia is not adaptive, but symptomatic of the limits of our adaptability. It is one of the constraints on adaptation belonging to the inner environment.

The economist expresses this discounting of the future by a rate of interest. To find the present value of a future dollar, he applies, backwards, a compound discount rate that shrinks the dollar by a fixed percentage for each step from the present. Even a moderate rate of interest can make the dollars of the next century look quite inconsequential for our present decisions. There is a vast literature seeking to explain, none too convincingly, what determines the time rate of discount used by savers. (In modern times it has hovered remarkably steadily around 3 percent per annum, after appropriate adjustment for risk and inflation.) There is also a considerable literature seeking to determine what the social rate of interest

should be what the rate of exchange should be between the welfare of this generation and the welfare of its descendants.

The rate of interest should not be confused with another factor that discounts the importance of the future with respect to the present. Even if we are aware of certain unfavorable events that will occur in the distant future, there may be nothing to be done about them today. If we knew that the wheat harvest was going to fail in the year 2020, we would be ill-advised to store wheat now. Our unconcern with a distant future is not merely a failure of empathy but a recognition that (1) we shall probably not be able to foresee and calculate the consequences of our actions for more than short distances into the future and (2) those consequences will in any case be diffuse rather than specific.

The important decisions we make about the future are primarily the decisions about spending and saving about how we shall allocate our production between present and future satisfactions. And in saving, we count flexibility among the important attributes of the objects of our investment, because flexibility insures the value of those investments against the events that will surely occur but which we cannot predict. It will (or should) bias our investments in the direction of structures that can be shifted from one use to another, and to knowledge that is fundamental enough not soon to be outmoded knowledge that may itself provide a basis for continuing adaptation to the changing environment.

## The Change in Time Perspective

One of the noteworthy characteristics of our century is the shift that appears to be taking place, especially in the industrialized world, in our time perspectives. For example, embedded in the energy-environment problem that confronts us today, we can see three almost independent aspects. The first is our immediate dependence on petroleum, which we must reduce to protect ourselves from political blackmail and to achieve a balance of international payments. The second is the prospect of the exhaustion of oil and gas supplies, a problem that must be solved within about a generation, mostly by the use of coal and nuclear energy. The third is the joint problem of the exhaustion of fossil fuels and the impact of their combustion on the climate. The time scale of this third problem is a century or so.

What is remarkable in our age, and relatively novel I believe, is the amount of attention we pay to the third problem. Perhaps it is just that we have all three confused in our minds and have not sorted them out to the point where we can think about the more pressing ones without concern for the other. But I do not think that is the reason. I believe there has been a genuine downward shift in the social interest rate we apply to discount events that are remote in time and space.

There are some obvious reasons for our new concern with matters that are remote in time and space. Among these are the relatively new facts of instantaneous worldwide communication and rapid air transportation. Consequent on these is the continually increasing economic and military interdependence of all the nations. More subtle than either of these causes is the progress of human knowledge, especially of science. I have already commented on the way in which archaeology, geology, anthropology, and cosmology have lengthened our perspectives. But in addition new laboratory technologies have vastly increased our ability to detect and assess small and indirect effects of our actions. Oscar Wilde once claimed that there were no fogs on the River Thames until Turner, by painting them, revealed them to the residents of London. In the same way our atmosphere contained no noxious substances in quantities of a few parts per million until chromatography and other sensitive analytic techniques showed their presence and measured them. DDT was an entirely beneficent insecticide until we detected its presence in falcons' eggs and in fish. If eating the apple revealed to us the nature of good and evil, modern analytic tools have taught us how to detect good and evil in minute amounts and at immense distances in time and space.

It may be objected that there has been no such lengthening of social time perspectives as I have claimed. What perspective can be longer than the eternity of life after death that is so central to Christian thought, or longer than the repeated reincarnations of Eastern religions? But the attitudes toward the future engendered by those beliefs are very different from the ones I have been discussing. The future with which the Christian is concerned is his own future in the light of his current conduct. There is nothing in the belief in an afterlife or a reincarnation that calls attention to the future consequences for this world of one's present actions. Nor