Because organisms are not energetically closed systems, there is no way to deduce the direction, much less the rate, of evolution from classical thermodynamic considerations. All estimates indicate that the amount of entropy, measured in physical units, involved in the formation of a one-celled biological organism is trivially small about -10<sup>-11</sup>cal/degree.<sup>7</sup> The "improbability" of evolution has nothing to do with this quantity of entropy, which is produced by every bacterial cell every generation. The irrelevance of quantity of information, in this sense, to speed of evolution can also be seen from the fact that exactly as much information is required to "copy" a cell through the reproductive process as to produce the first cell through evolution.

The fact of the existence of stable intermediate forms exercises a powerful effect on the evolution of complex forms that may be likened to the dramatic effect of catalysts upon reaction rates and steady-state distribution of reaction products in open systems.<sup>8</sup> In neither case does the entropy change provide us with a guide to system behavior.

## Evolution of Multi-Cellular Organisms

We must consider a fourth objection to the watchmaker metaphor. However convincing a model the metaphor may provide for the evolution of atomic and molecular systems, and even uni-cellular organisms, it does not appear to fit the history of multi-cellular organisms. The metaphor assumes that complex systems are formed by combining sets of simpler systems, but this is not the way in which multi-cellular organisms have evolved. Although bacteria may, in fact, have been produced by a merging of mitochondria with the cells they inhabited, multi-cellular organisms have evolved through multiplication and specialization of the cells of a single system, rather than through the merging of previously independent subsystems.

Lest we dismiss the metaphor too quickly, however, we should observe that systems that evolve through specialization acquire the same kind

of boxes-within-boxes structure (e.g., a digestive system consisting of mouth, larynx, esophagus, stomach, small and large intestines, colon; or a circulatory system consisting of a heart, arteries, veins, and capillaries) as is acquired by systems that evolve by assembly of simpler systems. The next main section of this chapter deals with nearly decomposable systems. It proposes that it is not assembly from components, per se, but hierarchic structure produced either by assembly or specialization, that provides the potential for rapid evolution.

The claim is that the potential for rapid evolution exists in any complex system that consists of a set of stable subsystems, each operating nearly independently of the detailed processes going on within the other subsystems, hence influenced mainly by the net inputs and outputs of the other subsystems. If the neardecomposability condition is met, the efficiency of one component (hence its contribution to the organism's fitness) does not depend on the detailed structure of other components.

Before examining this claim in detail, however, I should like to discuss briefly some non-biological applications of the watchmaker metaphor to illustrate the important advantages that hierarchic systems enjoy in other circumstances.

## Problem Solving As Natural Selection

Hierarchy, as well as processes akin to natural selection, appear in human problem solving, a domain that has no obvious connection with biological evolution. Consider, for example, the task of discovering the proof for a difficult theorem. The process can be and often has been described as a search through a maze. Starting with the axioms and previously proved theorems, various transformations allowed by the rules of the mathematical systems are attempted, to obtain new expressions. These are modified in turn until, with persistence and good fortune, a sequence or path of transformations is discovered that leads to the goal.

The process ordinarily involves much trial and error. Various paths are tried; some are abandoned, others are pushed further. Before a solution is found, many paths of the maze may be explored. The more difficult and novel the problem, the greater is likely to be the amount of trial and error required to find a solution. At the same time the trial and error is not completely random or blind; it is in fact rather highly selective. The

new expressions that are obtained by transforming given ones are examined to see whether they represent progress toward the goal. Indications of progress spur further search in the same direction; lack of progress signals the abandonment of a line of search. Problem solving requires selective trial and error.<sup>9</sup>

A little reflection reveals that cues signaling progress play the same role in the problem-solving process that stable intermediate forms play in the biological evolutionary process. In fact we can take over the watchmaker parable and apply it also to problem solving. In problem solving, a partial result that represents recognizable progress toward the goal plays the role of stable subassembly.

Suppose that the task is to open a safe whose lock has 10 dials, each with 100 possible settings, numbered from 0 to 99. How long will it take to open the safe by a blind trial-and-error search for the correct setting? Since there are 100<sup>10</sup> possible settings, we may expect to examine about one half of these, on the average, before finding the correct one that is, 50 billion billion settings. Suppose, however, that the safe is defective, so that a click can be heard when any one dial is turned to the correct setting. Now each dial can be adjusted independently and does not need to be touched again while the others are being set. The total number of settings that have to be tried is only 10 × 50, or 500. The task of opening the safe has been altered, by the cues the clicks provide, from a practically impossible one to a trivial one.<sup>10</sup>

A considerable amount has been learned in the past thirty years about the nature of the mazes that represent common human problem-solving tasks proving theorems, solving puzzles, playing chess, making investments, balancing assembly lines, to mention a few. All that we have learned about these mazes points to the same conclusion: that human problem solving, from the most blundering to the most insightful, involves nothing more than varying mixtures of trial and error and selectivity. The selectivity derives from various rules of thumb, or heuristics, that suggest which paths should be tried first and which leads are promising. We do not need to postulate processes more sophisticated than those involved in organic evolution to explain how enormous problem mazes are cut down to quite reasonable size (see also chapters 3 and 4).<sup>11</sup>

## The Sources of Selectivity

When we examine the sources from which the problem-solving system, or the evolving system, as the case may be, derives its selectivity, we discover that selectivity can always be equated with some kind of feedback of information from the environment.

Let us consider the case of problem solving first. There are two basic kinds of selectivity. One we have already noted: various paths are tried out, the consequences of following them are noted, and this information is used to guide further search. In the same way in organic evolution various complexes come into being, at least evanescently, and those that are stable provide new building blocks for further construction. It is this information about stable configurations, and not free energy or negentropy from the sun, that guides the process of evolution and provides the selectivity that is essential to account for its rapidity.

The second source of selectivity in problem solving is previous experience. We see this particularly clearly when the problem to be solved is

## (footnote continued from previous page)