similar to one that has been solved before. Then, by simply trying again the paths that led to the earlier solution, or their analogues, trial-and-error search is greatly reduced or altogether eliminated.

What corresponds to this latter kind of information in organic evolution? The closest analogue is reproduction. Once we reach the level of self-reproducing systems, a complex system, when it has once been achieved, can be multiplied indefinitely. Reproduction in fact allows the inheritance of acquired characteristics, but at the level of genetic material, of course; that is, only characteristics acquired by the genes can be inherited. We shall return to the topic of reproduction in the final section of this essay.

## On Empires and Empire Building

We have not exhausted the categories of complex systems to which the watchmaker argument can reasonably be applied. Philip assembled his Macedonian empire and gave it to his son, to be later combined with the Persian subassembly and others into Alexander's greater system. On Alexander's death his empire did not crumble to dust but fragmented into some of the major subsystems that had composed it.

The watchmaker argument implies that if one would be Alexander, one should be born into a world where large stable political systems already exist. Where this condition was not fulfilled, as on the Scythian and Indian frontiers, Alexander found empire building a slippery business. So too, T. E. Lawrence's organizing of the Arabian revolt against the Turks was limited by the character of his largest stable building blocks, the separate, suspicious desert tribes.

The profession of history places a greater value upon the validated particular fact than upon tendentious generalization. I shall not elaborate upon my fancy therefore but shall leave it to historians to decide whether anything can be learned for the interpretation of history from an abstract theory of hierarchic complex systems.

## Conclusion: The Evolutionary Explanation of Hierarchy

We have shown thus far that complex systems will evolve from simple systems much more rapidly if there are stable intermediate forms than if there are not. The resulting complex forms in the former case will be

hierarchic. We have only to turn the argument around to explain the observed predominance of hierarchies among the complex systems nature presents to us. Among possible complex forms, hierarchies are the ones that have the time to evolve. The hypothesis that complexity will be hierarchic makes no distinction among very flat hierarchies, like crystals and tissues and polymers, and the intermediate forms. Indeed in the complex systems we encounter in nature examples of both forms are prominent. A more complete theory than the one we have developed here would presumably have something to say about the determinants of width of span in these systems.

## Nearly Decomposable Systems

In hierarchic systems we can distinguish between the interactions among subsystems, on the one hand, and the interactions within subsystems that is, among the parts of those subsystems on the other. The interactions at the different levels may be, and often will be, of different orders of magnitude. In a formal organization there will generally be more interaction, on the average, between two employees who are members of the same department than between two employees from different departments. In organic substances intermolecular forces will generally be weaker than molecular forces, and molecular forces weaker than nuclear forces.

In a rare gas the intermolecular forces will be negligible compared to those binding the molecules we can treat the individual particles for many purposes as if they were independent of each other. We can describe such a system as decomposable into the subsystems comprised of the individual particles. As the gas becomes denser, molecular interactions become more significant. But over some range we can treat the decomposable case as a limit and as a first approximation. We can use a theory of perfect gases, for example, to describe approximately the behavior of actual gases if they are not too dense. As a second approximation we may move to a theory of nearly decomposable systems, in which the interactions among the subsystems are weak but not negligible.

At least some kinds of hierarchic systems can be approximated successfully as nearly decomposable systems. The main theoretical findings from

the approach can be summed up in two propositions: (1) in a nearly decomposable system the short-run behavior of each of the component subsystems is approximately independent of the short-run behavior of the other components; (2) in the long run the behavior of any one of the components depends in only an aggregate way on the behavior of the other components.

Let me provide a very concrete simple example of a nearly decomposable system.<sup>12</sup> Consider a building whose outside walls provide perfect thermal insulation from the environment. We shall take these walls as the boundary of our system. The building is divided into a large number of rooms, the walls between them being good, but not perfect, insulators. The walls between rooms are the boundaries of our major subsystems. Each room is divided by partitions into a number of cubicles, but the partitions are poor insulators. A thermometer hangs in each cubicle. Suppose that at the time of our first observation of the system there is a wide variation in temperature from cubicle to cubicle and from room to room the various cubicles within the building are in a state of thermal disequilibrium. When we take new temperature readings several hours later, what shall we find? There will be very little variation in temperature among the cubicles within each single room, but there may still be large temperature variations among rooms. When we take readings again several days later, we find an almost uniform temperature throughout the building; the temperature differences among rooms have virtually disappeared.

We can describe the process of equilibrium formally by setting up the usual equations of heat flow. The equations can be represented by the matrix of their coefficients, $r _ { i j } ,$ where $r _ { i j }$ is the rate at which heat flows from the ith cubicle to the jth cubicle per degree difference in their tem-

<table><tr><td></td><td>A1</td><td>A2</td><td>A3</td><td>B1</td><td>B2</td><td>C1</td><td>C2</td><td>C3</td></tr><tr><td>A1</td><td></td><td>100</td><td></td><td>2</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>A2</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>100</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>A3</td><td></td><td>100</td><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>B1</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td>100</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>B2</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>100</td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>C1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td></td><td></td><td>100</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C2</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>100</td></tr><tr><td>C3</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td></td><td>100</td><td></td></tr></table>

## Figure

A hypothetical nearly decomposable system. In terms of the heat-exchange example of the text. A1, A2, and A3 may be interpreted as cubicles in one room, B1 and B2 as cubicles in a second room, and C1, C2, and C3 as cubicles in a third. The matrix entries then are the heat diffusion coefficients between cubicles:

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Al</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>B1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Cl</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>A2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>C2</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>A3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>B2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>C3</td></tr></table>

peratures. If cubicles i and j do not have a common wall, $r _ { i j }$ will be zero. If cubicles i and j have a common wall and are in the same room, $r _ { i j }$ will be large. If cubicles i and j are separated by the wall of a room, $r _ { i j }$ will be nonzero but small. Hence, by grouping together all the cubicles that are in the same room, we can arrange the matrix of coefficients so that all its large elements lie inside a string of square sub matrices along the main diagonal. All the elements outside these diagonal squares will be either zero or small (see figure 7). We may take some small number, , as the upper bound of the extra diagonal elements. We shall call a matrix having these properties a nearly decomposable matrix.

Now it has been proved that a dynamic system that can be described by a nearly decomposable matrix has the properties, stated earlier, of a nearly decomposable system. In our simple example of heat flow this means that in the short run each room will reach an equilibrium temperature (an average of the initial temperatures of its offices) nearly independently of the others and that each room will remain approximately in a state of equilibrium over the longer period during which an over-all temperature equilibrium is being established throughout the building.