frequency dynamics with the larger systems. It is generally believed, for example, that the relevant planning horizon of executives is longer, the higher their location in the organizational hierarchy. It is probably also true that both the average duration of an interaction between executives and the average interval between interactions are greater at higher than lower levels.

## Summary: Near Decomposability

We have seen that hierarchies have the property of near decomposability. Intra component linkages are generally stronger than inter component linkages. This fact has the effect of separating the high-frequency dynamics of a hierarchy involving the internal structure of the components from the low-frequency dynamics involving interaction among components. We shall turn next to some important consequences of this separation for the description and comprehension of complex systems.

## Biological Evolution Revisited

Having examined the properties of nearly-decomposable systems, we can now complete our discussion of the evolution of multi-cellular organisms through specialization of tissues and organs. An organ performs a specific set of functions, each usually requiring continual interaction among its component parts (a sequence of chemical reactions, say, each step employing a particular enzyme for its execution). It draws raw materials from other parts of the organism and delivers products to other parts, but these input and output processes depend only in an aggregate way on what is occurring within each specific organ. Like a business firm in an economic market, each organ can perform its functions in blissful ignorance of the detail of activity in other organs, with which it is connected by the digestive, circulatory, and excretory systems and other transport channels.

Expressing the matter slightly differently, changes within an organ affect the other parts of the organism mainly by changing the relation between the quantities of outputs they produce and the inputs they require (that is, their overall efficiency). Thus, biological organisms are nearly-decomposable: the interactions within units at any level are rapid and intense in comparison with the interactions between units at the same

level. Inventories of various substances, held in the circulatory system or in special tissues, slow down and buffer effects of each unit on the others. In the short run, single units (e.g., single organs) operate nearly independently of the detail of operation of the other units.

Within the Darwinian framework of natural selection there is no way in which the fitness (efficiency) of individual tissues or organs can be separately evaluated; fitness is measured by the number of offspring of the entire organism. Evolution is like a complex experiment, with fitness as the sole dependent variable, and the structures of the individual genes as independent variables. The goal of the process is to compare the contribution to total fitness of alternative forms (alleles) of each gene and of combinations of these alternatives for sets of genes.

If, in fact, the fitness of a particular gene depended on which alleles of all the other genes it was combined with, the combinatorics, involving tens of thousands of genes in complex organisms, would be staggering, and the problem of measuring the contribution of a particular allele to fitness would be overwhelming.<sup>17</sup>

With near-decomposability, we can assume that the relative efficiency of two different designs for the same organ (e.g., two different gene sequences with the same function) is approximately independent of which variants of other organs are present in the organism. The total fitness is essentially an additive measure of the nearly independent contributions of the individual organs. Essentially, we obtain the advantages of the clicking safe: the "correct" setting of each dial (the genes governing one organ's processes) can be determined independently of how the other dials are currently set. The search is for effective sets of organs instead of effective sets of individual genes.

Enough is known today about the architecture of the genome to be reasonably certain that it has a hierarchical control structure mapping reasonably closely to the hierarchy of processes in the organism.<sup>18</sup> Of

course, this is a gross simplification of the total picture in any actual organism. In addition to the genes that operate in particular organs (turned on and off by control genes), there are also the genes that determine the more general metabolic processes that are found within all the cells. But these common intracellular processes are at the cell level of the hierarchy, below the level of tissues and organs, and again the corresponding genes can be supposed to operate nearly independently of those that control specialized processes in specific organs.<sup>19</sup>

## The Description of Complexity

If you ask a person to draw a complex object such as a human face he will almost always proceed in a hierarchic fashion.<sup>20</sup> First he will outline the face. Then he will add or insert features: eyes, nose, mouth, ears, hair. If asked to elaborate, he will begin to develop details for each of the features pupils, eyelids, lashes for the eyes, and so on until he reaches the limits of his anatomical knowledge. His information about the object is arranged hierarchically in memory, like a topical outline.

When information is put in outline form, it is easy to include information about the relations among the major parts and information about the internal relations of parts in each of the sub outlines. Detailed information about the relations of subparts belonging to different parts has no place in the outline and is likely to be lost. The loss of such information and the preservation mainly of information about hierarchic order is a salient characteristic that distinguishes the drawings of a child or someone untrained in representation from the drawing of a trained artist. (I am speaking of an artist who is striving for representation.)

## Near Decomposability and Comprehensibility

From our discussion of the dynamic properties of nearly decomposable systems, we have seen that comparatively little information is lost by representing them as hierarchies. Subparts belonging to different parts only interact in an aggregative fashion the detail of their interaction can be ignored. In studying the interaction of two large molecules, generally we do not need to consider in detail the interactions of nuclei of the atoms belonging to the one molecule with the nuclei of the atoms belonging to the other. In studying the interaction of two nations, we do not need to study in detail the interactions of each citizen of the first with each citizen of the second.

The fact then that many complex systems have a nearly decomposable, hierarchic structure is a major facilitating factor enabling us to understand, describe, and even "see" such systems and their parts. Or perhaps the proposition should be put the other way round. If there are important systems in the world that are complex without being hierarchic, they may to a considerable extent escape our observation and understanding. Analysis of their behavior would involve such detailed knowledge and calculation of the interactions of their elementary parts that it would be beyond our capacities of memory or computation.<sup>21</sup>

<sup>21.</sup> I believe the fallacy in the central thesis of W. M. Elsasser's The Physical Foundation of Biology, mentioned earlier, lies in his ignoring the simplification in description of complex systems that derives from their hierarchic structure. Thus (p. 155):

If we now apply similar arguments to the coupling of enzymatic reactions with the substratum of protein molecules, we see that over a sufficient period of time, the information corresponding to the structural details of these molecules will be communicated to the dynamics of the cell, to higher levels of organization as it were, and may influence such dynamics. While this reasoning is only qualitative, it lends credence to the assumption that in the living organism, unlike the inorganic crystal, the effects of microscopic structure cannot be simply averaged out; as time goes on this influence will pervade the behavior of the cell "at all levels."

But from our discussion of near decomposability it would appear that those aspects of microstructure that control the slow developmental aspects of organismic dynamics can be separated out from the aspects that control the more rapid cellular metabolic processes. For this reason we should not despair of unraveling the web of causes. See also J. R. Platt's review of Elsasser's book in Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 2(1959):243 245.