I shall not try to settle which is chicken and which is egg: whether we are able to understand the world because it is hierarchic or whether it appears hierarchic because those aspects of it which are not elude our understanding and observation. I have already given some reasons for supposing that the former is at least half the truth that evolving complexity would tend to be hierarchic but it may not be the whole truth.

## Simple Descriptions of Complex Systems

One might suppose that the description of a complex system would itself be a complex structure of symbols and indeed it may be just that. But there is no conservation law that requires that the description be as cumbersome as the object described. A trivial example will show how a system can be described economically. Suppose the system is a two-dimensional array like this:

<table><tr><td>A</td><td>B</td><td>M</td><td>N</td><td>R</td><td>S</td><td>H</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>C</td><td>D</td><td>0</td><td>P</td><td>T</td><td>U</td><td>J</td><td>K</td></tr><tr><td>M</td><td>N</td><td>A</td><td>B</td><td>H</td><td>1</td><td>R</td><td>S</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>P</td><td>C</td><td>D</td><td>J</td><td>K</td><td>T</td><td>U</td></tr><tr><td>R</td><td>S</td><td>H</td><td>1</td><td>A</td><td>B</td><td>M</td><td>N</td></tr><tr><td>T</td><td>U</td><td>J</td><td>K</td><td>C</td><td>D</td><td>0</td><td>P</td></tr><tr><td>H</td><td>1</td><td>R</td><td>S</td><td>M</td><td>N</td><td>A</td><td>B</td></tr><tr><td>J</td><td>K</td><td>T</td><td>U</td><td>0</td><td>P</td><td>C</td><td>D</td></tr></table>

Let us call the array $| _ { C D } ^ { A B } | _ { a , }$ the array $| { } _ { \mathrm { O P } } ^ { M N } | _ { m , }$ , the array ${ \binom { R S } { T U } } _ { r }$ and the array ${ \binom { H I } { J K } } _ { h }$ Let |am| ${ \binom { r b } { h r } } _ { X }$ |wx] us call the array w, and the array . Then the entire array is simply . While the original structure consisted of 64 symbols, it requires only 35 to write down its description:

$$
\begin{array} { c c c c c c c c c c c c c } { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } \\ { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } \\ { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } \\ { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } \\ { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } \\ { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } \\ { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } \\ { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } }  \end{array}
$$

We achieve the abbreviation by making use of the redundancy in the original |AB| structure. Since the pattern , for example, occurs four times in the total pattern, it is economical to represent it by the single symbol, a.

If a complex structure is completely un redundant if no aspect of its structure can be inferred from any other then it is its own simplest description. We can exhibit it, but we cannot describe it by a simpler structure. The hierarchic structures we have been discussing have a high degree of redundancy, hence can often be described in economical terms. The redundancy takes a number of forms, of which I shall mention three:

1. Hierarchic systems are usually composed of only a few different kinds of subsystems in various combinations and arrangements. A familiar example is the proteins, their multitudinous variety arising from arrangements of only twenty different amino acids. Similarly the ninety-odd elements provide all the kinds of building blocks needed for an infinite variety of molecules. Hence we can construct our description from a restricted alphabet of elementary terms corresponding to the basic set of elementary subsystems from which the complex system is generated.

2. Hierarchic systems are, as we have seen, often nearly decomposable. Hence only aggregative properties of their parts enter into the description of the interactions of those parts. A generalization of the notion of near decomposability might be called the ''empty world hypothesis" most things are only weakly connected with most other things; for a tolerable description of reality only a tiny fraction of all possible interactions needs to be taken into account. By adopting a descriptive language that allows the absence of something to go unmentioned, a nearly empty world can be described quite concisely. Mother Hubbard did not have to check off the list of possible contents to say that her cupboard was bare.

3. By appropriate "recoding," the redundancy that is present but unobvious in the structure of a complex system can often be made patent. The commonest recoding of descriptions of dynamic systems consists in replacing a description of the time path with a description of a differential law that generates that path. The simplicity resides in a constant relation between the state of the system at any given time and the state of the system a short time later. Thus the structure of the sequence 1 3 5 7 9 11 . . . is most simply expressed by observing that each member is obtained by adding 2 to the previous one. But this is the sequence that Galileo found to describe the velocity at the end of successive time intervals of a ball rolling down an inclined plane.

It is a familiar proposition that the task of science is to make use of the world's redundancy to describe that world simply. I shall not pursue the general methodological point here, but I shall instead take a closer look at two main types of description that seem to be available to us in seeking an understanding of complex systems. I shall call these state description and process description, respectively.

## State Descriptions and Process Descriptions

"A circle is the locus of all points equidistant from a given point." "To construct a circle, rotate a compass with one arm fixed until the other arm has returned to its starting point." It is implicit in Euclid that if you carry out the process specified in the second sentence, you will produce an object that satisfies the definition of the first. The first sentence is a state description of a circle; the second, a process description.

These two modes of apprehending structures are the warp and weft of our experience. Pictures, blueprints, most diagrams, and chemical structural formulas are state descriptions. Recipes, differential equations, and equations for chemical reactions are process descriptions. The former characterize the world as sensed; they provide the criteria for identifying objects, often by modeling the objects themselves. The latter characterize the world as acted upon; they provide the means for producing or generating objects having the desired characteristics.

The distinction between the world as sensed and the world as acted upon defines the basic condition for the survival of adaptive organisms. The organism must develop correlations between goals in the sensed world and actions in the world of process. When they are made conscious and verbalized, these correlations correspond to what we usually call means-ends analysis. Given a desired state of affairs and an existing state of affairs, the task of an adaptive organism is to find the difference between these two states and then to find the correlating process that will erase the difference.<sup>22</sup>

Thus problem solving requires continual translation between the state and process descriptions of the same complex reality. Plato, in the Meno,

argued that all learning is remembering. He could not otherwise explain how we can discover or recognize the answer to a problem unless we already know the answer.<sup>23</sup> Our dual relation to the world is the source and solution of the paradox. We pose a problem by giving the state description of the solution. The task is to discover a sequence of processes that will produce the goal state from an initial state. Translation from the process description to the state description enables us to recognize when we have succeeded. The solution is genuinely new to us and we do not need Plato's theory of remembering to explain how we recognize it.

There is now a growing body of evidence that the activity called human problem solving is basically a form of means-ends analysis that aims at discovering a process description of the path that leads to a desired goal. The general paradigm is: Given a blueprint, to find the corresponding recipe. Much of the activity of science is an application of that paradigm: Given the description of some natural phenomena, to find the differential equations for processes that will produce the phenomena.

## The Description of Complexity in Self-Reproducing Systems

The problem of finding relatively simple descriptions for complex systems is of interest not only for an understanding of human knowledge of the world but also for an explanation of how a complex system can reproduce itself. In my discussion of the evolution of complex systems, I touched only briefly on the role of self-reproduction.

Atoms of high atomic weight and complex inorganic molecules are witnesses to the fact that the evolution of complexity does not imply self-reproduction. If evolution of complexity from simplicity is sufficiently probable, it will occur repeatedly; the statistical equilibrium of the system will find a large fraction of the elementary particles participating in complex systems.

If, however, the existence of a particular complex form increased the probability of the creation of another form just like it, the equilibrium between complexes and components could be greatly altered in favor of the former. If we have a description of an object that is sufficiently clear