# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS After enjoying the assistance of many individuals and institutions during nearly a decade of research on the history of American advertising, it is gratifying to have the opportunity to acknowledge formally their indispensable support, cooperation, and advice. A Humanities Fellowship from the Rockefeller Foundation brought this project to fruition by providing me with an uninterrupted year in which to complete my research and write a first draft of the book. Patient support from the Academic Senate Committee on Research of the University of California, Davis, enabled me to visit the various corporate and agency archives and maintain my momentum over an extended period of research. I greatly appreciate the privileges and courtesies extended to me by several advertising agencies. The J. Walter Thompson Company, by establishing a professionally supervised archive, has recently taken a major step to remedy the neglect of the historical record common to most agencies. I am particularly gratified by the precedent which J. Walter Thompson has set by extending me the privilege of consulting and quoting from the confidential verbatim minutes of the meetings of its creative staff and its account representatives during the 192os and 193os. The J. Walter Thompson archivist, Cynthia G. Swank, and her assistant, Annemarie Sandecki, provided expert help in identifying the relevant materials and verifying the accuracy of references. During a research trip before the formal establishment of the JWT archive, N. Terry Munger and Mary Gegleys of J. Walter Thompson kindly provided me with convenient access to historical materials in the JWT library. I was generously given access to historical agency materials by N. W. Ayer and Son, by Batten, Barton, Durstine and Osborn, by Foote, Cone and Belding, and by Young and Rubicam. I am indebted to Mr. Brad Lynch and Mr. John Kaufman of N. W. Ayer and Son for taking an interest in my project and providing me access to materials still retained by the agency; and to Ms. Tony Falcone, Ms. Terry Glenzole, and Ms. Lindsey Cohen for helping me identify specific files and boxes of Ayer correspondence and publications. At BBDO, Mr. Ray Maloney, Ms. Ann Heitner, and Ms. Paula Brown furnished me with working space and access to historical materials in the BBDO information center during two research trips. Robert J. Koretz of Foote, Cone and Belding Communications informed me of the existence of a comprehensive collection of scrapbooks of the ads of Lord and Thomas, the agency which subsequently became Foote, Cone and Belding. He also kindly shared with me his recollections of the Lord and Thomas years and his manuscript recounting the agency's history. John Kok of Foote, Cone and Belding assisted me in using materials in the agency library, and Joe Lentino initiated me into the mysteries of the cellar crypt where the Lord and Thomas scrapbooks are entombed. At Young and Rubicam, Ms. Celestine Frankenberg graciously found working space for me in the agency's tiny archive and made special provisions to enable me to make efficient use of the archives in the time I had available. Ms. Ina Geske of Kenyon and Eckhardt took the time to copy and pass on to me the meager historical data retained by that agency. Several major corporate advertisers have also been generous in their cooperation and interest in my project. Since I have simultaneously been conducting specialized research on institutional advertising, the extent of my indebtedness to many of these companies will become apparent only upon the completion of a subsequent book. Mr. Hubert M. (Bart) Snider provided me access to the General Electric Company library and archives on institutional advertising, and also shared with me his own research into the company's history. Mr. Julian E. Aurelius of E. R. Squibb and Sons, Inc., took the time to familarize me with the scope and organization of that company's extensive archive. At the Hoover Worldwide Corporation, Mr. R. W. Gillman and Mrs. Helen Magaw were particularly accommodating in helping me use Hoover house organs and other historical materials. Mrs. Claudia Penna at the American Telephone and Telegraph Company archives and Ms. Margaret Hall and Ms. Gerry Flanzraich at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company library gave me valuable assistance in locating correspondence files and house organs in those companies' substantial collections. Mr. Ed Rider provided me with useful materials from the Procter and Gamble Company files, and Ms. Helen Vincent, editor of True Story Magazine, gave me access to the backfile of True Story Magazine at the Macfadden publishing offices and permission to reproduce a 1929 magazine cover. Many of these businesses are not organized to accommodate academic scholars. I greatly appreciate the special efforts they made to provide me with working space and access to little-used files and collections. Many scholars and friends have made the most indispensable of intellectual contributions to this studya willingness to listen sympathetically yet critically to my ideas. David Brody, Daniel Brower, Daniel Calhoun, T. J. Jackson Lears, and Michael Schudson read major portions of the manuscript at various stages in its development. Each alerted me to further interpretive opportunities or stimulated me to search for a more cohesive integration of my materials. Michael Schudson and Richard W. Pollay generously shared their unpublished work-inprogress with me. Many friends and colleagues, including William Bowsky, Paul Goodman, Norma Landau, Eugene Lunn, Ruth Rosen, Lorenz Schultz, Lenora Timm, and Merline Williams, read segments of the manuscript or listened to my dilemmas and offered astute advice. Richard Schwab and K. C. Liu took a special interest in my project and provided vital assistance in bringing my work to fruition. Stanley Burnshaw and John Caples took the time to answer my questions and share some of their recollections of agency work in the late 192os and early 193os. Robert J. Koretz not only shared his recollection of Lord and Thomas with me, but later assisted me in ensuring the accuracy of detail in my accounts of several incidents. Matthew Joseph shared with me both his warm hospitality and his intimate knowledge of the Bruce Barton Papers. Professor Richard Tedlow helped me arrange a most profitable exploration of the various sources of the Harvard School of Business Administration, and Ms. Jen E. Sullivan helpfully guided me in the use of the school's unpublished Case Study files. The librarians and archivists of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin, the Baker Library of the Harvard School of Business Administration, the New York Public Library, the Arthur and Elizabeth Schlesinger Library, and the California State Library have all given me indispensable assistance. I am indebted to Donald J. Kunitz of the Special Collections Department of the Shields Library of the University of California, Davis, and to Ms. Sabra Basler, Ms. Marcia McCune-Feldman, and Mr. Levi Phillips of his staff, for accommodation and assistance during the time I was writing the book. Ms. Faye Vierra and Ms. Gladys Taylor of the interlibrary loan department at the University of California, Davis, patiently responded to my heavy demands on their services. I have frequently benefited from the support of individuals who have loaned or given me useful materials. Mrs. Enola Hicks, Mr. Robert Powell, Mrs. Terry Richard, Mr. Max Rothe, Mr. Michael Woodard, and Mrs. Freida Young have all sustained me with their contributions and their interest. Several research assistants, including Carolyn Brown, Wendy Gamber, Jim Lapsley, Sue Lehmer, Frank Lortie, and Karen March have aided me in various aspects of my research. I am also indebted to Bill Antaramian, Karen Hairfield, Carole Hinkle, Phyllis Graham, Katherine Hill, Dianc Dean, and Evelyn Echevarria for their patient work in converting the scrambled segments and insertions of various drafts into a readable manuscript. Working with the University of California Press has been a pleasure. Mr. James Clark, the Director of the U.C. Press, has particularly sustained me through the last stages of my work with his enthusiasm for the project and his specific suggestions. I have benefited from the opportunity to work with editor Marilyn Schwartz and production manager Chet Grycz. As copy editor, Gene Tanke astutely and persistently guided me toward greater clarity in style. It has been a pleasure to work with someone so sensitive to nuance and so adept at straightforward expression. In preparing the illustrations, I have been fortunate in being able to draw upon the expertise and patience of Richard Kulmann and the staff of Illustration Services, University of California, Davis. The enthusiasm of Steve Renick, Art Director of the University of California Press, and his sensitivity to the unique pictorial qualities of the ads of the 192os and 193os have made the task of designing and coordinating the illustrations a stimulating experience. I owe my deepest gratitude to my family for sustaining me through the long period of research and writing. My mother, Mildred Marchand Watson, and my stepfather, John L. Watson, have supported me with their unflagging interest and confidence. My daughters, Sue Marchand and Jeannie Marchand, have not only stimulated me with their critical eye for contemporary advertising, but have willingly submitted themselves to my requests that they serve as sounding boards for my ideas and as critics of my esthetic and literary judgments. My wife, Betsy Marchand, has sustained me with the love and confidence that she has brought to all of our truly mutual endeavors. In addition, by sharing with me the full texture of her experience in elected political office, she has constantly reminded me of some of the realities of American life against which I might appraise the semblances and fantasies of that life that have constituted modern advertising. In 1926 the venerable Philadelphia advertising agency of N. W. Ayer and Son made the following bold prophecy: “Historians of the future will not have to rely on the meagre collections of museums, will not have to pore over obscure documents and ancient prints, to reconstruct a faithful picture of 1926. Day by day a picture of our time is recorded completely and vividly in the advertising in American newspapers and magazines. Were all other sources of information on the life of today to fail, the advertising would reproduce for future times, as it does for our own, the action, color, variety, dignity, and aspirations of the American Scene."1 I began to study the social content of American advertising in the 192os and 193os in much the same spirit of naive optimism exhibited in this self-congratulatory agency pamphlet. I marveled that historians could have written so much about social values and popular attitudes without examining the ads—a profusion of documents aimed precisely at reflecting those values and shaping those ideas! In my more romantic moods, I saw myself as a crusader charging off to rescue all those neglected damsels, the advertisements, from the dungeons and dustbins of history. My quest for the lost historical treasures of advertising led me first to an intensive survey of the ads of the Great Depression. By the early 193os advertising had progressed far beyond the age of the poster and the slogan. For more than two decades, artists and copywriters had been perfecting techniques of suggesting consumer benefits. Ads now regularly portrayed the lives of “typical" consumers as enhanced by the use of the product. Surely, I thought, the advertising tableaux of these years, as mirrors of society, would reflect the momentous changes of circumstance and attitude wrought by the depression. But any naive assumptions I harbored about the character of advertising as an authentic and uncomplicated social mirror were quickly dashed as I immersed myself in the ads. Year by year, from the stock market crash of 1929 through the mid-193os, advertising themes and motifs remained remarkably consistent. The social content of the ads changed far less than did the styles of layout and illustration; in fact, the attitudes and values conveyed by the ads proved exceptionally persistent. Certainly the ideas and images in the ads changed much more slowly than the attitudes of most Americans are generally thought to have changed. In some cases, the advertisements of the early 193os even reiterated, with increased intensity, certain attitudes and values associated with the pre-depression era. From this discovery, one might conclude that the early years of the depression had no more than a slight effect on American ideas and social values. This hypothesis was not entirely implausible—Robert Lynd arrived at much the same conclusion when his research team revisited “Middletown" (Muncie, Indiana) in the mid-193os to analyze changes since the 192os.2 But another, more disconcerting, hypothesis could not be ignored: perhaps the ads did not provide an accurate reflection of social reality after all. I broadened the chronological boundaries of my intensive survey to include the 192os as well as the 193os. My sample expanded to include substantial selections from Good Housekeeping, Ladies' Home Journal, Better Homes and Gardens, Fortune, True Story Magazine, Redbook, Literary Digest, Photoplay Magazine, McCall's, Delineator, the American Weekly, the Chicago Tribune, and the Los Angeles Times, as well as comprehensive coverage of every issue of the Saturday Evening Post and the American Magazine from 1923 through 1937—in all, an approximate total of 18o,ooo ads of a quarter-page or larger. The addition of a large segment of advertising from the 192os not only provided a basis for judging the modification or persistence of themes and attitudes during the depression; it also extended my survey to include the crucial period during which advertisers brought to maturity their techniques for depicting the product or its benefits “situationally"—that is, in the life of the consumer. Still, I only encountered new perplexities in my quest for the social mirror that would “completely and vividly" reflect the times. No wonder so few had taken up the challenge of reconstructing the attitudes and values of an era from its ads! Quandaries and imponderables loomed on every side. Did the content of advertisements mirror the consumers' actual conditions and behavior—or their fantasies and aspirations? Or did the ads reflect, even more faithfully, the particular values and preoccupations of advertisers, advertising agents, and copywriters? Of what value was a systematic analysis of the overt elements of the content of advertisements when subtle nuances often lay at the heart of their appeals? Almost by definition, nuances defy quantification and categorization. Moreover, even a plausible explanation of the content of a group of advertisements, as intended by their creators, would prove nothing about the impact of the messages in those ads on consumers. If sales increased during a particular advertising campaign, other factors in merchandising, distribution, economic conditions, or social fads might have triggered this response. Even if advertising could be isolated as the crucial factor in the “merchandising mix," the placement, frequency, special offer, or eye appeal of a given ad might have influenced consumers far more than any aspect of its implicit or explicit social content. I regret to say that I have not resolved these dilemmas. I cannot prove conclusively that the American people absorbed the values and ideas of the ads, nor that consumers wielded the power to ensure that the ads would mirror their lives. In fact, as advertisers quickly perceived, people did not usually want ads to reflect themselves, their immediate social relationships, or their broader society exactly.\* They wanted not a true mirror but a Zerrspiegel, a distorting mirror that would enhance certain images. Even the term Zerrspiegel, denoting a fun-house mirror, fails to suggest fully the scope of advertising distortions of reality. Such a mirror distorts the shapes of the objects it reflects, but it nevertheless provides some image of everything within its field of vision. Advertising's mirror not only distorted, it also selected. Some social realities hardly appeared at all. One has to search diligently in the ads of the 192os and 193os to find even fleeting glimpses of such common scenes as religious services, factory workers on the job, sports fans enjoying a boxing match or baseball game, or working-class families at home. The angle of refraction, and hence the degree of distortion of these advertising images, was determined not only by the efforts of advertisers to respond to consumers' desires for fantasy and wish-fulfillment but also by a variety of other factors. The most obvious source of distortion in advertising's mirror was the presumption by advertisers that the public preferred an image of “life as it ought to be, life in the millennium" to an image of literal reality. "The people are seeking to escape from themselves," concluded a writer in Advertising and Šelling in 1926. “They want to live in a more exciting world." Working under this assumption, ad creators tried to reflect public aspirations rather than contemporary circumstances, to mirror popular fantasies rather than social realities.³ Advertisers recognized that consumers would rather identify with scenes of higher status than ponder reflections of their actual lives. In response, they often sought to give products a “class image" by placing them in what recent advertising jargon would call “upscale” settings. Even apart from such upscale strategies, advertisements of the 192os and 193os were likely to convey unrepresentative class images. Most advertisers defined the market for their products as a relatively select audience of upper-class and uppermiddle-class Americans. Even had they sought to depict the lives of these consumers with absolute fidelity, their ads would have mirrored only this select audience rather than society as a whole. Moreover, most ad creators occupied a class position and displayed cultural tastes that distanced them from popular conditions and values. Not only were they likely to portray the world they knew, rather than the world experienced by typical citizens, but also they sometimes allowed their cultural preferences to influence their depiction of society. Their “elite provincialism" and their tendency to create ads that satisfied their own tastes further distorted social reality. Most powerful of all in distorting advertising's social mirror were specific merchandising strategies. The central purpose of an ad was not to reflect reality but to “move merchandise." Often the strategy of an advertiser would dictate a deliberate distortion of reality—for example, the repeated depiction of women gazing spellbound into their open refrigerators, or lovers rejecting potential mates solely because of bad breath. Background elements of the ad that were not critical to the selling message were often determined by pictorial convention or artistic convenience rather than by close observation of contemporary life. The required background of “a family" or “a city” often assumed a conventionalized form. Attempts by historians to find in the ads of any era certain truths about family size or the spacing of children, for example, would be quickly thwarted by requirements of specific merchandising strategies (show children of different ages to demonstrate the broad age appeal of the product) and of artistic economy (include only enough figures to convey the idea of children). In the process of selling specific products, advertisers also communicated broader assumptions about social values. Implicit value statements, passed along unconsciously as givens, usually carried an ideological bias toward “system reinforcement." Manufacturers and ad agency leaders recognized their stake in the contemporary configuration of economic and social institutions, and thus found little reason to portray realities that might bring the system into question. Advertisements therefore promulgated what Jacques Ellul has characterized as “integration propaganda"—that is, ideas and images that reinforce and intensify existing patterns and conceptions.⁴ To the extent that contemporary business ideology led advertisers to exclude aspects of a broader, more diverse social reality, the ads failed to hold up a true mirror to society. In this sense, the relation of advertising images to contemporary social realities is best suggested by the phrase Michael Schudson has coined to describe American advertising art: Capitalist Realism.⁵ Like the paintings and murals of Socialist Realism, the illustrations in American advertising portrayed the ideals and aspirations of the system more accurately than its reality. They dramatized the American dream. Despite these serious distortions in advertising's mirror, some of them virtually inherent in the nature of advertising, the case for advertisements as useful historical documents may not be entirely without merit. Advertisements present problems that differ more in degree than in kind from those involved in interpreting social reality from more conventional historical sources. We may not be able to prove the specific effect of an advertisement on its readers, but neither can we prove the effects of religious tracts, social manifestos, commemorative addresses, and political campaign speeches on their audiences. We like to believe that the content of movies, popular literature, and well-attended amusements reveals something about the attitudes and values of audiences during a given era, but we cannot prove this from their content. Bruce Kuklick and Jay Mechling have judiciously warned us that even such apparently revealing documents as jingoistic campaign speeches or advice books for mothers, whatever their measurable popularity, cannot be taken as authoritative evidence of the ideas of those who heard or read them. As Herbert Gans succinctly warns: “The critics' practice of inferring effects from content is not valid."6 Advertisements merely share the characteristics of many other suspect forms of evidence about popular attitudes: we do not know exactly why they were popular or successful; we do not know if audiences shared or adopted the ideas presented; and we have reasons to suspect that the authors had motives and biases that did not completely coincide with those of the audience. Once we have placed advertisements in the same category as many traditional historical documents, it may be possible to argue that ads actually surpass most other recorded communications as a basis for plausible inference about popular attitudes and values. Among elite communicators, advertisers have been motivated by a particularly direct and intense need to understand and communicate effectively with their audiences. Certainly they have had few rivals in the expenditure of money and effort in assessing audience response. Deficient as their early methods were, advertisers still tested the effects of their communications more often and more rigorously than novelists, writers of magazine fiction, newspaper editors, movie directors, cartoonists, or even politicians. And they had reasons for taking these “reality checks" seriously.7 Advertising leaders recognized the necessity of associating their selling messages with the values and attitudes already held by their audience. They sought to strike only those notes that would evoke a positive resonance. As one agency ad reminded advertisers: “You must not implant the smallest grain of disagreement in a reader's mind. . . . There are certain things that most people believe. . . . The moment your copy is linked to one of those beliefs, more than half your battle is won."8 Whatever the results in ad content and audience reaction, advertising people clearly invested more time, energy, and money than any other mass communicators in the effort to discover such fundamental beliefs. Sometimes advertising content directly reflected the consumer attitudes reported in surveys and questionnaires. For its 1926 Pyrex campaign, the Corning Glass Ware Company sought to place the product in the context of the housewife's immediate reality. After determining which dishes housewives prepared most often, the company used the five most common ones as illustrations in all Pyrex ads.9 Advertising artists carefully reproduced the exact details of current fashions in dress, furniture, and home decoration, although comparisons with home inventories would reveal that such illustrations more accurately reflected the living conditions of the wealthy and avant-garde than the tastes of typical Americans. The 1929 Harvard Awards Committee for advertising suggested the probable degree of refraction in the mirroring of living conditions in ads. It noted approvingly that a series of Armstrong Linoleum ads had depicted “rooms not sufficiently out of the ordinary to be regarded by the representative reader as unobtainable."10 In a variety of ways, advertisements provide glimpses of past social realities. Illustrations of eager delivery boys with baskets of groceries, or formally attired department store clerks with a deferential hunch to their shoulders, remind us of economic services and social relationships that once existed for certain segments of society.11 Such illustrations would not have appeared without some basis in actuality. Advertisements quickly reveal that bridge and golf were current fads. Yet such ads fail to provide a mirror, because they offer no accurate measure of how many people played golf or bridge, or how often they did so. At the minimum, however, ads do reveal what products and services were sold during a given era, when new products first attained mass distribution, and what explanations and suggestions were offered for their use. Testimonial ads tell us which public figures a well-informed and highly motivated advertising elite believed the consumers would identify with and accept as adequate authorities. Another argument for the contribution of advertisements to an understanding of social realities rests on certain unprovable but commonsense assumptions about the broad impact of advertising. Few students of mass communication now accept the “hypodermic-needle" theory, which emphasizes the power of media images to inject certain attitudes and ideas into the minds of audience members. But scholars do acknowledge the power of frequently repeated media images and ideas to establish broad frames of reference, define the boundaries of public discussion, and determine relevant factors in a situation. (Advertising research has repeatedly confirmed that ads emphasizing the aroma, taste, or texture of a food product, though not necessarily effective in shifting brand preferences, do successfully establish the criterion they emphasize as the relevant one for the consumer making a choice.) Certainly few images have buffeted the consciousness of twentieth-century Americans as repetitively as advertisements. As Walter Benjamin observed of architecture and film decades ago, they have been largely perceived by the audience in an inattentive “state of distraction."12 Still, they may have shaped the audience's frame of reference all the more effectively for being passively absorbed rather than actively contemplated. As I shall argue later, by disseminating certain incessantly repeated and largely uncontradicted visual clichés and moral parables, the ads were likely to shape or reinforce the same popular attitudes they sought to reflect. Advertisements also contributed to the shaping of a “community of discourse," an integrative common language shared by an otherwise diverse audience. Except in movie theaters, advertising maintained a highly visible and nearly ubiquitous presence in all the popular media of the 192os and 193os. Through repetition, bold display, and ingenuity, advertisements infused their images and slogans into America's common discourse. If the metaphors, syntactical patterns, and verbal and visual “vocabularies" of our common language establish our parameters of thought and cut the furrows along which our ideas tend to flow, then advertising has played a significant role in establishing our frames of reference and perception.13 In my survey of advertising content in the 192os and 193os, I have sought to interpret some of the major contributions advertising has made to the vocabulary and syntax of American common discourse, and thus to the framing of basic societal assumptions. I have not tried to make a case for the probable impact of specific ads, or even of single campaigns. Rather, through a process of total immersion, I have sought to recognize and analyze certain persistent patterns of verbal and visual expression. Although I became more conscious of the distortions in advertising's social mirror as my study progressed, I have sought to determine what can be salvaged from advertising “reflections" by plotting the probable angle of refraction or direction of distortion in the Zerrspiegel of advertising. By examining the social backgrounds of those who shaped the advertisements and by listening to their shoptalk about themselves, their audiences, and their working conditions, I have tried to assess their biases and the accuracy of their perception of social realities. In interpreting advertising content, I have tried to work backward to the underlying social realities by correcting advertising's depiction of American society for the refractions introduced by such biases, motives, and assumptions.14 One significant bias of advertisers deserves particular attention; and it is a bias that, paradoxically, offers us the prospect of using the advertisements of the 192os and 193os more confidently as a key to understanding certain realities of American culture. The ad creators of that era proudly proclaimed themselves missionaries of modernity. Constantly and unabashedly, they championed the new against the old, the modern against the old-fashioned. This bias, inherent in their economic function, ensured that advertisements would emphasize disproportionately those styles, classes, behaviors, and social circumstances that were new and changing. This bias toward modernity, although it further amplified advertising's distortions of typical social circumstances, ironically served to enhance the fidelity of ads as mirrors of a wider cultural ethos. As apostles of modernity, advertisers paid close attention to signs of consumer resistance to their messages and thus acquired a particular sensitivity to certain consumer discontents with modernity. Although consumers responded positively to the claims of modernity in technology, in style, and in ways of doing things, and although they appreciated the benefits that economies of scale brought to their standard of living, still they resented certain “indignities of scale" that accompanied modernization. Through consumer response, through trial and error, and through close observation of the other media of popular culture, advertisers gradually observed and responded to a popular demand that modern products be introduced to them in ways that gave the appearance and feel of a personal relationship. People craved opportunities, through vicarious experience, to bring products within the compass of their own human scale. At the same time, advertisers came to recognize certain vacuums of advice in modern society. They had always offered advice in a narrow, prescriptive sense: use our product. Now they discovered a market for broader counsel and reassurance. In response, they gave advice that promoted the product while offering expertise and solace in the face of those modern complexities and impersonal judgments that made the individual feel incompetent and insecure. Advertisers, then as now, recognized a much larger stake in reflecting people's needs and anxieties than in depicting their actual circumstances and behavior. It was in their efforts to promote the mystique of modernity in styles and technology, while simultaneously assuaging the anxieties of consumers about losses of community and individual control, that they most closely mirrored historical reality—the reality of a cultural dilemma. Yet even here, we must still reckon with some refraction in the advertising images. Although the ad creators sought, above all, to discover and empathize with public needs and anxieties, they most convincingly portrayed those anxieties that closely approximated their own. In view of both the opportunities and the obstacles presented by advertisements as reflections of American culture, I have concluded that the 192os and 193os provide the optimum era for exploring this approach to historical interpretation. American advertising took on a new scope and maturity during these years. Not only did the number of advertisements, the variety of products advertised, and the media available to advertising expand dramatically; in addition, advertisements increasingly gave predominant attention to the consumer rather than the product. In their efforts to win over consumers by inducing them to live through experiences in which the product (or its absence) played a part, advertisers offered detailed vignettes of social life. This evolution toward an emphasis on consumer anxieties and satisfactions, which culminated by the 193os, was what made American advertising “modern." It also made advertising more useful than ever before to the cultural historian. Of particular assistance to the historian is the sense of innocent self-assurance about their cultural mission that many advertising people retained during this period. Despite a rapidly growing sophistication within advertising agencies, many ads still conveyed their messages far more ingenuously and explicitly than would be the case several years later. Advertising leaders took delight in the new maturity and power of their profession. They anxiously explored the possibilities and perils of acting as intimate advisors to the fickle, suggestible, and inexperienced new masses of economically enfranchised consumers. Their excitement led them impulsively to fill the pages of the trade press with revealing gossip about their techniques, their perceptions of the audience, and their own motives. The advertising of the 192os was the response of advertising agents, representing the economic and cultural elite, to their perception of a new consumer constituency in much the same way that Jacksonian politics and the Whig “Log Cabin" campaign of 184o represented the response of a political establishment to perceptions of a new political constituency. In both instances, the established elites felt some sense of distaste for the ignorance and vulgarity of their new constituents. The advertisers, however, made greater efforts to examine the full dimensions of the needs and desires of their new constituency, and then not only to “pander" to it but also to counsel and uplift. Their motivation was no less self-interested than that of the early Democrats and Whigs, but the frequency and variety of their campaigns led them to search diligently for unfulfilled needs that they might promise to satisfy. Discovering vacuums of advice and psychological deprivations in modern society, they accepted a therapeutic role in helping Americans adapt to new social and technological complexities. The American dream, they promised, was a thoroughly modern dream, adaptable to a modern scale. It offered new and satisfying forms of individualism, equality, personal interaction, and cost-free progress within the emerging mass society. We may discount the solutions they offered to modern problems. But we would be unwise to neglect their diagnosis of the needs and desires of the expanding consumer society, or to ignore the refracted images of it that they projected in their advertising tableaux.