# ABANDONING THE GREAT GENTEEL HOPE: FROM SPONSORED RADIO TO THE FUNNY PAPERS Radio was the most tantalizing, yet most perplexing, new medium ever to confront advertisers. No other media had offered such potential for intimacy with the audience. Radio surpassed all others in its capacity to deny its own status as a mass medium. Moviegoers congregated in public crowds, and newspaper and magazine readers were affected by the “distancing" qualities of print. But radio carried the human voice directly into the privacy of the home, to the center of the revered family circle. In that setting, listeners might readily imagine that the speaker was talking personally to them. Moreover, the level of concentration required by early radio ensured the listener's undivided attention. But radio's tempting strategic position within the family circle also created dangers for the advertiser. Any false note on such an inherently “intrusive" medium might bring a very negative reaction. To add to this perplexity, radio posed the issue of the relation of advertising to entertainment in the bluntest possible way. After the first few tentative years, during which radio manufacturers found it expedient to produce radio programs in order to stimulate the sale of receivers, no one stepped forward to provide the entertainment to gather an audience for the advertiser. If radio was going to serve as an advertising vehicle, the advertiser would have to attract his own audience, playing the role of entertainer as well as that of serious salesman. As close observers of popular culture, advertising leaders at first took a strikingly different attitude toward radio than they had taken toward other new media. Whereas they had often viewed the movies with disdain, they approached radio with reverence. The tabloids and confession magazines, they concluded, revealed the ignorance and tastelessness of the people; radio, however, promised their cultural redemption. There were several reasons behind these emphatic distinctions among the media. One was the diversity of their social origins. The background of the movies was plebeian: they had emerged from the nickelodeons patronized by the urban masses. True Story and the tabloids had aimed at working-class audiences. The ownership of radio sets, by contrast, gradually spread from the wealthier classes to the less affluent, thus suggesting an initial elite audience. Such distinct class origins fit nicely with implications that arose from the apparent nature of the various media themselves. Movies played to a crowd in a garish public setting; they seemed to reflect the indiscriminate tastelessness and sensuality of people in the mass. Tabloids and confession magazines conveyed the aura of subways, screaming newsboys, and crowded newsstands. Radio, by contrast, reached its audience as individuals, or in small family groups, insulated by the home setting from any of the base passions of the mob.² Sponsorship Only: Radio as Culturaí Uplift Historians of broadcasting have sometimes dramatized the contrast between the early dreams for radio and its ultimate commercial reality by describing radio mogul David Sarnoff's vision of radio as a philanthropically supported public service, or by quoting Herbert Hoover's comment that it would be “inconceivable that we should allow so great a possibility for service to be drowned in advertiser chatter."³ Such pious declarations might lead us to suspect that these “good intentions” for the future of radio must have been undermined by a conspiracy among advertising agents. But the advertising industry did not set out in the early 192os to capture this new medium. Quite the contrary. The overwhelming majority of advertising leaders held just as lofty a view of radio as anyone else. Eventually most agencies had to be ardently wooed before they took up with the new medium. In 1922 and 1923 Printers' Ink editorialized against radio as an “objectionable advertising medium." Twice in 1925 it rejected broadcasting as a "legitimate advertising medium" and insisted that it did not belong in advertising accounts. While admitting the “alluring" attractions of radio, the journal emphasized the dangers of creating public ill-will and reminded the profession that “the family circle is not a public place, and advertising has no business intruding there unless it is invited." A contributor to Advertising and Selling in 1922 issued a similar warning against any commercial “intruder" into the sanctity of the home. Advertising should refrain from any association with radio unless it could discover a way to do so without the slightest debasement of radio's “refinement and general satisfaction."4 Meanwhile, however, tentative experiments with advertising on the air had begun, in spite of the “almost universal" opposition expressed at the first Radio Conference in Washington, D.C. Station WEAF in New York City, the experimental station of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, invited all comers to pay to enter WEAF's radio “phone booth" in order to deliver a message. Takers soon appeared. Within a year or so, several advertisers, including the National Carbon Company (Eveready batteries), Ipana Toothpaste, and Cliquot Club Ginger Ale had begun to sponsor programs of musical entertainment.⁵ Still, opposition to radio as an advertising vehicle remained strong in most advertising circles. To sponsor a program as a public service was commendable, but a direct pitch for a product would debase the medium. As late as 1926, a writer in Printers'Ink wrote that while he was intrigued as an advertising man by the “immediate possibilities of radio advertising," he still concluded “as a family man and radio enthusiast" that the medium would be imperiled “if advertising were ever permitted to touch radio even remotely." Printers' Ink, reviewing the dangers of “an invasion of the home," warned that the injection of advertisements into every communications medium would “breed public resentment” against all advertising.6 By the mid-192os a consensus had emerged; it disapproved of any “direct advertising" of products on the air but acknowledged the merits of commercial sponsorship. Radio's sole value to the sponsor, which might be destroyed by any direct advertising, was the creation of public goodwill.7 The “sponsorship only" theory of radio advertising, which predominated in the advertising press from 1923 until 1927, reflected several propensities of big business and advertising in the mid-192os. One of these was the ideal of business paternalism. Invigorated by the challenges of World War I and schooled by an era of muckraking and antitrust agitation, many corporate leaders had entered the 192os with a sense of their responsibility to conduct business as a public service. Having experimented with such welfare capitalism programs as profit-sharing, pension plans, and immigrant “Americanization," many of these leaders prided themselves on a capacity to uplift the masses. Prominent among the spokesmen for a public-service vision of business were the leaders of General Electric and AT & T—both of which played a major role in the development of radio. Owen D. Young, the chairman of General Electric and the chairman, in 1926, of Radio Corporation of America, regarded RCA's new subsidiary, the National Broadcasting Company, as a “semi-philanthropic" activity.8 Few new media have enjoyed an aura of cultural uplift comparable to that of radio in the mid-192os. Technology seemed to be fulfilling its destiny as a civilizing force. A National Carbon Company ad, after alluding to famous orchestras and classical arias, concluded: “The air is your theater, your college, your newspaper, your library."9 In part, the vision of radio as uplift may have arisen from a moral resolve to see that this technological miracle was used only for the loftiest purposes. To an equal degree, I suspect, the image of radio as a civilizing force derived from its early broadcasts of classical music. Radio would provide the widening audience an opportunity——perhaps its first—to listen to “good" (classical) music, with all its calming, enlightening, and culturally uplifting qualities. On the flimsiest of evidence, advertising journals claimed radio's success in the elevation of popular taste. Advertising and Selling boasted in 1926 that “radio has transformed numberless homes from deadly monotony into enjoyment of the finest things in life" through such experiences as listening every Sunday night to “the world's greatest musicians."10Judicious Advertising presented the optimistic assessment of David Sarnoff, the general manager of RCA: “Countless thousands whose musical experience had nèver transcended the phonograph and the local town band have learned to enjoy the music of a symphonic orchestra; vast numbers whose tastes had been limited to popular music have been initiated into