# THE CONSUMPTION ETHIC: STRATEGIES OF ART AND STYLE In 1928 a vice-president of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company boldly proposed that the giant corporation overturn tradition and adopt “a changed psychology toward the telephone." The public, unfortunately, had come to look upon the telephone as a necessity. Although this “psychology" was exactly the state of mind that AT & T had sought to inculcate over several decades, it had now, in the late 192os, ironically become a barrier to progress. The power of advertising to change public habits and ideas, argued Arthur W. Page, Vice-President for Publicity, should now be employed to transform the consumer image of the telephone from that of a necessity to that of a convenience, even a luxury. A “changed psychology" would lead “normal" families to seek “all the telephone facilities that they can conveniently use, rather than the smallest amount they can get along with." Nor did Page's challenge to hallowed utilitarian tradition stop here. AT & T, he suggested, might even wish to entice the public to buy colored hand sets as “outward and visible signs of an inward and spiritual grace. "1 Prior to this time AT & T advertising had been primarily institutional, supplemented by promotion of its long-distance lines. Its institutional campaigns made no direct pitch for increased usage or sales; they focused on creating a personable corporate image and on protecting the company from political attack by justifying its status as a private monopoly. Now, at the 1928 AT & T General Commercial Conference, Page sought to justify a new “comfort and convenience" advertising campaign that would persuade the public to adopt higher standards cf “adequate service." Page made his case on firm merchandising principles. The company needed increased sales for growth and stabilization. A major potential market lay untapped among the affluent who could well afford additional telephones, extensions, and intercom systems. But, as Page elaborated at a subsequent conference, additional telephone extensions competed for consumer dollars “with everything from cigarettes to a trip abroad." Until they shed the image of dull necessity, telephones were unlikely to win the competition with more glamorous conveniences and luxuries. What was more, Page added, the modern consumer was critical of the price and quality of things purchased as necessities, but liberally purchased whatever contributed to comfort and convenience. AT & T, he implied, might even enhance its corporate image and strengthen its political armor by transforming its image from that of a monopoly controller of a necessity to that of a provider of attractive accessories for gracious living.² Page alluded to the 142 different kinds of switchboard cables that AT & T made available to associate companies. “That was quite a degree of personalization," he observed. Yet to the public AT & T offered merely “one black desk set, a hand set, a wall set, and one of those black buttoned inter-communication systems." That hardly represented the personalization the public sought or the image of luxury for which it was increasingly willing to pay.³ Anticipating some skepticism, Page pointed to the most celebrated merchandising lesson of the era, the contrast between General Motors and Henry Ford. With the consumer inducements of multiple colors, new styles, accessories, and a variety of technical improvements, General Motors had first forced the once-dominant Ford to adopt colors and then to shut down entirely in 1927 to produce a Model A that would more nearly meet the public demand for style and convenience. Page clinched his case by conjuring up the parable of Henry Ford and the new consumer of the 192os: “He made one little black instrument, too, and it did just what ours did: when it got started, it went fine, and so did ours. But, you know, Henry has recently come to the point where he realized he had to make a change and I think now that he has made a lady out of Lizzie, we might dress up these children of the Bell System."4 Symbolically what Page proposed, and what the entire advertising and merchandising world of the late 192os appeared to affirm, was that business should cast off its sober, utilitarian outlook in favor of a new, more pleasure-minded, consumption ethic. The idea had too long persisted that the telephone should not be used for “frivolous conversation." Page snorted: “That is about as commercial as if the automobile people should advertise, Please do not take this car out unless you are going on a serious errand.""5 In order to break down the older attitude "that the telephone is a necessity not to be trifled with," Page explained, AT & T would experiment in 1929 with a “comfort and convenience" advertising campaign that might eventually make it “the style" for an average home to have two or three telephone extensions and an affluent home to have as many as fifteen. At least the company would have responded to the public's new taste for style and luxury by attempting to “give the public what they desire."6 A brief flurry of enthusiasm greeted Page's proposals. The comfort and convenience campaign went forward in a number of women's and “class" magazines. In 1929 another leading AT & T officer spoke enthusiastically of a further "personalization" of service through styling. Color choices could be supplemented by alterations in shape and size, so that the same type of telephone no longer need appear in both the fish market and the bank president's office.7 Even so, AT & T stopped short of exploring the full implications of Page's proposals. Another company official noted that if the Bell system had a competitor who