# CONFIGURING IKEA

‘Why is the Swedish team sponsored by IKEA?’ a Spanish gentleman wondered while attending the Euro 2012 football championship in the summer of 2012.<sup>1</sup> The Swedish team’s blue and yellow kit clearly triggered associations with IKEA, rather than with the Swedish flag. One is prompted to ask whether IKEA has actually outgrown Sweden in the public consciousness.

IKEA does not merely sell design. It sells Sweden and, indeed, Scandinavia too. Few international brands have such an explicitly national profile. IKEA has made ‘Swedishness’ a virtue in itself, as well as an essential aspect of its strategy for the brand. The blue and yellow logotype alludes to the Swedish flag, while the products have names that associate them with Sweden or Scandinavia; and Swedish food is served in IKEA’s restaurants under the device ‘A Taste of Sweden.’ It is not just a matter of aesthetic and concrete references, for IKEA also makes use of more abstract notions about Swedish society and Swedish design.

There are, for example, constant references to an image of Sweden as suffused with social and economic equality and an equally traditional notion as to what really characterizes Swedish design. Has IKEA adopted Swedish values and has it developed a corporate ideology that includes social and political consciousness, or is this a matter of cynically exploiting Swedish culture and fundamental Swedish values? One readily forms the impression that IKEA is driven by a social and democratic pathos, though the business strategy is, of course, primarily dictated by crass financial self-interest.

Neither aspect excludes the other. The goal of increased sales does not exclude a sense of social responsibility. Making use of a national identity as a resource and a sales pitch is neither particularly dramatic nor uncommon. But one can reflect upon the consequences. Underlying the narratives there are commercial impulses, but it would be an oversimplification to dismiss these as innocuous. The financial interest does not drastically reduce the impact of the message and, accordingly, the setting and the rhetoric cannot be ignored. On the contrary, the use of such narratives in IKEA’s marketing strategy helps to establish our view of the past and our understanding of the present. Those responsible for the narrative do not need to have political, cultural or ideological intentions for their narratives to have an impact beyond the purely commercial. What we believe, know and imagine has largely been shaped by various narratives. We are not just influenced by the daily assault of news through the media but, possibly to a greater extent, by advertising, films and computer games. For example, a fictional TV series like ‘The West Wing’ has a greater impact on how people view American politics than what actually takes place in the political sphere. Actual power and influence over an individual’s ideas and opinions do not always have to be regarded as intentional or as the result of a conscious strategy.

Popular culture is a genre of its own but it also contributes to our view of society in general. In the years since the millennium, ‘soft power’ has become an increasingly central term for explaining political influence. Soft power distinguishes itself from traditional concepts like military and economic power. The term was minted by Joseph Nye and is concerned with an ability to generate sympathy and to appeal to people by means of attractive narratives, consumption and culture. Nye maintains that, in our own time, it is a question of which narrative wins and so occasional symbolic gestures and actions mean more that traditional political activities.<sup>2</sup>

This book is concerned with a global brand that impacts on how the world regards Sweden and Swedish design but that is also important to how Swedes view themselves. Determining a company’s nationality is difficult in our globalized existence. In the case of IKEA, it is clear that the concept and the brand are owned by Inter IKEA Systems B.V. which is registered in the Netherlands, while most of the products are manufactured far beyond Sweden’s borders, frequently in low-wage countries. That IKEA functions as Sweden’s face in the world as well as a symbol of Sweden is not just a role that the company has assumed voluntarily. In Sweden IKEA is proudly regarded as a sort of national symbol, and even though there is little in IKEA’s corporate structure that has anything to do with Sweden, the company still receives a helping hand from the Swedish authorities.

For decades IKEA has taken advantage of established notions about Sweden as a democratic and egalitarian welfare state. The company’s narrative has acquired a certain standing and a degree of official legitimacy. Indeed, on occasions IKEA has been chosen to represent Sweden and to shape notions about Swedish society and Swedish design. And so it is important to ask ourselves which narrative is being promoted, as well as reflecting on the fact that a commercial brand can play such an important role in promoting the image of a country’s culture, ideology and politics. Fundamentally it is a matter of how the conception of Sweden and Swedish design are renegotiated and shaped by a corporate culture.

Yet another aspect that prompts this book is the fact that IKEA has largely ‘written its own history’ without encountering any serious friction. The historical narratives are then credulously repeated by the media and in surveys of design history. By partially financing exhibitions and books about the company, IKEA has been able to retain an influence on its own historical narrative which is then adopted and reproduced by other people in other contexts.<sup>3</sup>

## A furniture company’s history and legitimacy

The subject of this book is IKEA. But IKEA is a gigantic organization. Not just in itself but in the material pertaining to it. The company was registered as a business in 1943 by a seventeen-year-old Ingvar Kamprad. In the space of few decades it developed into one of the world’s leading furniture manufacturers. Initially Kamprad sold all sorts of wares including matches and pens, but he soon decided to concentrate on home furnishings.

IKEA is an acronym made up of the founder’s initials together with the initial letters of the names of Elmtaryd and Agunnaryd, the farm and the village where he grew up.

IKEA started to sell so-called ‘knock-down furniture’ by mail-order back in 1956. This was furniture that was delivered in a package and that customers assembled themselves from parts. Two years later the doors opened at the first IKEA shop located in the small southern Swedish town of Älmhult. In 1965 a flagship store was opened at Kungens Kurva in the south of Stockholm. The first store outside Scandinavia opened in Switzerland in 1973 and, in the same decade, a succession of stores was established in different parts of Europe. The international expansion continued throughout the 1980s at the same time that a complicated corporate structure developed. Inter IKEA Systems B.V. owns the concept and the brand. Each new store is meticulously planned by Inter IKEA which is also responsible for training management and staff, as well as ensuring that the store adheres to the concept which requires following all sorts of regulations and guidelines for running an IKEA store. In 2013 there were 298 stores in more than thirty-eight countries, and the annual turnover, according to company accounts, amounted to €27.7 billion.<sup>4</sup>

IKEA’s exceptional success and the size of the company have attracted the attention of scholars, particularly in the field of business studies which have focused on the internal organization of the company and Kamprad’s unusual management style.<sup>5</sup> One central interest is in determining what factors have led to this success which is generally explained in terms of well-developed logistics and a highly distinctive business model. But IKEA’s success is also attributed to the strong corporate culture.

One early study (1990) analyzed the values and visions that have permeated the organization. Researchers maintained that Kamprad’s opinions and approach provided guidelines for how the staff should act and that the leader came to be regarded as a sort of cohesive cement. Since the corporate culture was seen as being linked up with the founder’s innovative and unconventional style of leadership the question also arose as to how IKEA would be able to continue to grow and flourish without Kamprad’s leadership.<sup>6</sup>

There can be no doubt that both the corporate culture at IKEA and Ingvar Kamprad himself have played an important part in the company’s success, but there is much to suggest that the narrative of organization and the brand are of greater significance.<sup>7</sup> In an influential and penetrating field study entitled Identity Across Borders: A Study in the ‘IKEA-World’ (1994), Miriam Salzer studied IKEA as a culture in which norms and ideas were implanted with the help of the staff’s own narratives that exist at different levels and in different contexts within the company. Symbols, culture and identity are seen as parts of a process that is constantly developing within the organization.<sup>8</sup>

Narratives have not just been important internally, but have also been central elements of external communication. They have acted, inside and outside the company, as a form of linguistic artifacts that give expression to the brand and testify as to what IKEA is and wants to be. Of great significance is the success story that explains how and why the company was started. Taken together, the stories form a narrative which is neither static nor permanent. Rather, there is a living narrative that is constantly tended and redrafted. New chapters are written, not only by IKEA itself but also by customers and media, and this reproduces the narrative, keeping the mythology and the story of the brand alive. The narrative has long been used in one way or another to establish unity or identity, which can be likened to what Benedict Anderson classes as ‘an imagined community.’ This community builds on a sense of connectedness with people who one neither knows nor will ever get to know. The basis for the sense of being connected lies, precisely, in the notion of forming part of a community.<sup>9</sup>

The company is no exception here, but the narratives—whether true or false—are used to attract customers, to create a sense of community and identity, and to motivate the staff. But while the concept of ‘storytelling’ is general in application, the notion of ‘corporate storytelling’ more specifically refers to narration within organizations and businesses in both internal and external contexts.<sup>10</sup> In brief, it is a matter of using narratives to establish norms and values, goals and visions among the staff as well as providing a strategic tool for communicating with customers.

The success of the chain of stores is often explained in terms of well-developed logistics, a potent corporate culture, and Kamprad’s curious style of leadership. Flat packs and low prices are other common explanations. But as we have already mentioned, the starting point for this particular book is in the narratives that have played a central role in IKEA’s success story. That companies make use of narratives both internally and externally in building their brands is in no sense unique to IKEA. The fundamental question in this book is, rather, concerned with what it is that makes IKEA’s narratives so effective.

My aim is not to identify the recipe for IKEA’s success. Rather, it is to analyze and deconstruct IKEA’s narratives in order to explain why these particular narratives have been so extraordinarily effective. Several questions need to be answered: Is there some form of guiding principle or recurring Ur-narrative? What is emphasized and what do the narratives refrain from mentioning? How have the narratives been shaped, used and handed on?

IKEA’s use of Sweden and Swedish design is hardly the result of free fantasies but is firmly secured in established notions and in the real world. The mild, virgin countryside of Sweden that is portrayed in emotive photographs of the company in catalogs and on IKEA’s website certainly exist. There are mooses there too. And mooses frequently stop and stare in the middle of a road. Blond, blue-eyed people do live in Sweden and social issues play an important role in political debate.

This book does not seek to determine whether IKEA’s narratives are an accurate reflection of reality or not. My ambition is, rather, to identify the content of the narratives. The analysis also includes relating them to contrasting narratives as well as direct criticism. The aim is not, fundamentally, concerned with the truth of the stories, nor of refuting or destroying the company’s narratives but, rather, in explaining why they appear as they do and how they have been shaped, as well as the reasons for their success.

The limits of the chosen period run from the late 1970s, when IKEA was ‘Swedicized, to the 2000s with the focus on the 1980s and 1990s. Clearly, the profile has not always been Swedish. In the 1950s, for example, the brand name was actually spelt with an accent in a French idiom: Ikéa. It was in connection with IKEA’s international expansion that the Swedish identity was emphasized in order to create a more distinct and coherent profile. In parallel with its growth, IKEA began to formulate its history, origins and identity strategically. Courses were organized to teach employees about the firm’s values and the importance of its heritage in rural Sweden. That IKEA was not just any capitalist corporation, but that it was inspired by a social mission was stressed, not least, in a creation story as to how and why the business had been started.<sup>11</sup>

Reality itself is always adapted and edited in every narrative or history. There may be much in a narrative that is true. But reality can also be renegotiated dramaturgically. Situations and facts are shaped to make a good story. Thus it is not the range of products, not the furniture and design items as such, that are the focus but the narratives of the range and the brand. The approach distinguishes itself from histories of design based on material considerations which are primarily concerned with artifacts, their methods of manufacture, materials and design.<sup>12</sup> Rather, it is the context, the discourse and rhetoric attaching to the company’s products as well as Swedish design in general that is of interest. And so I have concentrated on the notions, histories and fictions pertaining to IKEA’s design, rather than the artifacts themselves.

Discourse analysis is a wide-ranging concept. In the present book, narrative theory is central. IKEA does not just produce designs in the form of products but also ‘fabricates’ narratives which, in turn, draw substance from other narrative descriptions. In other words it is a question of a narrower spectrum of the company’s activities, though a spectrum which is central to understanding the IKEA brand and the company’s success. The point of departure and the interpretation demand a broader approach with detours into politics and history, for example. In order to analyze the issues treated in the book we need to move between different fields, using theoretical perspectives from a variety of disciplines. As Elizabeth Wilson has pointed out in connection with fashion history, it is difficult to understand the complexity of the subject and its links with, for example, politics, gender and economics if one studies it in isolation.<sup>13</sup> One can inspect the seams but the context is the decisive element.

## Facts and fictions

National characteristics and markers have long been used by governments and corporations in positioning themselves. This is largely a matter of emphasizing attractive characteristics in order to profile oneself in relation to others. But we have to ask whether design really has national overtones. My argument takes the view that it is notions, histories and fictions about what characterizes Swedish design that directs the interpretation rather than any specific and innate properties.

The concept of ‘Swedish Modern’ is a good example. The term was minted in the 1930s to describe a gentler version of a modernist idiom: wood instead of metal tubing, organic forms rather than hard and angular designs. The style was synchronized with Sweden’s political mainstream and the concept is regularly taken up as an example of the international success of Swedish designers. But as art historian Jeff Werner has indicated, the concept was most often used to describe furniture manufactured in the

USA and designed by American designers. In other words, it was the narratives of the nation itself and of Swedish design, rather than the design itself, that made this style Swedish.<sup>14</sup>

That language is fundamental to our understanding of reality is an established hypothesis in postmodern discourse. True, people perceive the world in many different ways, but the point is that our perceptions of past and present are influenced by stories, images, metaphors and words that help to explain what would otherwise be an incalculably complex and fragmented world. The narratives scarcely reproduce reality like a blueprint but simplify and refine our perceptions. Also important in this context are: who is responsible for the narrative and what are their aims.

It is a well-established truth that companies do not just produce material artifacts or offer services, but that they also create brands that are by no means confined merely to a logotype and a product. Competition between manufacturers is no longer just a matter of price and quality but also of corporate narratives. Business has changed in step with a shift from focus on actual, material goods to immaterial aspects. Branding also includes feelings, ideas, images and stories.<sup>15</sup> There is no fixed meaning as such, no permanent content but constant change according to time and context.

As brands have developed into more than just a label, the importance of brands and branding has spiraled. In psychology identity has long been interpreted as a consistent and coherent ego but, in more recent times, has been defined as something that develops rather than something that is. Accordingly, there is simply no ego to manifest but it can, on the other hand, be constructed. Of course a brand identity can be understood in similar fashion. Companies commit major resources to building and preserving their identity. With the help of narratives about values and characteristics and conscious management of elements such as graphic design a ‘personality,’ a distinct and unique identity is created.

Branding is, quite simply, a matter of defining what one is in order to distinguish and position oneself in the market. It is a matter of values and meanings, in addition to the company’s products or services, that are communicated by stories and images. How the brand is actually perceived is not, of course, the same as how the brand seeks to be understood. There can be a large discrepancy between how a company formulates its identity and how this identity is actually received. Thus the images and narratives that companies construct to describe themselves can differ from those actually generated in the recipient’s consciousness.

During the 1990s there was increasing corporate interest in dramaturgical notions and so-called corporate storytelling became increasingly popular. The economic potential of a good story was emphasized and management consultants claimed that brands should be launched and organizations should be described using narratives. In the public domain they are used as marketing tools while internally they are a way of strengthening the corporate culture and promoting a sense of community among employees. American management and marketing books in particular, with titles such as Shakespeare on Management (1999) and The Classic Touch: Lessons in Leadership from Homer to Hemingway (1999) testify to inspiration from the literary world.<sup>16</sup> The pervading opinion shared by advocates of the policy is that narratives are more effective than information communicated in traditional ways. The key to success is, quite simply, considered to be a good story. Or as Rolf Jensen put it in his book The Dream Society (1999): ‘whoever tells the best story, and whoever tells it the best, will win.’<sup>17</sup> The superiority of the genre has also been explained with the idea that conviction is the core to all forms of successful business activities, and that if one is to convince people one has to know how to tell a story.<sup>18</sup>

In practice it is a matter of reshaping and systematizing a company’s history and strategy to provide a narrative. In order to arouse feelings and to distinguish oneself from competitors, products and traditions are woven into the story with the aim of captivating and engaging the public. Facts become meaningful and are easier to remember and to relate to when they are part of a narrative since the narrative is understood in a context. In our modern economies, in which the consumption of goods, lifestyles and dreams take up a lot of room, storytelling has, accordingly, become very much a matter of ‘storyselling.’<sup>19</sup>

A corporate narrative is generally concerned with how and why the company was founded, what it stands for today and its visions for the future. Most people would agree that a narrative is a construction, but there are different opinions as to the role that the actual situation should play in this context. While some people consider that reality ought to be central to the narrative, others maintain that the main thing is that the narratives appear to be genuine and that they make an impression of authenticity.<sup>20</sup>

In Storytelling. Bewitching the Modern Mind (2010), Christian Salmon opines that storytelling, which is motivated instrumentally and commercially, has also left its mark on the political sphere. He shows how the phenomenon has developed in marketing in the USA and in French politics. According to Salmon, underlying this sort of successoriented storytelling is a greater awareness and cynicism than we find in literature and in classical myths. Thus the narrative approach is consciously employed as an instrument for exercising power and influence.<sup>21</sup>

Marketing of nations, regions and cities has long existed, but an understanding of branding has become increasingly important. There is fierce competition in the global arena and it is not just in the corporate sector that organizations are seeking to shape their identity. Countries, too, invest large sums of money in creating or strengthening their national identities.<sup>22</sup>

Research into the use of such narratives has increased in parallel with the growth of interest in corporate storytelling. The starting point for such research lies in an understanding that history can be shaped, can be created, and can be used for a variety purposes, and that it is truly a product of its own time. As long ago as the nineteenth century Friedrich Nietzsche devoted himself to the study of what history can be used for.<sup>23</sup> Inspired by German philosophy and the classification of how we master and are mastered by history, Klas-Göran Karlsson has developed a typology of seven ways of using history: scientific, existential, moral, ideological, non-use, educationally political and commercial.<sup>24</sup> In this context it is primarily the commercial use of history that is interesting. This can be traced in films, in fiction, in magazines and in advertising and it reaches a large audience. Thus the commercial use of history clearly influences our view of the past and Karlsson poses the somewhat rhetorical question: ‘What happens to history in popular culture?’ Does the holocaust become Americanized on its way to Hollywood because it is furnished with American and commercial values that, at times, can be almost impossible to conceive: like a happy ending?<sup>25</sup>

Corporate storytelling does not have to be backward looking, though the past frequently plays a central role. Advocates of what has been called ‘History Marketing’ emphasize the importance of preserving and communicating a company’s history in order to strengthen and intensify the corporate culture. History is seen as a vital resource in the company’s marketing strategy. One reason that has been put forward is that the company’s history is unique and thus cannot be copied by competitors.<sup>26</sup> There are even companies that specialize in relating a company’s history by organizing a museum, mounting exhibitions, organizing jubilee celebrations or writing a book devoted to the company’s history. The US consultants ‘The History Factory’ claim that they can help to ‘tell an organization’s story with techniques as time-tested as Homer, Shakespeare and the latest Hollywood blockbuster. Our StoryARC™ methodology results in a narrative of your organization that is not only informative, but genuinely entertaining.’<sup>27</sup>

## The self-image in a landscape of manuals

IKEA’s own answer to the question of the company’s success is that it is due to a special business idea and a concept that is regarded as holy: ‘If we stick to the concept we will never die.’<sup>28</sup> The explanations point one to Pandora’s famous box though in some respects there are no secrets. Everyone who visits an IKEA store can study the concept at close quarters. As with other multinational chain stores, the same sales principles apply throughout the world. Thus the legendary concept can be partially defined as a business model which can be rented for a franchise fee.

On the company’s intranet one can find the heading ‘The IKEA Manual Landscape.’ The heading hides a rigorous list of directives covering everything from how the logotype is to be used to what a complete IKEA store is to look like in order to function optimally. There are also manuals describing the brand identity, how this should be used and how it is to be marketed. The material is not classified as secret but the manuals of guidelines are intended for use within the corporation. The manuals cover such issues as how IKEA wants to be perceived, that is its self-image and its narrative which is, of course, not the same thing.

That a product has the same name and appearance all over the globe does not mean that it has the same significance everywhere, nor that it is understood in the same way globally. How it is interpreted and understood must be seen in a perspective that includes cultural, economic and social factors. IKEA is by no means the only global brand that has different connotations in different parts of the globe. In poor countries Coca-Cola signals exclusivity while in the West it is connected with everyday life. One readily realizes that meanings change. The goal is to reach out as extensively as possible.

The brand’s ambition is, accordingly, to create coherent narratives and a well-defined identity which can also be understood globally. IKEA’s concept is communicated from the center, that is from Inter IKEA Systems B.V., to the individual stores. The company’s images, symbols, words and metaphors are identical everywhere, but are understood by consumers not only in relation to national contexts but of course also in relation to class and cultural capital. In many parts of the world an IKEA store is associated with low prices, though the products are not as cheap for Russians as they are for Swedes.<sup>29</sup> For Russians the products and brand have greater status than for Swedes. And while IKEA’s famous meatballs function as a sort of everyday nationalism to Swedes, people of other nationalities regard them as something exotic.

Globalization also encourages regional interpretations. As Anthony Giddens has noted, when customs, meanings and symbols are exchanged globally they are torn from their original context and they then establish themselves in the countries where they land; which results in a local translation.<sup>30</sup> In Germany, for example, there are deeply rooted notions about Sweden and an intense admiration of Swedish ideals, which has led to highly clichéd portrayals of that nation. The German TV series ‘Inga Lindström’ was filmed in the Swedish archipelago. All the characters are blond, drive Volvos and live in red houses flying blue and yellow flags from white poles. The veritable orgy of clichés can be a little too much for a Swede, but for a mass audience in Germany the series works as the model of a romantic view of Sweden.<sup>31</sup>

It is only a short step from here to IKEA’s German TV advertising which frequently alludes to Swedish traditions, Nordic views on equality and progressive Swedish welfare policies.<sup>32</sup> For Germans, IKEA’s blue and yellow colors and its frequent references to the Swedish countryside and to welfare say something very different from what they communicate to a Chinese audience. Of course IKEA’s marketing is not the same all over the world. True, there are uniform guidelines for advertisements and commercials with clear definitions of the brand identity. But advertising is created by agencies in different countries, which means that marketing strategies can vary and can have local overtones or a national profile.<sup>33</sup>

IKEA’s advertising has often challenged accepted conventions.<sup>34</sup> One notable example is the American commercial showing Steve and his male partner who are hunting for a new dining table while also challenging the American understanding of the family. While conservatives were scandalized, the commercial won approval in liberal circles.<sup>35</sup> It is hardly likely that this film would have worked as well in Saudi Arabia or in Russia.

My study touches on how IKEA has been received in various different countries, though it is the brand’s self-image and the guidelines for how this is to be expressed that is the main focus. Comparing IKEA’s advertising in different countries could widen one’s perspective, particularly with regard to national elements in marketing strategies. So too would a study of the global reception of IKEA. How and why our understanding varies between countries and groups is, without a doubt, an interesting question but it would be a gigantic research project that is beyond the scope of this study.

Research on IKEA, as we have noted, is dominated by economic and organizational aspects, often with a focus on the internal activities of the company.<sup>36</sup> But there are many other more important issues pertaining to IKEA and by no means all of them are concerned with economics. In spite of IKEA’s global diffusion, research into cultural aspects is limited. One of several explanations may be that the company was formerly rather reserved; another is the language barrier, since earlier materials are mainly in Swedish. This does not mean that the matter is totally unresearched and there is research based on a more cultural orientation. Both the American and the French perceptions of IKEA have been penetrated.<sup>37</sup> Many studies have a specific focus. One such study looks at how IKEA is perceived in the UK, or rather, what UK consumers regard as good value in furniture.<sup>38</sup> Another study compares how customers in Stockholm and Dublin view shopping at IKEA.<sup>39</sup> And catalogs from different periods have also been studied.<sup>40</sup> There are books about IKEA on a more general level too. Some of them are highly informative with regard to design and products, while others are more discursive, lacking critical distance. A considerable number of books about IKEA are written from an economic perspective with the focus on management.<sup>41</sup> There are books commissioned by IKEA while other books question the company or seek to confront it. Historien om IKEA (1998) by Bertil Torekull (Leading By Design: The IKEA Story) was commissioned by Kamprad and is an initiated but fairly deferential portrayal.<sup>42</sup> Journalist Thomas Sjöberg has written a much less respectful book in which he maps Kamprad’s Nazi contacts based on earlier revelations of Kamprad’s Nazi sympathies.<sup>43</sup> Just as critical is the book The Truth About IKEA (2010) which is a sort of kiss-and-tell story in which a former employee, Johan Stenebo, takes his former boss to task.<sup>44</sup>

In the present book, information from IKEA intended for the staff plays an essential role. This information is gleaned from publications dealing with sales methods, branding strategies, and goals and visions, as well as documenting IKEA’s culture, tradition and history. I have had access to this material partly in IKEA’s own archive and partly in the Royal Library in Stockholm. Originally the material was only available on paper in Swedish. More recent material can be found in English on IKEA’s intranet to which all the company’s employees have access. I have made use of both categories of information.

Other material is, so to speak, external and available to the public, containing information that IKEA has published as part of its marketing strategy. Important in this context are catalogs devoted to particular collections or products and books published in connection with various jubilees. I have also had access to material in Hans Brindfors personal archive. Brindfors was head of the agency that IKEA used in the initial phase of international expansion.

Where the material is only available in Swedish, references are translated into English. Where IKEA’s own texts are available in English these are used throughout the book. Readers should note that IKEA’s English texts are idiosyncratic with regard to language usage. This distinctive use of English can be seen as a conscious strategy on the part of the company to appear genuine and unaffected.

The library and archive of Sweden’s Ministry for Foreign Affairs have also provided material for my analysis of the relation between IKEA and Sweden in the international arena. I have also conducted a number of interviews which have been important from two perspectives. They have provided information not otherwise available and this has proved helpful in generating insights and establishing perspectives. Basically, all of the people interviewed currently have or have had leading positions in IKEA with a focus on branding and corporate culture.

The book is arranged thematically within an overall chronology. In chapter two the focus is on IKEA’s striking role as a storytelling organization. Of central interest is the store’s basic narrative which can be seen as a sort of foundation or nucleus. Oral tradition within the company has been important but external marketing has also contributed to the mythology. One prominent element of the narrative is Sweden itself, and in chapter three I analyze which type of Swedishness is reflected in IKEA’s rhetoric. I also show how the product range is exploited in order to promote the sense of Swedishness.

The fourth chapter considers the actual importance of the stores for the Swedish brand. IKEA excellently illustrates the fact that brands often play an important part in nation branding. The IKEA story and Swedish design are espoused though they differ from other representations. Chapter five of the book analyzes the company’s own selfimage, relating it to direct criticism. The concluding chapter takes as its starting point the fact that IKEA is part of our modern consumer culture while also presenting a summary of the book’s conclusion.

## Notes

Related by a member of the public at session with Sara Kristoffersson, ‘Sweden designed by IKEA.’ Paper presented at Culture Politics and Cultural Policies, VII International Conference on Cultural Policy Research, Barcelona, 2012.

2 Joseph Nye, Soft Power: The Means to Success in World Politics (New York: Perseus Books, 2004).

3 One example is the exhibition Open me shown at Kulturhuset in Stockholm 2001. The exhibition was produced in connection with IKEA launching its catalog and it reflected the year’s theme: storage. Staffan Kihlström, ‘IKEA, Rörstrand och ITföretag har ställt ut,’ Dagens Nyheter, January 1, 2007. In 2009 IKEA financed an exhibition at the Liljevalchs municipal art gallery in Stockholm. This is discussed in chapter 6.

4 Company information at http://www.IKEA.com/ms/sv\_SE/about-the-IKEAgroup/company-information/index.html (accessed October 29, 2013).

5 IKEA is quoted as a successful example in several business-economics studies. Among the earlier ones are Michael E. Porter, ‘What is Strategy?,’ Harvard Business Review, Nov–Dec, 1996; Richard Normann and Rafael Ramirez, ‘Designing Interactive Strategy: From Value Chain to Value Constellation,’ Harvard Business Review, July, 1993, pp. 107–117; Sumantra Ghoshal and Christopher A. Bartlett, The Individualized Corporation. A Fundamentally New Approach to Management. Great Companies are Defined by Purpose, Process, and People (New York: HarperBusiness, 1997).

6 Christopher A. Bartlett and Ashish Nanda, Ingvar Kamprad and IKEA (Harvard Business School Case 390–132, 1990).

7 This is also noted by Lars Strannegård, ‘Med uppdrag att berätta,’ in Anders Dahlvig, Med uppdrag att växa. Om ansvarsfullt företagande (Lund: Studentlitteratur, 2011), p. 18.

8 The business study was inspired by ethnology/anthropology. Salzer uses participatory observation at stores in Sweden, France and Canada to analyze how members of a company constructed an organizational identity in an international context. Miriam Salzer, Identity Across Borders: A Study in the ‘IKEA-World,’ Diss. (Linköping: 1994), pp. 7–14, 16. See also Miriam Salzer-Mörling, Företag som kulturella uttryck (Bjärred: Academia adacta, 1998).

9 Benedict Anderson was primarily interested in notions about a joint nation and he described the national aspect as being imaginary ideas about collective belonging. Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities. Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (Verso, London, 1983).

10 Literature in this field also uses the term ‘business narrative,’ though less frequently than ‘corporate storytelling.’ David M. Boje, Yiannis Gabriel and Barbara Czarniawska are leading exponents of storytelling research in management and organization research. See David M. Boje, ‘Stories of the Storytelling Organization: A Postmodern Analysis of Disney as “Tamara-Land”’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. 4 (1995); Yiannis Gabriel, Storytelling in Organizations: Facts, Fictions, and Fantasies (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000); Barbara Czarniawska, Narrating the Organization: Dramas on Institutional Identity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press 1997); Hilary McLellan, ‘Corporate Storytelling Perspectives,’ Journal for Quality & Participation, Vol. 29, No. 1 (2006).

11 The narrative was written by Leon Nordin and has been published in several editions, with minor alterations since 1984, and in a variety of languages. This book quotes from the English edition of 2008; The Future is Filled With Opportunities. The Story Behind the Evolution of the IKEA Concept, Inter IKEA Systems B.V. (2008) [1984] (IHA).

12 A succession of questions about the character of the subject have been discussed in recent decades: Is design history an academic discipline in its own right? How extensive is the field? Does it have its own methodology? In earlier times the subject was dominated by questions of style and taste but it is now regarded as interdisciplinary. For example, rather than dealing with the heroic contributions of particular designers, the subject often embraces everything in our everyday environment and material culture. The discipline developed in the 1970s and 1980s, not least through the foundation of The Design History Society in 1977. For a survey and discussion of the development of the subject, including theories and methods, see Kjetil Fallan, Design History. Understanding Theory and Method (Oxford: Berg, 2010). For essential discussion of the subject in the 1980s and 1990s, see Grace Lees-Maffei and Rebecka Houze (eds), The Design History Reader (Oxford: Berg, 2010); Hazel Clark and David Brody (eds), Design Studies. A Reader (Oxford: Berg, 2009).

13 For a long period, fashion research was decidedly materialistic with the focus on individual fashion items and costume history. But fashion covers more than just items of clothing and there are far more people active in the field than merely fashion designers, including stylists, journalists, stores and public relations (PR) agencies, as well as consumers. See the introduction to Elisabeth Wilson, Adorned in Dreams. Fashion and Modernity (London: Virago, 1985). See also Yuniya Kawamura: Fashion-ology. An Introduction to Fashion Studies (Oxford: Berg, 2005).

14 Jeff Werner, Medelvägens estetik. Sverigebilder i USA Del 1 (Hedemora/Möklinga: Gidlunds förlag, 2008), p. 289; Helena Kåberg, ‘Swedish Modern. Selling Modern Sweden,’ Art Bulletin of Nationalmuseum, 18 (2011), pp. 150–7.

15 There is extensive research on brands. A pioneering study of the historical roots of the logotype that emphasizes the fact that brands consist of more ingredients than the logo itself is Per Mollerup, Marks of Excellence. The Function and Variety of Trademarks (London: Phaidon, 1997). For a survey with a greater emphasis on sociological and cultural aspects see Jonathan E. Schroeder and Miriam Slazer-Mörling (eds), Brand Culture (London: Routledge, 2006).

16 Paul Corrigan, Shakespeare on Management. Leadership Lessons for Today’s Managers (London: Kogan Page Business Books, 1999); John K. Clemens and Douglas F. Mayer, The Classic Touch: Lessons in Leadership from Homer to Hemingway (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1999).

17 Rolf Jensen: The Dream Society. How the Coming Shift from Information to Imagination will Transform your Business (New York: McGraw-Hill), 1999, p. 90.

18 Bronwyn Fryer, ‘Storytelling That Moves People,’ Harvard Business Review, June (2003). Robert McKee is a leading scriptwriter who has also been commissioned by companies to talk about storytelling. In the film Adaptation, in which Nicolas Cage plays a desperate scriptwriter he goes to a seminar led by McKee looking for help. Adaptation, Director Spike Jonze (2002).

19 Miriam Salzer-Mörling, ‘Storytelling och varumärken’ in Lars Christensen and Peter Kempinsky (eds), Att mobilisera för regional tillväxt (Lund: Studentlitteratur, 2004), p. 119.

20 Lena Mossberg and Erik Nissen Johansen, Storytelling (Lund: Studentlitteratur, 2006), pp. 159–65.

21 Christian Salmon, Storytelling. Bewitching the Modern Mind (London: Verso Books, 2010) [2007].

22 Wally Olins is one of the earliest advocates of branding and has pointed to the fact that nations and companies are increasingly reminiscent of each other. Wally Olins: Trading Identities: Why Countries and Companies are Taking on Each Others’ Roles (London: Foreign Policy Centre, 1999).

23 As early as the end of the nineteenth century Friedrich Nietzsche divided history’s uses into three headings: Monumental, in which history is used as a teacher, Antiquarian, in which history is used for preserving values and artifacts, and/or Critical, which embraces the need to put the past on trial. Friedrich Nietzsche, The

Use and Abuse of History (New York: Cosimo, 2005) [1874].

24 Klas-Göran Karlsson and Ulf Zander (eds), Historien är nu: En introduktion till historiedidaktiken (Lund: Studentlitteratur, 2004), pp. 55–66. This is a further development of the topology Karlsson introduced in Klas-Göran Karlsson, Historia som vapen: Historiebruk och Sovjetunionens upplösning 1985–1999 (Stockholm: Natur & Kultur, 1999).

25 Karlsson and Zander 2004, p. 68.

26 Wolfgang Hartwig and Alexander Schug, History Sells!: Angewandte Geschichte ALS Wissenschaft Und Markt (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 2009).

27 http://www.historyfactory.com/how-we-do-it/storytelling/ (accessed August 9, 2003).

28 Kamprad quoted in Bertil Torekull, Historien om IKEA (Stockholm: Wahlström & Widstrand, 2008) [1998], p. 153. There is an English edition of the book entitled Leading by Design (New York: Harper Collins, 1999). Since the English edition is somewhat abbreviated, I have chosen to use the original Swedish version.

29 Irina Sandomirskaja, ‘IKEA’s pererstrojka,’ Moderna Tider, November (2000), pp. 54–7. See also Lennart Dahlgren, IKEA älskar Ryssland. En berättelse om ledarskap, passion och envishet (Stockholm: Natur & Kultur, 2009). Dahlgren was formerly on the staff of IKEA and was involved in establishing the company in Russia.

30 Anthony Giddens, Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1991).

31 Berthold Franke, ‘Tyskarna har hittat sin Bullerbü,’ Svenska Dagbladet, December 9, 2007.

32 Jennie Mazur, Die ‘schwedische’ Lösung: Eine kultursemiotisch orientierte Untersuchung der audiovisuellen Werbespots von IKEA in Deutschland, Diss. (Uppsala: Department of Modern Languages, Uppsala University, 2012).

33 Interview with Lismari Markgren, Inter IKEA Systems, Waterloo, January 4, 2011.

34 That IKEA’s marketing is usually perceived as relatively provocative is generally noted in discussion of the company’s advertising. See, for example, Elen Lewis, Great IKEA! A Brand for All the People (London: Marshall Cavendish, 2008), pp. 118–32.

35 Stellan Björk, IKEA. Entreprenören. Affärsidén. Kulturen (Stockholm: Svenska Förlaget, 1998), p. 266.

36 For example, the transmission of knowledge between members of the IKEA staff in conjunction with establishing the company in different countries has been studied, with a particular focus on Russia, China and Japan. Anna Jonsson, Knowledge Sharing Across Borders—A Study in the IKEA World, Diss. (Lund: Lund Business Press, 2007).

37 On IKEA in the USA see Jeff Werner, Medelvägens estetik. Sverigebilder i USA Del 2, Hedemora: Gidlunds, 2008), pp. 249–69. On IKEA in France see Tod Hartman, ‘On the IKEAization of France,’ Public Culture, Vol. 19, No. 3 (Duke University Press, 2007), pp. 483–98; Anders Björkvall, ‘Practical Function and Meaning. A

Case study of IKEA Tables’ in Carey Jewitt (ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Multimodal Analysis (London: Routledge, 2009), pp. 242–52. The latter deals with how IKEA’s tables have been used in Australian homes.

38 The study claims that the shopping experience is of great importance to how British consumers perceive IKEA. Frida Andersson, Performing Co-Production. On the Logic and Practice of Shopping at IKEA, Diss. (Uppsala: Department of Social and Economic Geography, 2009).

39 Pauline Garvey: ‘Consuming IKEA. Inspiration as Material Form’ in Alison J. Clarke (ed.), Design Anthropology (Wien, New York: Springer Verlag, 2010), pp. 142–53.

40 Hanna Lindberg, Vastakohtien IKEA. IKEAn arvot ja mentaliteetti muuttuvassa ajassa ja ympäristössä, Diss. (Jyväskylä: Jyväskylän yliopisto, 2006).

41 Eva Atle Bjarnestam, IKEA. Design och identitet (Malmö: Arena, 2009); Björk 1998; Dahlgren 2009; Lewis 2008. The latter book is concerned with design history but the author has not had access to internal documents, nor has interviewed members of the staff.

42 Torekull 2008.

43 Thomas Sjöberg, Ingvar Kamprad och hans IKEA. En svensk saga (Stockholm: Gedin, 1998).

44 Johan Stenebo, Sanningen om IKEA (Västerås: ICA Bokförlag, 2009).