# ONCE UPON A TIME

‘A long time ago a boy was born in a poor country called Småland (pronounced smallland).’<sup>1</sup> The IKEA creation story is like many other fables, and it permeates the corporate culture. Both within IKEA and in the world in general there are numerous parallel stories; in particular stories about sales strategies and products and, not least, about the founder’s frugal lifestyle. IKEA is internationally recognized as a pioneer in corporate storytelling and this circumstance forms the starting point for the chapter.

There are two foundational narratives of IKEA: The Testament of a Furniture Dealer (1976) and The Future is Filled with Possibilities (1984).<sup>2</sup> These deal with how the company started and what it stands for (Figure 2.1). The anecdotes, myths and stories that circulate both within and without the company are generally based on and complement these two tales which thus form a sort of Ur-text.

IKEA’s leading position in corporate storytelling raises a number of questions. What are the messages? How are they communicated? What types of narrative do they form? What significance have they had on the corporate culture? The company points to three important aspects of the operations: the business idea, the corporate culture, and the stores themselves together with the catalogs.<sup>3</sup>

That narratives play an important part becomes evident from the IKEA Culture Center in Älmhult (Figure 2.2). The center trains and imbues employees from all over the world in the company’s culture and brand.<sup>4</sup> Just outside the entrance there is part of a stone wall. This is IKEA’s symbol for hard work, thrift and perseverance; and another stone wall now surrounds the recently opened store in Älmhult.<sup>5</sup> The handle on the main door of the center is shaped like an enlarged version of the company’s well-known hex or Allen key: ‘The magic key. An important tool for democracy. The key that assembles IKEA furniture.’<sup>6</sup>

Inside the building there are lecture theaters, a complete collection of catalogs, maps showing all of the stores and interiors from various epochs. An interactive display, intended only for IKEA’s employees, presents selected aspects of the operation with didactic explanations as to how and why things are done as they are. At the coffee machines, foreign guests can learn about the Swedish concept of ‘FIKA [fee-KA] The Swedish coffee break is more than a coffee break. It is a ritual.…’<sup>7</sup>

Besides learning about everyday life in Sweden, visitors get to experience the culture of Småland by, for example, building a dry-stone wall, fishing for crayfish or visiting a local farm under the device: ‘Experience Småland.’ The point of these activities is that the participants, in very tangible fashion, should gain a more profound understanding of how the supposed Småland mentality and traditions have influenced the corporate culture.<sup>8</sup> Above all, visitors are able to acquaint themselves with The Testament of a