# for Ceci ## Frontispiece 1 Corridor in the two-storey bridge which spanned a road and housed the administration and Gropius' private practice. New Bauhaus building, Dessau, 1926 Any copy of this book issued by the publisher as a paperback is sold subject to the condition that it shall not by way of trade or otherwise be lent, resold, hired out or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including these words being imposed on a subsequent purchaser. © 1984 Thames & Hudson Ltd, London First published in the United States of America in 1984 by Thames & Hudson Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, New York 1o11o thamesandhudsonusa.com Reprinted 2000 Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 83-50527 ISBN 0-500-20193-5 All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording or any other information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publisher. Printed and bound in Singapore by C.S. Graphics preface 7 I aims and ambitions 9 2 art, crafts, architecture and the academies 13 3 art education reformed 27 4 the founder 3I 5 problems 4I 6 the first appointments SI 7 the students 67 8 achievements 73 9 new arrivals 80 IO the basic course: colour and form 103 II going dutch 116 12 towards a new unity: moholy-nagy and albers 123 I3 the public face 136 14 dessau I5I 15 young masters 166 16 a new director 179 17 the bitter end 192 18 judgments 197 documents 202 bibliography 2II sources of quotations 213 index 215 The Bauhaus began life in 1919. It was born into a world quite different from the one which we inhabit, yet its influence is still manifestly at work. The questions it raised – about how art and craft should be taught, about the nature of good design, about the effects buildings have on the people who live in them - are still being asked and with the same urgency, even after more than half a century and at a time of increasing conservatism in educational and architectural activity. The objects the Bauhaus produced continue to provide those who shape our environment with inspiration. And its approach to art education in general continues to affect the teaching in many art schools throughout the world. Much has been written about the Bauhaus. Yet surprisingly, there has until now been no basic book which tells the story of the school, examines its aims and achievements and describes the personalities, both teachers and students, who were associated with it. That I was able to undertake research in the former German Democratic Republic is due to the kindness of the British Council and the Cultural Ministry of the GDR whose representative in Berlin, Angelika Landmann, organized my programme, arranged access to archives and introductions to scholars and curators. Herr Günther Michel-Treller of the Thuringian State Archive and Frau Jutta Hörning of the Castle Museum gave me help in Weimar in various ways, as did Herr Eberhard Renno and Hermann and Ingeborg Sommer. Professor Christian Schädlich of the Hochschule für Bauwesen und Architektur in Weimar was especially helpful and gave me access to his school's collection of rare Bauhaus photographs. I am also grateful to Dr George Opitz who gave me the run of the splendidly restored Bauhaus and a tour of the other buildings associated with the Bauhaus in Dessau, and to Dr Ulla Jablonowski of the Dessau City Archive. Considerable thanks are also due to the British Academy which provided me with a generous grant to work in the Bauhaus Archive in West Berlin, to the late Professor H. M. Wingler, the first director of that archive, for allowing me to use its admirable facilities, and to Frau Barbara Stolle for dealing with my requests and expediting orders for scores of photographs with patience and efficiency. Paul and Charlotte von Kodolitsch assisted me in ways too numerous to mention here. Gratitude is due to Robert Edwards, editor of the Sunday Mirror and Professor Christopher Frayling of the Royal College of Art in London for their help and understanding during the writing of this book. More specific help was provided by Roy Wright and Carl Bruin. I must also thank Iain Boyd-Whyte, Paul Joannides, Gillian Naylor and John Gage for reading the typescript and doing a great deal to improve it. Richard Hollis pointed out a number of errors in the first edition which are now corrected. I can only hope that no more remain. Great Wilbraham, Cambridge, 1991 F.P. W.