# bibliography The following is a guide to the sources on which this book is based and also to selected further reading. The major public collections of Bauhaus documents are preserved in the Bauhaus Archive, West Berlin (which also contains copies of some material held elsewhere; it is abbreviated here as BA), the Busch-Reisinger Museum of Germanic Culture at Harvard University and the Thuringian State Archive in Weimar (which is limited to the Weimar period; it is abbreviated here as STAW). Many of the most important documents in these and other archives are published in HANs M. WıNGLER's massive Das Bauhaus [Bramsche and Cologne 1969 and subsequent editions] which appears in English as The Bauhaus [Cambridge, Mass., and London 1969 and subsequent editions]. Wingler contains the fullest bibliography available, in the latest English edition brought up to 1975. Readers are also referred to the collection of contemporary newspapers in the Dessau City Archive, to the MiEs VAN DER RoHE papers in the Library of Congress, Washington, DC, and the GropIus papers at Harvard University. Key documents in STAW and other archives appear as an appendix to KARL-Heınz HÜter's Das Bauhaus in Weimar [East Berlin 1976], perhaps the best book on the school's early period and its social and political background. Often as enlightening as official papers are published diaries, letters and reminiscences. Of these, the most consistently fascinating are ScHLEMMER's diaries and letters, edited by his wife Tut Schlemmer [Munich 1958, translated into English, Middletown, Conn., 1972]. FeININGER's letters, some of which are collected by June L. Ness in Lyonel Feininger [New York 1974], also provide glimpses into life at the Bauhaus. Two teachers published books which include memories of their time at the school, but neither GEORG MuCHE's Blickpunkt [Tübingen, 2nd ed. 1965], nor LoTHAR SCHREYER's Erinnerungen an Sturm und Bauhaus [paperback ed., Munich 1966] is entirely reliable: a pity, since both are full of memorable anecdotes. Only slightly more reliable are NINA KANDINsKY's memoirs Kandinsky und ich [Munich 1976]. HANNES MEYER's Bauen und Gesellschaft, edited by Lena Meyer-Bergner [Dresden 198o], includes letters and articles written by Meyer about his experiences at the Bauhaus and his philosophy as teacher and architect. The memoirs of the then mayor of Dessau, FrItz HessE, Von der Residenz zur Bauhaus-Stadt [privately published, Bad Pyrmont 1963], include some interesting material; and HENRY VAN DE VELDe's autobiography, Geschichte meines Lebens [Munich 1962] is enlightening on the pre-history of the Bauhaus and the ideas and circumstances which gave it shape. The reminiscences of former students, published for the most part as articles, are an invaluable source of information about teaching methods and daily life at the school. Those I have found most useful are: HELMUT vON ERFFA, ‘The Bauhaus before 1922' in College Art Journal, vol. 3, Nov. 1943, pp. 14–20, and Bauhaus: First Phase' in Architectural Review, vol. 132, August 1957, pp. 103-5; GEORGE ADAMs, 'Memories of a Bauhaus student' in Architectural Review, vol. 144, Sept. 1968, pp. 192-4; BRUNO ADLER, ‘The Bauhaus 1919–33' in The Listener, vol. 41, 24 March 1949, Pp. 485-6; PETRA PETITPIERRE, Aus der Malklasse von Paul Klee, Bern 1957. A splendid anthology of reminiscences can be found in EcKHARD NEUMANN's Bauhaus and Bauhaus People, [New York 197o], a translation of Bauhaus und Bauhäusler, Bekenntnisse und Erinnerungen [Bern and Stuttgart 1971]. Still more reminiscences are published in the catalogue of the Bauhaus collection of the Busch-Reisinger Museum, Harvard University: 'Concepts of the Bauhaus', 1971. Books by former students include: LUDWIG HIRsCHFELD-MACK, The Bauhaus [Victoria 1963; not a memoir but an introductory survey]; Theodor BoGler, Ein Mönch erzählt [Honnef 1959]; PAUL CITROEN, Introvertissimento [The Hague 1956] and, by an artist but briefly at the Bauhaus, HEINRICH BAsEDOW, Meine Lebenserinnerung [Hamburg 1973]. Among numerous accounts of the Weimar Bauhaus, the following are especially recommended: MARCEL FRANCIsCONO, Walter Gropius and the Creation of the Bauhaus in Weimar [Urbana 1971]; WALTHER SCHEIDIG, Crafts of the Weimar Bauhaus [London 1967; the English version of Bauhaus Weimar 1919-1924, Werkstattarbeiten, Leipzig and Munich 1966]: not as specific as its title makes it sound, this is a first-class introduction; CHRISTIAN SCHÄDLICH, Bauhaus Weimar 1919-1925 in the series ‘Weimar Tradition und Gegenwart', vol. 35 [Weimar 1979]; LoTHAR LANG, Das Bauhaus 1919-1933, Idee und Wirklichkeit [East Berlin 1965]. Concise but informative surveys are provided by DIETHER SCMIDT, bauhaus [Dresden 1966] and GIL-LIAN NAYLOR, The Bauhaus [London and New York 1968]. ADALBERT BEHR's Das Bauhaus Dessau [Leipzig, 2nd ed. 198o] is the only book to deal exclusively with the Dessau period, although a special issue of the East German periodical Form und Zweck [vol. 8, no.6, 1976] marks the soth anniversary of the school's removal to Dessau with an anthology of excellent articles and reminiscences. A later issue of the same journal [vol. 11, no. 3, 1979] prints documents and memoirs from every period of the school's life. A further invaluable collection of papers given at the Bauhaus colloqium in Weimar in 1979 is published in the Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Hochschule für Architektur und Bauwesen Weimar, vol. 26, 1979, nos. 4 and 5. This also includes an exhaustive bibliography of publications about the Bauhaus in the GDR between 1977 and 1979. Among the studies of particular aspects of the Bauhaus that can be recommended are: GiuLio CARLO ArGAN, Gropius und das Bauhaus [Reinbek 1962]; EBERHARD RoTERs, Maler am Bauhaus [West Berlin 1965; English edition Painters of the Bauhaus, London and New York 1969]; and the very thorough examination of the school's teaching methods, RaıNEr WiCk, Bauhauspädagogik [Cologne 1982]. Catalogues of exhibitions and permanent collections provide an incomparable source of illustrations and information about all aspects of the school. The BA published its Sammlungs-Katalog in 1981 and there is also a fine, brief and well-illustrated introduction to the archive in the ‘Museum' series, published by Westermann in Brunswick in 1979 [2nd ed. 1982]. The Schlossmuseum Weimar published its catalogue Bauhaus 1919-25, Werkstattarbeiten in 1979. The Busch-Reisinger Concepts of the Bauhaus is referred to above. The catalogue of the to-date largest Bauhaus exhibition 5o Years Bauhaus, Royal Academy of Arts, London i968, is an essential tool [German edition 5o Jahre Bauhaus, Württembergischer Kunstverein, Stuttgart 1968]. There are so many articles on every aspect of the Bauhaus that the following lists only those that I have found especially stimulating: WoLF von Eck-ARDT, ‘The Bauhaus'in Horizon 11, 1961, pp. 58–75; WuLF HERZOGENRATH, 'Die fünf Phasen des Bauhauses' in Paris-Berlin, colloque de l’office francoallemand pour la jeunesse, Centre Ġeorges Pompidou, Paris, 1978, pp. 1-13; NiKOLAUs PEVsNER ‘Post-war tendencies in German art schools' in Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, 17, 1936, pp. 248–56; ULLA MACHLITT and HANs HARKSEN, Vor so Jahren kam das Bauhaus nach Dessau' in Dessauer Kalender, 1975, pp. 19–28, and Aus der Arbeit der Bauhaus-Werkstätten in Dessau' in Dessauer Kalender, 1977, pp. 76–102. The cultural and political background to the Bauhaus is described in: GorDoN Å. CRaIG, Germany 1866-1945 [Oxford 1978]; HELMUT HEIBER, Die Republik von Weimar [Munich 1966]; JosT HER-MAND and FRANK TrOMMLER, Die Kultur der Weimarer Republik [Munich 1978]; PETER GAY, Weimar Culture [London 1968]; Gay's essay on Gropius in his Art and Act [New York 1976] is also to be recommended; WALTER LAQUEUR, Weimar – a cultural history 1918–22 [London 1974]; JoHN WöLLETT, The New Šobriety [London 1978]; ÅLEX DE JoNGE, The Weimar Chronicle [London 1978]; BARBARA MILLER LANE, Architecture and Politics in Germany, 1918–1945 [Cambridge, Mass., 1968]; Tendenzen der 2oer Jahre, catalogue of the series of exhibitions organized by the Council of Europe, Berlin 1977; H. M. WINGLER (ed.), Kunstschulreform 1900-1933 [Berlin 1977]; REYNER BANHAM, Theory and Design in the First Machine Age [London 196o and subsequent editions]; JuLIus PosENER, From Schinkel to the Bauhaus [London 1972]. The articles collected and edited by UwE M. ScíNEEDE, Die Zwanziger Jahre [Cologne 1979] are a useful selection of contemporary essays and theoretical statements of the period, including some of direct relevance to the Bauhaus. I have not included the books published by the Bauhaus itself and the newly edited reprints, nor articles from the Bauhaus journal. Monographs on the various teachers and students are listed in the standard bibliographies and especially Wingler.