# Graphic Design History A Critical Guide Johanna Drucker University of Virginia Emily McVarish California College of the Arts Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Drucker, Johanna Graphic design history : a critical guide / Johanna Drucker, Emily McVarish p. cm. ISBN 0-13-241075-3 (alk. paper) 1. Graphic arts—History. 2. Art and society—History. I. McVarish, Emily. II. Title. NC998.D78 2009 760.09—dc22 2007045493 Editor in Chief: Sarah Touborg Editorial Assistant: Christina DeCesare Director of Marketing: Tim Stookesberry Executive Marketing Manager: Marissa Feliberty Senior Managing Editor: Mary Rottino Production Editor: Black Dot Group/Rebecca Dodson Project Management Liaison: Joe Scordato Senior Operations Supervisor: Brian Mackey Senior Art Director: Pat Smythe Interior and Cover Design: Emily McVarish and Johanna Drucker Cover Illustration/Photo: The Amusement of a Bill Sticker, 1820 (colour litho) by French School (19th century). Musée de la Ville de Paris, Musée Carnavalet, Paris, France/Giraudon/The Bridgeman Art Library. Director, Image Resource Center: Melinda Patelli Manager, Rights and Permissions: Zina Arabia Manager, Visual Research: Beth Brenzel Manager, Cover Visual Research & Permissions: Karen Sanatar Image Permission Coordinator: Nancy Seise Photo Research: Jerry Marshall, Truitt & Marshall; Rachel Lucas; Julie Tesser Photo Scanning: Pearson Imaging Centers Imaging Specialists: Rob Uibelhoer, Ron Walko, Corin Skidds Composition: Emily McVarish and Johanna Drucker Full-Service Management: Black Dot Group Printer/Binder: The Courier Companies Cover Printer: Phoenix Color Corp. Credits and acknowledgments borrowed from other sources and reproduced, with permission, in this textbook appear on appropriate page within text (or on pages 373–377). Copyright © 2009 by Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, 07458. Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. This publication is protected by copyright and permission should be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. For information regarding permission(s), write to: Rights and Permissions Department. Pearson Prentice Hall™m is a trademark of Pearson Education, Inc. Pearson™m is a registered trademark of Pearson plc Prentice Hall™m is a registered trademark of Pearson Education, Inc. Pearson Education LTD. Pearson Education Singapore, Pte. Ltd Pearson Education, Canada, Ltd Pearson Education—Japan Pearson Education Australia PTY, Limited Pearson Education North Asia Ltd Pearson Educacion de Mexico, S.A. de C.V. Pearson Education Malaysia, Pte. Ltd 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 Prentice Hall ISBN 0-13-241075-3 978-0-13-241075-5 ## Brief Contents Prehistoric Prelude to Graphic Design 2 1. Early Writing: Mark-making, Notation Systems, and Scripts 10 2. Classical Literacy 28 3. Medieval Letterforms and Book Formats 44 4. Renaissance Design: Standardization and Modularization in Print 68 5. Modern Typography and the Creation of the Public Sphere 94 6. The Graphic Effects of Industrial Production 118 7. Mass Mediation 140 8. Formations of the Modern Movement 162 9. Innovation and Persuasion 186 10. The Culture of Consumption 212 11. Public Interest Campaigns and Information Design 234 12. Corporate Identities and International Style 258 13. Pop and Protest 280 14. Postmodernism in Design 300 15. Digital Design 322 ## Contents Acknowledgments ix Preface x Introduction xiii Prehistoric Prelude to Graphic Design 35,000-2700 Bce 2 4 Evolutionary foundations of communication 4 Language and design 5 Early graphic forms 6 Communicating ideas and beliefs 7 The invention of proto-writing 7 Conclusion 8 Timeline 9 Tools of the trade 1. Early Writing: Mark-making, Notation Systems, and Scripts 3000-500 Bce 10 11 Mark-making 13 Notation 14 Varieties of early writing 18 The spread of writing as idea and script 21 The alphabet 24 Literate culture 25 Conclusion 26 Timeline 27 Tools of the trade 2. Classical Literacy 700 Bce-400 ce 28 30 Variations of literacy and the alphabet 33 The function of graphic codes 37 Models of writing: gestural and constructed 41 Writing at the end of the Classical age 41 Conclusion 42 Timeline 43 Tools of the trade 3. Medieval Letterforms and Book Formats 400-1450 44 45 Medieval culture and graphic communication 48 Graphic media and contexts 50 The codex book 53 Letterforms, manuscript hands, and pattern books 59 Graphic forms of knowledge 62 Publishing communities and graphic arts 65 Conclusion 66 Timeline 67 Tools of the trade 4. Renaissance Design: Standardization and Modularization in Print 1450-1660 68 70 Early print design 73 Graphic communication in Renaissance culture 76 Print technology and type design 82 Graphic forms of knowledge 90 Conclusion 92 Timeline 93 Tools of the trade 5. Modern Typography and the Creation of the Public Sphere 1660-1800 94 96 Printed matter and the public sphere 99 News books, broadsheets, and newspapers 102 Politics and the press 104 Graphic arts and design 107 Modern type design 114 On the edge of industrialization 115 Conclusion 116 Timeline 117 Tools of the trade 6. The Graphic Effects of Industrial Production 1800-1850 11 120 Industrialization and visual culture 121 Illustrated papers 124 Book design for mass production 127 Printing images 130 Advertising design and typography 133 Fine art and graphic art 136 Critical issues 137 Conclusion 138 Timeline 139 Tools of the trade 7. Mass Mediation 1850-1900s 140 142 Printed mass media 144 Changes in print technology 148 Changing patterns in the use of graphic media 151 Media networks 154 Graphic design and advertising 157 Posters and public space 159 Conclusion 160 Timeline 161 Tools of the trade 8. Formations of the Modern Movement 1880s-1910s 162 163 Responses to industrialism 165 Arts and Crafts publications 167 Arts and Crafts dissemination 170 Art Nouveau 171 Jugendstil 173 Viennese design 176 Decadence and Aestheticism 178 The private press movement and modern design 181 integration of design and industry 182 Conclusion 184 Timeline 185 Tools of the trade 9.Innovation and Persuasion 1910-1930 186 188 Visual culture and avant-garde design 189 The graphic impact of Futurism and Dada 193 From experiment to principles 196 Propaganda and mass communication studies 198 Graphic persuasion and its effects 200 Institutionalizing graphic design 207 Conclusion 210 Timeline 211 Tools of the trade 10. The Culture of Consumption 1920s-1930s 212 214 Designing the modern lifestyle 216 Modern style in graphic design 220 Consumer culture 224 The profession 231 Conclusion 233 Tools of the trade 11. Public Interest Campaigns and Information Design 1930s-1950s 234 236 Public interest and education 242 Photojournalism and documentary 245 Wartime propaganda 249 Wartime information 250 Commercial and technical uses of information design 251 Information analysis and design process 253 Conclusion 256 Timeline 257 Tools of the trade 12. Corporate Identities and International Style 1950s-1970s 258 260 Image and identity systems 263 International style 267 Style, systems, and graphic design concepts 269 Technology 274 The profession 276 Conclusion 278 Timeline 279 Tools of the trade 13. Pop and Protest 1960s-1970s 280 282 Pop culture and style 284 Self-conscious graphic design 286 Slick surfaces and high production values 288 Counterculture and the alternative press 291 Revolutionary culture and protest 293 Changes in the profession 295 Critical vocabulary 297 Conclusion 298 Timeline 299 Tools of the trade 14. Postmodernism in Design 1970s-1980s and Beyond 300 303 Postmodern styles 309 Postmodern consumption and conservatism 313 Critical theory and postmodern sensibility 315 Postmodernism and activism 317 Changes in the profession 319 Conclusion 320 Timeline 321 Tools of the trade 15. Digital Design After the 1970s 322 324 Digital technology: from punch cards and plotters to desktop computing 327 Media transitions: type design and publications 331 Fluidity and functionality 335 The myth of immateriality and challenges of digital design 337 Conclusion 340 Timeline 341 Tools of the trade Glossary 342 Bibliography 365 Credits 373 Index 378 Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Sarah Touborg for her constant confidence and commitment to the project of this book; Rebecca Dodson and Sandra Reinhard at Black Dot for their diligence, good humor, and masterful coordination of the editorial process; Joe Scordato for his dedication and skill in managing this book's production; and Christina DeCesare for behind-the-scenes orchestration. Special thanks to Tim Duffy for his fact-checking on the timelines. Thanks also to our picture researchers, Jerry Marshall, Rachel Lucas, and Julie Tesser, for their persistence in a difficult task, and to the designers who generously granted us permission to reproduce their work. Finally, our gratitude to all the careful readers of our first drafts who provided constructive suggestions and spotted factual and conceptual errors, among whom: Michael Balasis, Loyola University; Gerry Beegan, Rutgers University; Ken Botnick, Washington University; Kelly Dennis, University of Connecticut; Brett DeBoer, University of the Pacific; Beverly Grindstaff, San Jose State University; Elizabeth Guffey, SUNY Purchase; Kevin McCloskey, Kutztown University; Debra Parr, Columbia College; James Petrillo, California State University, East Bay; Margaret Re, University of Maryland, Baltimore County; Jim Rose, Clarion University of Pennsylvania; Lori Rubeling, Villa Julie College; Susan Russo, Youngstown State University; David Skora, Western Connecticut State University. Johanna: Thanks to Gino Lee, as always, for the best of wise counsel and friendship throughout, and to Jerome McGann for ongoing conversations. Fond appreciation to Boris and Jane Drucker whose enthusiasm for this project has never flagged. A debt of affectionate gratitude to Becky Bond, who let us work many hours and with great concentration. Finally, to Emily McVarish, whose partnership in this enterprise has turned out to be more remarkable in its many dimensions than I could ever have imagined at the outset. Few collaborators could have shown such constant good wil and humor as our small project grew to unexpected and all-consuming proportions. Emily: I would like to express twenty years' worth of gratitude to Johanna for all her formative interventions, for every mind-rousing conversation, and for the immense gift of this collaboration. It has been the ultimate extension of her generosity, an adventure in productive friendship, and a richly rewarding experience. I would also like to acknowledge as phenomenal and essential the buoyant support of my partner, Becky Bond, without whose big-picture faith I might have remained lost in troublesome details on a hundred occasions. Finally, I would like to thank California College of the Arts—especially the Chair of its Graphic Design program, Mark Fox—for support of this project, and my students for daily inspiration. Preface This book evolved from our practice as artists and teachers. We both make use of theory and research in our creative work, and we are regularly struck by the realization that many of the models we follow and forms we use have long histories. Insight into the role of history in daily practice can be thrilling, just as critical concepts can be powerful tools for thinking about a design process or product. Our sheer enthusiasm for these ideas and a desire to share them led to this project. We didn't want to tell the story of graphic design, as if it were something that happened in the past, but to expose the many principles of current composition and communication that are grounded in historical precedent. Our complementary perspectives brought this project to life. We were both trained in the practical aspects of layout and printing, typography and visual expression, book arts and publication design, but we were also deeply influenced by theoretical texts we read in the 1980s when structuralism and post-structuralism were in the air. From these readings we gleaned a language to describe the life of images and texts. Elements of cultural studies and art history, theories of representation and signification, threads of intellectual history and visual studies have proved stimulating and useful to us in keeping our own creative processes in play. This book is a synthesis of these many strains of thought. It presents ideas that are basic to studio and scholarly practice in the field of graphic design. Our work with students prompted and framed many of the questions that we address here. Johanna Drucker was teaching art history at Yale when she first began to work with the ideas that animate this book. The student body combined sophisticated graphic designers and open-minded art historians—a terrific constituency through which to explore the intersection of art and design. In the early 1990s, Johanna taught a course on the dialogue between modern art and graphics, with an emphasis on the exciting period from the turn of the nineteenth century through the middle of the twentieth century. That opportunity brought into focus the challenge of thinking about how borrowings from art history and critical theory might shape a history that would be appropriate and specific to graphic design. The solution was an approach based on analysis of social forces and conditions but grounded in the study of individual artifacts and works. Emily McVarish teaches courses at California College of the Arts that integrate theoretical points of departure with studio process and critique. At CCA, as at other contemporary arts institutions, intellectual and practical disciplines are intertwined. A design problem is a thought experiment, not just a task on which formal or technical skills are brought to bear. Emily's teaching involves devising seminars and studios in which critical questions drive graphic design, and historical research becomes a direct instrument for realizing projects. In these courses, theoretical readings and hands-on exercises are combined to position students to develop their own informed approaches to design practice. We set out to write a short book, a brief set of principles through which to engage with the history of graphic design. Several years and much work later, we present a book that retains the spirit of light and spaciousness with which we began. Our book is available to browsing and visual encounter but also lends itself to more systematic study. In its design, images and captions form their own units and are not subsumed by the body text. Our hope is that the book stimulates its reader in much the same way that a lively slide show or well curated exhibition might. A desire frequently expressed by graphic design educators for a book that would begin with prehistory and trace the impulses of mark-making and early symbolic expression forward to present currents of thought inspired the span and shape of our book. Early chapters have enormous temporal sweep. Later chapters are focused on shorter periods and changes in the profession. The culture of graphic design has changed as much as the technology through which it realizes its tasks, but basic principles from the earliest circumstances of human communication and exchange are still operative. Our approach has attempted to keep historical perspectives in view while demonstrating profound continuities in the practice of graphic arts, visual expression, and design. In this endeavor, we have drawn on many sources. All who work in this field are indebted to Philip Meggs, whose groundbreaking A History of Graphic Design is a major reference work that has provided a descriptive historical foundation for the field. We were inspired by insights into the cultural contexts of design practice contained in the admirably succinct Graphic Design: A Concise History by Richard Hollis. Our methodological approach was sympathetically informed by Paul Jobling and David Crowley's Graphic Design: Reproduction and Representation since 1800. But a greater influence on our critical approach came from the social historian Max Gallo's The Poster in History. That book's demonstration of the links between graphic works and the social forces and conditions of their production sparked epiphanies. Other classic works and writings by our peers, too numerous to mention here, are listed in the bibliography. These texts are of real value and use to a field that has only begun to formulate itself: the critical history of graphic design. What drove this book more than anything was our genuine enthusiasm for the material. At every stage of research and writing, review and exchange, layout and production, we found ourselves deeply involved with the images in front of us. Working on early writing systems, Medieval letterforms, or the uses of information graphics, we were always discovering materials so compelling that we would say, "This stuff is the most interesting of all." If we manage to communicate some of that enthusiasm to our readers, for any part of the material we've covered, we will have reached our goal: to pass on an interest in looking at these images, now and in the future, as sources of inspiration for investigative study, creative production, and reflection on the ways our work participates in the broader culture and the history of its formative ideas Graphic design is never just there. Graphic artifacts always serve a purpose and contain an agenda, no matter how neutral or natural they appear to be. Someone is addressing someone else, for some reason, through every object of designed communication. The graphic forms of design are expressions of the forces that shape our lives. We need a critical history of graphic design: To provide ways of thinking about graphic form Interest in the historical inventory of graphic design is high. Practitioners plunder the vast archive of visual forms for inspiration. Students look for precedents. The industries of mass multimedia consume ideas at a terrifying pace. Rapidly expanding online and in-print graphic resources are accessible and ubiquitous. Designers seek striking models to make their work stand out in the fields of advertising, packaging, identity, publication, and information design. But the history of ideas about form is difficult to recover. We need a vocabulary to grasp the way graphic design communicates. Beyond the catalogue of style samples, historical insight offers an understanding of how design takes shape within cultural systems. How are we to understand the relations between style and technology? Between cultural moments and forms of expression? Between the persuasive tactics of graphic design and the messages they embody? When these questions are correlated with the history of graphic developments, critical dimensions come into stark relief. Ideas about form offer their own possibilities for increasing our understanding of the way graphic design works to reflect or create values in our time. To gain insight into design as a cultural practice As a cultural phenomenon, graphic design is embedded in institutions. Design studios, advertising agencies, publishing houses, print shops, and media companies, as well as the schools and programs that provide professional training, are all shaped by cultural and historical forces. As a profession, graphic design operates within a network of constraints Legal and economic issues, business and trade conventions, social and cultural mores, and attitudes toward imagery, language, composition, and representation are invisible—but potent—influences on the individual designer and the field as a whole. Graphic designers were once artisans of the manuscript page and painted sign. Then they were tradesmen in print shops, working at type cases and imposing tables. Then they became professionals with specialized skills. More recently, they have come to be thought of as artists--or even celebrities. As workers in the industries of consumer culture, how much choice do they have about the interests their work serves? A critical approach to graphic design and its history is useful to anyone engaged in reading the cultural landscape of contemporary life. For designers, such an approach provides conceptual skills (ways of thinking) that extend their production capabilities (ways of making). Recognizing the historical dimension of the field sheds light on the choices that individual practitioners make on a daily basis—as well as the cultural dynamics within which they operate. The shape of a critical history of graphic design Rather than tell the "story" of graphic design, we will outline some basic principles for thinking about the way historical origins inform contemporary practice. At issue is not just a history of designs but a history of ideas and assumptions about forms of communication. Why does this page look the way it does? Why does it have margins and page numbers? Why are the lines this length? But even more, what assumptions about reading, about texts and information, and about imagined readers or actual audiences are encoded in its format? These questions can be answered, in part, by a purely formal analysis (with attention to proportion, balance, choice of typeface, size, and style). Skills for reading these visual properties are crucial tools. But what historical aspects of graphic forms are invisible? A critical approach to graphic design exposes the rhetorical workings expressed in formal structures. (The shape of text blocks and use of page numbers express expectations about how this book will be read. These forms are the legacy of shifts in reading practices in the late Middle Ages, not just pleasing arrangements grounded in "universal" ideals of legibility.) Graphic forms carry their history encoded as conventions, charged with cultural values—and loaded with social implications. The authority of any particular text is often linked to the codes of its presentation. (Does it look like a bible, an official document, or a tabloid newspaper?) In choosing a particular form of communication—whether it is a grid, type style, decorative element, or illustration—we perpetuate ways of thinking. Any system of formal organization expresses an attitude toward knowledge and its representation. Critically informed historical knowledge shows us how the structure of information becomes part of its meaning as form. The critical approach to graphic design history is not a series of descriptions of artifacts but a set of theoretical frameworks for seeing the forces and conditions within which those objects came into being. The history of style is a history of culture. Analysis of form is a way to see that history reworked in the objects of contemporary life. What, then, should we look at—and just as important, how? ## The definition of the field Identity of the graphic designer Activities, trades, skills, and capabilities that mark the designer's changing identity ## Professional institutions Guilds, shops, studios, agencies, schools, professional associations, industry and government support programs ## Internal discourse Venues and means by which the field acquires legitimacy: trade publications, competitions that foster critical attention and recognition Graphic design profession Graphic designers are defined by the tasks they perform, and our idea of a designer's identity at any given historical moment is a product of circumstances, not independent of those circumstances. The once anonymous practitioner may now aspire to "star" status. But graphic designers' work frequently ends up circulating without attribution, unmarked, as a free ion in the communications infosphere. Many graphic objects are made by committee or through a complicated chain of decisions in dialogue with a client. Design choices may be unwittingly constrained by cultural conventions about what is and is not allowed to be said or shown. Thus, a graphic artifact is as much a product of a complicated cultural system as it is the work of an individual designer. The designer's vision is often overwhelmed by professional exigencies. Meanwhile, the identity of the field as a whole changes in any given era. Critical reflection on graphic design developed mainly in the twentieth century, although harbingers of such internal discourse existed in the work of earlier practitioners—many of whom would not have known the term graphic designer or identified with the profession. Professional organizations have altered the landscape of graphic design, codifying a hierarchy of status and prestige within the field. But even as accomplished designers are now recognized with awards and prizes for their work, the majority of the public remain surprisingly ignorant of the names and contributions of those whose designs they make use of every day. Try subtracting everything set in typefaces designed by John Baskerville or Matthew Carter or Zuzana Licko from the visual landscape. The image of that gap-toothed universe makes a dramatic point. ## The making of an artifact General technology Inventions and innovations that are widespread in their effects but without which specific design technologies could not emerge Design production and reproduction processes and technology Methods of making and reproducing a design through all stages of its creation and circulation Technology Style choices in design are not entirely under the control of designers but are related to the ways technology develops in a broader cultural sphere. Mass production required power sources and high-speed machines, which, in turn, were developed through industrial processes. But technology does not determine social or formal change; it operates within changing cultural circumstances. (Electrification did not create digital media; it simply contributed a necessary element to its development.) Possibilities for production are called into being by particular cultural needs or eclipsed by shifting desires. The capabilities of production always constitute affordances, within which design practices can be conceived as well as realized. Many technologies of graphic design have long aesthetic traditions associated with them. The development of new tools and materials often leaps ahead of the conception of a graphic style suited to them. The history of design is as filled with peculiar attempts to reconcile inherited formal models and new technologies as it is with the spontaneous invention of appropriate styles. Images look radically different when the main method of production shifts from pen and ink to metal, or from hand-drawn lithographic pictures to photographs. But the aesthetic of a particular medium develops in relation to ideas, not just as an automatic or immediate effect of a new material or tool. (Visual approaches, like the photographic close-up or montage, embody ideas about images as materials that can be manipulated and recombined rather than simply received as realistic documents.)