# Guilds, Innovation, and the European Economy, 1400–1800 Edited by S. R. Epstein London School of Economics and Political Science Maarten Prak Universiteit Utrecht, The Netherlands CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo Cambridge University Press The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York www.cambridge.org Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521887175 © Cambridge University Press 2008 This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press. First published in print format 2008 ISBN-13 978-0-511-38844-6 eBook (NetLibrary) ISBN-13 978-0-521-88717-5 hardback Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate. List of Contributors page vii Acknowledgments viii Introduction: Guilds, Innovation, and the European Economy, 1400–1800 S. R. EPST EIN AN D M AART EN PRAK 1 Craft Guilds, the Theory of the Firm, and Early Modern Proto-industry 25 U LRIC H PFIST ER 2 Craft Guilds, Apprenticeship and Technological Change in Pre-industrial Europe 52 S. R. EPST EIN 3 Subcontracting in Guild-based Export Trades, Thirteenth–Eighteenth Centuries 81 C AT H ARIN A LIS AN D H U G O SOLY 4 Circulation of Skilled Labour in Late Medieval and Early Modern Central Europe 114 REIN H OLD REIT H 5 Painters, Guilds and the Art Market during the Dutch Golden Age 143 M AART EN PRAK 6 Craft Guilds and Technological Change: The Engine Loom in the European Silk Ribbon Industry in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries 172 U LRIC H PFIST ER 7 Guilds, Technology and Economic Change in Early Modern Venice 199 FRAN C ESC A T RIVELLAT O Contents 8 Inventing in a World of Guilds: Silk Fabrics in Eighteenth-century Lyon 232 <sub>LILIAN E P EREZ</sub>´ 9 ‘Not to Hurt of Trade’: Guilds and Innovation in Horology and Precision Instrument Making 264 AN T H ON Y T URN ER 10 Reaching beyond the City Wall: London Guilds and National Regulation, 1500–1700 288 IAN AN D ERS G AD D AN D PAT RIC K WALLIS 11 Guilds in Decline? London Livery Companies and the Rise of a Liberal Economy, 1600–1800 316 M IC H AEL BERLIN Index 343 MICH AEL BERLIN is lecturer in History, Birkbeck College, University of London. S. R. EPST EIN (1960–2007) was professor of Economic History at the London School of Economics. IAN ANDERS GADD is lecturer in English Literature at Bath Spa University. C AT H ARIN A LIS is professor of Social History at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium. LILIANE P EREZ´ is lecturer in the History of Technology at the Conservatoire national des Arts et M´etiers in Paris and member of the Centre d’Histoire des Techniques et de l’Environnement. ULRICH PFIST ER is professor of Social and Economic History at the Westf¨alische Wilhelms–Universit¨at in M ¨unster, Germany. MAART EN PRAK is professor of Economic and Social History at Universiteit Utrecht, The Netherlands. REINH OLD REIT H is professor of Economic and Social History at the Universit¨at Salzburg, Austria. H UGO SOLY is professor of Early Modern History at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium. FRAN C ESC A T RIVELLAT O is professor of History at Yale University. ANT H ONY T URNER is an independent historian based in Le Mesnil-le-Roi, France. PAT RIC K WALLIS is lecturer in Economic History at the London School of Economics. This book originated in a small workshop which the editors organised in Utrecht in January 2000, funded by the Dutch National Research Council NWO, and the Utrecht Research Institute for Culture and History OGC. The editors are grateful for the support of both institutions. We also wish to thank Utrecht University for hosting the conference, and all the participants for their intellectual contributions. Since then, the conference programme took a very long time to transform into this book; the outcome also has only a superficial resemblance to the original programme. Four chapters in this book were presented at the 2000 conference. All the others have been added since. The editors owe a huge debt of gratitude to all our authors, for the immense amount of work they invested in this project, and for their patience; this applies especially to Michael Berlin, Catharina Lis, Ulrich Pfister, Reinhold Reith, and Hugo Soly, who were all there in 2000. In the night of February 3, 2007, S. R. (Larry) Epstein passed away, completely unexpectedly, as the result of injuries to the head sustained in a motorcycle accident almost thirty years before. At the time of his death all the chapters in this book had been completely revised, and Larry was about to start writing a first draft of the introduction. As it was, he left behind only 19 PowerPoint slides, which he presented in another conference on guilds in Utrecht, on October 6, 2006.<sup>1</sup> On that occasion, he stated in so many words that this was indeed the outline of the introduction for this book as he imagined it. Utilising some research notes and photocopies found in Larry’s study, as well as my own material, I have put words to the structure outlined in that PowerPoint presentation. Maarten Prak Spring 2007