# Introduction: Guilds, Innovation, and the European Economy, 1400–1800 S. R. Epstein and Maarten Prak<sup>1</sup> Craft guilds, Adam Smith famously suggested in 1776, are ‘a conspiracy against the public’, and the government should ‘do nothing to facilitate such assemblies, much less to render them necessary’.<sup>2</sup> As in so much other economic thinking, Smith was a trendsetter in this too. Not only were his ideas about guilds shared by some of his late eighteenth-century contemporaries, they seemed to apply almost overnight when French revolutionaries abolished the guilds, first in France (in 1791) and then in much of the rest of continental Europe. For a long time, historians have interpreted the simultaneity of ideas and policies as definitive proof that the guilds had outlived themselves as the gothic remnants of a bygone age and should make way for the modern world of the steam engine and laissez-faire. Guilds, in other words, were seen as part of an economic system that had prevented the European economy from realising its full economic potential. It was, if anything, a demonstration of the validity of this argument, that England was the first European country to lose its guilds – English guilds were supposed to have vanished through some unplanned process starting in the second half of the seventeenth century – and also the first country to industrialise. The negative view of guilds survived for the best part of two centuries in history textbooks and specialised works.<sup>3</sup> A recent survey of the early modern European economy routinely portrays guilds as ‘restrictive’, as instruments of elite rent seeking, and as hotbeds of economic conservatism.<sup>4</sup> In his wonderful work on the history of clocks and clock making, David Landes observes, without much supporting evidence, that because ‘most guilds defended the interests of their weakest and most timorous members . . . , they were compelled to wage a ceaseless struggle against the forces of change’.<sup>5</sup> Similarly, Joel Mokyr, in his groundbreaking work on the origins of the knowledge economy, blames guilds, together with tax collectors and foreign invaders, for the industrial decline of Northern Italy, Southern Germany, and the Low Countries.<sup>6</sup> This generally negative evaluation of the guilds slowly started to change, however, in the 1980s.<sup>7</sup> Anglo-American historians like Steven Kaplan, Michael Sonenscher, and James Farr produced work that cast doubt on the negative impact of guilds.<sup>8</sup> Concentrating on French towns, their work set out to demonstrate that guilds were of great significance to urban life during the Old Regime, and not necessarily in a negative sense. They each discovered how, in a variety of ways, guilds had, in the course of time, adapted to new circumstances. Far from being the fossilised remains of the Middle Ages, they suggested that guilds were indeed capable of absorbing change in the run-up to the Industrial Revolution. In their work, Kaplan, Sonenscher, and Farr emphasised the social and political dimensions of the corporate world and seemed to suggest that economically guilds were indifferent, rather than a positive or a negative influence. The new keyword for guilds was flexibility; guilds were survivors, adapting to changing environments.<sup>9</sup> This book aims to move beyond the discourse of ‘flexibility’ and seeks to reinstate the economy into the debate about guilds.<sup>10</sup> It raises fundamental questions about the economic impact of craft guilds:<sup>11</sup> were they indeed the rent seeking institutions of middle-class producers, as Adam Smith saw them? Did they uniformly obstruct the introduction of innovations? And was their impact on the fate of the late medieval and early modern European economy at best indifferent, or even outright negative? There are some prima facie arguments against this thesis. The abolition of the guilds was in most of continental Europe a political decision, for which economic motivations were at best of secondary importance.<sup>12</sup> New quantitative research has suggested that economic growth in pre-industrial Europe could in fact coincide with an upsurge in the number of craft guilds.<sup>13</sup> This book seeks to further explore the possibilities of an alternative interpretation of the guilds’ economic history, across a range of European countries and regions, and through a variety of approaches.<sup>14</sup> In the language of Douglass North’s institutional economics, it claims that guilds helped reduce transaction costs in at least three distinct, significant stages of the industrial process. First, by creating a stable environment, which encouraged craftsmen to invest in training the successor generation. Second, through the coordination of complicated production processes. And finally, in the marketing stage, through the reduction of information asymmetries between producers and customers. Some of the following chapters pursue these aspects for the guild system as a whole: guild organisations, apprenticeship, subcontracting, labour mobility. Others look at specific branches of craft industry, to investigate in detail the contribution guilds made in the Venetian silk and glass industries, the silk industry of Lyon, the painting industry of Holland, and instrument making in various European countries. Special attention will be paid to the craft guilds of Britain, because the interpretation of their history has been so enormously influential in the debate over the economic role of guilds. The purpose of the rest of this introduction is to provide a general framework for the specialised case studies in this book. It will do so by sketching a number of general features of industrial production before the Industrial Revolution, and subsequently demonstrate how these features were handled by guilds. We will concentrate on their contribution to the growth of human capital (through the training of the skilled workforce), the coordination of production functions, the creation of markets, and on guilds’ reactions to innovation. We will also briefly discuss the main alternatives to guild organisation. ## Introduction ## Characteristics of Craft Production It is now generally accepted that, rather than a complete break with the previous period, the changes of the Industrial Revolution were the outcome of a long process of innovations during the preceding centuries.<sup>15</sup> These innovations were characterised by micro, rather than macro, inventions and hence were incremental, though significant.<sup>16</sup> Most pre-modern industries, in particular those producing traded goods, such as printing (where a macro invention did indeed happen), textile fabrics, glass making, and clock making, as well as shipbuilding and the metal industry, all displayed marked process and product innovations between roughly 1400 and 1800.<sup>17</sup> In view of their specific characteristics, the source of these innovations, and of their transfer and adoption, must have been primarily the organisation of the production process and the training of the (skilled) workforce.<sup>18</sup> Knowledge of how to make things – and make them well – was experience-based, rather than propositional and objectified. Therefore, to understand the process of industrial innovation in pre-industrial Europe, we have to investigate workers’ training and the organisation of the various branches of industry, more specifically the institutions that promoted the creation of pools of skills. Given the face-to-face character of the transmission of skills and hence technology, communities of craftsmen were, at least potentially, the sites where technological development, and innovation more generally, were most likely to occur. The institutional framework for the training and clustering of the skilled workforce in 1800 was not fundamentally different from what it had been in, say, 1400: throughout this period guilds were the predominant institution governing early modern Europe’s urban industries. Many pre-industrial products made huge demands on the skills of their producers, as anyone will be able to testify who has ever looked inside a watch, tried to paint a realistic human figure, or considered the complicated patterns in many textile fabrics. These demands are in fact not unlike the type of expertise required for work that the readers of this book will perhaps be more familiar with: academic research.<sup>19</sup> From undergraduate to PhD is a trajectory that for most people takes the best part of a decade. Cognitive psychologists have discovered that the time of training required to master complicated skills is in fact remarkably similar across a wide variety of tasks: it takes roughly ten years to become a top-level expert in any kind of skill-based task.<sup>20</sup> Obviously, one does not have to go through the whole curriculum to be able to execute certain aspects of a job at a reasonable level. Therefore, the training of skills is usually subdivided into a number of stages. Again the academic curriculum provides a helpful illustration of the point: one can get out with a degree at BA, MA, and PhD levels, and at each point some students will feel they have developed the skills they are looking for, while at the same time it is well understood that there are further levels of expertise they are forsaking. One reason why it took – and, in fact, still takes – so long for adolescents and young adults to become fully trained, is that crafts (like academic courses) typically combine so-called propositional and tacit types of knowledge.<sup>21</sup> Propositional knowledge is factual as well as theoretical, logical, and explicit, and can therefore be learned from printed sources. Tacit knowledge, on the other hand, is implicit, non-linear, and addresses ‘how’ rather than ‘why’ questions.<sup>22</sup> Because it cannot be articulated – ‘we can know more than we can tell’, as one scholar put it – tacit knowledge needs to be transferred from person to person.<sup>23</sup> This is confirmed by psychological research that demonstrates how this transfer of tacit knowledge happens most effectively in ‘communities of practice’, like craft guilds; modern skills training programmes in fact still reflect this.<sup>24</sup> Think of the university again: one can learn a lot about the historian’s craft from textbooks, but to become good historians, students must practice that craft, over and over again, under the supervision of their teachers. These teachers work not as individuals, but collaborate in collectives of experts that usually identify themselves as, say, a History Department. In fact, the ideal of this learning environment, the university college, where teachers and students work and live together, was originally derived from the guild format; accomplished students still obtain a master’s degree, another reflection of that shared origin with craft guilds.<sup>25</sup> Given the huge importance of skills for their economic performance, it comes as no surprise that craftsmen, and hence their organisations, showed a marked preference for labour-intensive over capital-intensive innovations. On numerous occasions, they indeed showed a strong dislike of the latter. Yet it would be wrong to equate this with an aversion to innovation per se, as will be demonstrated by many of the chapters in this book. ## Guilds and the Pre-industrial Economy ## Apprenticeship So how exactly did craft guilds help promote innovation? The literature, and indeed the essays in this book, suggests that this could happen in a variety of ways. Probably their single most important contribution to innovation and the pre-industrial economy generally was the guilds’ involvement in the training of human capital, as S. R. Epstein argues in the second chapter of this book.<sup>26</sup> Despite an extensive literature, it is a topic that still gives rise to a lot of confusion. One major source of this confusion is the length of time necessary to learn a craft. In the literature one can detect a tendency to see training, and hence apprenticeship, as one single programme, rather than a series of modules, each providing access to another level of competence and expertise. A subdivision of the training process into separate stages can, for instance, help explain the discrepancies, often observed, between the length of training programmes prescribed in various pre-industrial countries for roughly similar jobs, as well as the fact that many apprentices bailed out of their training programme before completion. Why should it take an apprentice tailor in England seven years to complete his training, in the Dutch Republic three to four years, in the Spanish Netherlands a mere two, but in Paris three to six years?<sup>27</sup> On the basis of the foregoing it is easy to see that the most likely answer is that English apprentices who completed the full seven years must have reached a much more advanced level of expertise than their Dutch counterparts after two. But then again, even in the Low Countries the nominal course was seldom seen as sufficient preparation for the independent exercise of a skilled craft. Most Dutch tailors’ guilds, for example, formally required two years of experience as a journeyman before admission as a master. The masters of the Amsterdam tailors’ guild were on average thirty years old on admission. All this suggests that a complete training took much longer than the number of years specified in the regulations, which must be read as the minimum time to develop a specific and locally defined set of necessary skills.<sup>28</sup> The comparison with the university is illuminating in another respect. As in any training programme, a lot of people dropped out on the way. Of almost 2,000 carpenters’ apprentices in London between 1540 and 1589, only 40 percent became free of the City, hence entered the corporation. A staggering 15 percent died during their apprenticeship, while the largest number, 45 percent, were recorded as ‘gone’, that is, disappeared, either into another trade or to set up shop in a non-incorporated community.<sup>29</sup> In Bristol the rate of attrition was slightly lower, but there, too, half the apprentices failed to become masters, at least in the local corporations.<sup>30</sup> Data for other English towns suggest the same pattern.<sup>31</sup> Still, the numbers involved in apprenticeship were impressive. Rappaport estimates that in sixteenth-century London, roughly 10 percent of the population were apprentices.<sup>32</sup> There is evidence, discussed in Prak’s chapter in this book, to suggest that specific craftsmen trained apprentices in specific skills. Some masters were no doubt better teachers, or, more important, perceived as better practitioners, and could therefore also command higher training fees. These varieties in the supply of skill training created problems, discussed in Epstein’s chapter, because of the fact that masters could only gradually recoup the costs of their investment of time and effort in the apprentice’s training, and would therefore refuse to make that investment unless they could be reassured that the apprentice would serve the whole length of his (or her) contract. Guilds’ apprenticeship arrangements were designed to overcome these externalities. Nonetheless, there were areas where guild regulations seem to have had a negative impact on human capital formation. The most obvious was, no doubt, gender. In general, guild membership was heavily tilted towards males, but this was especially true in craft guilds. Some of them, particularly in Germany, explicitly excluded women from membership, but even where this was not stated in so many words, the male domination of guild membership speaks volumes.<sup>33</sup> Other exclusion mechanisms might also apply, such as those based on origin and religion. Masters’ sons would receive preferential treatment. Religious discrimination often worked through local citizenship regulations; citizenship in most towns was a prerequisite for membership of a guild.<sup>34</sup> The available evidence suggests, however, that the net effects of discriminatory rules against aliens and religious minorities were limited.<sup>35</sup> Direct descendants of guild members were usually a minority of total membership; with some well-known exceptions, religious discrimination rarely determined patterns of craft labour migration and, by implication, of apprenticeship.<sup>36</sup> This raises questions about the guilds’ role in the discrimination against female workers: how could it be so effective – or was it merely reinforcing other, possibly more significant social mechanisms? Alternatives to guild-based apprenticeship nonetheless did exist, and especially for women they were of vital importance.<sup>37</sup> There was first of all the family. Many teenagers must have received their first taste and experience of a craft while watching and helping their parents at home, before entering their apprenticeship with a non-family master. This would explain why, in many guilds, masters’ sons could be apprenticed for a shorter period and against reduced rates: they were assumed to have already mastered some of the basic skills at home. At the same time, the fact that only a minority of craftsmen followed in the footsteps of their parents suggests that the family should not be overrated as a source of training.<sup>38</sup> Charitable institutions constituted another alternative. In Paris, the Hˆopital de la Trinit´e already provided craft training in the sixteenth century, partly through masters in its own employment and partly by placing orphan boys and girls with ordinary guild masters.<sup>39</sup> In Amsterdam, on the other hand, the Civic Orphanage – many of whose charges came from artisan families, a reason for the institution to care deeply about their education – provided for skills training by placing the boys with guild masters. For girls, who were usually not permitted to leave the premises unsupervised, the orphanage provided in-house training in knitting and sewing, but it is not entirely clear if these were aimed at productive or household use.<sup>40</sup> A third alternative form of education was provided by a range of non-guild professional institutions, the best known of which are probably the artist academies that emerged in many of Europe’s large towns in the course of the early modern period.<sup>41</sup> It is unlikely that we will ever know precisely how these alternatives measured up against training within the corporate context. Training by orphanages and similar institutions, as well as academies, seems to have been marginal, in purely quantitative terms, next to the sheer numbers apprenticed by guild masters. It would also be extremely difficult to separate informal family training from formal apprenticeship. However, the relatively low levels of skill premium in Europe, compared to East Asia and India, suggest that the corporate system of professional education must have been generally efficient.<sup>42</sup> ## Specialisation, Division of Labour, Coordination In the past, historians liked to point to conflicts between guilds over the demarcation of their respective ‘spheres of influence’ as proof of the inefficiency of the guild system. However, new evidence is emerging relating to the coordination roles played by guilds in complex production processes. In the leather industry in Bologna, for instance, the tanners’ and shoemakers’ guilds negotiated about the prices and qualities of the hides delivered by the former to the latter, thereby sustaining a delicate equilibrium in the industry.<sup>43</sup> As Ulrich Pfister explains, in his first contribution to this volume, guilds were performing several economic functions that were later absorbed by firms, especially contributing to the reduction of information costs incurred by the necessity of multiple measurements and monitoring. Guilds could thus provide institutional advantages in a world of craft production, characterised by numerous small workshops.<sup>44</sup> This was especially important in proto-industries, where competitive advantages were determined by institutional, rather than technological, innovations, but they must have applied equally in technologically more advanced industries, such as coach making or the production of clocks and watches, where the production of complex parts, usually in a variety of different trades, had to be coordinated to allow the assemblage of the final product. Collective action by the producers in the whole chain of production, mediated by their craft guilds, underscores the importance of industrial organisation in these branches of industry.<sup>45</sup> Numerous authors have by now pointed out that the world of craft production was much more flexible than guild regulations had suggested. This was often perceived as a weakness of the corporate system: its monopoly claims on the production of specified goods were circumvented by the presumably illegal practices of outsourcing and subcontracting.<sup>46</sup> Catharina Lis and Hugo Soly, in their contribution, suggest a radically different interpretation of this phenomenon. Subcontracting was not so much the opposite of guild-based production as an integral part of it. It permitted artisan entrepreneurs to expand their operations, while leaving intact the socially and politically desirable structures of ‘small commodity production’.<sup>47</sup> It helped create effective networks of credit supply and overcome the coordination problems of increasingly complex and specialised skills.<sup>48</sup> And it provided an opportunity for entrepreneurs to transfer production risks to the subcontractees in the network. Such subcontracting networks within the corporate world were more likely to emerge, Lis and Soly add, where artisan-entrepreneurs had political voice, through guild representation in local governing councils. Artisan-entrepreneurs were likely to promote, and possibly invest in, product innovation when the profits of those innovations would accrue to themselves rather than to merchant-entrepreneurs. The latter were, for obvious reasons, more interested in cost cutting, that is, labour saving, and hence favoured process innovations. Coordination by guilds was not limited to the production process alone. As Maarten Prak argues in his chapter, clustering created a range of externalities beneficial to the membership and to the industry as a whole, like for instance the reduction of information asymmetries between producers and customers. Pre-modern markets were seriously hampered by a lack of information about both producers and their products, and this problem could ultimately lead to a complete standstill of the trade in products, when customers became too suspicious about their quality.<sup>49</sup> In a variety of ways, guilds contributed to the reduction of this problem. First and foremost, they would ensure the quality of the workforce, or more specifically the master craftsman who was responsible for output quality. The production of a masterpiece was a peer-reviewed demonstration of skill. It was not, as is sometimes assumed, an attempt to impose a uniform standard of quality, but merely testified to the fact that the master was able to produce at a certain (minimum) level of expertise.<sup>50</sup> Alternatively, guilds could require that their members’ products meet certain quality standards, and attach a label or other testimony for export purposes.<sup>51</sup> Local authorities often showed a strong interest in this type of quality control. In most towns, guilds of silver- and goldsmiths were formally charged with upholding regulations concerning the precious metal content of their members’ products.<sup>52</sup> In England, this so-called assay, that is, the testing of gold and silver products to determine their ingredients and quality, was a national privilege of the London Goldsmiths’ Company. As Ian Anders Gadd and Patrick Wallis demonstrate in their chapter, such national regulations were closely related to the Crown’s tax policies, but also to the specific characteristics of the product itself. Next to gold and silver, pewter – with similar problems of quality control – was one of the few products for which the same arrangements were successfully introduced. With one or two exceptions, attempts by other London guilds to obtain similar national privileges for purely rent-seeking motives, were either non-starters or otherwise short-lived. Still another possibility for guilds to contribute to market transparency, discussed in Prak’s chapter, was the guild salesroom, where customers could make an informed choice from a range of price–quality combinations. Dutch painters’ guilds would also mediate between producers and their dissatisfied customers, another way of dealing with the problems arising from information asymmetries. ## Protecting and Sharing Knowledge Given the importance of tacit knowledge in most crafts, the experiential nature of most technological knowledge and the fact that technological progress was small-scale and incremental, rather than wholesale and revolutionary, intellectual property rights were difficult, often impossible, to establish. Knowledge sharing – voluntary, or as an unintended outcome of labour mobility – thus seems to have been the norm, despite contemporary references to the ‘mystery’ of the craft. These can seem to suggest, at first sight, some sort of secretiveness, but on closer inspection it turns out that this ‘mystery’ was precisely the tacit knowledge that was impossible to articulate with any precision and hence had to be transmitted in person. The documents in which this language is found are mostly about the conditions that will give apprentices access to these ‘mysteries’. It would be fair to say that this type of environment is indeed more conducive to micro, rather than macro, inventions. The primary impact of such inventions would be local, as is suggested by evidence presented in Prak’s chapter about the development of new pictorial traditions in seventeenthcentury Netherlands. In technologically advanced trades, however, where technological innovations were at a premium, craftsmen could pick up inventions very quickly, as Anthony Turner’s chapter in this book demonstrates. When Christiaan Huygens invented the pendulum clock in 1658, and had a prototype built by one Salomon Coster, clock maker in the Hague, it was imitated within months, perhaps even weeks. Attempts by Huygens and Coster to establish a patent and twenty-one-year monopoly on the new technology failed miserably, as the invention (a macro invention, in this case) was copied, adapted, and improved upon by craftsmen all over Western Europe. Turner makes the important point that clock makers’ and instrument makers’ guilds were not opposed to innovation per se, but tended to resist attempts to monopolise such innovations for individual profit. Their argument was, precisely, that inventions were a common good, because they built upon cumulative knowledge that could not be ascribed to this or that individual, but was the shared property of the trade as a whole. In quite a few areas, such as shipbuilding and construction, mining, or some aspects of metalworking, the division of labour was such that it was indeed extremely difficult to identify major technological innovations, let alone pinpoint the individual ‘inventor’.<sup>53</sup> Typically, nobody knows who ‘invented’ the first fluitschip (flute ship), which was to carry Dutch international trade to world dominance in the seventeenth century. There can be no doubt that the fluitschip as such was a major technological innovation, but its creation was the outcome of a process of incremental improvements, made by hundreds, possibly thousands of unknown craftsmen, on many dozens of shipyards scattered along the North Sea coast.<sup>54</sup> Such a system of shared intellectual property rights might act as a disincentive to the development of new technology.<sup>55</sup> Some guilds tried to overcome these constraints by introducing reward schemes for inventors. As Liliane P´erez’s contribution in this book demonstrates, the Lyon silk industry could be highly innovative owing to a system that rewarded individual inventors, and at the same made the results of their efforts available to the industry as a whole. The Lyon scheme at times even managed to make the payout to inventors dependent on the adoption of their innovation, by paying a specified amount of money for each individual loom employing the innovation. Important though it is, technology was just one form of innovation relevant to craftsmen, and the debate about guilds and innovation has been unduly focused on this particular aspect. In the luxury trades, product innovations were randomly introduced by incorporated trades, without any technological developments whatsoever. The Parisian clothing trade, for instance, witnessed dramatic changes since the late seventeenth century, rapidly developing into a genuine fashion industry and introducing innovations at an ever-increasing pace.<sup>56</sup> The manteau, garbled in English to become ‘mantua’, revolutionised women’s everyday dress code throughout Europe in this period. It was developed in Paris simultaneously with the incorporation of the seamstresses, that is, the female producers of these dresses, who acquired their statutes in 1675.<sup>57</sup> Even process innovations did not necessarily require technological change. Think of the clothing industry again. In Antwerp, around 1600, incorporated trades started to experiment with the production of readymade, rather than customised, clothes such as cloaks, stockings, and breeches. Fabritius Pamphi, a hosier possibly of Italian origin, in 1604 held a stock of 1,836 pieces. Almost 80 percent of his business was outside Antwerp. By 1610 the tailors of Brussels and Mechelen (Malines) were complaining about the selling of these ready-made clothes from Antwerp by secondhand dealers in their own towns.<sup>58</sup> ## Labour Mobility Many innovations either occurred as a result of the combination of knowhow developed in different production locations, or more straightforwardly through the mobility of the labour force.<sup>59</sup> It has by now been firmly established that the world of the crafts, as much as the rest of early modern urban society, was one of significant mobility. Some more or less random figures can help illustrate the point. A survey in Vienna in 1742 showed that out of a total of $4 , 7 7 3$ guild masters, a mere 1,160, or 25 percent, had been born locally. A third of the masters were foreigners, mostly originating from the non-Habsburg territories in the Holy Roman Empire.<sup>60</sup> In eighteenth-century Amsterdam, the largest single region of origin for master tailors was Germany – 37 percent had immigrated from there; on the other hand, only 21 percent were natives of Amsterdam itself.<sup>61</sup> The London Goldsmiths’ Company in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries had a constant influx of craftsmen, both from other English regions and from the continent, in particular the Low Countries and France, but also Germany.<sup>62</sup> Dietrich Meyer, one of a long line of painters, engravers, and goldsmiths from Zurich, has left a sketchbook with designs for metalwork made on his itinerary as a journeyman. Setting out in 1669, he worked in Basel, in Augsburg, long-time centre of the goldsmith trade, possibly Amsterdam, and then Basel again, before returning to his native city in 1674. In every town he made drawings of the designs he came across, subsequently integrating them into his own work.<sup>63</sup> In spite of persistent suggestions to the contrary in the literature, guild petitions and actions against ‘aliens’ were seldom directed against immigrants as such, but rather against non-members, or non-resident aliens. Not only did guilds tolerate migration but, especially in Central Europe, they actively encouraged it, as Reinhold Reith points out in his chapter in this book. The mobility of skilled labour had significant implications for the diffusion of skills and innovations, and must have been a source of innovation in its own right.<sup>64</sup> Technologically advanced areas, such as Northern Italy and the Low Countries, were major attraction poles for migrant workers, including artisans.<sup>65</sup> The role of these skilled immigrants in the shifting location of technological leadership in pre-industrial Europe was very significant.<sup>66</sup> ## From 1400 to 1800 ## Response to Change It is often routinely assumed that guilds opposed every form of technological innovation.<sup>67</sup> It is true that numerous examples can be found of such opposition. The general equation of guilds and technological conservatism is nonetheless wrong on at least two counts. First of all, as we already discussed, most technological change in pre-industrial Europe was the result of incremental, micro improvements, discovered more or less unintentionally by craftsmen practising their trade. In other words, technological change and progress was the unintended outcome of craftsmen going about their normal business, which was to produce industrial products to the best of their abilities. Guilds did not, perhaps, contribute directly to these improvements as such, but they did matter a lot to their diffusion; moreover, as diffusion is, for the application of new technology, at least as important as the actual invention, this contribution could indeed be vital.<sup>68</sup> Dutch shipbuilding offers a good example of this piecemeal, incremental type of innovation. During the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries the industry was very dynamic and indeed innovative; it became a major export industry in its own right and, crucially, its products helped propel Holland’s economy to global dominance.<sup>69</sup> Shipwrights’ guilds contributed to these developments in a number of significant ways. They created stable environments for investments in innovations. The guilds often invested collectively in expensive equipment, such as slipways and cranes. Through price controls they, moreover, forced producers to seek alternative means of distinguishing themselves from their competitors. The superior quality and efficiency of their products, and of the production process, were among the obvious outcomes of such pressures. Innovation in the shipwrights’ guilds tended to be collective rather than individual, as the guild provided a forum for the exchange of ideas in its regular meetings, where attendance was compulsory. And last but not least, through the training of apprentice shipwrights, innovations were passed on from one generation to the next. It is a fact that in the seventeenth century the industry lost its innovative capacity, and its guilds became much more conservative. This is, however, no reason to deny their capacity to carry and indeed stimulate a process of long-term innovation in the preceding centuries.<sup>70</sup> The example of the Holland shipwrights suggests that the thesis of guilds’ general technological conservatism is wrong for a second reason: there are numerous examples, in fact, of guilds embracing new technology.<sup>71</sup> It is therefore important to understand when and why guilds would reject new technologies, and when they might accept them. Ulrich Pfister’s second contribution to this volume seeks to establish those conditions, through an analysis of the introduction of the silk ribbon loom in various production centres throughout Europe during the seventeenth century. He argues that given the importance of skills and the relative scarcity of capital in most craft workshops, it is reasonable to assume that guilds representing such workshops would generally oppose capitalintensive and labour (esp. skilled labour)-saving innovations, which would undercut their members’ competitive advantage. Guilds might react to such innovations by erecting market barriers, but their success in doing so critically depended on two conditions. The political context would ultimately decide whether guild protests were translated into prohibitive measures. Where guilds had a powerful voice in political institutions, as was the case in many German towns, they found it much easier to follow a path of exclusion and rent seeking. In other polities, such as for instance English or Dutch towns, local governments were more likely to take a wider range of interests into account. The other critical aspect was the composition of a guilds’ membership. Where this consisted overwhelmingly of small masters, a guild was more likely to seek refuge in restrictions on new technologies. Where the membership was more varied, and included master-entrepreneurs, or even merchants, the guild was likely to be more receptive to innovation. Indeed, the combination of master-entrepreneurs and political access could produce a powerful environment for innovative industrialisation aimed, typically, at product upgrading, as Lis and Soly’s chapter in this book demonstrates. Francesca Trivellato’s chapter illustrates a somewhat similar scenario. The Venetian silk and glass industries were both incorporated industries without political representation. Rent seeking was therefore not on the cards for them. Instead, both industries reacted to price competition from other centres of production, by upgrading through the application of new technologies and shifting to more complex products, which made the most of the workforce’s highly developed skills.<sup>72</sup> In the late seventeenth century, for example, apprenticeships in the silk weavers’ guilds were extended from five to seven years, not, it seems, to exclude outsiders but as a reflection of the increased complexity of the job. For the same reason, masters were no longer permitted to apprentice more than one or two youngsters at a time, to make sure these received proper training. Whereas this might be interpreted as the typical signs of a closed trade, there seems to be another, more straightforward, explanation in the development of the industry as such. ## Alternatives? The historical literature presents two types of alternatives to the guild as an industrial organisation, emerging in the two centuries before the Industrial Revolution. The first is proto-industry. According to the standard account, proto-industry emerged in the European countryside because entrepreneurs hoped to escape the technological conservatism and high wage levels imposed by urban guilds.<sup>73</sup> This argument is at the least misleading, and probably wrong. In several proto-industrial areas, the (rural) industry was actually regulated by guilds. Probably the best-documented example is the worsted industry in the German duchy of W ¨urttemberg, investigated by Sheilagh Ogilvie. Her material demonstrates how it was completely dominated by regional guilds of weavers and merchants and, Ogilvie claims, it was ultimately doomed as a result of these guilds’ rentseeking activities.<sup>74</sup> Guilds dominated proto-industry in much of the German lands, Italy, and Spain.<sup>75</sup> But this was not necessarily detrimental everywhere and at all times, as Pfister demonstrates in the first chapter of this book.<sup>76</sup> The second reason why it would be wrong to see rural protoindustry as an alternative to the incorporated industries of the towns, is proto-industry’s dependence on exactly those urban producers. Much rural proto-industry concentrated on the low-skill end of the production process; high-skill finishing, such as shearing and dyeing in textiles, were executed by urban craftsmen who were usually members of one or another craft guild. Rather than alternatives, urban and rural industries were thus complementary parts of one chain of production.<sup>77</sup> In the same vein, England and to a lesser extent the Dutch Republic have often been portrayed as alternatives for guild-ridden Europe, and hence by implication as examples supporting the argument that guilds were ‘bad for business’.<sup>78</sup> This is now starting to look increasingly doubtful. Research on guild foundations in the northern Netherlands demonstrates that during the seventeenth century, that is, in the period of the Dutch Republic’s very strong economic expansion, more guilds were established than ever before, in traditional as well as innovative sectors. This suggests that the corporate system was still very much in development, and also that such development was perfectly compatible with a dynamic and growing economy.<sup>79</sup> The Dutch Republic, these data demonstrate, was not exceptional when it comes to the economic role of guilds. New research on England equally suggests that it is seriously problematic to equate the absence, ineffectiveness, or decline of guilds with an increased potential for economic growth. According to the best estimates we now have, per capita growth in England was as high in the seventeenth century as it was in the eighteenth: approximately 50 percent.<sup>80</sup> Yet the decline of English guilds was a phenomenon of the eighteenth century.<sup>81</sup> Michael Berlin’s chapter in this book highlights a much more complex history of English guilds than the standard argument of ‘decline’ allows for. He emphasises how the seventeenth century was actually the high point of incorporations, in London at least. Figures on membership suggest an even later zenith for the towns of southern England as a whole: 1710–1730.<sup>82</sup> It would be equally wrong to assume a general decline of English guilds during the eighteenth century, as Berlin demonstrates. In some crafts the guild’s position did indeed diminish, but in others, like the organisationally and technologically advanced coach and clock making industries, they remained innovative and significant through the end of the eighteenth century – and beyond. It is true that the English corporate system was in some ways unique in Europe. National legislation on apprenticeship – the 1563 Statute of Artificers, or the national regulation of certain industries by the guilds of the capital, were features found in no other country. The chronology of, and reasons for, the decline of English guilds, on the other hand, are difficult to relate to these features, and indeed to the transition to mechanised industrialisation. The Industrial Revolution itself has implicitly, and often also explicitly, been presented as the most significant alternative to the corporate system. Its arrival, at first sight simultaneously with the decline of guilds, has more than anything else been strongly suggestive of the negative impact of guilds. There are, again, two reasons to be doubtful about this interpretation. As was already pointed out, the decision to abolish the guilds was political rather than economic. In some countries, like the Netherlands, it took place long before the arrival of modern industry, while in England the guilds were never formally abolished. The coincidence between the demise of the guilds and the Industrial Revolution is predicated, in other words, on a chronology that is fundamentally misleading. Moreover, small-scale crafts continued to function in parallel to mechanised factory production. As the various works of Charles Sabel and Jonathan Zeitlin have demonstrated, the industrialisation of nineteenthand twentieth-century Europe very often took place in small firms, which faced the same types of problems that equally small firms experienced before the Industrial Revolution.<sup>83</sup> It is therefore no surprise to see that guilds themselves, or equivalent organisations utilising the guild format, continued to function in the nineteenth century in many skill-intensive industries. The Lyon silk weavers, for example, had a range of associations, clubs, and friendly societies that each catered to a specific aspect of the trade formerly covered by the guild. Typically, many weavers joined several of these organisations simultaneously, so that they still had access to the same range of ‘services’ as had been formerly offered by the guild. Governance in these voluntary organisations was consciously modelled on the guilds of the Ancien R´egime. The most notable among them was the cercle, an association devoted to the development of skill and technology through technical instruction, sharing knowledge, and promoting inventions. The Lyon weavers sent delegations to several international industrial exhibitions, to inspect the presentation of their own work and spy on the competition.<sup>84</sup> In the German town of Solingen, renowned centre for cutlery, the abolition of the guilds, and the repression of alternative organisations by subsequent liberal-minded regional, French, and Prussian authorities, led to the opposite development: a negative spiral of product downgrading, declining wage levels, and overall impoverishment of the industry and its workforce. In the absence of institutionalised coordination, nobody had a clue of how to revive the industry.<sup>85</sup> This book claims that the impact of guilds on the early modern economy was more positive than has so far been acknowledged by historians of the traditional, and even of the revisionist, school. It investigates how and why this was so. Guilds promoted the reproduction of the skilled workforce. They supported the mobility and hence the geographical integration of that workforce. Guilds provided a framework for the vertical and horizontal integration of complicated production processes. They helped set quality standards, and thus generated greater market transparency. In other words, through institutionalised clustering, guilds created an environment that was conducive to the type of tacit, embodied, and incremental innovation typical of most industrial development before the Industrial Revolution, and much of it even after that momentous event. It is, however, important to circumscribe the claim that guilds were economically beneficial. The authors of this book are concerned with craft guilds, not all guilds. More specifically, most chapters in this book discuss highly skilled industries, crafts where technology was often quite significant in the production process. None of the contributors claims that guilds were an optimal solution to the problems facing the pre-industrial economy, or that they were the only institutions capable of generating innovation, or were supporting economic growth at all times.<sup>86</sup> We do claim, however, that the evidence presented here, in combination with the sheer size and longevity of the corporate system, provides strong proof of the often beneficial, and at times indeed crucial, positive effects of craft guilds on Europe’s pre-industrial economy and its innovative capacities. The book thus paves the way for a much more variegated, and therefore deeper, understanding not only of the guilds as such but of the transformation of European industry in the centuries leading up to the Industrial Revolution, and indeed beyond.