# 5 Painters, Guilds, and the Art Market during the Dutch Golden Age∗ Maarten Prak ## Introduction Over the past few decades the historiography of craft guilds has changed dramatically, as historians have realised that the rules and regulations that had formerly underpinned writing about guilds were not necessarily adhered to in practice.<sup>1</sup> This has resulted in a double reorientation of the historiography. On the one hand, many historians of the guilds have construed the inconsistencies between practices and norms as evidence of ‘flexibility’. On the other hand, they have de-emphasised the economic impact of the craft guilds, in favour of their social and cultural contributions to the shaping of medieval and early modern European society. The upshot of this reorientation has been that guilds have been declared irrelevant in the economic domain where they were traditionally perceived to be most significant. Much of the recent literature, however, covers broad swathes of the pre-modern economy and lumps together evidence from a wide variety of trades, which did not necessarily follow the same rules and dynamics.<sup>2</sup> To diminish the potential dangers of this approach, this chapter focuses on a single trade during a relatively brief span of time.<sup>3</sup> The arts are a particularly attractive sector for pre-modern economic historians for two reasons. First, since artists signed their products and since those products were generally durable, it is possible to trace details over time about sales, prices, and so on for individual paintings, and at times even for sculpture and silverware. Second, the huge effort expended by art historians in reconstructing the genealogy of paintings provides a ready mine of information, and the artistic history of the Dutch Golden Age has already been well researched from an economic point of view. Moreover, the Dutch guilds offer a particularly interesting case study, in view of the argument by Jan de Vries and Ad van der Woude that the Dutch Republic had the ‘first modern economy’,<sup>4</sup> and the demonstration by Piet Lourens and Jan Lucassen that the Dutch corporate system expanded dramatically at the same time.<sup>5</sup> The latter’s proposal that the two phenomena were causally related has been rejected by Catharina Lis and Hugo Soly, who claim that incorporation was largely restricted to traditional trades operating in local markets, whereas the export industries remained mostly unorganised, but the example of Dutch painting fits poorly into their model.<sup>6</sup> For a long time, art historians explained the success of Dutch seventeenth-century painting in terms of subject. In what is probably the most widely read text on the history of the visual arts, E. H. Gombrich argued that Italian Renaissance artists had developed their work to such a state of perfection that it proved impossible to surpass. As a result, western art was plunged into a profound crisis, further aggravated by the intellectual crisis generated by the Reformation. ‘Genre’, that is to say realistic depictions of scenes from everyday life, became one way of overcoming this crisis.<sup>7</sup> During the past two decades a rival interpretation has emerged, or rather reasserted itself, mainly under the impact of American economist J. Michael Montias,<sup>8</sup> followed by Marten Jan Bok, Michael North, Neil De Marchi and Hans Van Miegroet, de Vries, and van der Woude.<sup>9</sup> Their work has produced a broad consensus that the quantitative and stylistic development of seventeenth-century Dutch painting was powerfully shaped by market forces, and this chapter must be read within the broad parameters of that argument. I do, however, wish to raise issues of structure and organisation that are generally overlooked in the existing literature. More specifically, I argue that the guild-based structure of the sector was a key factor in its success, and that the analysis of how and why this was so allows us to specify more precisely the economic role played by craft guilds. ## The Market for Paintings Painting was a growth industry in the Low Countries already during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. At the time, however, painters were concentrated in the south, mainly in Flanders and Brabant. Towns like Bruges, Brussels, Ghent, and subsequently Antwerp were centres of international renown. Painters like Jan van Eyck, Rogier van der Weyden, Hugo van der Goes, Gerard David, and in the sixteenth century Hieronymus Bosch and Pieter Brueghel spread the fame of early Netherlandish painting far beyond its region of origin.<sup>10</sup> In addition to these famous masters, a host of minor artists helped create an ever-widening market for paintings ranging from huge triptychs for display in churches to very small pictures adorning the walls of a private home, from world-class quality to mediocre or worse. Early Flemish and Brabantine painters also pioneered labour-saving techniques, such as the repeated use of the same design, cut-outs for standard elements, and collaboration between specialist workshops.<sup>11</sup> Output in the northern Netherlands, by contrast, seems to have been generally poor in terms both of quantity and quality, and was concentrated in the towns of Haarlem and Utrecht, perhaps also Amsterdam. This pattern was, however, to change dramatically around the turn of the seventeenth century. Between 1600 and 1635 the number of painters working in Haarlem rose from nineteen to thirty-four.<sup>12</sup> In 1650 the number had increased to an estimated sixty-eight.<sup>13</sup> In The Hague an estimated seventy-five painters were active during the first decade of the seventeenth century. The number increased to two hundred in the second decade and to three hundred in the third, to decline again thereafter.<sup>14</sup> In the Dutch Republic as a whole, the number of painters increased as much as fourfold between 1600 and 1619, doubled again by 1639, and rose by a further 50 percent in the next two decades.<sup>15</sup> Other calculations suggest that in 1650 Alkmaar, Delft, Haarlem, The Hague, Leyden, and Utrecht between them housed an estimated 280 professional painters.<sup>16</sup> Alongside the two traditional centres of Haarlem and Utrecht, Amsterdam, Delft, Leiden, and to a lesser extent Middelburg (for a brief period), The Hague, Dordrecht, and Rotterdam all developed into significant centres of production.<sup>17</sup> Foreigners were astonished to see the numbers of paintings even in ordinary Dutch households. Writing in the 1660s, French schoolmaster Jean Nicholas de Parival, who lived in Leiden for twenty years, could not ‘believe that so many good painters can be found anywhere else; also the houses are filled with very beautiful paintings and no one is so poor as not to wish to be well provided with them’, and his impressions have been substantiated by research into probate inventories;<sup>18</sup> even eighteenthcentury farmers in rural Zeeland owned on average five to ten paintings each.<sup>19</sup> To meet this demand, it has been estimated that seventeenthand eighteenth- century painters in the province of Holland produced a staggering 5–10 million paintings, at least half of them between 1600 and 1700.<sup>20</sup> To turn out such numbers, Dutch painters had to think hard about productivity – a famous tale had it that landscape artists Fran¸cois Knibbergen, Jan Porcellis, and Jan van Goyen made a bet as to who could produce the best work in a single day.<sup>21</sup> We know that works of art changed hands for as little as one guilder, which was the daily wage of a skilled labourer. Such work cannot have taken much time to produce, and it would seem that that an average Dutch artist in the seventeenth century produced two paintings a week: in 1615 Porcellis entered a contract that bound him to produce exactly forty paintings in twenty weeks.<sup>22</sup> To attain such levels of output, new working methods were called for. Painters in Antwerp had already developed ways of standardising their work. To this, Dutch artists added rigorous specialisation and a new, more rapid style of brushwork. Van Goyen, for example, became famous for his sketchy landscapes that used only a limited range of colours, mainly yellows and browns, and applied very little detail; likewise, he and his colleagues limited themselves to specific types of painting, producing instantly recognisable works that were often simply copies of earlier work. Both techniques saved significantly on time.<sup>23</sup> Market expansion went hand in hand with a widening range of products on offer. In 1613 the masters’ register of the Delft guild included specialists in portraiture, still-lives, flower pieces, landscapes, and ‘histories’, which depicted traditional biblical, mythological, or classical topics.<sup>24</sup> However, Dutch artists were also busy inventing the new type that has become known as ‘genre’, usually defined as ‘scenes from everyday life’, which became the hallmark of the Holland school of the Dutch Golden Age. ‘Genres’ came in an astonishing variety of sub-types, such as ‘conversations’, where we see two people talking, ‘kitchens’, which depict a kitchen interior, usually with a maid at work, cortegaardes (from Fr. corps de garde), depicting one or more soldiers on guard duty, as well as people reading possibly love letters, scenes from brothels, and so on.<sup>25</sup> Established types were also developed into new directions. Thus the popular landscapes were expanded to include typically Dutch townscapes; customers could choose among views of the town’s exterior (Vermeer’s View of Delft being perhaps the best-known example), well-known locations such as Dam square in Amsterdam or Haarlem’s Great Church, as well as unprepossessing street scenes such as Vermeer’s Little Street in Delft.<sup>26</sup> Later in the seventeenth century, in addition to the specialists listed in 1613, the Delft guild’s membership register included specialists in ‘perspectives’, in battles, and in seascapes.<sup>27</sup> Customers could also choose from early on from a wide variety of quality. At 240 auction sales held in Amsterdam between 1597 and 1619, prices for paintings ranged between less than half a guilder (919 out of a total of 5,165 items) to over 500 guilders.<sup>28</sup> Even individual painters commanded a wide range of prices. Works by the marine painter Jan Porcellis, for example, fetched between 4 and 300 guilders in the seventeenth century.<sup>29</sup> Economic historians have pointed to two more or less simultaneous developments from the late sixteenth century to explain this expansion of the Dutch market for art. On the demand side, traditional customers were replaced by a new kind of clientele. Painters had customarily worked on commission for clients who would specify the details and sometimes even the overall design of the painting. Clients themselves were routinely included in works of art, most obviously in portraits, but also, for example, as donors on the side-panels of triptychs. Courtiers, aristocrats, and the church were by far the most important customers. During the sixteenth century a mass market for works of art developed in Antwerp, where painters diversified in subject, style, and price and began to produce substantial numbers of works for export.<sup>30</sup> Paris was a popular destination, as were Spain and Spanish America.<sup>31</sup> We do not as yet have a clear picture of the quantitative dimensions of the Antwerp art market, but we do know that it displayed many of the qualitative features found later in the Dutch Republic. During the Dutch Revolt, the social, religious, and economic conditions that had begun to transform the Antwerp art market were intensified in the northern Republic. Dutch Calvinists took control of all church buildings formerly occupied by the Catholic Church and abolished church patronage in the areas under their control. The Orange court was financially in dire straits and in no position to commission expensive works of art.<sup>32</sup> Many aristocratic families moved south. Then, around 1600, the Dutch Republic – more specifically the towns of the province of Holland – experienced a remarkable revival that soon turned into an unprecedented economic boom.<sup>33</sup> A newly wealthy group of middle and upper middle class families emerged as potential customers for paintings, and pretty soon they began to decorate their homes with pictures and to build up collections.<sup>34</sup> These shifts in demand were accompanied by changes in supply. In spite of the collapse of the art market in the northern Netherlands in the mid-sixteenth century, many artists had moved there from the south, mainly for religious reasons.<sup>35</sup> Understandably, they found it difficult to make ends meet. Karel van Mander, who had been an accomplished painter before settling in Haarlem in 1583 at the outset of the Dutch Revolt, was forced to earn a living by painting numbers and names on wooden crates and canvas bags.<sup>36</sup> Men like Van Mander had to think hard about their commercial position. With traditional customers gone, their only chance of success lay with the urban middle classes, whose ranks and wealth began to grow rapidly after 1590. It may have helped that other refugees from the southern Netherlands, where the middle classes had already acquired a taste for paintings, swelled those ranks.<sup>37</sup> To please such new customers, painters had to adapt their working methods and consider new subjects – ‘genre’ painting being the main result. They also had to lower costs – so they diversified, specialised, reduced format and detail, and began to anticipate demand rather than working solely on commission. Painters had to get used to working for a market that was not fundamentally different from the market for wine or furniture.<sup>38</sup> The overall picture, then, appears to be one in which supply and demand reinforce each other to generate optimal results. But is the invisible hand of the market enough to explain the rise of seventeenth-century Dutch painting? Several authors have noted that the growth of the art market went hand in hand with the strengthening of corporate structures. De Vries comments that ‘the growing number of artists made possible the reinvigoration or re-establishment of Saint Lucas guilds, more formal apprenticeships, specialisation, and export’; these ‘organizational changes established a scale and specialization that . . . facilitated product and process innovations’.<sup>39</sup> Montias, who has pioneered the economic history of seventeenth-century Dutch painting, draws a more mixed picture. Having shown that guilds were fairly successful in forcing artists to join them and comply with their rules,<sup>40</sup> he has also claimed that ‘extant guild records suggest that the restrictions [on sales practices] on the books were not systematically enforced, and . . . there was much scope for accommodation with the town authorities, the guild officers or both’.<sup>41</sup> North has noted that guilds were involved in the training of young artists and in the marketing of paintings,<sup>42</sup> and Bok has recently suggested that local guild restrictions on the imports of out-of-town works ‘fostered the development of local schools [of painting] with their own artistic character and their own dynamism’.<sup>43</sup> But although these remarks raise interesting points about the contributions of painters’ guilds to industrial and commercial developments, they are mainly intended to explain developments in the art world and have not been developed into a systematic argument. ## Painters’ Guilds Painters were organised in guilds in the Low Countries since the late Middle Ages.<sup>44</sup> Most guilds were established in the fifteenth century, although some were considerably older, notably in Flanders and Brabant.<sup>45</sup> In most cases, however, the painters were one among a whole range of artistically related crafts, assembled in a single guild that need or need not be named after St Luke, the patron saint of painters; however, painters predominated in some of these, for example in Haarlem. All this, too, would change in the decades around 1600. In 1579 the painters of Amsterdam split from several other trades to form a new guild dealing exclusively with the visual arts. The newly established Guild of St Luke encompassed the painters, as well as sculptors, engravers, fa¨ıenciers, embroiderers, tapestry-makers, and glass-painters. The establishment had little to do with the specific circumstances of the arts, but was part of a broader reorganisation of the town’s corporate structure triggered by Amsterdam’s rather delayed switch from the Habsburg to the rebel side in the Dutch Revolt, and by the religious changes that entailed. The role of the guilds in the churches needed redefining, and apparently the Amsterdam authorities used the occasion as a pretext to rectify several other features of the local craft guild system.<sup>46</sup> A few years later, in December 1585, the Zeeland town of Middelburg also gave its artists new statutes, but the reason for doing so in this case seems to have been attracting some of the thousands of refugees from Antwerp, which had fallen just four months before, in the hope of reviving the local economy. For about two decades painting flourished in Middelburg as a result.<sup>47</sup> A further and more significant series of guild foundations began around 1609. Two years earlier peace talks had begun between the Dutch rebels and the Spanish Habsburg, who still claimed sovereignty over the entire Low Countries. The Twelve Years’ Truce, which took effect from 1609, opened Dutch borders to industrial products from the south – including paintings. Painters in many Dutch towns complained about the quantity as well as the poor quality of the imports, which the Amsterdam guild claimed were ‘mostly bad copies’. The Amsterdamers predicted that ‘shortly the whole town, nay the country will be filled with trash and bad pupils’ works’ that would ‘dupe the generally uninformed public’.<sup>48</sup> The painters’ representatives in Leiden voiced similar anxieties.<sup>49</sup> Following the complaints, new guilds of St Luke or similar organisations were established in Gouda and Rotterdam in 1609 and in Delft and Utrecht in 1611. These four guilds aimed first and foremost to protect indigenous painters against imports from the South. In Utrecht the statutes dealt with four issues: how to become a member, regulation of training and apprenticeship, guild administration, and control of the market. Eight out of a total of twenty-eight rules were devoted to the latter topic and they were the most detailed and elaborate.<sup>50</sup> The statutes of the Delft guild likewise emphasised its monopoly over production and trade of paintings: ‘no one at any time shall make with his own hand a painting or any other work regulated by the aforesaid guild of this town unless he be a guild brother’, and ‘no one shall bring here from outside any painting or other work regulated by this guild, unless he be a guild brother’, read two key phrases on the statute book.<sup>51</sup> The same applies to the guild or quasi-guild established in Leiden in 1648. The town government of Leiden was noted for its opposition to guilds – the only anti-guild treatise written in the seventeenth-century Dutch Republic was by Pieter de la Court, a Leiden textile entrepreneur whose family had emigrated from Flanders.<sup>52</sup> It may well be the case that the strong position of craft guilds in the southern Low Countries, particularly in the textile trades, had warned the Leiden elites – who were heavily involved in cloth-making – against the dangers of artisan corporations, for their distrust of craft guilds was already apparent in the sixteenth century; immigration from the South probably served to strengthen their views. So when the Leiden painters asked for their own guild in 1610, they were rebuffed. They tried again in the early 1640s, claiming that many famous albeit unnamed painters – including Rembrandt, as everyone would have realised – had left the town because the market was not properly organised. In 1648 the town council gave in, to the extent that it produced a regulation for the sale of paintings in Leiden, but avoided chartering a guild or regulating registration, training, and other customary guild features. Despite having no proper legal foundation to do so, the artists agreed by common consent to set up a guild, and proudly entitled their first register ‘Dean’s and Overseers’ book of the Guild of St Luke’.<sup>53</sup> These were not the only painters’ organisations established in the Dutch Republic. The Dordrecht painters created a confrerie in 1642. Hoorn got its Brotherhood of St Luke in 1651. Before that, the painters of Alkmaar had created a guild in 1631, while the painters in the eastern town of Zwolle established their guild in 1652. But the corporations of Haarlem, Amsterdam, Middelburg, Delft, Gouda, Rotterdam, Utrecht, and Leiden were the most significant. With the exception of the Gouda guild, they were located in the most populous towns of the Dutch Republic,<sup>54</sup> and, again with the exception of Gouda, they gave rise to distinctive schools of painting in the seventeenth century.<sup>55</sup> Thus, in the seventeenthcentury Dutch art industry the establishment of painters’ guilds, the expansion of the market, and the development of specific niche products all coincided. ## Controlling the Producers Most guild regulation was concerned with the number and skills of the membership. However, Dutch guilds generally set few restrictions on numbers and the guilds of St Luke were equally relaxed. Entry fees were usually very modest: 3 to 12 guilders in Delft, 5 to 12.5 guilders in Dordrecht, and 5 guilders in Amsterdam, representing at most a couple of weeks’ wages.<sup>56</sup> It is true that outsiders would also have to purchase the town citizenship, which in Amsterdam had risen to 50 guilders by the 1650s; but fees elsewhere in Holland and in Utrecht were more modest.<sup>57</sup> Such low rates may have contributed to strong levels of participation; in Delft all known painters were members of the guild.<sup>58</sup> Given such ease of access, monitoring could focus on the members’ skills. Two instruments were available for this purpose: training and the masterpiece. In the absence of state schools providing vocational training, it has been observed, the guilds offered an essential framework for training skilled artisans;<sup>59</sup> as Epstein suggests in Chapter 2 of this book, this was perhaps the main reason why guilds survived for more than half a millennium. It is true that guild statutes, almost without exception, included one or more clauses about apprenticeship; but it is equally true that those clauses were more concerned with the registration of apprentices than with their actual training.<sup>60</sup> Typically, the regulations of the Haarlem guild of St Luke from 1590, which were in force throughout the seventeenth century, established the number of apprentices that a master could have at any one time, and stated that an apprentice had to be registered and could not become a master before working at least a year after finishing his threeyear training, but nowhere did it say what the apprentice was supposed to learn.<sup>61</sup> Likewise, the regulations of the Utrecht Schilders-Collegie from 1644 stipulated that apprentices should register with the guild within a month, that if they left their master early they would still have to pay him the tuition fee, that masters were not allowed to poach each others’ apprentices, and that apprentices who were dissatisfied with their masters could turn to the guild’s overseers; again, however, there was no word about the skills they would acquire. From other sources we can get some idea of what a painter’s education might mean.<sup>62</sup> In or around 1600, the Haarlem artist and author Karel van Mander explained that an apprentice should learn to put up the canvas and prepare a canvas or panel, make paints and work neatly, and generally ‘watch the master’s palette and brushes’.<sup>63</sup> These may appear at first sight like pretty basic and menial tasks, but it would be easy to underestimate their importance and complexity – knowing how to rub and mix pigments with egg yolk or oil to exact specifications and amounts was a highly sophisticated skill.<sup>64</sup> Yet these were just beginner’s stuff – the next stage was learning how to draw and, finally, to paint, neither of which skills could be straightforwardly acquired. Apprenticeship contracts sometimes referred to this problem, stating that the master would teach his pupil the art of ‘painting and all that it entails, in so far as the aforesaid lad will be able to accept and understand it, which he will try to do to the utmost of his abilities’.<sup>65</sup> Some masters were good draughtsmen; others were more popular at teaching how to paint. The Utrecht master Abraham Willaerts attracted many pupils wishing to learn how to draw, whereas his colleague Paulus Moreelse was more appreciated as a painter.<sup>66</sup> Rembrandt, on the other hand, seems to have accepted only advanced pupils, who the Haarlem sources label ‘disciples’ rather than apprentices.<sup>67</sup> Such disciples were meant to help in the workshop producing paintings, or parts of them, in the style of the master who might put some finishing touches and sell them under his own name. While some masters were very popular with apprentices, others never trained anyone in their entire career. In Utrecht, 65 out of 105 pupils that can be identified between 1611 and 1639 trained under just four masters. Paulus Moreelse and Abraham Bloemaert, arguably the most famous Utrecht painters of their time, were together responsible for fortyone pupils. Adam Willaerts and Joost Droochsloot, who together trained another twenty-four boys, provided almost exclusively drawing lessons, while Moreelse and Bloemaert trained painters.<sup>68</sup> The training did not merely cover the ordinary skills required of a painter, but also the very specific skills that were needed for a successful career in, say, portraiture or landscape painting. Masters like Bloemaert and Moreelse ensured not just the transfer of general painterly skills, but also the reproduction of a style of work and of specific ‘inventions’ that they and their workshop had devised. As the documents sometimes reveal, good teaching included every ‘mystery’ of the craft: an apprenticeship contract between the father of sixteen-year-old Nathaniel Austin and the painter Jan Theunisz from Amsterdam required the latter to ‘apprentice, steer and teach the boy as a good master should, without hiding anything from him’; the contract for Goosen Hogehuijs in 1625 specified similarly that his master would not hide anything from him ‘regarding the said trade’.<sup>69</sup> Apart from the reputation of the master, access to the specific ‘secrets’ of a master’s style and repertoire and the skills necessary to execute them – inventions and innovations that, as we have seen, underpinned the extraordinary expansion of the seventeenth-century Dutch art market – were a further reason for the large variation in tuition fees between masters.<sup>70</sup> In that sense, artists’ workshops were probably typical of incremental improvements that were occurring everywhere in artisan workshops.<sup>71</sup> Although the Haarlem statutes set the basic artistic training at a mere three years, both in Haarlem and elsewhere it took more than twice as long – between seven and nine years – for an apprentice to become a guild master.<sup>72</sup> It is a matter of definition whether we want to define the entire period as training, but we may plausibly assume that the formal period of apprenticeship covered merely basic skills, and that the subsequent period was needed to develop into a master painter who would be able to set up shop on his own. Masterpieces were an ex post facto assessment of the effectiveness of a training process that was regulated, but not actually carried out, by the guild.<sup>73</sup> Remarkably, Dutch painters’ guilds did not require one as proof of skill.<sup>74</sup> It is not entirely clear how to explain this omission, although it has to be said that it was far from unique among Dutch guilds more generally; the lack of a masterpiece would seem to undermine the guilds’ claim that only their members were capable of producing good-quality work. The importance of training in the guilds’ activities is underscored by the fact that, in several towns, the masters who taught the largest number of pupils also participated very substantially in the guild’s administration. In Utrecht, Paulus Moreelse was dean of the guild during its first two years in 1611 and 1612, and twice again during the next seven years. During that same period Abraham Bloemaert, the other leading light of the Utrecht school, also served as dean. During the 1620s Gerard van Honthorst, another leading painter, served four terms of office, several of them together with Adam Willaerts, who was one of the most active teachers of young artists in the city. Bloemaert, Honthorst, and Willaerts, together with Joost Droochsloot, not only trained two-thirds of all registered pupils in the early years of the Utrecht guild, but between them also filled half of the forty slots on the guild’s board during the first twenty years of its existence.<sup>75</sup> The most prominent painters and teachers attached similar importance to guild activities in other towns. In Delft, for example, the first guild official known by name is Michiel van Miereveld, who was a board member in 1611 when he was also the most significant local painter.<sup>76</sup> In Haarlem painters with a reputation of ‘outstanding master’ (Dutch uytnemende meester) were far more likely to become board members than ones of mediocre fame.<sup>77</sup> It seems fair to conclude that practitioners perceived the guild as vital to the craft’s persistence and success, even though it was not directly involved in training. ## Controlling the Market Control over their product markets was what pre-modern guilds are meant to have been all about. In the Dutch Republic, also, the guilds seem to have been predominantly preoccupied with enforcing a monopoly over production and sale by the membership. So, the 1644 statutes of the Utrecht Schilders-Collegie stated that ‘no one, be he alien or inhabitant, will be allowed to exercise the art of painting as a master in this town, or make any paintings, before he is admitted to this College’, and that ‘nobody, being a stranger here, or coming from outside, shall sell publicly or secretly, any paintings or related works’.<sup>78</sup> The 1611 statutes of the Guild of St Luke in Utrecht declared similarly that ‘nobody who is not a brother of the Guild of St Luke’ could make oil or watercolor paintings; anyone wishing to paint or indeed to sell paintings needed to first sign up as a member.<sup>79</sup> Haarlem’s statutes had made the same point already in 1514 and they repeated it in later regulations.<sup>80</sup> Similar rules applied with all guilds of St Luke. If we take the frequency with which individual items were discussed at the Haarlem guild’s monthly meetings, issues of membership were the top priority. Hardly a meeting went by that the overseers did not enquire into the dealings of a painter who was practicing outside the guild’s remit. Throughout the spring and summer of 1642, for example, one Willem Willemszoon Swinderswijck, an otherwise insignificant artist, was relentlessly pursued because he painted and traded outside the corporation. His case was discussed at eight separate meetings and fines were imposed almost every time. In the end, Swinderswijck gave in and registered.<sup>81</sup> Notwithstanding their efforts, the guilds found it very hard to control sales. There were three reasons for this. First, guild statutes did not prevent private individuals from buying paintings elsewhere.<sup>82</sup> This was pretty much inevitable, since different towns produced quite different kinds of painting, at least at the top end of the market (it is likely that local painters could match a broader range at the middle and lower ends of the market). Someone who wanted a really good Italianate painting, for example, would be unlikely to find it in Rotterdam or Delft and would need to travel to Utrecht or Amsterdam to buy it. In Leiden, probate inventories show that the proportion of non-local paintings actually increased after the mid-seventeenth century, when Leiden painters finally established their guild.<sup>83</sup> The trade in paintings – the second infringement of the guild’s nominal ‘monopoly’ – aggravated the problem. Commercial dealers were active in many Dutch towns in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and they were not just stocking local produce; they could do this thanks to the article of the guild statutes that allowed members to sell paintings produced elsewhere.<sup>84</sup> The third source of leakage in guild ‘monopolies’ can also be traced to resistance by the membership itself. In Haarlem, in particular, the guild was racked by fierce conflicts in the 1630s and 1640s over the legitimacy of alternative sales outlets like auctions and lotteries.<sup>85</sup> In 1630 the dean and other board members of the Guild of St Luke filed a petition with the town burgomasters demanding the suppression of ‘the numerous public auctions, sales, lotteries and raffles’ containing paintings imported from outside – a practice that was ‘extremely damaging to, and disrespectful of, the artists and the art of painting, that most outstanding art that has always provided honour and fame to this praiseworthy town’.<sup>86</sup> Unfortunately, prominent members of the guild were themselves involved in these dealings. In November 1631 a Haarlem innkeeper planned to auction paintings that included works by such well-known local masters as the Hals brothers, Molenaer, van Ruysdael, and Porcellis, who had evidently connived to make their works available for this illicit sale. In 1636 Frans Pietersz de Grebber, one of the guild’s most prominent members, announced a lottery with his own and other painters’ works as prizes. He was fined, because the lottery had been announced and tickets sold within the city; the guild ruled that the fact that the draw had taken place outside the Haarlem perimeter was no excuse.<sup>87</sup> De Grebber, who also served on the ruling board on numerous occasions, was at the centre of a new dispute over these issues in 1644. Two years earlier, the guild had persuaded the local authorities to issue a general ban on lotteries, which, the guild’s overseers claimed, had been organised ‘not just by the guild’s brothers but also by individual burghers’.<sup>88</sup> Forty-nine members of the guild signed a petition to the burgomasters.<sup>89</sup> De Grebber, however, filed a counterpetition with four colleagues, claiming that attempts to control product markets were misguided and would both deter normal customers and undermine a means of reaching new and inexperienced art buyers. Young painters in particular, who had yet to establish a name for themselves, found lotteries a convenient way to market their wares.<sup>90</sup> Whatever the merits of the individual arguments, there is no doubt that painters were operating in a ‘competitive, diversified market’.<sup>91</sup> Paintings could be commissioned and bought directly from the painter’s workshop;<sup>92</sup> but they were sold at so-called free markets, through official and unofficial auctions, through lottery schemes, and from art dealers who held large stocks of paintings in various price ranges.<sup>93</sup> However, the opposite conclusion that guild efforts to control local trade were wholly ineffective is not borne out by a survey of the paintings in local collections, which shows a significant overrepresentation of local artists. In Delft, for example, local masters painted 60 percent of attributed paintings; only two of the nineteen most popular painters were outsiders.<sup>94</sup> In Amsterdam, a larger and more cosmopolitan city, just half attributed paintings were by Amsterdamers. In Haarlem, by contrast, local painters painted almost four-fifths of all locally owned paintings. Montias, whose research I have quoted, reckons that Delft and Haarlem were more typical than Amsterdam.<sup>95</sup> The evidence may be biased against local painters, because attributions are more likely in the upper-class collections, where the more expensive, out-of-town works were more common.<sup>96</sup> Evidence from Leiden probate inventories suggests, however, that the link between patterns of consumption and guild activities was far from straightforward. In the first half of the seventeenth century the most popular painters among Leiden collectors were almost invariably local; from 1650, however, the popularity of non-local paintings grew considerably despite the fact that Leiden painters had established a guild in 1648. The guild’s creation, on the other hand, was followed by a substantial increase in the size and value of the overall art market: only one of nine major collections of the period pre-dates the guild’s creation, and prices increased after 1650, benefiting local as well as non-local painters.<sup>97</sup> In sum, the guild masters’ monopoly on the production and sale of works of art was far from complete – so much that the term monopoly is surely a misnomer.<sup>98</sup> ## Stimulating Demand Guilds arguably helped create markets (a public good) that they were able to control only partially. Among the reasons for this is that the quality of a painting is not evident in quite the same way as is the quality of a loaf of bread or even of a piece of furniture. This is all too obvious when we think of the deep suspicion with which many people consider modern art and the vast sums paid for it. Such beliefs found their seventeenth-century equivalent in a remark by a French traveller who noted in his diary, \`a propos a work of Vermeer, ‘qu’on avait pay´e six cens livres quoyqu’il n’y est qu’une figure, que j’aurais cru trop payer de six pistoles’ – in other words: 600 guilders for a single figure was outrageously overpriced.<sup>99</sup> Such insecurity about the true value of a product whose value is determined largely by desire can, as the economist George Akerlof has theorised, potentially give rise to a buyers’ strike, that is, to the total collapse of trade for lack of trust.<sup>100</sup> The problem of asymmetric information applied especially to the top of the range, where connoisseurship mattered most and where huge sums of money were involved. No one wished to return home with an expensive painting, signed by a well-known master, to find an identical copy made by apprentices on sale the next day. Could craft guilds reduce this asymmetry between producers and their customers?<sup>101</sup> Probably the most important way that guilds made the market more transparent was through their sales room, which gave customers the opportunity to compare products and price. Painters’ guilds in Antwerp and Bruges had already opened such premises in 1460 and 1482 respectively, and the Dutch later imitated them. The regulations of the new Schilders-Collegie, established in Utrecht in 1644, included the establishment of a sales room and the requirement that every guildsman help stock it and provide a new work when the previous offering was sold.<sup>102</sup> The painters’ guilds of Haarlem, Amsterdam, and The Hague also had a salesroom, while in Delft – which had no permanent exhibition – the guild hall was designated as the sole place to hold auctions and sales of paintings.<sup>103</sup> The 1656 statutes at The Hague required every master to submit a work ‘in his own hand’ that would be put up for sale at a price determined by the guild’s overseers. In 1658 it was decided to make a comprehensive list of all works on sale with their prices.<sup>104</sup> In Utrecht the local government subsidised the salesroom, including covering heating costs; and an eighteenth-century attempt to revive the local school of painting – which was believed to add to the town’s prestige – included a revival of the sales room.<sup>105</sup> The Schilders-Collegie, received a hefty 500-guilder grant to refurbish the room, and when the final costs turned out to be substantially higher (‘as always happens’) a further 350 guilders were provided.<sup>106</sup> Painters were not always enthusiastic about contributing their work to these public, corporate salesrooms. The Utrecht Collegie seems to have had problems enforcing its rule of 1644 that every master should supply three paintings. It reiterated the statute in 1660, and in 1664 it was forced to specify that the paintings submitted had to be ‘done by [the master] himself, completely finished, with the usual colours, in the prescribed format’.<sup>107</sup> The reasons for this are unclear. While it was certainly in the artists’ collective interest to ensure market transparency, it may be that such a corporate exhibition and pricing had the effect of compressing prices, particularly at the top end of the market, which went against the interests of the better individual artists; unfortunately, we lack the relevant price lists to establish if this was the case. To avoid confusion, guilds also tried to educate their better-off customers. The Leiden master painter Philip Angel held a famous lecture on St Luke’s Day, 1641, in which he set forth both the intellectual status of painting – an ancient and highly esteemed craft, superior to poetry and sculpture – and, just as significantly, how to recognise a good piece of work. Presumably his audience, which included middle class businessmen in addition to fellow artists, needed some guidance in both cultural snobbery and connoisseurship. Although Angel seems mainly to have been urging his colleagues to apply a ‘sweet-flowing naturalness . . . a pleasingly decorative richness’, to ensure a ‘proper combination of lights and shadows’ and to make sure that they got their perspective right, there was also a good deal to learn in the lecture for the simple consumer and patron of the arts.<sup>108</sup> Angel’s example was followed later in the century by the blind painter Gerard de Lairesse, who gave a series of lectures for the general public in the arts room of Amsterdam town hall. His text was later published as a book.<sup>109</sup> More commonly, however, painters made themselves available to potential customers. The autobiography of Constantijn Huygens, who was chief adviser for paintings to the Orange court in the first half of the seventeenth century, is full of painters with whom the author discussed the arts.<sup>110</sup> Alternatively, individuals with a serious interest in the arts could sometimes register with a guild as liefhebber or devotee and participate in its social activities, including the gossip and small talk that are so important for the definition of an artistic reputation.<sup>111</sup> Finally, the guild arbitrated in disputes between painters and their customers. In 1643 the Haarlem guild arbitrated between Isaac van Ostade, the younger brother of a well-known local master, Adriaan, and the art dealer Leendert Hendrixsen of Rotterdam. Two years before, nineteenyear-old Ostade had agreed to make several paintings for Hendrixsen for a fixed sum, but he now claimed a higher fee ‘because his work had become more expensive’. The guild ordered him to finish the job, but agreed that he should be paid more for doing so.<sup>112</sup> In 1654 Rembrandt filed a notarial claim against Diego d’Andrada, whose daughter he had portrayed, and who had apparently withheld payment because he did not appreciate the likeness. Although Rembrandt demanded to be paid in full, he added, significantly, that he was prepared ‘to submit to the directors of the Guild of St Luke whether or not it [the picture] looks like the daughter, and if they say it does not, then he will change it’.<sup>113</sup> Making the market more transparent was not just in the interest of the arts, but also of business. ## Promoting Quality Although further investigation is needed, we may plausibly assume that a reasonably complete range of paintings was on offer in most urban markets in the Netherlands, especially in the larger towns. The membership register of the Delft guild for 1611 and 1612 lists specialists in portraiture, still life and flowers, histories, and landscape; the register that runs from January 1613 to June 1649 also includes specialists in ‘perspectives’, ‘genre’, battles, and seascapes, and each of these varieties included more than one painter.<sup>114</sup> The art market in The Hague similarly included ‘a great variety in styles and subject’.<sup>115</sup> At the same time, as we have seen, each town produced types of paintings that were not necessarily unique but were made in such quantity and quality to warrant a specific reputation.<sup>116</sup> Thus, Haarlem was renowned from the late sixteenth century for its marine and landscape painters; Middelburg was briefly famous around 1600 as a centre for flower still lifes; and Utrecht gained a reputation for its Italianate works and specialised in history paintings.<sup>117</sup> Although only a lesser art centre, Rotterdam developed a school in farm interiors, and Leiden eventually became the centre of the socalled painters of the beau-fini, notably Gerard Dou and the van Mieris family, whose extremely detailed and expensive work was very popular in the 1650s and ’60s.<sup>118</sup> Slightly earlier, Delft masters made a name for themselves for urban perspectives, including the indoor scenes by de Hooch and Vermeer, public buildings by Emanuel de Witte, and urban landscapes, partly by Vermeer but mainly by van Bassen, Houckgeest, van Steenwijck, and Vosmaer. Two towns do not fit this pattern: Amsterdam, which was so big that it could sustain a range of specialisms;<sup>119</sup> and The Hague, where the court and its entourage commissioned many works from out-of-town painters and from abroad.<sup>120</sup> It would be an exaggeration to claim that these local schools were the direct outcome of guild activities, for in most cases these specialities can be traced to one or two individual masters. It is a fact, however, that specialists tended to cluster where painting was organised by craft guilds. The situation in Leiden is particularly interesting, because the painters’ guild there was established late by comparison with other towns. Its creation was followed by the emergence of a local school of beau-fini painters and a growing investment in paintings. However, the large collections created in the second half of the century included an increasing proportion of imports, suggesting that incorporation helped to increase both the size and quality of the local market. This conclusion, that established craft organisations helped create specific styles and repertoires and raise quality standards, is also upheld by developments in other countries during other Golden Ages. It is not possible to go into much detail here, but a brief discussion of three important examples will serve our present purpose: the Flemish School of early Netherlandish painting of the fifteenth century, the Spanish Golden Age of the seventeenth century, and the flowering of English painting in the later eighteenth century. Michelangelo is supposed to have remarked that Netherlandish painters were brilliant craftsmen but lacked the intellectual refinement to produce really great art.<sup>121</sup> As Michelangelo was no doubt well aware, however, this did little harm to Netherlandish painting’s popularity at home or abroad, even in Renaissance Italy;<sup>122</sup> Jan van Eyck, Rogier van der Weyden, Gerard David, and Hans Memling are still household names. What is more, Flemish painters were among the first to explore the possibilities of mass production.<sup>123</sup> Copies were produced on a vast scale with the help of templates and other means that boosted labour productivity. The average size of workshops was small, so it is likely that independent specialists collaborated on individual pieces.<sup>124</sup> Thus, like Dutch artists in the Golden age, late medieval Flemish painters produced a typical combination of mass-made, high-quality art. Like in the north in the seventeenth century, these developments occurred within a highly structured environment.<sup>125</sup> During the fourteenth century the craft guilds in Brabant and Flanders rose to such prominence that some have defined the period as the age of the guild revolutions, not least because guilds participated in political affairs through membership of civic institutions.<sup>126</sup> Craft guilds that regulated the arts protected both their members’ interests – for example by claiming exclusive access to local markets – and that of their customers, who were offered second opinions on quality if they felt short-changed. At the same time, local government supported the guilds’ efforts to market their output by establishing exhibition spaces known as Pandt. The Antwerp luxury crafts created a Pandt in 1460 and their Bruges peers followed suit in 1482. These were specially built exhibition areas, shaped like a cloister, where paintings were sold together with books, prints, and sculpture in Antwerp, and with gold objects, jewellery, and other luxury goods in Bruges.<sup>127</sup> Whereas Flemish guilds collaborated with towns to promote artistic excellence, contemporary Spanish painting suffered from the lack of such institutional arrangements. In the late fifteenth century, with the Reconquista still underway in Granada, the Christian government enlisted the arts to fashion a new identity for Spain through a combination of direct patronage at the court and of enforced artistic competition that overruled traditional local monopolies. Artists from Germany, the Low Countries, and Italy were suddenly in great demand in Spain, where they could easily settle and set up business.<sup>128</sup> By contrast, rising demand did very little for Spanish painting, and indeed much Spanish art of the time consists simply of imitations of the northern style. In the early seventeenth century, a writer expressed surprise at ‘how little Spaniards esteemed their own native painters’ and cites the court-painter Eugenio Caj´es – himself of Italian origin – as complaining about the lack of self-confidence among native painters and, specifically, about the lack of proper professional training in Spain.<sup>129</sup> The Spanish Golden Age, consequently, differed fundamentally from the Dutch and the Flemish. Throughout the sixteenth century Spanish painting was under the spell of Netherlandish and Italian styles. Prominent Spanish painters were trained abroad, mostly in Italy, and Philip II and his courtiers invited large numbers of foreigners to work for them. El Greco, born in the Venetian colony of Crete, may have been an enigma in terms of style and composition, but was entirely typical in terms of his background.<sup>130</sup> This is not to deny the greatness of some of the works painted in sixteenth-century Castile – but they mainly fed off other ‘institutional systems’ for artistic production.<sup>131</sup> The Golden Age of indigenous Spanish art occurred in the first half of the seventeenth century. It was as wonderful as it was short-lived. Remarkably, it was not so much Madrid, whence the main commissions originated, but Seville that produced the most significant Spanish painters, foremost among them the towering figure of Diego de Velazquez. With fewer than thirty guild members in a city of 100,000, Seville’s community of painters was extremely small by Dutch standards; Delft, with only a quarter of Seville’s population, provided work for thirty-six painters in 1650.<sup>132</sup> But Seville, by contrast with Madrid, possessed both a guild and an informal artistic academy, where painters, writers, and scholars met under the guidance of the painter Francisco Pacheco – who also happened to be Velazquez’ teacher, and would become his father-inlaw.<sup>133</sup> Significantly, attempts to turn these arrangements into a formal Academy proved ineffective, however. Painters filed several petitions with the Madrid government, including in 1624 a full set of rules that had only to be printed to come into take effect – but these were ignored and left to gather dust on a civil servant’s desk.<sup>134</sup> Once the informal academy in Seville lost steam, there were no formal training mechanisms in place to turn a brief ‘golden age’ into a longer-lasting tradition. England followed a similar pattern for much of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, but with a happier ending. A market for paintings emerged, mainly in London of course, during the seventeenth century, slowly at first, more spectacularly from the 1680s onwards.<sup>135</sup> For a long time this chronology was seen as resulting from successful protectionism by the London guild of Painters and Stainers.<sup>136</sup> It is now clear, however, that its role was overestimated. In England as in Spain, the Stuart monarchy and court wished to obtain the best – which at that time meant international – art available, and sought to promote English industry by importing foreign skills. By 1630 already London’s guild of Painters and Stainers was fighting a losing battle against these initiatives and its members were reduced to decorating, while top commissions went to foreigners like Van Dijck.<sup>137</sup> As a result of royal policy, the development of English domestic painting remained dependent for a long time on foreign inputs, especially from the Low Countries.<sup>138</sup> The situation was only fundamentally reversed with the creation, in 1768, of the Royal Academy of Arts that offered training and ‘regular public exposure’, thus offering native artists unprecedented freedom to learn and experiment.<sup>139</sup> ## Conclusion Michael Montias has suggested that the flowering of the arts during the Dutch Golden Age was a result of ‘critical mass’, of the improvement in quality that ensued from having such a great number of painters competing for buyers.<sup>140</sup> The foregoing indicates that, important as critical mass is, numbers in themselves are not sufficient. Perhaps we should substitute ‘critical mass’ with ‘clusters’. Michael E. Porter, who has done so much to raise the profile and underscore the importance of clusters as dynamic forces in modern economies, defines them as ‘geographic concentrations of interconnected companies, specialised suppliers, service providers, firms in related industries, and associated institutions’.<sup>141</sup> One important aspect of clusters is precisely the organisations and institutions, whose role, Porter suggests, can range from lobbying government and hosting social functions to ‘providing a neutral forum for identifying common needs, constraints and opportunities, . . . organizing national and international fairs and delegations’, creating training programmes, collecting cluster-related information, and ‘pursue[ing] many other common interests’. The benefits of clustering are especially important for small- and medium-sized firms that need ‘a collective body to take on scale-sensitive functions’.<sup>142</sup> Arguably, painter workshops in Holland formed exactly the type of constellation that Porter describes. It would be foolish, of course, to suggest that guilds made the Golden Age in Dutch painting. There was more to it than just organisation. What the evidence does suggest is that professional organisations – craft guilds in our case – could make a significant contribution to the development of the arts, and by implication to that of industrial production more generally in the early modern period. At a general level, we observe a significant coincidence in time between the establishment of specific guilds for the fine arts during the 1610s and the rise of the so-called Dutch school of painting. Many of its defining characteristics may have been pioneered in sixteenth-century Antwerp, a corporate town in its own right, but there is no denying that the painters from Holland produced works that were artistically innovative and hugely successful commercially. That contemporaries saw the guilds as instrumental to this success is borne out by the fact that many of the leading painters of the age were prepared to spend precious time on their guild boards. More specifically, painters’ guilds contributed to both artistic and commercial success by providing a stable framework for training of painters and by organising a market for paintings that was both varied and made transparent through the information it provided to consumers. In most of these areas, guilds and their members did not behave uniformly or consistently. Permanent tensions existed between the interests of the painters’ community as a whole and those of individual artists, which translated into conflicts within the guilds. These tensions and contradictions were among the reasons why guilds never successfully controlled local markets for paintings. Available figures do suggest, however, that they managed to corner a significant slice of their home markets and at the same time to deepen those markets by creating the transparency needed for consumer confidence. Thanks to that stable local market, they could also develop more sophisticated and expensive products for export within the Republic and abroad. Thinking about the effects of clustering on artistic production can also help clarify a problem that has confused the historiography of guilds in no small way. Like modern employers’ organisations, guilds were in the business of producing collective as well as public goods.<sup>143</sup> Guilds themselves were well aware of this and of the connection between the two. Time and again, Dutch guild petitions emphasised how their members’ private welfare also benefited the urban public interest. They presented themselves as the backbone of their local community, in general terms as well as with specific reference to taxation.<sup>144</sup> Local authorities usually agreed, and often went out of their way to accommodate guild demands.<sup>145</sup> However, as producers of public goods, guilds faced the usual agency problems of how to ensure that a significant proportion of the benefits accrue to their members. It is important to understand that private enterprises will produce public goods if their benefits to producers outweigh the costs.<sup>146</sup> This point would seem to explain much of the guilds’ behavior, together with the observation by many historians that they did not always do what they said they would. The Dutch guilds of St Luke tried to enforce control of sales, but allowed certain well-defined exceptions; this resulted in some but not complete protection of their domestic markets. Interestingly, this apparent failure does not seem to have bothered them too much. But we have to bear in mind that the costs of organisation were modest too, and that as the evidence we have examined suggests, the economic benefits of guild membership more than likely repaid its costs.