# Inventing in a World of Guilds: Silk Fabrics in Eighteenth-century Lyon Liliane P´erez This chapter examines the production of silk brocades in Lyon in the eighteenth century through the technical possibilities and skills that underpinned inventiveness, the social status of inventive artisans, and the policy of innovation that the powerful silk guild known as the Grande Fabrique developed in tune with the municipality.<sup>1</sup> Thanks to Lesley E. Miller and Carlo Poni, we know about the practices and the context of artistic creation in Lyon, especially the part played by design.<sup>2</sup> The success of the Lyon silk fabrics relied on design creativity and on the management of stocks of patterns owned by local firms. Their protection, application, and fraudulent circulation were the basis of the new Lyon fashions launched yearly across Europe. The utility of design was based upon technical ingenuity. Inventing a new fabric relied on a combination of new patterns as well as new devices and commercial projects, calculations, and plans. No refined patterns could have been realised without the multiplication of warp threads and of numerous tiny shuttles for weft threads, new devices for quickly changing patterns on looms, and new stitches giving the illusion of relief, shades, and half-tones in portraits. New flowered silks were at the heart of a web combining work on shapes, materials, processes, and projects.<sup>3</sup> These claims raise several questions. How could technical creativity develop within a silk guild that dominated the economic, social, and political life in Lyon? How did the guild cope with theft, fraud, copying, and poaching in a system in which competition between craftsmen was intense?<sup>4</sup> Did guild officials contrast legitimate copying with illegal imitations? How did inventors express and explain the linkages between creating new patterns, contriving new technical devices, and launching new enterprises? We shall first analyse how the Grande Fabrique and the municipality fostered innovation through the collective management of technical initiatives. In Lyon, politics supported innovation and technology helped shape public policy. Alain Cottereau has described this process for the Revolutionary Era and the nineteenth century;<sup>5</sup> we will push back the enquiry into the eighteenth century when the guild was still the main economic actor in town.<sup>6</sup> Second, we shall examine the balance between guild activities and inventors. Paradoxically, the collective aims of the guild fostered individualistic claims and competitiveness. Invention was shaped by conflict. In that context, how did a heroic model of invention emerge from the legends of de Lasalle and later Jacquard?<sup>7</sup> ## Artisans, Guilds, and Innovation Artisans constituted the main workforce in Lyon during the Ancien Regime and they produced most finished goods. Most Lyon inventors up to and during the Industrial Revolution came from their ranks, especially in the luxury trades, where constant innovation was essential for business.<sup>8</sup> Historians have generally considered artisans and their guilds as brakes to innovation because of their alleged secrecy, conservatism and inherited know-how, the strict rules for quality standards, and the barriers between trades. More generally, artisans are supposed to have been subjects of ‘blind routine’ and of a collective ethos that choked initiative. Steven L. Kaplan has demonstrated how masters could express contradictory feelings toward guilds, which helped them gain reputation, authority, and credit in the marketplace, but also restrained their personal ambitions.<sup>9</sup> Eighteenth-century French liberals, from Vincent de Gournay to Turgot, fiercely opposed guilds on this basis.<sup>10</sup> As a matter of fact, the artisan world was never as immobile or routinised as its critics have assumed. Recent studies have stressed three points for understanding technical innovation within guild-based manufactures. First, the artisan world was highly heterogeneous, with powerful merchants and ambitious masters eager to make profits, some of them combining individual patenting activities and membership of a guild. A competitive atmosphere fostered inventiveness. There was intense copying, imitating, and stealing of other workers’ devices. The fact that entrepreneurs relied on extensive subcontracting among complementary trades also made it easy to transpose technical processes and stimulated invention.<sup>11</sup> Second, the boundaries between specialities were porous: growing specialisation went hand in hand with multi-tasking. In the Grande Fabrique, individual masters could equally weave, develop new technical mechanisms, and draw patterns for brocades.<sup>12</sup> Artisans could also belong to several guilds and combine different skills and networks of expertise.<sup>13</sup> Third, this dynamism was sustained by cooperation. Urban artisans in France obtained financial support, material supplies, skilled workers, commercial opportunities, and political protection through complex social networks involving family ties, kinship, neighbourhood, and wider circles that included courtiers, financiers, and academicians. Guilds provided support by testing new devices, certifying and regulating new products, and securing inventors’ rewards – including providing advice for patenting. French guilds were ‘open technique institutions’ that taught, demonstrated, and bought new equipment.<sup>14</sup> For a long time, continental European guilds and private incentive mechanisms such as exclusive privileges (the functional equivalent of modern patents of invention) that often included the obligation of teaching within guilds, were complementary – two sides of the same mercantilist coin of promoting the economy of the state.<sup>15</sup> This arrangement also applied to Ancien Regime France. French guilds also offered strong incentives to invent and to spread inventions by financing innovation and rewarding merit. Guilds offered resources to inventors within a public, collective management of innovation that included technical expertise, funding of new equipment, and protection against frauds and imitations.<sup>16</sup> Technology was ‘politicised’.<sup>17</sup> Hence, guild policy and state policy could be in tune, especially when egalitarian liberals like V´eron de Forbonnais, Vincent de Gournay, and Trudaine controlled French commercial administration. Although they criticised guilds as conservative, their innovation policies relied in practice on the guilds themselves. In eighteenth-century France, Lyon’s Grande Fabrique was a model and laboratory for establishing a national system of innovation management. ## Artisans, Municipalism, and Merchant Capitalism Lyon is an example of the arrangement that Charles Sabel and Jonathan Zeitlin call ‘municipalist’, by which they refer to the agreements between authorities and producers in some European cities during the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, whereby local institutions helped coordinate skilled independent workshops and encouraged manufacturing strategies based upon labour flexibility and product innovation.<sup>18</sup> With 143,000 inhabitants in 1789, Lyon was the second largest town in France. The Grande Fabrique or Manufacture des ´etoffes de soie, d’or et d’argent directly employed nearly a quarter of the population, not including the guilds of velvet makers, dyers, carders, throwers, silk stocking weavers, gold wire drawers, ribbon weavers, and gold lace makers (just the last two accounted for more than six thousand workers). The Fabrique itself was responsible for fourteen thousand looms in the eighteenth century, twice the number under Louis XIV.<sup>19</sup> The silk guild was at the heart of Lyon’s economy. It was also the main nexus of its political organization. The first attempt to institutionalize the manufacture of silk fabrics in Lyon occurred in the fifteenth century and became a source of conflict between Louis XI and the municipality or Consulat. Lyon already had a monopoly over the trade in silk fabrics linked to its great annual fairs; the aim of the legislation of 1466 was to extend this prerogative to manufacture. Silk consumption was increasing, and foreign skilled workers had to be attracted, especially Italians.<sup>20</sup> However, the Consulat successfully resisted the foundation of a guild under royal control (m´etier jur´e or jurande), and in 1554 Henry II accepted that the guild be turned into a free trade (m´etier libre).<sup>21</sup> Indeed, under the Ancien Regime only four out of sixty-eight guilds in Lyon were m´etiers jur´es.<sup>22</sup> Nonetheless, freedom of work inside the Grande Fabrique was pretty much illusory.<sup>23</sup> The trade came under the town’s control and strict rules were soon established for apprenticeship, journeymanship (compagnonnage), and the masterpiece (from which masters’ sons were exempted). The Consulat named the guild leaders (maˆıtres-gardes), following a procedure common to nearly all guilds in Lyon.<sup>24</sup> Over time, this enhanced the power of the silk merchant-manufacturers (marchands fabricants), who were allowed from 1667 to enter the guild, to subcontract work, and to sell their own fabrics. Gradually, merchants extended their control. In 1702 it was stipulated that four out of six maˆıtres-gardes had to be merchants, in 1712 subcontracted workers had to pay a substantial fee if they wanted to sell directly on the market, and in 1731 combining the roles of weaver and merchant was outlawed.<sup>25</sup> After a period of troubles and a temporary victory of the workers in 1737, a new set of regulations in 1744 further enhanced the power of the merchants. They were aided by government reforms led by the inspector of silk manufactures, Jacques Vaucanson, who wished to rationalize the entire French silk trade under the control of Lyon merchants who ran silk throwing mills in southern France.<sup>26</sup> Although the scheme failed and Vaucanson was forced to flee to Paris, by then the seventy top merchants had taken charge of the industry. The number of independent weavers decreased during the eighteenth century, while the number of subcontracted workers, still called masters (canuts in the nineteenth century), rose to seven thousand.<sup>27</sup> The domination of the merchants coincided with the expansion of trade, and the introduction of design regulations and stronger protection of industrial activities, including an early form of copyright.<sup>28</sup> This was echoed by strict rules against the emigration of workers and by the exclusion of Protestants (the latter dating back to 1667) and of ‘foreigners’ from the guild. Whereas in 1737 aliens – who were expected to provide information about foreign industries – were still allowed to work three months in Lyon, by 1744 permission had been withdrawn on the grounds that they threatened local designs and devices.<sup>29</sup> Except for looms, capital investment in buildings and equipment was not large. Far more important for the industry’s success were the investment in circulating capital (silk threads, gold and silver wire, designs) and the ‘fluid exchanges’ (Sabel and Zeitlin) between skilled agents, that is, the coordination between merchants, designers, metteurs en cartes who transposed designs on point paper, weavers, d´evideuses (the female silk winders), silk throwers, dyers, and other female workers.<sup>30</sup> The silk guild and the town authorities played an essential part in providing skills through craft apprenticeship and by fostering links between agents. Lyon relied for its success upon a combination of ‘organizational mobility’ and ‘economy of variety’ that balanced the interests of individuals and the collective management of technical and human resources.<sup>31</sup> Merchants ordered samples and fabrics from different workshops and master weavers dealt with several merchants over their lifetimes or (after a reform in 1700) at the same time. In 1667 a system of receipts (billets d’acquit) established a credit system for buying equipment, whereby the looms (up to four per weaver) belonged to the masters but the cost was shared with the merchants.<sup>32</sup> This arrangement was not a free gift by the merchants, however, but a mechanism to lock in subcontracting masters; subcontractors wanting to work for a new merchant had to reimburse any advances by their former employer.<sup>33</sup> Some of this system’s rigidities were loosened from the 1740s, when the guild and town authorities began to offer financial support to masters who adopted new kinds of loom. From 1770 indebted masters were allowed to switch merchants provided they paid back one-eighth of their future earnings. This arrangement was reinforced in 1806 with the creation of the Conseil de Prud’hommes, a local tribunal that helped settle credit disputes; the Prud’hommes upheld loans for more efficient looms and permitted weavers to change employers provided they had their current merchant’s consent.<sup>34</sup> ## Coordination in the Workshop Silk brocades were made with complex machines called draw looms. In plain weaving, warp threads were pulled in groups linked to vertical coupling cords (lisses) fixed into frames (lames) operated by pedals. Patterns could be sophisticated but were always symmetrical and repetitive. In Lyon’s m´etiers \`a la tire, by contrast, all kinds of designs, even portraits, could be woven because the warp threads were chosen individually, and were not gathered into frames but were pulled by drawgirls (tireuses) by means of attached cords; the four hundred to eight hundred hanging cords formed the simple (semple).<sup>35</sup> One simple permitted one design that was programmed by arranging cords in small groups linked by lashes or loops (lacs) and tied to a thick cord in the order they had to be pulled. Each loop corresponded to one colour of weft. The weft, in turn, was composed of threads (duites) of different shades reeled on small shuttles. It took twenty-five days to set up a new pattern. When a master had finished weaving a design, it was removed, and he moved on to another loom while the first one was reloaded. This technology relied upon a complex coordination between weavers and auxiliaries, which included reader girls (liseuses) who transposed the patterns from point paper into simples, loopmakers, drawgirls, d´evideuses, and remetteuses, who mended damaged threads and cords. Four looms employed seven auxiliaries, in addition to the weaver himself, his wife, an apprentice, and a journeyman. The guild regulations made a distinction between weavers and auxiliaries. The former belonged to the Fabrique and were a privileged workforce. Journeymen could not be paid less than half the price of the product they made, and, although they were bound to their masters by credit, advances were restricted, which supported skilled journeymen’s mobility in the long term.<sup>36</sup> The auxiliaries were not members of the guild, they were bound to their master and their earnings were low.<sup>37</sup> Most inventive activity in the eighteenth century aimed at lowering the cost of simples and, even more, at reducing the number of auxiliary workers and at easing the coordination of tasks in the workshop so as to adapt more quickly to changes in fashion.<sup>38</sup> At the same time the technical context for pattern design evolved. Inventive efforts concentrated on programming patterns, in parallel with the intensified activity of designers connected to Parisian merchants and customers.<sup>39</sup> From the early eighteenth century most new devices aimed at easing the selection of warp threads and the reading of designs onto the simples. In 1725 Basile Bouchon developed a loom whose hanging cords were armed with horizontal needles that were pushed against a roll of perforated paper. When a needle struck paper (rather than holes), it was pushed back and grasped by a fork, connected to a pedal operated by the drawgirl that would pull the warp thread down. Bouchon’s partner, Jean-Philippe Falcon, improved this device in 1742 by replacing the roll with a chain of perforated cards hanging from a prism. The principle was the same, but the greater number of needles for each line of design made more complex patterns possible. Falcon improved the mechanism several times and was still adapting the loom for making rich brocades when he died in 1765. But his major contribution was his device to perforate the boards, the socalled reading machine. Cutting stamps were tied up to hanging cords, making it possible to perforate cardboards according to the pattern transposed onto a simple. This ‘reading’ operation could then be repeated as often as necessary, providing perforated cards for numerous workshops and enabling the industry to launch new designs on a massive scale. What is more, the reading process was independent of the loom and could take place outside the workshop, freeing up valuable workspace. Falcon’s inventions were matched by devices aimed at making cord-pulling easier, reducing the size of the simple or making it possible to detach the simple from the loom, the latter being a major contribution by Philippe de Lasalle.<sup>40</sup> A third type of innovation was to combine pattern programming and labour saving by mechanical means. Such contrivances were generally attempted for small-sized designs (petite tire). Only Jacques Vaucanson’s draw loom offered a solution for larger designs, but it was forgotten until Joseph-Marie Jacquard rediscovered it much later in the collections of the Conservatoire des Arts et M´etiers. Vaucanson’s device, invented between 1747 and 1750 in Paris, was a perforated cylinder set up on the loom; the needles that struck it were connected to hooks that pulled the warp threads. However, the holes on the cylinder were too few to allow complex designs.<sup>41</sup> In 1804 Jacquard combined Falcon’s cardboards and Vaucanson’s cylinder and grate into a major breakthrough. A chain of perforated cards that rotated around a prism selected the needles and, by that means, also the hooks, the coupling cords, and the warp threads. Although the Jacquard loom could not be used for rich brocades, it permitted more sophisticated patterns than Vaucanson’s, in particular flowered silks or fa¸conn´es. Yet, far from being a radical invention, as later legend would have it, it was the outcome of a host of small, incremental inventions and it required major improvements to be effective. It stemmed from an original policy of innovation based upon guild activity and township funding. ## Public Management of Innovation Technological progress was a major concern of the Lyon elites, and Lyon was the most technologically innovative city in France. Lyon artisans accounted for at least 170 of the nearly 900 inventors who applied to the French national administration for a privilege of invention or a reward. At least seventy-three of them were connected to the Grande Fabrique; only twelve of these were large merchants.<sup>42</sup> The Lyon inventor was characteristically an independent master, a member of the social category that relied most on guild cohesion and whose reputation was based on its high skills. The corpus of Lyon inventions accounted for 265 proposals: 229 of these were related to textiles, of which 116 applied to draw looms. No other French city seems to have been so ‘invention intensive’ – by comparison, Parisian inventors in the same corpus accounted for 193 applications and were not specialised in any one sector.<sup>43</sup> Lyon inventors were strongly encouraged by the local municipality to invent and develop new initiatives. Already in the sixteenth century, the king and Consulat had taken measures to attract foreign artisans to Lyon to increase luxury trades and give work to the poor. In 1536 Etienne Turquetti, a merchant from Piedmont with support from Lucca (then still a major silk-producing centre) was given the right to tax artisans who used the machinery he had introduced to the city; having obtained further loans and tax exemptions, he settled in Lyon and became a leader of the velvet-makers’ guild in 1540.<sup>44</sup> Lacking a specific study of invention and innovation in Lyon in the seventeenth century, it is hard to make any firm statement for this period, although a local policy to support innovators was probably already in place; certainly immigration by foreign silk workers is well documented. By the beginning of the eighteenth century, local privileges (ordonnances consulaires) were granted by the Lyon Consulat and state privileges were managed by a local Police des Arts et M´etiers.<sup>45</sup> Nevertheless, the main feature of eighteenth-century innovation policy in Lyon’s silk industry was the substitution of monopoly concessions for inventions with public funding.<sup>46</sup> The first instance of this shift took place in 1734 when, in response to Pierre Chaussat’s request for a monopoly patent for a new velvet fabric, his competitors proposed that the Fabrique pay him 10,000 livres instead and make the invention public.<sup>47</sup> By midcentury this strategy had become commonplace. Funding was provided through two closely related channels. First, the guild itself granted financial support, which could be significant. For instance, the guild paid Jean-Philippe Falcon, one of the most rewarded inventors in Lyon, 52,194 livres between 1738 and 1755, first to pay off his debts and later as a loan.<sup>48</sup> However, guild support was occasional rather than standard practice, and followed approval by the Consulat and agreement by the central administration. The second funding channel was used more regularly, and drew on a tax on foreign silk entering Lyon that had been established in 1711 and was administered by the town council through the Caisse du droit des ´etoffes ´etrang\`eres.<sup>49</sup> From 1725 half the revenue, 30,000 livres, was handed over to the pr´evˆot des marchands to reward deserving silk manufacturers; the other half was destined to the hospital of La Charit´e. The first grants were made in 1732.<sup>50</sup> The French government, which was open to liberal reformers such as Trudaine and Vincent de Gournay who favoured public over private initiatives, turned Lyon into a kind of laboratory for its policy. In 1752 the state representative or intendant took control of the fund, with the Consulat and the Fabrique maintaining oversight; management became more complex and gave rise to permanent bargaining between royal and local administrators. At the same time, the government created a national fund, the Caisse du commerce, mainly devoted to supporting industry.<sup>51</sup> From 1752 growing numbers of Lyon inventors were rewarded and payments were diversified according to a scale of merit; grants made in 1753 ranged from 300 to 12,000 livres. A system of bounties, varying from 30 to 300 livres for each new loom and indexed to the number of looms built to the new standards, was introduced in 1760. As the sums bestowed increased from mid-century, payments could be shared between the Caisse and the Fabrique; each paid half of Philippe de Lasalle’s bonus of 200 livres for every one of the first 150 new looms set up in 1771.<sup>52</sup> Moreover, as the funding system became more sophisticated, examinations, proofs, and estimations got more complex. The fund financed innovation from the research stage to training experts right through to commercialization, and the authorities had to determine the technical efficiency and economic value of inventions based on a detailed monetary index and in relation to inventors’ needs and merits. ## Negotiating Technical Utility The central principle underlying the fund in the eighteenth century was that inventions were a collective good.<sup>53</sup> Most artisans were expected to invent, improve their devices, show them and sell them to their Lyon peers. Inventing was considered a service to the town and this assumption lay at the basis of the examinations that brought together weavers, guild officials, and members of the Lyon Acad´emie des Sciences, Belles-Lettres et Arts. Public utility was, however, validated by, and negotiated between, two distinct networks: the intendant and a local academician, Georges-Claude de Goiffon, on the one hand and the town officials and guild inspectors on the other.<sup>54</sup> Other local institutions could also be involved in the procedures, mainly the inspector of manufactures (Antoine-Fran¸cois Brisson was particularly active) and the Chamber of Commerce. The Paris Academy of Sciences and new societies like the Free Society of the Abb´e Baudeau were also addressed by well-connected and ambitious inventors like Claude Rivet, Jean Paulet, and Philippe de Lasalle, whose proximity to the court and other seats of power and to the enlightened elites allowed them to lobby central government. But the most frequent procedure in mid-century involved the maˆıtres-gardes and the academician Georges-Claude de Goiffon. Technical validation combined academic legitimacy and guild expertise. The procedure was deliberately set up by the central administration to get a range of opinions based on different criteria of efficiency and utility. When the contrˆoleur g´en´eral des finances addressed the Consulat and the intendant in 1761 about Jean Bouvard’s loom, the intendant’s notes read: ‘do not report the pr´evˆot des marchands’ advice’.<sup>55</sup> When disagreements arose, the final decision always fell to the central government, which generally followed the intendant’s advice. In 1756 with regard to a draw loom invented by Jean-Baptiste Peyrache, the state administrator Vincent de Gournay wrote to the pr´evˆot des marchands, who transmitted the case to the maˆıtres-gardes of the guild, who proposed a reward of 1,000 livres.<sup>56</sup> Gournay then turned to the intendant, who consulted academician de Goiffon, who in turn proposed 500 livres. The inventor was then granted 500 livres. Although lobbies and cabals did exist, not least because the maˆıtres-gardes were themselves involved in trade, the management of innovation attempted to balance local interests with public policy, leading to a kind of ‘public distancing’ or deflection of local antagonisms.<sup>57</sup> Behind the bargaining between local and central institutions, local experts were mobilised to establish the value of inventions based on public interest. De Goiffon and the guild’s officials were practical-minded, and user approval rather than judgements of authority was the main point of reference.<sup>58</sup> This concept of utility fostered a system of bonuses indexed on diffusion that required making enquiries in the workshops and among weavers. In 1763 the maˆıtres-gardes approved Jean-Jacques Maynard’s loom that reduced the required number of drawgirls, made the work easier, and improved the quality of cloth; they noted that eight of the new looms were already in use in the Fabrique and proposed a reward of 1,800 livres. De Goiffon approved the invention on the same grounds. He also compared it with an earlier and more sophisticated invention by Jean Benoˆıt Allard, noting however that Maynard’s was less cumbersome and was preferred by the workers, who had already adopted it: as de Goiffon put it, ‘now in this case, the worker is the best judge’.<sup>59</sup> Maynard was granted 300 livres and a bonus based on the loom’s take-up in town. The academician and the guild’s inspectors did also disagree. De Goiffon complained that the inspectors ‘pretend to be the sole and sovereign judges of any innovation in silk making, [and thus] free themselves from giving reasons for their judgments’.<sup>60</sup> In 1764 his employers challenged a new satin fabric invented by the journeyman Jean Paulet. Although the maˆıtres-gardes approved the new fabric, de Goiffon sided with the employers in stating that it was neither new nor interesting; although the cloth saved on raw materials, its quality was unacceptably poor.<sup>61</sup> The intendant confirmed that such contrivances had to be forbidden or at least resisted. In 1765 the academician thought that Etienne Chassagneux’s latest improvement to roping for draw-looms did not deserve a reward, although the guild’s inspectors had approved it. The intendant Jean Baillon wrote to the Bureau du Commerce in Paris that the guild officials had misunderstood the invention because they were ‘busy with many details, makers who only know the practical side of production and have not studied, like M. de Goiffon, the theory of the loom and the different parts it is made of’.<sup>62</sup> The matter at issue was about how experts belonging to different institutions could reconcile their views on utility. In this context, the inclusion of the guild was quite remarkable. Lyon’s examination procedure expressed the slow, conflict-ridden emergence of expert status during the Old Regime. Utilitarian proof was based upon matter of fact, a rationale that underlay all French procedures of the period even though it could threaten academic authority.<sup>63</sup> In Lyon, it was formalised into regular administrative procedures. ## Collective Practices of Innovation This system of technical assessment reinforced interaction and debate – including allegations of improper lobbying with the maˆıtres-gardes.<sup>64</sup> Local institutions supported collective practices of learning and knowledge, and frowned upon secrecy and private appropriation of knowledge. After a reward was granted, the loom was deposited in the guild’s office, which thus became a repository of inventions; making the reward commensurate to the number of pupils he trained ensured that the inventor share his know-how widely. When the merchants drafted a new regulation for the Fabrique under Jacques Vaucanson’s direction in 1744, they decided to promote Falcon’s loom developed in 1742 by demanding that journeymen model their masterpieces on the new device. In 1760 Michel Berthet, who had invented a new loom based on Falcon’s innovation, was granted 1,000 livres after de Goiffon’s report to the intendant Jean-Baptiste-Fran¸cois de la Michodi\`ere – 600 livres immediately and the rest if he taught the maˆıtres-gardes and if four of his looms were set up in town. In 1765 he got 300 livres for another improvement, but again only if he shared his secret with the guild officials; the intendant forced him to deposit a model and description of the process at the guild’s office.<sup>65</sup> Whereas some inventors like Falcon and de Lasalle received huge rewards and life pensions and were upheld as glorious examples for the Fabrique, some officials suggested offering inventors equal sums to avoid rivalry.<sup>66</sup> De Goiffon advised to lower the grant that the pr´evˆot des marchands proposed for Jacques Roche from 600 to 400 livres, arguing that a smaller sum ‘will be more proportionate to the rewards offered so far to inventors, who must not be incited to jealousy’.<sup>67</sup> In practice, the city authorities differentiated between high-, medium-, and lower-quality inventors. At the bottom of the scale, poor inventors might receive financial support even if their devices were not considered successful (a measure that was also adopted by government administrators); in this case the funding system came close to a form of poor relief.<sup>68</sup> In 1780 the inventor Fleury Parra requested a life annuity for a new type of spinning wheel, arguing he was economically distressed; the intendant and pr´evˆot des marchands agreed to pay him 300 livres to refund his expenses and improve his circumstances, even though the innovation was of little use.<sup>69</sup> In the case of Fran¸cois Corbet, de Goiffon advocated support in 1764 because the man’s hardship arose from a disease contracted from being a velvet maker.<sup>70</sup> Grants that rewarded general merit or helped artisans fallen on hard times coexisted with a more focussed system, which aimed to manage the commercial exploitation of inventions by compensating inventors for making their innovations public or through incentives to diffuse new technologies. In the first case, inventions were bought at an officially set price and machines were exploited collectively. In 1760, for example, the inventor de Barme was given a life annuity of 600 livres provided he sold his new silk reel for 360 livres to the masters.<sup>71</sup> More important for the town was John Badger’s calender (press).<sup>72</sup> Badger had been enticed to France through the government’s efforts; after settling in Lyon he was granted a pension from the local fund, was paid expenses to build the new calenders for which he kept exclusive rights in the city, and was allowed to limit the initial spread of know-how to only two apprentices, Seguin and Scott, who were also his translators and partners. However, the contract with the silk guild also stipulated that the calenders were the king’s property (they still belonged to the state after the Revolution), that Badger could not ask masters to pay more than 6 s. per aune (1.18 m) of pressed silk, and that he could not refuse to work for anyone.<sup>73</sup> Another calender used to press brocades and improved by Vaucanson was owned instead by the town, which leased it to the finisher Claude Collet.<sup>74</sup> After 1760 most grants in Lyon were based on a bonus system indexed to the number of new looms employed, which replaced one based on private licence fees paid by users. There are several examples of exclusivity granted at the beginning of the century. In 1725 Claude Raymond applied for a monopoly that would allow him to levy 100 livres per loom; the town officials reduced his claim to 68 livres.<sup>75</sup> In 1730 Jean-Baptiste Garon was allowed to collect a tax of 40 livres per loom based on his technical principles, and in 1762 Fran¸cois Jacquette asked to collect 100 livres per loom from users who would register with the guild officials; but Jacquette’s request was turned down, since by then the system was based on a one-off, publicly funded bonus.<sup>76</sup> Rather than taxing users, the authorities paid inventors according to the number of looms they could sell to Lyon masters. The bonus could be significant: in 1760 an inventor of a brocade loom that imitated embroidery named Ringuet was granted a bonus of 300 livres for each of the first ten looms set up in town, 200 livres for each of the next ten looms and 100 livres for each of the subsequent hundred made within a space of ten years. His loom proved so popular that he had received 19,900 livres already by 1764.<sup>77</sup> How well did the system perform? Reports by guild officials provide detailed information about the diffusion of several new looms. Falcon’s looms were quite numerous: forty were working by 1765, hundred by 1773 (out of 14,000 looms in town), and in 1786 one rich merchant alone had fifteen of them. The loom of the weaver Fleury Dardois was rewarded with a single payment of 300 livres in 1776 and 24 livres for each of the first twenty-five machines set up in the city. In 1777 the guild officials recorded seven looms, six more in 1778, and in 1779 fifteen others, for a total of twenty-eight – which was more than they expected.<sup>78</sup> Six of the masters who bought the looms lived in parishes near the rue Groll´ee (in the old center of the Lyon peninsula) where Dardois had his workshop, and twelve of the masters lived in his own street. But although neighbourhood and kinship were clearly important for diffusion, a further ten looms were set up in the northern part of the peninsula on the Saint-Vincent slopes and on the west side of the river Saˆone, where such ties mattered little. These networks were the basis for Lyon’s pattern of innovation. Inventive artisans, both weavers and others, were quickly informed of new devices and constantly strove to improve them. Indirect evidence that invention was a collective activity is that the new drawing looms, from Falcon to Jacquard, had compatible programs resulting in ‘cumulatively compatible’ technology.<sup>79</sup> Vaucanson’s programming cylinder was inspired by Falcon’s first loom of 1742 that had paperboards passing round a prism. In 1777 Claude Rivet signed one of Dardois’ certificates; a few months later Rivet presented a new loom of the same kind. When building his second loom, Falcon called upon a weaver, Jean-Benoˆıt Allard, who had registered an improvement in 1763. Jacquard’s invention, itself inspired by Vaucanson’s model kept in the Conservatoire des Arts et M´etiers in Paris, was made operable by a group of masters and mechanics, including Jean Antoine Breton, a mechanic from Privas, when he returned to Lyon. Although we do not know what effect marketing rewards had on the price of looms, we may reasonably assume that the system prevented inventors from demanding prohibitive prices, and that it thus incentivised merchants, who were the main source of credit for equipment, to invest. Equally, local funds could come in aid of inventors, allowing them to pay back their debts or raise new credit, as happened extensively with Falcon.<sup>80</sup> Whereas women do not appear as inventors, widows inherited their husbands’ rights on the basis of their right to run a business in the guild. Falcon’s daughter and his son-in-law Balthazar Servier built fifty-five of Falcon’s second looms of 1762 after his death in 1765 and were paid 24,000 livres in grants between 1765 and 1790; the daughter also received a third of Falcon’s pension, formerly granted to her mother. The same system benefited de Lassalle’s wife, who was still asking to be paid her annuity in 1805.<sup>81</sup> Innovation helped build up a mechanical engineering sector. Locksmiths, joiners, combers, and lathe-turners developed their mechanical skills by making the new devices invented by master weavers. In so doing, mechanics also became increasingly involved in the inventive process. Thus, for example, in 1785 Dardois presented five user certificates, one of which came from a joiner who claimed to have built a loom \`a la Dardois in 1781 on behalf of a master weaver. But the process had begun earlier in the century. Thanks to Falcon’s debts we know about the mechanics to which he subcontracted work in the 1740s: a carpenter, Guillot; a lead merchant, Laubr´eaux; a turner, Comte; and two smiths, Bruno and Tripier. The latter was an important metal specialist involved in making steel draw benches.<sup>82</sup> Bruno’s widow appeared in John Badger’s accounts regarding his calender in 1755; Comte (or Conte) also took part in the introduction of the flying shuttle at about the same time.<sup>83</sup> Both Badger and Vaucanson called upon the locksmith Vial to make their cylinders to press brocades. Skilled mechanics from Switzerland were also employed: Jean Ulric Tumbal, from Basel (where draw looms were well established), developed a new loom for Philibert Dementhon in the 1750s;<sup>84</sup> Frederick Hildebrand, a wood turner, was involved in introducing the flying shuttle to Lyon. The silk trade was encouraging technical innovation and ‘spillovers’ in tool making, gold wire drawing for brocades, roll casting and polishing for moir´es, beating gold spangles and developing new alloys in substitution for gold and silver.<sup>85</sup> Iron forging and steel refining became Lyon specialties and great care was taken to promote metallurgical innovation and to control the flow of skills and materials to the city, as the examples of John Badger (called upon for his calender) and Abraham Mason (brought in for his metallic reeds for looms) demonstrate.<sup>86</sup> Paul Lecour and the Orsels brothers (from a family with a tradition in Alpine metallurgy and the silk trade) also set up major manufactures and workshops producing ‘toy ware’ in the English manner.<sup>87</sup> The success of Lyon’s ‘collective invention’ was based upon active public and private networking, coordination, and funding applied to a dynamic economic sector operating on a European scale. Whereas the Grande Fabrique was the main agent in these developments, paradoxically its actions gradually subverted the guild’s structure and traditions by strengthening links between different trades and developing cross-trade skills. ## Horizontal Conflict: Priority Disputes Lyon’s municipal system of rewards to inventions did not abolish priority disputes; in fact, it may well have enhanced them. Collective innovation and incentives for diffusion fostered controversy over public grants and reputation. The issue arose because the distinction between improvement, imitation, and theft was very fine and depended on judgements by guild officials who were potential competitors. Other difficulties came from the diffusion policy itself. The masters who bought Falcon’s looms quickly adapted and modified them and then claimed inventors’ grants. This was perfectly legitimate. Michel Berthet was rewarded in 1759 for adapting Falcon’s first loom and, in 1765, for modifying Falcon’s second one, which he had bought in 1764. The same occurred with a weaver named Bourgeois, who bought a Falcon loom in 1775 and submitted a modification in 1777. Such modifications could, of course, threaten inventors’ positions if they were deemed improvements. In 1765 Falcon accused Barbier of having simply modified a device he himself had invented years ago; but Barbier’s loom was preferred and Falcon was even asked to reimburse the 1,000 livres he was granted in 1764.<sup>88</sup> Generally speaking, the authorities were benevolent towards incremental improvers whose machines were hard to distinguish from clear inventions.<sup>89</sup> Subcontracting to mechanics also gave rise to fraudulent imitations. In 1757 Philibert Dementhon, a velvet maker, complained that Jean Ulrich Tumbal, a Swiss mechanic he had employed to build his new draw loom, pretended to be the real inventor.<sup>90</sup> The turner Milliet, who had copied de Lasalle’s reversible devices in 1769–70 while being employed to make them, was presented as an impostor by the pr´evˆot des marchands and the guild’s officials.<sup>91</sup> The introduction of the flying shuttle also gave rise to complex claims and counterclaims. The importer of John Kay’s invention was Fran¸cois Buisson, formerly an inspector of manufactures involved in Kay’s work for the French government in 1748, who had become associated with a Swiss lathe turner and projector called Frederick Hildebrand and with a member of the Fabrique named Chambeau.<sup>92</sup> To adapt the flying shuttle to the silk industry, the three subcontracted work to Conte, another turner, and Catin, a joiner and Chambeau’s neighbour in Saint-Just parish. In 1772 when the Consulat approved the new flying shuttle for silk looms, Buisson and Hildebrand refused to share the bonus with Chambeau. They accused him of having asked Catin to copy pieces of the mechanism and of having developed, with a cabinetmaker, a loom in which the new device was hidden. Chambeau’s network among local mechanics was at stake. Each party lobbied actively. Trudaine, who supported Buisson, argued that the first inventor was John Kay and that Buisson was simply the French importer; nevertheless, thanks to the intendant’s help, Chambeau was rewarded, provided he deposit a model in the guild’s office. Besides the considerable involvement of mechanics, the affair illustrates the growing concern with priority claims. As privileges of exclusivity became increasingly rare after the 1730s, inventors became eager to defend their priority and certificates attesting to the date of invention proliferated. In 1785 Fleury Dardois complained that his new loom had been copied by master Pierre-Fran¸cois Perrin, to whom he had sold it, and asked the Academy of Lyon to certify his priority; in support, he presented a document signed by ninety-one masters and merchants certifying him as the true inventor, and another one written by Perrin himself who promised not to show anyone the invention without Dardois permission.<sup>93</sup> Whereas the storage of models in the guild’s office aimed to make inventions a shared patrimony, the registration of certificates established an inventor’s individual rights. Control over the guild’s written records gradually acquired more importance. In 1765 the authorities rejected Falcon’s opposition to Barbier because the guild could not discover in its ledgers any certificate for the loom Falcon claimed to have invented.<sup>94</sup> In 1777 during the Bourgeois affair, the intendant Jacques de Flesselles sent the Bureau du Commerce a scheme to improve the registration of inventions.<sup>95</sup> He claimed that because inventions tended to be forgotten or to appear outdated with time, successful machines were sometimes ‘rediscovered’ and modified by artisans who were then paid undeserved subsidies. In fact, the guild and the town did keep records of past inventions. Formal registration of the few monopolies of invention bestowed in Lyon was taken very seriously. In 1725 the authorities asked that the drawing of Claude Raymond’s draw loom be deposited at the town hall and be signed by the pr´evˆot des marchands as a precondition for enforcing his local privilege. Users had to pay a registration fee at this office, which issued a certificate enabling them to get inventors’ permission to work on their looms. Reports of counterfeiting had to be sent by the guild to the town hall.<sup>96</sup> Registration practices also developed for managing the grant-based policy that followed the concession of individual privileges. In 1777 guild officials visited Bourgeois’ workshop to verify that he had not simply copied Gillet’s invention, which had been rewarded in 1756.<sup>97</sup> In 1781 Ponson’s loom was rejected by the guild officials as an imitation of Vulpillat’s, invented in 1751 as proved by certificate.<sup>98</sup> Intendant de Flesselles also proposed that the ledgers record drawings of new machines free of charge, as this would help apprentices and journeymen to become masters. There would be two copies of the plans and the examiners would provide written explanations. He further suggested that inventors deposit cardboard models at the local academy. The first proposal anticipated developments in the 1780s, when French privileges of exclusivity began to adopt some features of English patents. From then on, drawings and models were kept in a national repository of inventions, first in the Parisian Hˆotel de Mortagne and later in the Bureau des Dessinateurs at the Conservatoire des Arts et M´etiers.<sup>99</sup> Although the depositing of specifications and models in Lyon was initially related to the management of exclusive privileges, the reward system, which fostered competition, increased pressure on registration practices that would become critical after 1791, when inventors’ rights were first recognised. Lyon led France, in terms both of designs and inventions, with a nascent practice of registration that was embedded in the guild’s collective management of innovation. Although they became marginal to the Lyon silk trade after the 1730s, claims for private property rights still emerged occasionally. The principle that inventors owned their inventions was subsumed both ideologically and practically into the public reward system, via the concept of priority. Buisson accused his partner Chambon of claiming ‘property rights to invention’, whereas he considered them to be only improvers (rectificateurs), albeit the first, of Kay’s invention.<sup>100</sup> In 1765 the guild officials decided that Louis Jean-Baptiste Duon was the first inventor and ‘owner’ of an invention disputed with two other weavers, although neither Duon nor his rivals asked for a monopoly, only a subsidy.<sup>101</sup> The system also fostered debates on secrecy. The authorities were unclear whether subsidies were incentives to invent or a public preemption over inventions.<sup>102</sup> Some officials believed that disclosing secrets was unfair. When Jean-Baptiste Condurier demanded a reward in 1764 for inventing a new lining out of silk and wool, the guild officials offered 800 livres in exchange for disclosure to every master who wished to learn the process. However, the first alderman disagreed, writing that ‘the order of natural equity should let [Condurier] keep the production of his newly invented cloth for his own profit, so the reward could be granted without conditions’.<sup>103</sup> The state intendant Jean Baillon backed the guild, reminding everyone that ‘it was unnatural for the inventor to be rewarded before making his knowledge available’. ‘Natural’ meant different things to the two men and referred to a different set of principles: the alderman associated it with the private benefits secured by secrecy, the intendant referred to the sharing of innovation for the common weal.<sup>104</sup> The inventor and entrepreneur De Lasalle reflected the guild’s ethos in being a strong supporter of the free circulation of knowledge, including – perhaps ambiguously – stealing. Like Diderot, he was a strong opponent of secrecy and could be caustic on the matter. In 1760, as he was succeeding Dacier in the Fabrique drawing courses, he assured the government that he would not even condemn copying and forgery of his own business. He did not condemn the theft of patterns or inventions and was pleased when his printed silk cloth was copied and his workers enticed by rivals: ‘more than twenty of my colleagues employ hand-painters and entice mine every day as soon as they are trained, and they get from them colours and even my own drawings; but I do not complain about these events if they can help to prove that all prejudice against new styles is useless for the common weal and for private business’.<sup>105</sup> In fact, De Lasalle was generous as long as his priority as inventor was recognized. This was not difficult in Lyon, where he had strong connections and was adequately rewarded; but in Paris he was not so magnanimous. In December 1759 he sent a sample of a new allegorical fabric in the king’s honour to the contrˆoleur g´en´eral, asking that it not be shown to craftsmen (gens de l’art) before the king had approved it.<sup>106</sup> For much of the century, the tendency was increasingly to give public rights precedence over private ones. By the end of the century, however, inventors began more frequently to invoke the argument for secrecy, with the aim not just to compete against rival masters but also to fend off the growing pressure from powerful merchants. ## Vertical Conflict: Apprentices versus Masters, Masters versus Merchants Often mingling with horizontal conflicts, vertical ones seemed more violent. Some opposed apprentices to masters; others opposed individual inventors to the merchant elite. For instance, the introduction of English calendering by John Badger fostered such competition, probably because his ‘apprentices’ were in fact highly skilled workers who collaborated closely with the inventor. Badger’s apprentice, Seguin – the pupil that Badger was asked to train in exchange for his grants and privilege – became Badger’s partner and later his rival when he set up his own calendering workshop.<sup>107</sup> Quite the same problem occurred to the finisher Claude Collet, who was in charge of Vaucanson’s first calender and imitated Badger’s one; his worker, a turner named Milliet, copied Collet’s latest improvement.<sup>108</sup> In 1755 the weaver Antoine Bonnafond, one of Vaucanson’s rivals in calendering, complained that his journeyman Bouchon had stolen his ‘precious thread’, his tools, and even the invention, which Bouchon had submitted to the government as his own. Bonnafond, however, had planned for such circumstances, having got Bouchon to sign a contract compelling the journeyman to pay 2,000 livres if he divulged his master’s secret.<sup>109</sup> In 1765 Barbier (Falcon’s rival), formerly also a journeyman with Bonnafond, was accused by Bonnafond’s widow to have copied the master’s new loom; but the authorities paid the bonus to Barbier rather than to Bonnafond, who was described as simply the financial backer.<sup>110</sup> At stake in this case was how to keep a skilful worker in the widow’s workshop, which could justify some degree of compromise; but the situation was less easily managed when it pitted inventive masters against merchant power. Contests arose also from the perverse effects of public funding, which bound inventive artisans to public innovation policy. Thus, although Falcon was celebrated by the Fabrique and by the town council, was granted huge rewards, became a sort of role model for artisan-inventors, and was considered a symbol of merchant power in the Fabrique, his daughter – herself rewarded for diffusing her father’s looms – kept pestering the town authorities long after his death.<sup>111</sup> Her arguments reveal the peculiar frustrations of elite inventors. Falcon’s daughter claimed that her father had been humiliated for he had been compelled to invent.<sup>112</sup> He had had to teach workers and show his devices to anyone passing through Lyon, whereas he would have earned more money if he had worked for his own business: ‘his superior genius could have granted him a huge fortune in trading, but he would have worked for his sole benefit’. His membership of the merchant elite should have been given far more credit (‘my father was never brought up as a worker’). ‘Whereas his talent and genius should have secured him and his family a fortune, they brought about their ruin’. Collective management, she implied, did not suit the best inventors, for whom public service turned into a relation of dependence. The complaints by Falcon’s daughter echoed a wider opposition to the Lyon authorities, who were accused of exploiting the artisans on behalf of a merchant oligarchy whose powers kept growing during the eighteenth century. Some inventors argued that the collective ethos had been subverted by merchants who used it to force artisans to submit their inventions to the town oligarchy and deprived them of adequate profits from their creations. Artisan initiatives were not fully encouraged by merchants, who feared that the more dynamic workers could challenge their economic power. In 1775 Fleury Dardois complained that the authorities had asked him to invent a loom within one month for 144 livres, but that he was only paid half the amount.<sup>113</sup> When a guild official asked to see his device, Dardois contrived to conceal the new mechanism. He finally disclosed the invention in return for the promise of a certificate, which however he never received. Property rights to knowledge became part of a broader struggle and resistance to merchant power. Dardois wrote in anger that merchants ‘persist (in) . . . keeping the worker under their claws, to want him to depend on them as if they had sovereign power and even stronger: a despotic power . . . Tyranny!’. He was ‘ill-treated, insulted when he asked for his money’, ‘reduced to a beggar . . . because the guild wanted to deprive the artist of the reward and merit of his work’. ‘Was it possible’, he asked rhetorically, ‘to treat men . . . humanity so badly?’. Open conflict between inventors and authorities was nevertheless taboo. Public support for collective invention allowed the Lyon elites to forge a myth of the disinterested inventor that hid the fact that the latter could want a higher return on his invention. The glorification of benefactors began with Philippe de Lasalle’s death, in February 1804. Immediately, the Commission of the Conservatoire des Arts wrote a panegyric and a marble inscription was set up in the Conservatoire to honour the gift of de Lasalle’s machines to the town.<sup>114</sup> Jean Marin made copies of the looms for the Crystal Palace Exhibition of 1851, and in 1910–12 the town proposed erecting a monument in de Lasalle’s honour.<sup>115</sup> ## Conclusion The case of eighteenth-century Lyon is a good example of an open technique policy adapted to a local context. The Lyon silk industry was framed by institutions that helped devise and sustain a policy for innovation based on the collective management of invention. The rewards were considerable and sustained the international success of Lyon’s silk industry. An unusual compromise was set up between the economy of fashion and a policy of public assistance that encouraged innovation and enterprise within the guild. The market economy did not oppose public support; inventions were considered a public good. This public funding relied on persistent negotiation between the silk guild, the local academy, the municipality, the intendant, and the inspector of manufactures on one hand, and the central government and eventually the Paris Academy of Sciences on the other. The part played by the Fabrique was critical, as its officials evaluated inventions according to their users’ judgements, negotiated their value with local and central administrators, counted the new looms in town to assign the bonuses, kept models of devices for public information, and delivered certificates of invention to individuals. Innovation policy in Lyon was in tune with the restructuring of guilds that took place under the finance minister Jacques Necker in August 1776; the silk guild was already a representative of the emerging ‘new corporatism’, in which it acted to improve the exchange of information, products, and equipment, help emulation of talented producers, and register (through drawings and models) and regulate innovation, striking a balance between private initiatives and collective responsibility.<sup>116</sup> This system promoted a pattern of invention based on highly skilled designers and machine inventors bent on replicating and improving each other’s devices. Both legitimate imitation and fraudulent copying were integrated into the municipality and guild’s public policy. This ‘economy of imitation’ was essential for the emergence of technology as a distinctive field of analysis. Economic practices taking place in an old regime town and a guild system rooted in commercial capitalism supplied the matrix of a new conceptualisation of techniques. However, the collective management of innovation in Lyon also fostered conflict between masters, municipality and merchants over profit and praise. These tensions gave rise to growing pressure to improve registration of inventions. Registration helped both to share new knowledge and to establish inventors’ claims to a fair reward; but the harshness of negotiations between artisan-inventors and the authorities shows that some inventors could view the reward system as a source of dependence and as a kind of public pre-emption over their genius. Open technique policy was not necessarily or always consensual. Public and private interests may have achieved a better balance after the Revolution. The Napoleonic era inherited the collective management of innovation in Lyon and combined this legacy with the recognition of individual Human Rights. A Conservatoire des Arts was created in Lyon in 1802 with the aim of collecting all kinds of work (designs, samples, paintings, antiques, sculptures, and technical models) in aid of teaching, demonstration, and the support of invention. Designs and samples were systematically registered, first by the Conseil des Prud’hommes, then, after the copyright’s expiry, by the Conservatoire des Arts, as stipulated by the law on copyright devised for Lyon in 1806.<sup>117</sup> Continuity with the Ancien Regime was even stronger for technical inventions. The combination of inherited collective practices and new individual rights generated an original system for managing patents. The Chamber of Commerce, re-established in 1802, rewarded inventors who could not pay for a patent and who chose to transfer their inventions to the public domain. From 1828 profits from the public assay of silk (Condition des Soies) were earmarked for the encouragement of invention and the welfare of the silk trade.<sup>118</sup> The Chamber of Commerce examined numerous requests from inventors, and even bought patents from artisans who were unable to exploit their inventions.<sup>119</sup> The system allowed inventors to utilise different resources according to the state of their business. Rewards by the Chamber of Commerce could be used as an alternative to patenting, since all inventors were registered and could establish priority in the face of rival patents.<sup>120</sup> Inventions were quickly publicised by the deposition of models at the Conservatoire des Arts and from 1833, at the La Martini\`ere technical school; inventors were also issued La Martini\`ere certificates. The Chamber of Commerce kept the drawings. The Conseil des Prud’hommes was in charge of enforcement and could issue approvals, as could the local society for industrial encouragement, the Soci´et´e des Amis des Arts. The prefect of the Rhˆone gave final approval to funding. Despite the change of rules, this institutional pluralism offers a strong reminder of arrangements under the Ancien Regime. Last, but not least, the nineteenth century shared with the guild era a persistent difficulty in dealing with unusually inventive artisans. The collective encouragement of invention was still viewed as a form of public pre-emption, especially by inventors who were too poor to apply for patents. The most salient example of this was Jacquard, who, although described as a great benefactor, was never granted an individual patent for his loom.<sup>121</sup> The municipality may have forced him to stay in Lyon to prevent him from selling the invention to outside competitors.<sup>122</sup> Jacquard was also punished because his work did not fit with the expectations of the municipality.<sup>123</sup> In 1813 after he had lost his pension and his dwellings in the Palais Saint-Pierre, Jacquard complained that in principle his arrangement with the town allowed him to collect 50 francs per loom but that, lacking a patent, the machine was copied and he received no income. As he put it, ‘I could have had exclusive rights on my machine and sold it to all the silk-makers in town, and even to all manufactures in France, whereas as things stand the town of Lyon is the only beneficiary’.<sup>124</sup> The public management of innovation was once again under trial – but the conflict was veiled by the myth of the inventor devoted to the public good. <sup>124</sup> AML, 784 WP 13.