# 9 ‘Not to Hurt of Trade’: Guilds and Innovation in Horology and Precision Instrument Making Anthony Turner Clock and watch making in the mid-fifteenth century can be considered a new trade in Europe.<sup>1</sup> Although instrument making can hardly be considered a trade at all, the two occupations were intertwined – despite which the multi-faced, hard-to-define, small-scale nature of instrument making would mean that, unlike clock making, it would never become incorporated as a recognised trade. The two had developed together from the mid-thirteenth century onwards, when a new semi-autonomous mechanism, controlled by a falling weight for sounding bells, was combined with displays that presented visually not only the hour, but also the place of the Sun and Moon in the zodiac, the rising and setting of the signs, the length of day and night, the seasons, and, more rarely, the movements of the planets. The development of an alternative motive force – the controlled unwinding of a coiled spring – in the early to mid-fifteenth century made possible the introduction of a new range of portable and personal timekeepers, but many of them still offered calendrical and astronomical indications. At the same time, sundials were essential for setting any mechanical timepiece should it stop, and for checking the (often variable) time it showed against that given by the only available standard – the movement of the sun.<sup>2</sup> The making of sundials therefore became associated with clock making. That the London company of clock makers in the seventeenth century should claim that sundial makers and, by extension, all other mathematical instrument makers, should be under their control is therefore perfectly understandable.<sup>3</sup> Thus, horology in early modern Europe could be considered as covering all aspects of time finding, keeping, and measuring, and all the different kinds of instruments used in it.<sup>4</sup> Clock, watch, and instrument making was then a trade united by a purpose – time measurement. Other groupings however were possible. Laying out an astronomical clock dial or making a sundial required a degree of mathematical knowledge in both conception and execution. So too did the making of instruments for navigation, land surveying, weighing and measuring, drawing, gunnery, and architecture – particularly the new, geometry-based, military architecture. But such subjects could hardly be considered part of horology; indeed, one could rather claim horology as part of the mathematical trades than the reverse. For contemporary mathematical artisans, however, the grouping of activities by field of knowledge was outweighed by that which arose from the materials and techniques used.<sup>5</sup> Such was indeed the traditional basis of the craft guilds, but it was a basis to which neither clock nor instrument making was readily conformable. When thinking about the relation between the guilds and innovation in precision instrumentation, it is worth remembering that horology and instrument making were in themselves, as purpose-defined trades, innovations among the crafts. New occupations, they were also therefore, at least during the early part of this period, less prone to limitations from the past on the range of the goods they could produce and the methods they used to do so. But their being new, and anomalous, among the crafts also shaped the ways in which they settled into the guild structure and the way this structure affected innovation within them, which differed throughout Europe. Although it is hard to generalise in such a context, three main relations between horology, instrument making, and the guilds can be identified – separation, domiciliation, and incorporation. ‘Separation’ can be used to describe cases where, as in early sixteenth-century Nuremberg, clock and instrument making remained free or unregulated trades, and instances of craftsmen working in the free areas, ‘liberties’, of early modern cities where the judicial powers of the guilds had no authority. Such areas, protected by royal, ecclesiastical, or other seignieurial privilege, were of particular importance to instrument makers in Paris.<sup>6</sup> ‘Domiciliation’ designates the presence of instrument makers within more or less appropriate craft guilds without the individuals having group or corporate status of their own. Lastly, ‘incorporation’ describes the situation where craftsmen – usually clock makers – were established in their own, separate, guild. Reactions to innovation could be different between the three groups and even within them at different times and different places. New trades then at the beginning of our period, both clock making and instrument making affirmed their position during the following three centuries. Clock making, defined by its purpose, time measurement, and with its techniques and materials (iron for the large, public ‘great’ clocks; brass and steel for most domestic clocks and watches) stabilised, became a recognisable, well-defined trade by 1500. If the main manufacturing centres of the sixteenth century, Germany, the Low Countries, and France became France, England, and Geneva in the seventeenth century, some local manufacture nonetheless remained in the manufacturing areas of the former leaders and small-scale activity was to be found throughout Europe. Generally, as the activity evolved into an identifiable, independent occupation increasingly assimilated to the luxury trades in response to specific demand from courtly, aristocratic, and bourgeois society, there was a tendency to incorporate. Craftsmen in individual towns and cities felt a need for protection and mutual support as foreign imports and the migration of workers spread skills and increased competition in both manufacturing and retailing. At the same time the growth in the number of persons involved in the trade made regulation of interest to local authorities. Couching their demands in the language of public good, but with fundamentally self-interested aims, clock makers in Paris attained incorporation in 1544,<sup>7</sup> to be followed by those of Blois (1597), Geneva (1601), Rouen (1617), London (1631), and Lyon (1658).<sup>8</sup> Elsewhere clock makers were domiciled in other crafts. In Augsburg, for example, they were joined together with the locksmiths, armourers, and bell founders in the blacksmiths’ company, although with a distinct status of their own.<sup>9</sup> In Edinburgh (1646) and Glasgow (1649), clock making counted as a branch of locksmithing that was regulated by the Hammermen’s corporation.<sup>10</sup> In Rotterdam, with five other metalworking crafts, clock making was part of the guild of St Eloy.<sup>11</sup> That clock makers felt uncertain about their proper place is suggested by the fact that the London clock makers directed their initial efforts to obtain protected status to becoming members of the Blacksmiths’ Company.<sup>12</sup> In contrast with clock making, instrument making in the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries became increasingly less well defined. Already in the sixteenth century astrolabes, sundials, rules, dividers, alidades, and simple theodolites made up a more varied product group than that offered by clock makers. It was linked neither by materials (such instruments could be made in metal, wood, or even paper) nor by technique (the basic structure might result from casting, joining, or moulding; the scales and lettering upon it from engraving, punching, or printing), but solely by some basic geometrical knowledge. In the seventeenth century, product variety became even greater as navigational instruments, compasses, globes, and spheres were assimilated to instrument making, at the same time as production of new optical and physics instruments (microscopes, telescopes, barometers, air-pumps, and the like) expanded the range of materials to be manipulated to include glass, mercury, rubber, and leather. Despite this expansion, and again unlike clock makers, instrument makers remained relatively few in number. Theirs was not a trade that provoked regulation by public authority. They were too few to offer a threat either to ruling oligarchies or to public order. In Britain the names of 383 instrument makers working between 1551 and 1751 have been traced, of whom 323 worked in London. This is less than a quarter of those known to have worked in the following century, but both numbers hardly compare with the 5,000-odd clock makers who have been inventoried as working in Britain before 1700.<sup>13</sup> In Paris, instrument makers were even less numerous, only 227 having been listed for before 1750.<sup>14</sup> In Nuremberg, seventy-five dial makers have been identified working between 1500 and 1700.<sup>15</sup> Practitioners of an amorphous trade, most instrument makers became domiciled in more or less appropriate guilds or remained separate. Fully incorporated groups of instrument makers were uncommon and tended to be highly specialised. Balance makers in Paris had been incorporated since 1324, those in Rouen since 1415.<sup>16</sup> In Nuremberg, where there were no guilds as such, the Compassmachers (who actually made sundials) gradually mutated during the sixteenth century from a ‘free’ to a ‘closed’ craft.<sup>17</sup> By contrast, in London the only guild (apart from the clock makers) that came close to the specific needs of, at least, optical instrument makers was the Spectacle-Makers’ Company, itself a new foundation of 1629. Even so, optical workers could be found with all other kinds of instrument makers scattered through the Clockmakers, Joiners, Goldsmiths, Grocers, Weavers, Stationers, and Embroiderers’ companies.<sup>18</sup> Dispersion in Paris was similarly wide, with instrument makers to be found among the Tablettiers, founders, mirror makers, enamellers, booksellers, gun makers, and cutlers. Throughout Europe in the sixteenth century the precincts of the private jurisdictions mentioned above were important areas for the development of instrument making, as were royal, princely, and noble courts. Universities were also important, as they had been earlier for the development of printing and book production, as they offered refuge from guild pretensions and were sources of demand. Such liberties would remain of particular importance for both clock and instrument making in Paris throughout the Ancien R´egime. The interest of guilds and trade corporations to their members was mutual self-help, control of training, maintenance of quality standards, and trade protection. There was a priori no reason why the corporations should frown upon innovation, and they do not seem to have. Major innovations in the structure of clocks and watches such as the introduction of the fusee in watches, the pendulum in clocks, the balance spring in watches, the jewelling of bearings in watches, new escapements, and the development of thermal compensation systems all occurred with little or no guild comment, let alone opposition. Similarly the making of new instruments, such as telescopes, spyglasses, microscopes, and barometers, or new adaptations to old ones provoked no more reaction than did innovations in methods of manufacture such as the diffusion of wheeldividing engines and gear-cutting machines, or the invention of a method for the polishing of multiple spectacle lenses in a single operation. A more detailed examination of some of these innovations however will enrich the picture. In 1658 Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) published an account of the use of the pendulum as an isochronous regulator for clocks: seventeen years later he published an account of an equivalent regulator for watches, the balance spring. In so doing he provoked the single most important horological advance in the first four hundred years of its existence. Huygens himself seems to have made the first clock to employ the pendulum as a regulator following his own design, which he completed by Christmas 1656. In order to exploit the design he explained it to The Hague clock maker Salomon Coster (?–1659), permitting him to take out an octroy or privil\`ege (the equivalent of a patent) for it on 16 June 1657 that gave Coster the exclusive manufacturing rights for twenty-one years. It was, however, already too late. News and some knowledge of the new timepiece had already spread, not only within the Low Countries, but also to Paris and Florence. In early 1658 a Rotterdam clock maker, Simon Douw (c. 1620–1663), circumvented Huygens’ patent with such success that Huygens came to the conclusion that the only way in which he could ensure for himself the glory of the invention was ‘to make known the whole idea and construction of the new mechanism, which I the inventor himself, have undertaken to describe in a few words’.<sup>19</sup> Huygens wrote his description not just because his clock was already becoming well known in the United Provinces, but also because his friends had warned him that he could expect no better treatment abroad. Nonetheless he did make an attempt to profit from his invention by obtaining a privil\`ege in France. The request was refused three times by the chancellor, Pierre Seguier (1588–1672), with the comment each time that he did not want to have ‘all the master clockmakers of Paris crying after him’.<sup>20</sup> At the same time in London, Ahasuerus I Fromanteel (1607–1693) was also constructing pendulum clocks on Huygens’ pattern, which he advertised for sale in the Mercurius politicus for 27 October– 3 November 1658.<sup>21</sup> Huygens’ development of the pendulum regulator for clocks and its diffusion to the horological centres of Paris and London is in many ways exemplary of one way in which innovation occurred in early modern horology and instrument making. The invention is made outside the manufacturing trade itself, by a savant who, as a customer, commissions a free clock maker to produce the instrument for him. The innovation is successful and rapidly adopted by makers in the most active centres of horology. Neither in The Hague nor in London nor Paris is there any reticence on the part of clock makers to adopt it, nor any suggestion of opposition or even difficulty from the guilds. The latter appear indeed only indirectly, when there is question of a patent in Paris that would restrict exploitation of the new device. Patents, it will become clear from other examples, were frequently, even systematically, opposed by the guilds as being a restraint on trade. Although such an attitude may not have encouraged inventors, it did favour the dissemination of innovations that had escaped from their inventor’s control. Such a one was Huygens’ second fundamental innovation in horology, the balance spring regulator for watches. Watchmakers throughout Europe, who instantly recognised its interest, rapidly adopted it. So important did it seem that Isaac Thuret (1630–1706), royal clock maker in Paris from whom Huygens ordered his first example, attempted to plagiarise it as his own invention. As with his pendulum, Huygens initially sought to obtain patents for his invention in both France and England, but he quickly abandoned the effort in the face of opposition from other inventors, notably Jean de Hautefeuille (1647–1724) in Paris and Robert Hooke (1635–1703) in London. Totally discouraged, Huygens decided to leave ‘complete liberty to all clock-makers to work at this invention’.<sup>22</sup> The fecund inventiveness of Huygens was responsible for other devices that nourished the expanding instrument trade. One such was the form of simple microscope that he developed in 1678–9 for the study of infusoria. The design quickly became known. The expatriate English instrument maker in Paris, Michael Butterfield (1635–1724), a member of the Founders’ Company, was already advertising examples in late 1679, and examples datable to the 1680s and ’90s are known signed by two other Paris makers and, later, by makers in London, Rome, and Regensberg. The fourteen known surviving instruments of this type, six of them signed by one maker, J. Pouilly or de Pouilly, are not identical. They display a second kind of innovation, one generated from within the manufacturing trade itself as adaptations and improvements were made in the course of the commercialisation of an instrument. Of those who made Huygens-type microscopes, Butterfield, Pouilly, and Gr´egoire in Paris and John Marshall (1659?–1725) in London were members of craft guilds, but this fact was no inconvenience to their adapting a new instrument, adding it to their product range, and refining it both technically and in decoration so as to enhance its commercial attractiveness.<sup>23</sup> Huygens’ pendulum and balance spring are paradigm examples of the entry of major innovations into production, his simple microscope an equally paradigmatic example of the kind of non-radical innovation that would naturally be generated from within by an expanding, dynamic manufacturing and retail trade seeking to sell its specialist goods to a wider market. Examples of this kind of uncontested innovation can be multiplied, such as the introduction of reflecting telescopes into Paris optical manufacture by Claude Sim´eon Passemant (1702–1769) and Claude Paris (1703–1763) apparently working independently;<sup>24</sup> the invention and adaptation of the anchor escapement for clocks in both its recoil and deadbeat forms;<sup>25</sup> the integration into production of new instruments such as Philippe Danfrie’s graphometer c. $1 6 0 0 ^ { 2 6 }$ or the bubble level c. $1 7 0 0 ; ^ { 2 7 }$ and the spread of new techniques in production, such as the availability of wheel-dividing and cutting engines from the 1670s onwards.<sup>28</sup> In none of these cases, nor in the many others that could be examined, is any negative guild reaction known. Innovation, insofar as it did not affect the balance between guild members or the structure of the trade that it was the companies’ purpose to maintain, was of no concern to them; it was neither encouraged nor discouraged. But neither was it something that a company would engage in or exploit. On 3 November 1712 it was recorded in the minutes of the Clockmakers’ Company of London that ‘a proposal in writing of Mr. Samuel Watson’s about an instrument to discover the hour of the day at sea and several other useful mathematical matters, which he therein offered to deliver and sell to the company on certain conditions therein specified was read and considered, and the result was that this court do not concern itself therein’.<sup>29</sup> Innovations were a matter for individual makers; they were not matter for the guild except insofar as they might give one maker an unfair advantage over his fellows or have adverse effects on the trade as a whole. In 1693, John Marshall, a member of the Turners’ Company and optician to George I, described to the Royal Society a method he had devised for grinding several lenses at once, together with some other improvements. From the Royal Society, Marshall requested a testimonial as to the worth of his innovation. This, after the method had been duly inspected by Edmund Halley (1656–1742) and Robert Hooke, was accorded in a letter written by order of the Royal Society’s Council by Halley on 18 January 1693/4. Marshall used the letter to validate his method and products and to advertise them. This provoked an attack from the Spectacle-Makers’ Company, to which body Marshall had refused to transfer some years earlier when they sought to monopolise all craftsmen practising the trade that they theoretically governed. A delegation from the Spectacle-Makers was despatched to the Royal Society. Marshall’s new method, it claimed, ‘was not new, nor his, nor of the use claimed by him’. Written submissions (now lost) from both sides followed, the Royal Society eventually acquainting the Spectacle-Makers ‘that the society conceived their certificate was well grounded, and that if Mr Marshall did act against their charter they might right themselves at law’.<sup>30</sup> There was no further action. The Spectacle-Makers had no case against Marshall. Their protest was against an unusual public action by an old adversary that seemed to give him a trade advantage over their members. If, in this case, the company was protesting at all against innovation, it was not Marshall’s technical innovation that upset them but the marketing innovation he made in seeking, and publicly using, approbation from the Royal Society. Marshall was not in fact the first to use such a tactic. The mathematician Henry Bond, working in the context of longitude finding and compass making with the craftsman Henry Wynne (fl. 1662–1729), a member of the Clockmaker’s Company, and the Scottish gentleman John Gedde, in the context of bee-hive construction, had, though with less warrant than Marshall, claimed approbation from the Royal Society to validate their products. The method however was new to the spectacle makers and they protested against it. Their protest was not so much because it was new, but because it could hurt trade.<sup>31</sup> In fact their fears were unfounded. Marshall made his polishing method freely available and within a few months his trade rivals were also using it. The prospect of a trade advantage confined to one man or a small group, however, was always a target for guild antagonism. Patents were a particular odium. Of nine British horological patents granted between 1685 and 1755, three were unsuccessfully opposed by the London Clockmakers’ Company, which however succeeded in blocking four others. This was not opposition to innovation as such, but to the exploitation of a supposed invention by one man or a small group that in the guild’s view was a restraint, ‘a hurt of trade’. Frequently innovation was opposed on the grounds that the invention was not really new. This might well be the case, for patents could be granted for the exploitation of an existent invention that did not have to be a totally new one. Lack of novelty was not always a potent argument. Having failed to prevent the passing of Daniel Quare’s patent for portable barometers in 1695, the Clockmakers’ Company noted in its minutes that ‘there may be suits of law or trouble to some members that make or sell those weather glasses’. This seems to imply that other craftsmen than Quare were already making the new portable instruments, and it was ‘unanimously voted and ordered that the Company will defend any member of the Company in any actions or suits that may be brought against them on that account’.<sup>32</sup> In their opposition to patents, guilds considered themselves to be acting in the general good. They were not reacting against innovation, but against innovation that was not shared: their actions thus favoured the diffusion of new ideas, but at the expense of the inventor. The concerns of the Clockmakers’ Company of London emerge clearly from the fairly abundant documentation generated by their opposition in 1716–17 to the granting of a patent to Charles Clay (d. 1740) for ‘a machine to answer the end of a repeating watch or clock’. Clay, a watchmaker from Flockton, Yorkshire, seems to have moved to London early in his career as he is not known to have made clocks in Yorkshire.<sup>33</sup> Exactly what his machine was must remain unknown for lack of anything more than partial descriptions. It seems to have been a case containing the repeating mechanism of a clock, either single or adapted to ring changes and tunes as in a musical clock.<sup>34</sup> A non-repeating watch could be placed in this case, which did not need to be opened for this to be done; by means of a thin needle passing perhaps through the hinge or the case opening, a communication was established between the watch and the repeating mechanism so that this could be released and the hours and the quarters repeated at will. The Clockmakers’ Company attacked Clay’s invention in every possible way. It was not new (Daniel Quare produced one which was shown to the Attorney General on 20 March 1716), it was not useful and offered no advantages, but was only a novelty, a gimmick, which performed less well something that was already adequately done and anyway did not always work – ‘Nor will ever one of these perform its duty 3 parts in 4 of the time for 2 years though the maker live the next door to it.’ All this said, the basic reason for the Clockmakers’ opposition emerges in a remark that also illustrates the uncontroversial nature of innovation fully integrated into trade activity. Had Mr Clay been better acquainted with the many new inventions and improvements that have been made by members of the Clockmakers’ Company in Watches and Clocks, and the many and various ways of communicating the severall parts of work one with the other within 40 years past which has made their work famous through most parts of the world, yet none of them ever had a Patent for the greatest Invention they have made, Mr. Clay would have been so modest as not to desire a patent for what he has now done, since what has been done before apparently exceed his. If this Patent should pass it would create great disturbance and Law suits between the Patentee and the other workmen in London, and all over the King’s Dominions; And it is impossible to see at present the mischief it may do. And every man that makes the least alteration for the time to come that has not been done his way before will think himself entitled to a Patent as much as Mr. Clay was for his; and then Patents will soon be innumerable as the alterations have been within 40 years past. That Clay was not a member of the Clockmakers’ Company was probably not of any great significance in this affair, for the Company attacked its own members, as Daniel Quare had found in 1695, when they sought patents. It was because Clay sought to restrict to himself alone a part of the lucrative business of repeating mechanisms that he posed a threat. ‘This would cast great dump. As soon as past, notification without doubt in Gazette, will stop others.’ Patents should be applicable only to new manufacture ‘so as be not to hurt of trade or generally inconvenient’. All improvements are not new inventions. Patenting them can only harm the trade. All the possible alarm bells were rung. ‘This [clock making] a trade of great advantage to the Nation, we outdo all the world in this work, & great demands are daily in foreign parts for the English watches & Clocks, To give the Sanction of the Royall Authority to this project is to stop the sale of all repeating watches abroad, till people have seen the proof of this Invention, & till it be found to be a trifle, as it certainly will be, all the other watchmakers will find their trade at a stand, & the workmen may perhaps be forced to seek work abroad which be able/will neither he find nor live without at home, & may carry this trade & manufacture into another country.’<sup>35</sup> In the small commodity production of luxury goods, to which London clock and instrument making belonged, innovation was unproblematic and guild action favoured the diffusion of new ideas, despite frequent assertions to the contrary. Klaus Maurice has recently made a strong statement about guild technological conservatism in this area.<sup>36</sup> Although he restricts his remarks to south Germany where city-states, especially in the troubled seventeenth century, may have been more conservative than the larger and more dynamic cities of London and Paris, Maurice unfortunately offers no evidence for his assertion. David Landes has advanced a similar view, although his is more fully argued and substantiated: the effort [of the guilds] to prevent competition and gross inequalities of status and fortune led to technological conservatism and constraints on growth, both of the industry as a whole and of the shops within it. Most guild members were opposed to new things and new ways of making them, especially those ways that entailed capital expenditure beyond their means.<sup>37</sup> For Landes, however, ‘these constraints, which were honoured more in the breach than in the observance, were of limited effect. . . . They constituted at best a holding action against the forces of business enterprise and commercial change.’<sup>38</sup> Ignoring the whiff of economic determinism, one can object that much of the ‘business enterprise’ leading to ‘commercial change’ was actually being deployed by men such as Thomas Tompion, Daniel Quare, or John Marshall in London and Jean Pouilly, Nicolas Bion, Michael Butterfield, or Julien Le Roy in Paris, who were all guild members who found it perfectly possible to build up extensive, market-oriented businesses within the guild structure. Innovative techniques, at least in expanding centres such as Paris and London – we know less about the smaller manufacturing centres – whether in production or marketing, were not repressed. A part of Tompion’s success and great reputation resulted from the fact that his workshop was equipped with the most recent machine tools. Wheel-dividing and wheel-cutting engines, separately and combined, first appeared in London in the mid-1670s, possibly as the result of investigations by Robert Hooke. Like other London clock makers such as Josiah Aspinall, Tompion, perhaps starting from information from Hooke, built one himself to his own design.<sup>39</sup> A second advanced machine in Tompion’s workshop was for adjusting the fusee exactly to the force of the spring that it was to control.<sup>40</sup> Using such devices Tompion was able to ensure high and consistent quality to his products; his doing so provoked no reaction from his guild contemporaries except emulation. By 1680 wheel-dividing engines were being commercially manufactured in London by at least two makers. In the mid-eighteenth century the watchmaker Jean Jodin published a comprehensive attack on the Paris corporation.<sup>41</sup> For him the corporation was the seat of mediocrity. Of the fifty best clock makers in Paris, he claimed, nine-tenths had neither been apprenticed in the city nor were the sons of Paris masters, and the corporation concerned itself with formalities only rather than seeking to advance the art of clock and watch making. This however was the complaint of an ambitious maker thwarted in his ambitions, for Jodin, a native Swiss, had been refused the right of entry into the Paris guild. In deploring the fact that talented foreign workmen such as Sully and Enderlin, Carus, Stoelwerk, Berthoud, and so on ‘have been reduced to exercising their talents furtively in the privileged areas’, that is, in the freedoms outside guild jurisdiction, Jodin was deploring his own situation.<sup>42</sup> His apparently forward-looking plea for openness on the part of the Paris corporation to new talent and to new ideas from outside the limits prescribed by their statutes, is brought into question both by his reference to the openness of the Parisian guild to foreign masters and by his antagonism to the fact that practitioners of ancillary trades such as watch-case makers and spring makers were admitted to the guild. The apparently liberalising Jodin, advocate of an open trade, had himself more restrictive views. Guild searches would seem to be an obvious way in which conservative repression of innovation and novelty could be officially expressed. The searches, however, insofar as they actually took place, were devoted to the uncovering of defective products or goods clandestinely imported. How goods were made or that they were novelties was not a concern; indeed, many companies abandoned their right of search in the course of the eighteenth century. In any case, instruments seem rarely if ever to have been examined. In the records of the two guilds chiefly concerned – the Spectacle-Makers and the Clockmakers which were also two of the most active in maintaining their rights – only a small number of cases are recorded of sundials and rules being seized as defective by the Clockmakers and, although searches were profitable to the company, after 1735 they were discontinued.<sup>43</sup> No other kinds of instruments are mentioned in the Clockmakers’ records, and the Spectacle-Makers’ searchers apparently confined their attentions to spectacle-lenses and ignored microscopes and telescopes.<sup>44</sup> The several other companies to which instrument makers belonged seem not even to have attempted any quality control upon their products. Among horological products it was those that were ‘insufficient’ or imported without having been quality controlled by the company that were seized, not those that were unusual or produced by novel means. When in July 1656 John Wyeth showed the Clockmakers’ Company court ‘a watch and box made of a spelter mettle’, it was ‘utterly disliked’ not because it was an innovation but because it was ‘counted fraudulent in regard it may deceive the good people of this land, being an imitation of gold’.<sup>45</sup> A second area of guild supervision which offered scope for suppressing innovation and the curiosity and desire to be different that gave rise to it, is that of the training of apprentices and the transmission of skills in the long chains of apprenticeship affiliations that developed within the companies. To ensure minimum standards, guilds clearly had to codify tests of the skills apprentices deployed when they sought acceptance as fully competent workmen. Such testing occurred around the ‘masterpiece’. Insofar as requirements concerning it were standardised, innovation was not at a premium for meeting them, and failure to revise the requirements regularly meant that they could quickly become no test at all. It was for this reason that in December 1577 a new set of prescribed ‘masterpieces’ was introduced for clock makers seeking admittance to the Augsburg smiths, with whom horology was domiciled, since the old prescribed models had been ‘so sketched off and copied from that, what with tracing and copying, everyone knows the way and how of them’. Apprentices were here applying to the making of the masterpiece the technique of using pricked drawings for reproducing standard models, which was current practice in the workshops where they were trained. In condemning the application of this method when it was applied to the masterpiece – ‘it was no longer any art at all’ – the reforming masters were in effect condemning their entire workshop method. But the reform had little effect and the five new models prescribed for the masterpiece themselves remained unchanged for the following 150 years.<sup>46</sup> Mechanical repetition of a standardised and old-fashioned product was surely one factor in the decline of Augsburg clock making in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, but underlying it seem to be workshop convenience and inertia, together with declining commercial stimuli to innovate, rather than any deliberate guild refusal of innovation. By its nature, the teaching and training of apprentices, concerned to transmit a known and defined body of knowledge and skills, is likely to have a conservative appearance. Apprenticeship provided the basic equipment that a craftsman needed in order to execute innovative ideas, but was not and, it could be argued, should not be in itself a training for innovation. In dynamic trading and manufacturing cities such as London, Paris, and Geneva, new ideas would inevitably be generated. What was needed was a workforce sufficiently well equipped to respond to them. Guilds that maintained high standards of apprenticeship teaching and skill thresholds for acceptance as a free member would therefore assist innovation without doing so by any conscious act of policy.<sup>47</sup> It was in the act of giving material form to a new idea that techniques themselves could advance. The clock makers of Rouen had been incorporated since 1617 and, a small but highly competent group, they developed a viable commerce. In the metalworking trades they were almost the only craftsmen in Rouen with any claim to skill in precision working. In the mid-1640s it was therefore to them that Blaise Pascal (1623–1662) turned for the series production of his new arithmetical calculating machine. The task proved difficult. According to his sister Gilberte, developing the invention ‘tired him greatly, not for the thought nor for the movement which he found out without trouble, but to make the workmen understand all these things’.<sup>48</sup> Here we may suspect a degree of family hyperbole, for a primary reason advanced to justify the granting of a privil\`ege to protect his machine in 22 May 1649 was that ‘the said instrument can easily be counterfeited by various workmen’, although they would be incapable of bringing it to the ‘justness and perfection needed usefully to make use of it’.<sup>49</sup> What seems to be the case is that Pascal was seeking to bring the production of his machine completely under his control, for the clock makers of Rouen were not incapable of making it – some indeed seem to have done so without either Pascal’s advice or his authority. However, what is clear from an examination of the machines is that without a good deal of patience and perhaps the inventor’s exigency, they might not arrive at an entirely successful result. Pascal’s machines required the making of non-standard wheels by non-standard methods. The linked parallel wheels by which calculation is effected are not uni-planar gear wheels as they are in clocks and watches, but are closer to lantern pinions – lantern pinions, however, that have only one circular end-piece holding the pins in place at right angles. This means that for them to be sufficiently robust the pins could not be riveted into the end-piece, but needed to be cut with it from a solid block of brass.<sup>50</sup> Pascal’s invention is comparable with that of Huygens described above. The innovation came from a savant outside all trade structures who commissioned local skilled craftsmen – in Rouen all members of a guild – to execute his design. Neither on the part of the guild nor of its individual members was there any resistance to the innovation as such. Indeed, in both cases individual craftsmen showed themselves eager to make it without authorisation. Because Pascal’s machine was non-standard, however, it was difficult to execute and therefore caused the development of new techniques among the craftsmen. One innovation provoked another. All this occurred quite independently of the guild, which was irrelevant to the affair except insofar as it was the basic level of mechanical skill that the corporation control of craft training ensured, which made it possible for Pascal to find skilled workmen in Rouen.<sup>51</sup> If minimum skill levels, the sine qua non of effective exploitation of innovations, were ensured by corporations, so too was continuity. In recent decades, the work of Joyce Brown, Michael Crawforth, and Gloria Clifton on the guild affiliations of instrument makers in London has enabled chains of apprenticeship affiliations to be traced across several generations.<sup>52</sup> In the context of London, where instrument makers were often only a small minority submerged in larger bodies, such ‘trees of knowledge’ as Crawforth has called them, may have had importance in confirming group identity around the techniques of its unusual activity, and in favouring the transmission of knowledge both among contemporaries and across generations. That it had any more direct role in encouraging innovation than this, however, is difficult to establish in the absence of sufficient studies that relate specific manufacturing methods or types of instrument with individual chains of descent. There are however some useful pointers. From a sample survey of surviving sundials made by four members of the Grocers’ Company,<sup>53</sup> a dial characteristic of these makers has been identified that may represent ‘a fixed pattern . . . passed from master to apprentice during their training’.<sup>54</sup> If this was the case, however, then the effect of the transmission of knowledge along the affiliation chain was rather to improve a product through standardisation than to encourage innovation around it, for the similar dials studied differ by several decades in date. This impression is reinforced by the fact that although the equation of time scale engraved on the dials was an innovative feature in the 1680s when it first appeared, it then froze; in the second half of the eighteenth century Grocer dial makers were using equation of time tables that were some fifty years out of date.<sup>55</sup> A similar impression that the passing of knowledge along apprenticeship chains helped product improvement by standardisation rather than product innovation derives from examining a group of more complex sundials popular in late seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century England – the double horizontal dial. This was first devised by William Oughtred (1574/5–1660) in c. 1600, and first published in garden dial form in 1636.<sup>56</sup> Communicated by Oughtred to the instrument maker Elias Allen (fl. 1604–1654), the new instrument was absorbed into Allen’s production without difficulty (three examples signed by him are known), but its period of greatest popularity seems to have the been the half century from c. 1670 to c. 1720; of the twenty-eight known examples, only six can be firmly dated before this period. Of the thirteen known makers of the dial, six belong to the apprentice chain stemming from Allen, and others can be linked, if sometimes only weakly, to it. In this case, the value of the apprentice chain for Oughtred’s innovation was that of dissemination, first through standardised copying in the direct chain of Allen’s descendance, thereafter through emulation by other talented makers. Behind such a development lay the guild apprenticeship dispositions, which facilitated the spread of knowledge about a new instrument even if the guild itself had no direct role in stimulating the invention. In both London and Paris, the fact that instrument makers in particular, but clock makers too, were scattered among a wide range of companies mitigated strict control, leaving doors open for innovation. There were of course differences between the two countries. Division of labour or specialisation of function within a single, and possibly large, workshop, were easier in London than in Paris, where the multiplication of guilds, combined with stronger restrictions on the number of masters (seventy-two for the Clockmakers), apprentices, or journeymen that might be accepted, meant that workshops remained smaller and more limited in scope.<sup>57</sup> Retailing manufacturers in Paris therefore organised an elaborate system of subcontracting with a series of different workshops, rather than centralising production. While this may have meant that economies of scale were less easily achieved, it was not per se antithetical to innovation. Appropriate parts were obtained from appropriate makers. Lenses would be obtained from opticians for use in sighting instruments engraved by founders, but generally not cast by the same ones; steel points for dividers and drawing instruments, also cast by founders, would be obtained from the cutlers; cases for clocks, watches, and instruments came from the leather-gilders, who themselves obtained the actual case from the gainiers.<sup>58</sup> Although usually anonymous, such collaboration would sometimes be signalled: one surviving graphometer is signed and dated ‘Le Maire le fils \`a Paris 1745’ on its alidade, by ‘Lefebvre \`a Paris au Grand Turc’ on the telescope, and by ‘C. Langlois \`a Paris au Niveau’ on the frame.<sup>59</sup> Subdivision as minute as this across workshops is equivalent to division and specialisation of labour within a single workshop. The product range of instruments as well as, to a lesser degree, of clockwork devices was unusually wide, employing numerous different materials and skills. Uniting them in a single workshop offered no great advantage except in the manufacture of large-scale precision instruments, where the adjustment of component elements to the whole might be critical, or for such classes of instruments as octants, sextants, and compasses for which there was very large demand to be satisfied. It is particularly in this area of manufacture that a gap opened up between the capabilities of London and Paris instrument makers, and where the tighter guild organisation of Paris did have a damping effect. But it was a damping effect on workshop expansion and organisation, not on innovation in techniques, those available to Paris makers being perfectly adequate for precision manufacture had they been able to scale up production in the same way as their London counterparts would do.<sup>60</sup> By the seventeenth century instrument making outside Paris and London was a trade that responded primarily to local demands. The effects of guild control would therefore be experienced differently. An interesting case for comparison is that of the Compassmachers of Nuremberg – already by the mid–fifteenth century a wealthy, burgeoning city, the centre of a wide-ranging, almost worldwide mercantile network, but also supporting an extensive small-commodity production of mainly luxury goods.<sup>61</sup> By 1500 craft specialisation was already far advanced. Although there were no guilds as such, they having been abolished after a popular uprising in 1349, the five-thousand-odd masters who directed craft workshops there in the mid–sixteenth century were closely regulated by the patrician-controlled city council. Manufactures were rigorously protected and restricted. Divided into ‘sworn’ and ‘free’, the only major difference between them and guild-organised trades in other cities was the centralisation of their administration on the city council. Production methods were to be kept secret, masters in the sworn trades could only travel by permission, and other regulations concerning numbers of apprentices, their training, quality of handiwork, and numbers of journeymen and the like familiar from guild regulations throughout Europe were equally in force. Portable sundial making in pear-wood, boxwood, or ivory emerged as a distinct, identifiable trade in the third quarter of the fifteenth century, when it counted as a ‘free’ trade. It was never particularly large. Even during its heyday in the second half of the sixteenth century, just six families, with twenty-four manufacturing members, dominated production. For the entire period from 1500 to 1700 the names of a just forty-six makers outside of these families are known, for a total of only sixty. Despite this small size, however, the success of dial making in Nuremberg meant that in the course of the sixteenth century it moved from being a ‘free’ to a ‘sworn’ craft. Its regulations, first codified in 1535, were revised and augmented throughout the century to issue in 1608 a detailed set that regulated boundary disputes between different crafts (should compass makers or mirror makers insert the glass cover to the compass incorporated in each dial? Parchment makers may not insert dials into writing tablets; etc.), tried to ensure that craft knowledge should not extend beyond the city, and tended to limit marketing to the local region, which seems to have been quite effective. The decline in Nuremberg dial making is reflected in the rather few examples of such dials (often of indifferent quality) to have survived from the later period, and from the fact that known dial makers in the seventeenth century sometimes had second occupations.<sup>62</sup> An obvious reason for difficulty is the upheaval caused by the Thirty Years’ War, but civic control may have also had a hand in the matter. Gouk has suggested that the success of the Compassmachers in attaining the status of a sworn trade ‘was at the expense of any further innovation or development of the instruments that they produced’, but minor developments did carry on into the later sixteenth century. From the late 1570s pairs of vertical and horizontal dials sharing a common string-gnomon replaced the equatorial dials drawn in the diptychs, popular in the mid-century. Wind-roses and lunar volvelles were introduced at about the same time, and epact tables begin to appear at the turn of the century. For the moment, the question whether it was the stringent regulation of the diallists’ trade embodied in the 1608 codification of their statutes, or the disruption of warfare, which inhibited innovation and expansion, must remain open. What does seem clear is that the more successful control was within the city walls, the more it was likely not to stifle innovation but to channel it into clandestine marketing and to stimulate innovation – even that based solely on emulation – in neighbouring but freer areas. That fine-wood and ivory dial making in Nuremberg declined may have been because it was an insufficiently important trade to make the development worthwhile of an apparently rival, but often symbiotic, equivalent in the hinterland of the city. In any case, by the mid–seventeenth century a strong rival centre of ivory dial making, complete with a novel gimmick in the form of magnetic azimuth time-telling, had developed in Dieppe, possibly on the basis of dial-making skills imported from Paris.<sup>63</sup> But in Germany, as elsewhere, whatever stagnation guild regulation might cause could be mitigated by symbiotic competition. Augsburg, a prime centre of both clock and instrument making in the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, was, like Nuremberg, losing ground as an exporting centre from the mid–seventeenth century onwards. However, cooperation with the nearby, but independent, talented makers of Friedberg made that decline less dramatic. Long viewed as interlopers in Augsburg’s attempted monopoly of time telling, Friedberg craftsmen, happy to work anonymously, became essential partners of Augsburg retailers, supplying finely made and complex movements (particularly those involving repeating work) to be placed in an Augsburg case with an Augsburg name, or to be exported unsigned through the Eastern Hapsburg domains or even to London.<sup>64</sup> Innovation, although ultimately perhaps a matter of individual imagination combined with skill, is none the less powerfully stimulated by emulation. Insofar as guilds sought to maintain a status quo, they could have had a damping effect upon innovation and the diffusion of new ideas. In theory, the more successful they were, the less their members might respond to new technical or economic developments. Fortunately, innovation in itself was a matter of indifference to guild authorities. No guild regulations specifically spoke against innovation, and such as were made if they caused no disturbance could be, and were, easily absorbed in the trades of Europe. In the second and third quarters of the seventeenth century, the coincidence of the magnetic and geographical meridians, which occurred successively across Europe, made finding and indicating time by the position of the magnetic needle of a compass possible. In London, instrument makers such as Henry Sutton (Joiners’ Company) and Walter Hayes (Grocers’ Company, Clockmakers’ Company) responded with the development of a new instrument. In Dieppe, the makers of ivory diptych dials, all members of a guild, incorporated a magnetic azimuth component into them. In Nuremberg, however, the diptych dial remained unchanged, even though elsewhere in Germany another form of magnetic azimuth dial was developed.<sup>65</sup> The exact way in which guild control and innovation interacted in instrument making and clock making clearly differed according to the political, economic, and psychological factors prevailing in different areas of the continent.<sup>66</sup>