# 10 Reaching beyond the City Wall: London Guilds and National Regulation, 1500–1700 Ian Anders Gadd and Patrick Wallis Historians have traditionally seen guilds as local-minded associations whose interests and jurisdictions rarely strayed far beyond the outer walls of the town or city to which they belonged. However, just as few crafts did not rely in some way upon the world beyond the town walls, whether for labour, technology, raw materials, or markets, few guilds lacked mechanisms and procedures – apprenticeship, quality control, price regulation, and so on – designed in part to mediate their needs with this ‘outside’ world. In this chapter we explore a development in London guilds’ concern with the rest of the country that has received little attention from historians: the establishment and operation of nationwide jurisdictions and monopolies by a number of metropolitan guilds.<sup>1</sup> National jurisdictions were unusual. For the most part in England, as in the rest of Europe, the jurisdictions of craft guilds stopped at the town or city’s gate or extended only a few miles into its immediate suburbs and hinterland.<sup>2</sup> It is not surprising then that nationwide guild jurisdictions in England have tended to be ignored or dismissed, at best relegated to the footnotes of company histories. The few examples that are better known tend to be those that were most intimately associated with the financial problems and opportunism – even corruption – of the crown.<sup>3</sup> While the national reach and authority of the organisations which international merchants frequently formed (such as the Merchant Adventurers’ Company) are well known, nationwide craft guilds – which may have been inspired by some of these mercantile companies, particularly in the seventeenth century – have been neglected. Attention to the national connections of guilds has instead centred on their charitable and educational roles, and their impact on the migration patterns of young people.<sup>4</sup> Broader interest in craft guilds’ national ambitions has been limited to F. J. Fisher’s seminal study of experiments in guild forms in the seventeenth century.<sup>5</sup> In line with historical thought during the 1930s, Fisher assumed that traditional handicraft guilds were largely moribund by the seventeenth century. Focusing on how corporate systems were modified to bring capitalist and craftsman together, he paid little attention to the more traditionally structured guilds that sought national jurisdictions and monopolies. However, in several cases it was these guilds that actually exercised national jurisdictions in practice. In doing so, they often acted under internal pressure from craft members, rather than through the interest of the crown or projectors and investors who drove the experiments identified by Fisher. Four such guilds will be examined in detail here. Two, the Goldsmiths’ Company and the Pewterers’ Company, established their national powers before 1500; two others, the Stationers’ Company and the Framework Knitters’ Company gained national authority in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Several less durable attempts by London guilds to govern a trade nationally are also briefly considered. Fisher’s and his contemporaries’ views of craft guilds has not been sustained by more recent scholarship. After decades as the paradigmatic example of early decline, a more varied picture of English guilds as both adaptable and long lasting is now emerging.<sup>6</sup> While guilds in some crafts and trades were effectively defunct by the seventeenth century, in others they continued or even renewed their influence in the seventeenth and even the eighteenth centuries. Even the expansion of suburban London was not necessarily fatal to guild authority.<sup>7</sup> Yet comments on industrial development in England still tend to be prefaced by assertions about the unusual weakness of guilds in the country, assertions that frequently import assumptions derived from the study of the later eighteenth century into analyses of the seventeenth century.<sup>8</sup> Research into proto-industrialisation has reinforced this, as most recent studies of industry and manufacturing in England have been almost exclusively concerned with provincial, particularly rural, settings that were largely, but not entirely, free of corporate organisation.<sup>9</sup> As a consequence, with the notable exception of Keith Snell’s work on the eighteenth century, we have little sense of how London craftsmen reacted to the development of provincial rural and urban manufacturing. This is particularly striking, given that London’s importance as by far the largest manufacturing centre in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century England is now well established.<sup>10</sup> Were London’s craftsmen – organised into powerful guilds and based close to the heart of political power in the country – passive in the face of the emergence of distant competition? The cases that we explore in this chapter suggest otherwise. They illustrate the flexibility and longevity of guild-based regulatory mechanisms in England, and demonstrate how some guilds could adapt to national rather than local and regional economies.<sup>11</sup> They also reinforce, in an English context, Sheilagh Ogilvie’s emphasis on social institutions, particularly guilds, as a factor influencing rural as well as urban industry.<sup>12</sup> After all, London guilds were at the political as well as the industrial centre of England. ## Incorporation in the Provinces At the outset, it should be emphasised that only London craft guilds secured, or came close to securing, national jurisdictions. To some extent, this is another measure of the obvious asymmetry between the metropolis and provincial towns and cities. The English urban profile was peculiarly top-heavy in this period. By 1600 London’s population of roughly 200,000 amounted to one in twenty of the inhabitants of England; unsurprisingly, the guilds of the metropolis were larger and richer than their provincial counterparts. As London’s hinterland included much of England by this time, its manufacturers as well as its merchants had a broader horizon than many of their provincial peers.<sup>13</sup> They were also closer to the centres of power at court and Westminster. And, if we compare economic importance, wealth, and numbers of freemen (rather than population), the greatest of London guilds rivalled many provincial towns. In this world there was no level playing field in lobbying for economic privileges. That said, the most important factors in limiting national ambitions to London craft guilds were legal and structural. In England, only the crown could grant wider powers to a guild and in this period few urban centres outside London had craft guilds with their own independent corporate existence. Instead, most provincial guilds were established by the local borough corporation in whose jurisdiction they were based, and as such they were directly dependent on local mayors and burgesses. Guilds established in this manner had an existence that was dependent on the survival of the borough corporation and hence they were ultimately unable to survive the municipal franchise reforms of 1835. This direct relationship to the town authorities made these craft guilds in general weaker and more dependent on the urban authorities than their London counterparts. Combined with their generally smaller size – the Blacksmiths and Cutlers’ Company of Chichester was, for example, formed in 1609 with only eleven members – this also meant that they were more fluid in form than the metropolitan guilds.<sup>14</sup> Only a very few provincial craft guilds obtained costly royal charters of incorporation in the manner common to London guilds; most of those that did receive incorporation were in the cloth trade, for example, the weavers of Newbury (1601) and of Salisbury (1562; 1612).<sup>15</sup> Establishing provincial guilds by royal charter created the potential for damaging local tensions with the town corporation and as a result several incorporated guilds were short-lived. The 1604 charter of the Reading Weavers was annulled the following year, while the Ipswich Clothworkers were equally unsuccessful, having their privileges revised and limited in 1620, only one year after their incorporation.<sup>16</sup> On examining the Ipswich Clothworkers’ guild, the Privy Council’s commissioners even decided that under-corporations in cities were generally injurious.<sup>17</sup> The paucity of further incorporations in the provinces reflects this attitude; the Cutlers of Hallamshire around Sheffield, incorporated in 1624, were a successful exception, but in their case there was no local mayor and corporation to object.<sup>18</sup> In contrast, London guilds were incorporated in substantial numbers from the fifteenth century onwards.<sup>19</sup> By the seventeenth century, incorporation was the norm in the city, with relatively few metropolitan guilds not possessing a charter of their own. ## National Jurisdictions from London: the Goldsmiths’ and the Pewterers’ Companies Of the London guilds that exercised nationwide jurisdictions over their trades and crafts, the two oldest and best known were the Goldsmiths’ and Pewterers’ Companies. In both guilds, the primary concern was the nationwide maintenance of minimum standards of metal quality, and both employed predominantly the same mechanism: manufacturing and authorisation marks backed up by guild searches. Indeed, there is persuasive evidence that the Pewterers’ Company deliberately modelled itself on the Goldsmiths, consciously imitating the form of their charter.<sup>20</sup> These guilds’ national powers and jurisdictions had been in place long before the start of the sixteenth century. The Goldsmiths’ Company’s sphere of national influence had begun with parliamentary legislation in 1300 which obliged all English goldsmiths to keep the ordinances made by the London guild, and developed until the mid-fifteenth century through a succession of ordinances and royal charters which extended its powers of search for defective goods over the kingdom.<sup>21</sup> Marking practices were standardised over the same period, and an act of 1478 made the guild responsible for the standard of all gold and silver wares produced in the kingdom. At the same time, the system in London was centralised around an ‘assay’ office at the guild’s hall, whose crowned leopard’s head mark would authorise wares which also had to bear their makers’ marks.<sup>22</sup> No wares were to be sold in the city before they had been examined and marked.<sup>23</sup> In practice, the guild’s members had sole access to the assay in London, giving them a monopoly over the manufacture of wares in the city. The guild did not, however, enjoy a complete monopoly on the ‘assay’. A number of English towns had been formally granted their own assay office from the fifteenth century onwards.<sup>24</sup> But these were not always easily accessible and none seem to have been as active as the London office; a number of provincial goldsmiths joined the London company, presumably in order to maintain trade to the city.<sup>25</sup> It should be emphasised that the evolution of the Goldsmiths’ powers was inseparable from the crown’s concern with maintaining the value of the coinage. Royal interest encouraged a national perspective and made ambitious schemes feasible. Nonetheless, the London guild had its own purposes, and its regulations were shaped for local rather than national advantage. In comparison to the Goldsmiths’ Company, the Pewterers’ Company’s grip on the pewter trade across England, despite developing later, seems to have been more ambitious and more tenacious. Nationwide interest in standardised quality norms had begun in the fifteenth century with the apparently voluntary decision of the pewterers’ guilds of York and Bristol to use the London guild’s metal standards: the York guild even explicitly adopted the London Pewterers’ ordinances.<sup>26</sup> The motives behind this move by the pewterers of England’s second and third cities are unclear, but it seems plausible that the main purpose was to ease trade with London and abroad, indicating that the pewter industry already had a national dimension. It was therefore perhaps in response to provincial ambitions that the London guild spent twenty years and £200 later in the century to gain a charter granting it ‘search and Government of all manner of Workmanships and Merchandizes . . . wrought or to be wrought and Exposed to sale’ within London and in ‘any other places . . . throughout our whole Kingdom of England’.<sup>27</sup> To enhance their regulation of the trade further, in 1503 the London Pewterers also established marking for pewter and from 1522 all pewter wares in London had to be marked. Marks were registered with the company and could be withdrawn from makers as punishment.<sup>28</sup> The energy with which these two craft guilds exercised their national powers is hard to judge. Fragmentary records suggest that the Goldsmiths’ searches were largely restricted to the major fairs in the fifteenth century, but became wider ranging in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, reaching into the Midlands and the South West.<sup>29</sup> In 1657, for example, a former senior officer of the Goldsmiths’ Company who had fallen on hard times emphasised his ‘diligent care and pains’ in searching the west country ‘as far as Launceston’ in Cornwall in a petition for charitable support. More is known about the Pewterers’ efforts. The blanket terms of their charter prompted a regular pattern of national searches for substandard ware, unmarked pewter ware (following the statute of 1503), and, occasionally, brass that seems to have exceeded the Goldsmiths’ Company in extent and persistence over the next 250 years.<sup>30</sup> The company’s efforts were not always consistent, and in the sixteenth century there were periods in which provincial search was effectively abandoned or farmed to parties of freemen.<sup>31</sup> Nonetheless, search was pursued vigorously at times: between 1636 and 1702 parties of searchers (including the most senior officers of the guild) made at least one tour of England on search per year, visiting between fifty and hundred pewterers’ shops on each occasion; over these years they visited in total over two hundred towns or cities and ventured as far afield as Cornwall, Cumberland, Northumberland, Norfolk and, on one occasion, Wales.<sup>32</sup> In 1639 the guild even petitioned Parliament to be able to extend its searching activities into Scotland and Ireland.<sup>33</sup> Even so, in the sixteenth century, the London Pewterers ‘scrupulously observed’ the jurisdictions of provincial guilds, and the legislation of 1503 regarding the marking of pewter – itself the result of lobbying by both the guilds of London and York – acknowledged the right of ‘the Maister and Wardens of the seid crafte of Peweterers within every Cite and Borow of this Realme wher such Wardens ar’ to appoint local pewter search parties.<sup>34</sup> By the mid-seventeenth century, however, the picture seems to have changed: the London guild turned its attention instead to major pewtering centres, most notably Bristol, possibly indicating increased industrial concentration and a related concern with the increasing level of competition they presented. There is evidence to suggest that the Goldsmiths’ and Pewterers’ powers of search were effective or at least troublesome, for they did not go unquestioned. Challenges to the Goldsmiths’ right to search in the provinces appear as early as 1506, when the Norwich civic authorities forced the guild to seek formal confirmation of their rights by the King’s Council, although consistent and effective resistance seems to have developed only in the seventeenth century. The most striking example of local resistance came in 1683 when the London Pewterers’ activities seem to have prompted pewterers in Wigan to seek incorporation in order to obtain regional search powers over the north of England ‘as the London Pewterers have’.<sup>35</sup> Since the 1620s Wigan had been known nationally for its pewter ware, rivalling both Bristol and York, and by the 1680s it was a highly specialised manufacturing centre.<sup>36</sup> The Wigan pewterers’ unsuccessful petition was based on the claim that the London guild was no longer effectively regulating the remote northern pewter industry, as they ‘come seldome on this account, and then are in too much hast to rectifye those abuses’. Although the petition argued that a charter would enhance the national pewter industry and not prejudice the London company’s powers, it seems in fact to have been sparked by the London guilds’ attempt to search Wigan pewterers in 1676 – at which time the local pewterers had hidden most of their wares on hearing that the London searchers were coming.<sup>37</sup> The Londoners’ tin privileges also played their part, for the London guild had close, if not always cordial, links with the tin farmers and a right to secure supplies at reduced prices. In an attempt to gain some sort of commercial equity, the Wigan guild asked for favourable terms in the supply of tin from Cornwall.<sup>38</sup> We might reasonably judge the Goldsmiths’ and Pewterers’ execution of their national powers to be a qualified success. These jurisdictions were exercised with enough force to cause annoyance in the provinces; the impact on the development of provincial manufacturing is uncertain, but these searches do not seem to have inhibited the emergence and development of provincial guilds in these crafts. The reasons for craft guilds to maintain search over a local area are fairly well established. Search was generally part of a process by which nonmembers were excluded or marginalised in a craft or trade, or forced to join the craft, thus consolidating guilds’ monopolistic activities. Commercially, it underwrote the reputation and hence the value of their products, and ensured that demand for higher-quality products was not spoiled by supplies of cheaper versions. Fraternally, the homogeneity that it encouraged through the control of basic quality and sizing focused competition on product innovation, particularly variation in form and decoration. Publicly, it justified corporate privileges by protecting consumers from fraud. While there has been much scepticism by historians about the impact of guild search in England, the extent and impact of at least some guilds’ searches has been shown to be substantial, particularly in London.<sup>39</sup> In contrast, the sheer logistics that national searches involved suggest that they were unlikely to unearth anything more than a tiny fraction of the fraudulent activity they were ostensibly seeking out for punishment. It is hard to avoid concluding therefore that they must have been largely ineffectual in directly monitoring and controlling craft and trade activity.<sup>40</sup> Officers from outside the locality lost the advantages of proximity, common knowledge, and mutual interest that underpinned the effectiveness of guild searches within their hometowns. Focussing on the great fairs where so much national trade occurred could help redress this imbalance in the fifteenth century and before, but as internal trade grew more complex in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries this advantage was lost. Unsurprisingly, for both the Goldsmiths and Pewterers, provincial searches never seem to have been as frequent, comprehensive, or rigorous as the searches they carried out in London. Arguably, these limiting factors might be offset by the indirect benefits of searches. A travelling party of senior guild officers potentially could play an important role in the dissemination of quality standards (especially important for the metal trades), communicating marking and testing practices to local guilds and authorities; such searches could also provide an opportunity to develop new trade links with the provinces. Guilds for both of these crafts existed in various provincial centres. Where this was not the case, towns maintained their own forms of economic regulation. As the entertainment expenses of the searching parties underline, they regularly met with local magistrates as well as craftsmen. Nonetheless, the costs of search on a national scale were much more likely to outweigh its advantages as a regulatory system. In particular, nationwide search was likely to be as much or more of a burden as it was a help for those who ran the system on a day-to-day basis: the guild’s governors and officers. Why then were these London guilds so interested in the power to engage in lengthy tours of the provinces in search of fraudulent practices? Although the experience of attempting a national search might temper enthusiasm for its economic promise, for both these guilds the campaign to acquire national powers was inseparable from the immediate commercial concerns of their members. In theory, national search promised much. Neither the London Goldsmiths nor the Pewterers had a national monopoly over the manufacture of their wares, nor do they appear to have used their powers of search overtly to suppress rival manufacturers in the provinces. Ideally, however, search was a means by which the guilds could maintain standards, and hence prices and demand for their wares outside London. Asymmetric information was one of the fundamental problems in early modern markets, and a national system of quality control that reduced uncertainty could help manufacturer, retailer, and consumer alike. More particularly, by policing the standards of their provincial rivals the guilds might prevent sales of their products in the provinces being undercut by cheaper wares. Explicit fraud, particularly the copying of London manufacturers’ premium wares, would also be prevented. In this regard, national search also promised to improve guilds’ control over the London market, deterring or preventing imports of illicitly made goods from the provinces by discovering them at source; fraudulent marking was a major problem in the metalware trades.<sup>41</sup> This latter concern is most apparent in the Pewterers’ Company. London pewter was valued highly in the provinces, and, in effect, national search underwrote its brand value.<sup>42</sup> Doing so was particularly important if the value of makers’ own marks and collective marks such as the Rose and Crown (used on pewter for export) were to be preserved from fraudulent imitation. By the late seventeenth century, this was a major concern for the international as well as national pewter trade.<sup>43</sup> It seems likely that the London goldsmiths would have held similar concerns. Among the artisan freemen of these guilds there was an intense concern that corporate powers beyond the metropolis be secured and executed. The pressure these freemen could put on guild officers to fulfil their national role is apparent in the various campaigns and petitions for the enforcement of ordinances, particularly search, that appeared in these and other guilds whenever regulations were not enforced.<sup>44</sup> Although relations between the Court of Assistants who governed the two guilds and the body of the freemen were not always smooth, neither of these craft guilds was among London’s most divided. Nonetheless, when guild officers grew hesitant about carrying out national searches in the late seventeenth century, they faced a wave of protest from their members. In 1671 ‘diuers members’ of the Pewterers’ Company ‘Complained of the neglect of search in the Country’, even going so far as to offer money towards a ‘stock’ to fund the searches; and in 1712 senior pewterers again complained ‘that Searches are not so frequently made as they conceive to be necessary’.<sup>45</sup> Freemen in the Goldsmiths’ Company went further, complaining to the Privy Council in 1668 and 1678 about their guild’s failure to carry out enough searches.<sup>46</sup> These grievances were fuelled by freemen’s immediate worries about their trade. Problems in trade, artisans believed, could be blamed on the fraud and deceit of their rivals rather than more impersonal factors. Given what we know of internal guild politics, however, it is unlikely that guild officers would have acted if they had not shared the freemen’s belief in the value of national search to some degree. They were not simply reacting to pressure from below. The governors of these guilds took an interest in extending regulation. They led the long, expensive, and timeconsuming campaigns to secure national powers, campaigns that continued throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Clearly, this interest in obtaining authority did not necessarily translate into the enthusiasm needed to enforce it year on year. In this latter regard, personal profit may have been an extra incentive for official searchers, for despite its additional costs, national search, like local search, had its rewards. Several prominent pewterers were willing to purchase the right to search outside London, offering £12 in 1556–7, although the guild was normally happy to delegate search without payment.<sup>47</sup> In 1636 Sir Selwyne Parker, a courtier with an eye for profit, along with several others even petitioned the king for a privilege to carry out searches of pewter, presumably in imitation of the licencing and regulation privileges that were granted to a number of Tudor and Stuart projectors.<sup>48</sup> However, the commercial opportunities of searches for profiteering, for building up personal contacts, and for assessing local economic conditions and craft techniques need to be set against the costs in time, money, and inconvenience they involved for guild officers, particularly when their own businesses must have suffered from their sustained absence. Despite the complaints of the freemen, the decline in national search by the Pewterers’ and Goldsmiths’ Companies does not seem to have been the fault of the guilds’ officers. The central reason seems to have been a fundamental legal shift in the extent to which authority could be granted to corporations by acts of the royal prerogative – as guild charters were – rather than by statute law made in Parliament. In particular, guilds’ legal right to seize goods, enter premises, and fine non-members became increasingly suspect from about 1700. This is apparent in the way the Goldsmiths and Pewterers drew in their horns at this time. By the second half of the seventeenth century the Goldsmiths’ Company was clearly worried about the legitimacy of its authority, and from this point it employed alternative strategies to the straightforward search, principally the use of agents to purchase suspected wares prior to a prosecution.<sup>49</sup> It became increasingly difficult for the Goldsmiths to be able to sustain search even within the environs of London itself – a problem compounded by the arrival of significant numbers of immigrant Huguenot goldsmiths – and in 1716 the guild was advised by legal counsel that its charter provided no legal authority for searching premises outside London (or indeed seizing wares or fining individuals) without the owner’s consent, unless the suspects were members of the guild.<sup>50</sup> Moreover, the guild could no longer act directly against offenders in seeking fines; instead, such penalties had to be sued for in the courts. The last recorded search by the guild was in 1723; shortly afterwards, the practice of purchasing suspect wares and fining offenders was also discontinued. In a final blow, in 1725 the Attorney General overturned the rule restricting the ownership of individual hallmarks to members of the guild. Legislative attempts in subsequent years to establish a right of search failed.<sup>51</sup> By the early eighteenth century, the Pewterers’ Company was facing much the same difficulty over the legal basis of search. Its last full-scale provincial search was mounted in 1702, and in 1722, five years after the Goldsmiths, the Pewterers received advice from counsel that its searches were legally dubious. After 1723 it abandoned even limited searches outside London. ## National Jurisdictions from London: Stationers’ Company and the Company of Framework Knitters For most London guilds seeking a national jurisdiction in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the Goldsmiths’ and Pewterers’ Companies were not models to be slavishly imitated. Indeed, few other guilds had either the motivation or the wherewithal to muster regular national searching trips on a similar scale to these guilds without some better guarantee of the rewards they would bring. Separated from the conditions that had produced the first national jurisdictions by a period of urban decline and economic contraction in the late fifteenth century, the guilds that sought national powers in the sixteenth and especially the seventeenth century were, with a few exceptions, far more directly monopolistic in orientation. The right to search remote workshops and shops of craftsmen and tradesmen who were not members of the guild was no longer considered sufficient on its own; instead these guilds generally sought to restrict the practice of their particular craft or trade on a national level to their members alone. In a wave of corporate monopolies, guilds with national jurisdictions appeared in significant numbers in late sixteenth- and seventeenthcentury England. This was, of course, an era of monopolies as a series of monarchs and a sea of projectors controversially attempted to capitalise on the fiscal and financial opportunities presented by growing demand for consumer goods.<sup>52</sup> The guild and monopoly system overlapped from the start. Both relied on the powers of royal letters patent to give an individual or a group privileges that were legally enforceable across the kingdom.<sup>53</sup> The importance of corporate monopolies was enhanced in 1624 when Parliament overturned the rights of individuals to hold monopolies in the Statute of Monopolies, but exempted corporations in order to avoid damaging the privileges of towns and cities.<sup>54</sup> Because of this, a number of later monopolies were granted under the guise of a newly founded guild to individuals who had established links with groups of craftsmen.<sup>55</sup> However, guilds also obtained national monopolies without the involvement of external patrons or capitalist projectors. Two of these, both London guilds, are known to have had some success in enforcing their powers: the Stationers and the Framework-Knitters. <sup>54</sup> 21 Jac. 1, c.3. The text of the statute is reproduced in Price, English Patents, 135–41; the exemption for towns and other corporate bodies is in §9. See also E. R. Foster, ‘The Procedure of the House of Commons against Patents and Monopolies, 1621–1624’, in W. A. Aiken and B. D. Henning (eds.), Conflict in Stuart England. Essays in Honor of Wallace Notestein (New York: J. Cape, 1960), 59–85; Chris R. Kyle, ‘“But a New Button to an Old Coat”: The Enactment of the Statute of Monopolies 21 James I cap.3’, Journal of Legal History, 19 (1998), 203–23. The Stationers’ Company of London had already been active for over 150 years when, in May 1557, the Crown incorporated it with a national monopoly of printing. The guild’s charter also included national rights of search for all books ‘printed contrary to the form of any statute, act, or proclamation’.<sup>56</sup> The dominance of a single guild over printing throughout the nation was in marked contrast to most other European countries, where individual printers’ guilds were to be found in most reasonably sized towns or cities and no comparable single guild dominated the trade as a whole. Scholars have generally explained this by presenting the Stationers’ Company as a powerful state-sponsored watchdog for censorship, able to provide ‘a suitable remedy’, to quote the charter’s preamble, against the publication of illicit and illegal material. However, this perspective overly diminishes the agency of the Stationers’ Company. Instead, as the ongoing work of Peter Blayney suggests, the 1557 charter represented a commercial coup in which a group of booksellers and printer-publishers were able to secure a nationwide monopoly over the means of production in their industry.<sup>57</sup> In practice, it was at best a limited aid to censorship. The charter did not directly inhibit the selling of books in England; after all, the wider the possible market, the greater the possible commercial returns, especially for a commodity whose consumers required a modicum of skill. The enduring significance of the London Stationers’ monopoly was underlined in the guild’s short-lived second charter of 1684 that restricted the right to print to those members resident in London. Moreover, this charter demanded national recognition of the guild’s own system of title registration (a way of preventing direct competition or indeed piracy between its members), which had been set up around the time of its first charter of 1557. This restriction of printing to members of the Stationers’ Company or those able to gain direct royal licence remained in effect – bolstered by legislation and subject to occasional lapses and legal hiatuses – until the end of the seventeenth century; indeed, the development of a provincial printing industry in England prior to the eighteenth century was significantly retarded by the Stationers’ Company powers. That said, the extent to which the Stationers’ Company actively prosecuted its national monopoly of printing is unclear. There is no evidence of regular searching trips comparable with those of the Pewterers’ and Goldsmiths’ Companies, and the records suggest that searches were at best occasional occurrences. On only two occasions in the late sixteenth century can the names of the searchers themselves be found in the guild’s otherwise relatively extensive and intact archive. Even then, it is uncertain exactly how far into the countryside the guild’s representatives ventured, although we do know that guild officials visited Cambridge, Oxford, York, and Hull in the period between its two charters.<sup>58</sup> Moreover, the English import trade in books was large and lucrative throughout this period, and at least during the second half of the sixteenth century the Stationers’ Company took a pragmatic and flexible attitude to members of the trade from abroad, allowing them a form of ‘associate’ membership in the guild.<sup>59</sup> The Company of Framework Knitters presents a rather different story to the Stationers. Probably the longest lived of seventeenth-century national guilds, its members had a monopoly of the use of knitting frames – machines for hosiery manufacture – that had been invented in the late sixteenth century. An example of a genuine industrial invention, the craft only developed slowly in England. It seems to have been banned briefly in the 1610s, but by the 1640s and 1650s framework knitters, specialist craftsmen largely working with silk to produce a luxury product, were increasingly numerous in London and several other areas, particularly in the Midlands where the machine had been invented. In 1655 the London knitters sought incorporation and they received a charter in 1657. The guild’s authority was limited to the capital and its near surroundings, but pressure for a national monopoly was already growing by 1660 when a new charter was sought (all acts of the Protectorate had been voided on the restoration of the monarchy in that year). Although the Council of Trade recommended against a national guild, the final charter in 1663 obliged all framework knitters in England and Wales to join the guild. The monopoly in this case was justified by the newness of the technology and by the warnings of metropolitan craftsmen that it might be transferred to the continent, losing the country a valuable export; by 1655 framework knitters in London were already selling more hose abroad than at home.<sup>60</sup> Governing a trade that was already diffused across the provinces presented serious problems for the London-based guild which it ultimately failed to overcome. Nonetheless, before 1700 it does appear to have exercised its powers with some force, leading framework knitters in Nottingham, Leicester, and Hinckley to complain to Parliament in the 1690s about the troubles and costs the guild was causing.<sup>61</sup> There are signs in the early eighteenth century that framework knitters were moving from London to the Midlands to avoid guild supervision and that provincial manufacturers were illicitly enrolling large numbers of apprentices. However, the guild’s powers did not break down fully until a legal defeat in 1731, after which the system of provincial deputies that the guild had established ceased to operate. Up to that point, the London guild had been able to convince major provincial framework knitters to act as officers to register apprentices and freemen and, at least in theory, to pursue those who ignored its ordinances. The guild continued to hope for a restoration of its forfeited authority until 1753, when a Parliamentary committee judged their monopoly to be harmful following petitions from the provincial knitters.<sup>62</sup> These guilds’ involvement in nationwide jurisdictions was in no way disinterested. In contrast to the balance maintained by the Goldsmiths and Pewterers between local commercial advantages and the general utility of quality control, the national remits gained by the Stationers and Framework Knitters were inseparable from their monopolistic rent seeking. For them and most of the less successful national companies established in the period, quality control was only a minor although inescapable factor. <sup>61</sup> Journal of the House of Commons, vol.13, 131; Victoria County History, Leicestershire: vol. III, 8 Victoria County History, Derbyshire: vol. II, 367–9. <sup>62</sup> Chapman, ‘The Genesis’; William Felkin, History of the Machine-Wrought Hosiery and Lace Manufactures (Newton Abbot: David & Charles, 1967; first published in 1867); Gravenor Henson, History of the Framework Knitters (Newton Abbot: David & Charles, 1970; first published in 1831); Charles Deering, Nottingham Vetus et Nova: Or an Historical Account of the Present and Ancient State of the town of Nottingham (Wakefield: S.R. Publishers, 1970; first published in 1751), 100–1; Sheila A. Mason, History of the Worshipful Company of Framework Knitters (Oadby: Worshipful Company of Framework Knitters, 2000), 102–12. <sup>60</sup> S. D. Chapman, ‘The Genesis of the British Hosiery Industry, 1600–1750’, Textile History 3 (1972), 7–50. The Cutlers’ Company of Sheffield put great effort into a similar campaign against the export of skilled craftsmen in the early eighteenth century: Hey, Fiery blades, 140. ## National Jurisdictions from London: Conditions for Success If national powers were potentially workable and useful, then why do they appear to have taken off successfully in only these four cases? First, as mentioned earlier, it should be said that a number of other guilds did obtain nationwide authority although they seem to have had less success in implementing them than the guilds examined above. At around the time the Goldsmiths’ Company first acquired its national jurisdiction, at least two other London guilds, the Girdlers and the Skinners, obtained similar powers, and at least one other, the Cutlers, sought them. In 1327 the Girdlers’ Company was granted a limited right to search throughout the kingdom to prevent girdles being decorated with false metals. The guild was to work with those responsible for the craft in any town its searchers visited, and there is evidence of the guild exercising its authority several times in the first half of the fourteenth century.<sup>63</sup> In the Skinners’ case, the jurisdiction, also granted in 1327, was over trade fairs nationwide, but there is no evidence of whether or not they actually attempted to search for old furs deceitfully being passed off as new.<sup>64</sup> In an undated petition from the early fourteenth century, at about the same time as the London Cutlers sought authority to correct abuses in London, the guild asked for similar powers elsewhere in the kingdom; the king appears to have only granted the former.<sup>65</sup> Grants of national jurisdiction, generally linked to national monopolies, became more numerous in the seventeenth century. Most of these schemes failed quickly. The monopolistic Westminster Soapmakers’ and the Starch-makers’ Companies soon foundered on opposition from wellestablished existing manufacturers.<sup>66</sup> The Gold and Silver Wire Drawers, incorporated in 1623 with a national monopoly and powers of search, had their charter damned by Parliament as a grievance barely nine months later; the whole affair seems to have been fought out between two rival courtier-patentees, Matthias Fowle and Thomas Violet.<sup>67</sup> The authority of the Company of Silkmen, incorporated in 1631, was also shortlived, superseded in 1638 when the London Weavers’ Company gained the authority to search and seal cloth made from foreign materials (an ambiguous phrase largely meaning silk) anywhere in the kingdom, in exchange for a tax of 8d per pound of silk wrought. In an unusual sop to provincial manufacturers, six Canterbury weavers were added to the guild’s Court of Assistants.<sup>68</sup> The massively unpopular monopoly of retailing wine granted in 1638 to the London Vintners in exchange for a levy to the crown of 40s per tun of wine sold in England survived for an even briefer period, ending under resistance of provincial retailers and the general onslaught against monopolies of the Long Parliament in 1641.<sup>69</sup> Similarly, the Playing-card Makers and the Pinmakers, incorporated with national powers in the late 1630s, were directly tied to the King for capital or purchase of their products and as a consequence disappeared in the 1640s.<sup>70</sup> Some national grants did last longer. The national reach and membership granted to the so-called Foreign Shipwrights’ Company in successive charters in 1605 and 1612 became a costly and protracted source of conflict with the older and unchartered London Shipwrights’ Company and never seem to have operated properly; despite high-placed government support, the Foreign Shipwrights were unable to supplant the older guild and, following the cancellation of its charter in 1684, the newer guild had withered away by the early eighteenth century taking its national ambitions with it.<sup>71</sup> Interestingly, the London Company of Soap-makers, which after a long struggle bought out the privileges of the Westminster guild in 1637 for £43,000, maintained its national monopoly throughout the interregnum. In part, this was no doubt due to its usefulness as a source of tax, but it also related to its broader base among soap-makers in London and elsewhere. It seems to have been this latter characteristic that allowed it to justify its privileges.<sup>72</sup> 68 Calendar of State Papers, Domestic (1635–6), 193, 255; Calendar of State Papers, Domestic (1637–8), 454; Larkin and Hughes, Tudor Royal Proclamations, vol. II, no. 270; Alfred Plummer, The London Weavers’ Company (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1972), 280–1; Unwin, Industrial Organization, 204. Silk was the subject of much concern, and proclamations were issued several times against false dying: Larkin and Hughes, Tudor Royal Proclamations, vol. 2, nos. 138 and 262. See also statutes 14 Car. 2, c. 15 and 19 and 20 Car. 2, c.11. <sup>70</sup> Bodleian Library, Oxford, Bankes MS 12, fo. 63r; Price, English Patents, 39–40. There is evidence of a revival of the Pinmakers’ Company at the very end of the seventeenth century, with records surviving of provincial searches in the first decade of the eighteenth; see C. R. H. Cooper, ‘The Archives of the City of London Livery Companies and Related Organisations’, Archives 16 (1984), 349; City Livery Companies and Related Organisations: A Guide to Their Archives in Guildhall Library, 3rd edn (London: Guildhall Library, 1989), 91. Not all of the guilds that sought national powers in the seventeenth century were so obviously monopolistic in orientation. Several echoed the approach and the concerns of the Goldsmiths and Pewterers. Worries about poorly made hats from ‘remoate places’, presumably the work of rural producers, led a coalition of haberdashers and felt makers from York, Chester, Bristol, and London to seek the right to appoint searchers throughout England in 1618.<sup>73</sup> The artisan girdlers of London carried out a more effective campaign in the 1630s. That guild’s 1640 charter highlights the differences between the concerns of the assistants of the company and those of its artisan members. In this case, the power to search for bad wares throughout the kingdom was granted to the yeomanry – the artificers and workmen of the guild. The master and assistants were only responsible for metropolitan search, and even there the yeomanry could search if they were absent.<sup>74</sup> However, the unfortunate timing of the new charter meant that no attempt to put this into practice seems to have been possible.<sup>75</sup> As these examples suggest, belief in the potential effectiveness of national regulation was widespread in the seventeenth century. By the 1630s, demands for national jurisdictions were widespread. Even London’s Combmakers’ Company was pressing for the right to carry out nationwide searches, while the Musicians’ Company was seeking to incorporate musicians across the nation, presumably to prevent false notes.<sup>76</sup> This faith in national regulation was not necessarily baseless. Where national jurisdictions failed, it was normally not due to the difficulties of provincial enforcement but to internal squabbles, the rivalry of existing guilds, problems with monopolists, and the consequences of the defeat in the 1640s of the royal authority on which many of these national jurisdictions relied. Not all crafts were suited to national jurisdictions. As a comparison of the commodities with which these guilds and projects were concerned suggests, nationwide control was possible or advantageous only in certain cases. Two criteria seem particularly important. First, the four guilds considered here produced small, highly portable, high-value commodities which could be traded over long distances with ease: gold, silver, and pewter wares, silk stockings, and books were luxury items attracting a small, though growing, market. These commodities were all industrial products that were valuable enough to be worth regulating. A similar conclusion could be reached about the furs, ornate girdles, gold wire, wine, playing cards, and silk that were the concerns of some of the guilds that unsuccessfully sought national powers. (Ships, soap, starch, and pins can hardly be fitted into the same category, which helps explain their lack of success.) Such national jurisdictions were, in practice, good bets for metropolitan guilds. London still dominated these small-scale, lesscapital-intensive industries in the eighteenth century and, in some cases, well beyond. Over eighty percent of English gold, silver, and jewellery manufacturers and almost fifty percent of English printers were still based in London in 1851.<sup>77</sup> Second, for all of these commodities, national, even international, markets were of major importance. A national jurisdiction is, after all, only worthwhile if a commodity is traded nationally. In such markets, problems of quality control and reputation arising from asymmetric information were particularly salient. By contrast, for a number of major sectors of the metropolitan economy in the early modern period, particularly victualling and building, national powers would be pointless: bakers’ or butchers’ guilds had no interest in supervising craftsmen who were not supplying the same market. For others, a regional authority was more appealing: in 1611, for example, the Plumbers’ Company petitioned for a licence to search up to 100 miles from London and in certain places beyond that distance.<sup>78</sup> Guilds sought the jurisdiction that they felt was most useful. The practicalities of enforcing a national jurisdiction must also have played a part in influencing which crafts sought one. The goldsmiths, pewterers, stationers, and framework knitters were all crafts in which search was made easier by the demands of the manufacturing process. All dealt with highly visible industries that demanded fixed establishments of relatively immovable machinery, whether knitting frames, presses, or furnaces. They were also all relatively small crafts with fairly low numbers employed in them. To this extent, a national jurisdiction must have seemed in each case a real possibility. The practical limits of national jurisdictions can be observed in the cloth trade. Given that cloth was by far the most important manufactured product in early modern England, it would seem an obvious candidate for national regulation. There is evidence that the existing, largely local or regionally monitored quality control systems of cloth-marking were vulnerable to counterfeiters, such as the London clothworker, Thomas Jupp, who admitted in 1632 to fixing fake Colchester seals to poorerquality bays from Bocking.<sup>79</sup> There were in fact a number of attempts to control the trade nationally through the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.<sup>80</sup> However, when national systems were proposed, they were based on devolved authority rather than a metropolitan corporate overseer; indeed what came closest to a national search – secondary searching at London’s Blackwell Hall, the main marketplace for English cloth – was defeated in 1607, and had been only partially effective for many years before.<sup>81</sup> Cloth also provides the best examples of resistance to the influence of London. For example, in 1663 the Clothiers of Worcester, Shrewsbury, Leeds, Dorchester, and Stroudwater each petitioned Parliament about the inconvenience of new regulations imposed on Blackwell Hall and Leadenhall cloth markets by London’s Common Council.<sup>82</sup> In cloth, both the relative weakness of the London companies concerned, the existence of strong provincial interests, and, ultimately, the practical difficulties of trying to regulate such a massive and varied craft that was largely diffused into rural areas were overwhelming. Another comparable example is the form of county and borough licencing introduced in the 1630s for brewers.<sup>83</sup> Both these cases would suggest that national jurisdictions held by single guilds were most feasible in trades below a certain national size and importance, and which remained substantially urban in location. Determining the feasibility and commercial value of national regulation is one thing; obtaining the necessary corporate privileges is entirely another. It was politically as well as economically significant that the four successful crafts discussed here were all concentrated principally in London. The absence of major provincial centres of manufacture, at least at the time when a national jurisdiction was obtained, gave these guilds a political as well as practical advantage as objections from the provinces were likely to be muted – a problem for the London Girdlers as we have seen.<sup>84</sup> As can be seen in the pewter trade, it was only after a large provincial manufacturing centre appeared that a real challenge to the London guild was possible. As the fate of other seventeenth-century monopolies suggests, such political-cum-economic factors were highly important for the success or failure of such jurisdictions. Political circumstances within London mattered as well. Resistance from existing guilds and the City was a major threat to any changes in the institutional structures of London. Efforts to shift artisans working in a long-standing craft from their original guilds into a new, dedicated guild were notoriously problematic and were frequently challenged at law.<sup>85</sup> In the case of the four guilds discussed here, the national project had the support of those who were or who became the guild members. These four guilds were also unusually homogenous, largely containing craftsmen working in the guilds’ particular crafts, rather than the spread of different trades that was common in some other guilds in London. Search and other forms of craft regulation were less automatic in guilds that had come to encompass a greater diversity of trades and therefore had less interest in defending their original craft. In contrast, acquiring and enforcing national search for these guilds is a sign of what a reasonably rich and cohesive guild could achieve in the face of provincial and foreign competition. For the Pewterers’ Company, for example, search was just one of several devices used to give its members a commercial advantage over their rivals; the guild made strenuous efforts to fix prices for pewter and it also had a right to a certain volume of tin at discounted prices.<sup>86</sup> We might compare its situation with that of the Cutlers’ Company, whose members would potentially have benefited from being able to police the marks on blades nationally, but which was in frequent disputes over marking and search with the Armourers’ Company as well as facing provincial competition from the Hallamshire guild.<sup>87</sup> It is also significant that three of these four crafts had an unusual relationship with the crown. This is most apparent in the case of the Goldsmiths’ Company, whose powers were inseparable from the need to maintain standards in the coinage. Indeed, for the Goldsmiths, one could suggest that their national role was a by-product of the argument that if supervision was inevitable, it was better to do it oneself rather than have it imposed from above. Similarly, the attractions for the government of a mechanism to restrict and control printing were obvious because of its importance to censorship, while the relationship between the pewter trade and the tin mining concerns of the crown, through the Duchy of Cornwall, suggest at least one reason why this craft attracted interest at court.<sup>88</sup> Nonetheless, the national roles taken on by the guilds were not the product of central Diktat. If the crown had sought to take the initiative in regulating these particular crafts, it would have been able to do so without granting these guilds the autonomy, power, and monopolies that they gained. There were potential alternatives: most English towns had an extensive system of non-guild market and trade regulations, with food pricing regulations and quality assessors such as aleconners, fleshtasters, garblers, bread assizes, and the like.<sup>89</sup> That such national jurisdictions were sought by the guilds themselves, often at great expense, testifies to the strength of the guilds’ desire to be in control of their own economic destiny. ## Conclusion The national powers granted to the Goldsmiths and Pewterers represent modest success stories for the guilds involved as some manner of national economic control was established and maintained over a number of generations. A stronger case can be made for the Stationers, whose monopoly of printing was largely effective; a not insignificant one for the Framework Knitters. The legal jurisdictions of these guilds may have been undermined by competition from manufacturers operating in unregulated regions, but they were overturned through changes in the legal standing of their charters and letters patent, and the royal proclamations that reinforced them. These jurisdictions were based on a particular political situation in which the crown had the power to delegate certain nationwide powers without resorting to Parliament, and it was this authority that was questioned at law and then supplanted by Parliamentary legislation in the early eighteenth centuries. The legal setbacks suffered by these guilds were thus a microcosm of those faced by guilds across England. The first half of the eighteenth century saw many guilds face legal defeats on issues, such as their right to search and fine non-members, that had been uncontested for generations.<sup>90</sup> While it is often reasonable to see the rejection of local privileges by the law courts as a reflection of the ongoing shift towards a national and international economy, this general argument is less convincing for the Goldsmiths, Pewterers, Stationers, and Framework Knitters. In all these cases corporate power had been stretched to fit national markets and had often coexisted with them for centuries. Strikingly, the Pewterers’ effective loss of their power coincided with the shrinking rather than the expansion of the market for their products as Sheffield plate and other alternatives became fashionable, although the rigidity of the guild’s control may have played a part in this.<sup>91</sup> For none of the guilds discussed here (with the possible exception of the Framework Knitters) did the loss of power by the London guild tie in with the emergence of new forms of capitalist investment or productive relations.<sup>92</sup> Rather, the national powers of these guilds were overtaken by political as much as economic events and by the consolidation of a long-standing antagonism towards corporate privileges and protectionism by elements of the political and legal elite, bolstered after 1688 by the curtailment of the royal prerogative.<sup>93</sup> Without this shift, would more English guilds have retained their powers through the eighteenth century or even beyond? What do these examples of guilds with national ambitions tell us? Perhaps most significantly, they show English guilds throughout the seventeenth century and before actively adapting to changing economic conditions. These institutions were not all either moribund or shrunken to a purely ceremonial or charitable function as has too often been suggested. They reacted to a changing economy in ambitious and potentially effective ways. In some lights, London in the early seventeenth century was at its peak of influence, with a larger share of the urban population and trade of the nation than it had had before or would indeed have again until relatively recently.<sup>94</sup> The national perspective of some of its guilds reflects this. The timing of these two waves of regulatory enthusiasm is also relevant: both the early fourteenth century and the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries were periods of expansion in consumer demand for manufactured goods, suggesting that these guilds were engaged in economically expansionist rather than defensive strategies.<sup>95</sup> However, the limits of these ambitions are also important. A national ‘move’ of the nature we have discussed above was only relevant to craft guilds involved in some aspects of manufacturing; service and distribution guilds were not affected. For many and probably most economic sectors, England was still primarily a regional rather than national economy.<sup>96</sup> Moreover, attempting any assessment of the impact of guilds on the economy is notoriously difficult, even for local areas. This problem is multiplied for national jurisdictions. It is possible to establish crudely that they had some impact, but the benefits and costs of the quality control procedures that these guilds instituted are in detail lost to us. The practicalities of national searches without a monopoly suggest that they were poor devices for preserving standards unless they were mainly acting to reinforce local jurisdictions. These examples seem to challenge Bo Gustafsson’s recent contention that guild regulation was due to their efficiency in preventing fraud.<sup>97</sup> However, it must be admitted that there is little evidence to prove this either way. Equally, while we have suggested that in these cases national powers were attractive because they gave guild members a commercial advantage, for the Goldsmiths and Pewterers at least, the extent to which they supported the trade in the produce of London craftsmen is also impossible to assess, as is the burden, if any, they put on provincial economic growth in these areas. That said, there is little to indicate that these regulatory efforts harmed these industries in the way Ogilvie has argued occurred in worsted weaving.<sup>98</sup> All levels of guild membership among the Goldsmiths, Pewterers, Stationers, and Framework Knitters desired national jurisdictions. As a result, these guilds were willing, even eager, to invest substantial amounts of time, money, and effort in organising and running a costly nationwide system of searches despite their questionable practical value. Guild interests did not always stop at the city gate.