# 11 Guilds in Decline? London Livery Companies and the Rise of a Liberal Economy, 1600–1800 Michael Berlin The notion that guilds were antithetical to the development of a capitalist economy has long held sway among English economic historians. Beginning with their most illustrious investigator, George Unwin, historians of the English guilds have assumed that these bodies, with regulatory powers over apprenticeship and working conditions, the authority to limit numbers working in a given trade or to set prices, and a supposed antipathy towards new technology, formed a barrier to economic progress and the advance of market relations. The shedding of these powers and the waning of guild authority over urban economies has been seen as a necessary step in England’s development as an industrial and commercial nation. Although the decline of the guilds may have resulted in the loss of economic security by small-scale artisans and their transformation into wage labourers, this was an unfortunate side effect of economic progress. The decline of the guilds has been described in terms that assumed that this process of historical change was the outcome of the workings of underlying historical forces operating from the later sixteenth into the mid– eighteenth century. The story of decline describes the guilds as though they were organic bodies at the end of a life cycle. Unable to adapt to the new conditions and mentalities of the eighteenth century, guild structures became increasingly sclerotic, atrophied, and ‘out of date’. Laissez-faire capitalism and its inherent potential for unleashing the forces of individual creativity triumphed over the old regulatory powers of the guilds through a process that was both natural and inevitable. Although recent research has substantially revised the received wisdom, both in terms of the supposed hostility of the guilds to the processes of economic and technological development, and to the broad chronology of their influence, the older view of the role of guilds has proved remarkably persistent in economic and social histories of the early modern period. The purpose of what follows is to tease out some of the possible reasons for the persistence of the dominant view of the role of guilds and to survey recent revisions to the conventional history of guild regulation, particularly as these revisions apply to London. Although it might be argued that London lay outside the most important centres of economic development in pre-industrial England, the size of its workforce in the eighteenth and early nineteenth century – estimated to be up to 40 percent of a population approaching a million by 1800 – made the metropolis the largest centre of manufacturing in England and perhaps in western Europe. Given the City of London’s national and international significance as a centre of commercial and financial activity, this concentration of manufacturing makes the role of the metropolitan guilds worthy of attention. ## The Historiography of Decline The received view of historians that guild regulation was a barrier to progress has a long lineage. It was part of the rhetoric of the first advocates of laissez-faire. The received image of the incompatibility of guilds and economic expansion lies at the heart of classical economic theory. Adam Smith’s Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations saw the guilds as restrictive corporations designed to benefit artisan producers: The pretence that corporations are necessary for the better government of the trade, is without any foundation. The real and effective discipline which is exercised over a workman, is not that of his corporation, but that of his customers. It is a fear of losing their employment which restrains his frauds and corrects his negligence. An exclusive corporation necessarily weakens this form of discipline.<sup>1</sup> His remarks come at that very period which later historians have pinpointed as a time of declining guild control and concomitant economic growth. Thus the rhetoric of the eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century advocates of freedom from restriction, following Smith, became part of the historical explanation for what happened to the guilds in this period. Guilds were incompatible with advancing economic development in the eighteenth century and antithetical to the new doctrines of economic liberalism; therefore, as these historical forces advanced, the decline of the guilds could be largely assumed. This tautology became deeply embedded in the historical consciousness of later nineteenth-century historians of the guilds. Little was written on the economic role of guilds between the time of Smith and the last third of the nineteenth century. In the interim, antiquarians, who produced a plethora of individual histories of city companies that focused on the rituals and customs of guild life, dominated the study of guilds. Works such as William Herbert’s History of the Twelve Great Companies of London (1837) presented colourful, if somewhat longwinded accounts of feasts, pageants, heraldry, and regalia. This is not to deny the validity of the antiquarians’ efforts. What is notable is how these authors so studiously avoided the more recent history of the guilds, and the more controversial aspects of their powers.<sup>2</sup> This is understandable. The political reform movements that gave rise to the Great Reform Act of 1832 had, in the Royal Commission on Municipal Corporations of 1835, swept away the last vestiges of guild and other chartered incorporations from the provincial towns. It was only as a result of local accident that London escaped the same reforms: the appointment to the Royal Commission of the obsessive Whig historian Sir Francis Palgrave delayed the inclusion of the City of London and the livery companies in the legislation that reformed provincial towns.<sup>3</sup> The Corporation of London and the city companies remained largely unreformed, although the requirement that all retailers and shopkeepers in the square mile be freemen of the City, the last real barrier to free trade, was lifted in 1837. It was only in 1856 that membership of a livery company fully ceased to confer economic privileges in the Square Mile. Little wonder that the livery companies retreated into themselves. They had become, like Bagehot’s monarchy, the ‘dignified’ part of the City’s body politic. One of the first modern studies of the economic and social role of guilds emerged from this antiquarian context, but was also informed by an awareness of the limits of laissez-faire liberalism and the potential for social injustice that it could engender. The essay by the German social philosopher Ludwig Brentano, published in 1870, was the first systematic attempt to analyse the development of English guild regulations and their impact on industrial organisation. Brentano’s interest in guilds stemmed from his contact with English trade unionists during the 1860s, in particular with the Christian socialist trade union lawyer John Ludlow who befriended Brentano when he first visited England in 1867. Through this contact, Brentano came to believe that guilds were the historical antecedents of the trade unions, and that they had acted similarly as a buffer against the worst effects of social and economic change. From this Brentano developed the view that trade unions, like the guilds, could function as a source of social stability, moral improvement, and Christian solidarity, staving off radical political change through gradualist reform. Brentano was later to advocate this view of trade unions for the newly united German Reich.<sup>4</sup> Since, for Brentano, the decline of the guilds was a necessary concomitant of industrialisation, it was hoped by extension that the trade unions would serve to recreate the guild solidarities undermined in the course of a century of economic change. ‘In England’, Brentano wrote, ‘there grew up successors to the old Gilds, in the Trade-Unions of workingmen, which, like the first Gilds of the old freemen, sprang up as a defence against the great capitalists, who, like ever the strong, competed with each other at the expense of the weak.’ Thus, from a very early point, historical research on English guilds outlined a distinctive model of decline that stressed the inevitable break-up of these institutions with the triumph of laissez-faire capitalism. Guilds were overthrown by the development of large-scale capitalist enterprises, technological innovation, and restrictive practices by the crafts themselves: ‘handicrafts, and the corporations together with them, lost continually in importance, and only made themselves hated and despised in their endeavour to arrest the natural process of events’.<sup>5</sup> We must remember the political and intellectual context in which these first attempts at an economic and social history of the guilds were written. The first modern historians of the guilds were writing at a time when the shibboleths of economic liberalism were just beginning to be challenged: on the one hand by collectivists, who were developing a full-blown critique of unfettered capitalism, and on the other hand by social imperialists, who were beginning to enunciate a programme of greater state intervention and economic regulation. The first generation of economic historians were working within an atmosphere that was both keenly aware of the dislocating effects of the capitalist economy and wary of any attempts at its wholesale replacement. Antagonistic towards any radical break-up of the existing system, or of any theory of historical development that was based on such caesuras, they presented the loss of guild economic powers as a gradual organic process, a necessary albeit lamentable effect of the advance of capitalism. According to Cunningham, the decline of guild control was due to ‘abuses’ in the regulation of the urban markets that guilds controlled. These ‘abuses’ took the form of various restrictive practices that limited the development of national markets and which therefore had to be checked by the Tudor state, which attempted to ‘nationalise’ the guilds and take them out of municipal control: ‘the increase in capitalism had rendered the old system of municipal regulation exercised through householders, nugatory, and the abuses called for the intervention of parliament or the crown’. This was a process that had begun in the late fifteenth century and culminated in the age of Elizabeth, by which time ‘the days of these municipal organisations was over’.<sup>6</sup> This tautological approach to the decline of guilds featured strongly in the work of George Unwin, the foremost historian of English guilds and the first person to hold a chair in economic history at a British university. Unwin’s two major works on guild history, Industrial Organisation in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries (1904) and The Gilds and Companies of London (1908), were suffused with a sympathy for the lost world of the guild artisan, combined with the evolutionary approach to economic and social history described above. Although well aware of the worst excesses of laissez-faire, Unwin was distrustful of the role of the state, especially as espoused by Fabian socialists and social imperialists. His anti-statism, which led him to oppose grand imperialist schemes as well as different types of interventionist reforms (including imperial aggression in the Transvaal, the extension of compulsory education, and women’s suffrage), stemmed from a belief in the principle of free association as he saw historically manifested in the guilds. This antipathy to the state was very evident in his view of the guilds in the period of mercantilism.<sup>7</sup> The intervention of the Stuart state in the workings of the guilds corroded their original intentions and perpetuated them beyond a time when their powers of regulation were still desirable. Unwin’s aversion to the state was combined with a search for an economic theory that would act as a counter to Marxist interpretations based on class interest and social conflict. This led to a strong belief in the notion of ‘economic evolution’, in which the waning power of the guilds could be seen as a necessary concomitant of economic development.<sup>8</sup> Unwin ended the penultimate chapter of Industrial Organisation with a paean to the relative freedom from corporate restrictions as the source of England’s commercial and industrial supremacy: ‘the growth within a nation of a sound political organisation, based on the mutual respect of classes and the increasing recognition of individual freedom, leading by a natural process to the achievement of organic national unity’.<sup>9</sup> Following Unwin, later historians tended to assume rather than demonstrate the absence of guild powers in the eighteenth century, concentrating instead on the seventeenth century as the key period for their demise. As a result a contradictory and often vague chronology of the loss of guild regulatory powers developed, in which differences within London’s guilds and between London and provincial guilds were obscured. Unwin charted the loss of guild controls from the failure of mercantilist projects in the early seventeenth century. E. O. Dunlop’s study of apprenticeship and child labour claimed that the lifting of restrictions on the building trades after the Great Fire of London sounded the death knell of guild economic power. Stella Kramer’s 1927 study dated the beginnings of decline in the post-reformation period, extending down to and culminating in the early eighteenth century, while F. J. Fisher pointed to the period of England’s civil wars and Protectorate in the mid–seventeenth century as the critical turning point.<sup>10</sup> All these studies assumed a deep contradiction between guilds and an emerging capitalist economic order. As a result of this, economic histories of the eighteenth century took it as axiomatic that the guilds had lost all powers, and that this loss of powers in part accounted for England’s precocious industrial development.<sup>11</sup> The orthodox chronology of the loss of guild control began to break down with more detailed research in the second half of the twentieth century. J. R. Kellet’s study of London livery companies in the eighteenth century, published in 1958, pointed to the ways in which the city companies sometimes successfully sought to revivify their powers of regulation, after they had been seriously undermined with the lifting of restrictions to encourage migration to London after the Great Fire of 1666.<sup>12</sup> In particular, he pointed to the Acts of Common Council of 1712 and 1750, noting that the latter especially successfully perpetuated the regulatory framework by licensing non-guild labour. Rules that mandated compulsory membership in craftsmen’s nominal guild followed these local by-laws. Between 1750 and 1777 some twenty-two companies secured acts of the Common Council that enabled them to require all those practising their trades in the jurisdiction of the city to take up company membership. These policies had the effect of reversing a decline in numbers of London’s livery companies. Kellet’s study was reinforced by the first full-length study of this later period of guild regulation, by Michael Walker, which considerably rounded out both the metropolitan and provincial picture.<sup>13</sup> Using data based on the numbers enrolled in the guildated towns of London, Oxford, Bristol, Newcastle, Norwich, Coventry, and Exeter, Walker demonstrated how both provincial and metropolitan guilds sought with differing measures of success to reinvigorate controls in the later seventeenth century, after a period of disruption caused by the civil wars. Walker’s thesis postulated three distinct chronological strands for different occupations in different regions. The mercantile guilds, in particular the provincial trading companies such as mercers and drapers, experienced the earliest loss of control over their trades as they faced increasing competition from London’s overseas merchants engaged in the import and re-export of exotic and refined goods, as well as from increasing numbers of middlemen. The increasing scale of overseas trade and new marketing techniques based on shops and private bargains at inns, as opposed to urban markets, led to an abandonment of regulations by those engaged in these trades, in a process that gathered momentum in the 1660s and was largely complete by the end of the century. Artisanal guilds, by contrast, managed a revival of their authority that was sustained into the 1720s, although the numbers fell rapidly in the subsequent decades, as limits on numbers of apprentices were evaded. Finally service and assembly guilds, which possessed more flexible arrangements for hiring journeymen, managed to sustain control the longest, although by the 1770s these guilds too were affected by population increases and glutted labour markets. Walker suggested that the craft guilds of the southern guildated towns underwent change earliest, while the guilds of the corporate centres of the midlands and the north maintained their positions as primary forces in the urban economy much longer into the eighteenth century. Subsequent work on guilds have reinforced this picture. Keith Snell’s study of patterns of apprenticeship in southern counties has demonstrated how seven-year apprenticeships under Elizabethan legislation were sustained throughout the eighteenth century. Moreover, the apprenticeship system was just as concerned with the inculcation of religious and social norms as it was with the transmission of skill.<sup>14</sup> Leonard Schwarz has demonstrated the sustained viability of the corporate regulation of apprentices in early eighteenth-century London. Research on the continuing enforcement of powers of inspection by livery company officials, the so-called searches, has also shown how the companies continued, albeit erratically, to exercise economic control well into the Georgian period.<sup>15</sup> Studies of the Tudor and Stuart London livery companies have also helped to modify the orthodox view of the role of guilds in urban society and of the purpose of economic regulation. Ian Archer and Steve Rappaport have separately demonstrated how in the sixteenth century the London livery companies, while exercising a wide variety of powers over their members, were never able to entirely monopolise the economic life of the metropolis, nor was this their sole raison d’ˆetre. Joseph Ward’s study of the guilds in the seventeenth century has also highlighted the ways in which the older orthodox view of decline needs to be modified in the light of the guilds’ often successful attempts to introduce regulation into London’s newly expanding suburbs, and to integrate non-freemen into the guilds.<sup>16</sup> The metropolitan guilds were basic units of civic government, and foci for communal integration and social stability. Attempts to regulate apprenticeship, quality, and prices, combined with collective acts of worship and conviviality, were aimed at maintaining social cohesion through a regulation of economic activity based on a shared sense of a moral economy of production. These studies of London’s guilds reinforce the point made recently by James Farr that the guild regulatory system was as much about the enforcement of a symbolic ordering of urban society as it was strictly about economic regulation.<sup>17</sup> As Geoffrey Crossick and Heinz-Gerhard Haupt have observed, guilds operated on different levels: as economic and political institutions as well as symbolic representations of the economic, social, and political relations embedded in those institutions.<sup>18</sup> These studies, which focus decidedly on the social life of the guilds rather than on their economic impact, reflect a broader shift away from economic history and have important implications for interpretations of the later period of guild history. If the guilds were never solely economic organisations in the first place, then it is difficult to sustain the view that the loss of their regulatory powers was compensated for by purely social or political aims and objectives, a view put forward by a number of recent overviews of urban society. The chronological differentiation of these economic, social, cultural and political functions perhaps obscures more than it reveals.<sup>19</sup> These recent studies have highlighted the difficulties in giving a uniform chronology to the loss of guild authority, as well as the flaws of dividing the activities of the guilds into functionalist categories. Attempts to construct a grand narrative of the waning of guild control and the rise of capitalist economic forms have been pushed into the background, in favour of more modulated accounts of the ways in which these organisations functioned within urban society. On the other hand, in part because of a greater appreciation of the deeply entrenched and polymorphous role of these organisations in the social and political fabric of urban society, and in part because of changes in historical interests and a flight from economic explanations for historical change, there is a danger that the direct connections that earlier generations of historians tried to trace between the changing role of the guilds and broader social and economic transformation will be obscured. The concentration on the guilds as symbolic communities of the most recent guild scholarship need not be at the expense of understanding their role as economic institutions with a direct and changing role in London’s development. What is needed is an attempt to assess the changing significance of guild membership in the period when its formal economic regulation was giving way to a more informal cultural and social role. ## Survival and Loss of Guild Regulation When and how did the guilds lose their regulatory powers? In most recent accounts of guilds the seventeenth century has been seen as the crucial century of decline. The combined effects of the growth of London’s suburbs, the dislocation caused by the Civil War and Interregnum and the Great Fire of 1666 and its aftermath had the effect of profoundly undermining the status and powers of the guilds. The Civil War and the Great Fire rendered the livery companies impoverished, while London’s continuing spatial and demographic expansion increasingly forced their members into direct competition with a growing number of non-free craftsmen and traders in the suburbs. Internal divisions as witnessed in disputes over apprenticeship, rights of inspection, and elections before and after the civil war have been seen as manifesting a disruption of guild authority and the breakdown of the old regulatory system. Weaker craft control is also supposed to have been caused by the process of subcontracting and the subdivision of some trades, such as clock making, into detailed task work carried out in suburban backstreets where it was difficult to enforce the City’s by-laws.<sup>20</sup> The social dislocation caused by the Civil War and the decade of republican experiment that followed have thus been identified as a critical phase in the breakdown of traditional forms of regulation. Certainly the 1640s and 1650s were a time of upheaval in the life of the guilds. Recruitment into the armies, especially of apprentices, and the subsequent demands that former soldiers be allowed to resume their places in the city’s workshops, did much to upset the traditional patterns of apprentice recruitment. Attempts to enforce restrictions on non-free artisans also suffered. Moreover, disputes within the companies over forms of corporate government escalated, and the post–Civil War years witnessed a series of internal constitutional conflicts prompted by long-standing social antagonisms between artisans and craftsmen, represented in subordinate bodies of socalled yeomanry, on the one hand, and mercantile capitalist interests, as represented by the liverymen and courts of assistants, on the other. These confrontations between rank-and-file company members and guild governors were given added impetus by the infusion of democratic ideas from national political movements such as the Levellers, and they reveal much about the survival of the ideal, if not the reality, of corporate regulation in a period of revolution.<sup>21</sup> Traditionally, historians have viewed the Commonwealth and the Protectorate regimes as handmaidens to economic liberalisation. Yet, the response of central government during the Interregnum to demands for reinstating corporate regulation was not to overthrow centuries of guild regulation. By and large, the Commonwealth and Protectorate reinforced rather than abrogated the powers of the companies, and listened sympathetically to requests for increased powers, where necessary, as in the case of the framework knitters and pinmakers, who were granted new charters of incorporation.<sup>22</sup> In addition, numerous companies successfully lobbied for the enrolment of craftsmen in the guilds nominally representing those trades, consistent with perennial concerns with craft demarcation, while working craftsmen in other companies such as Weavers’ and Stationers’ Companies secured concessions from Parliament that sought to re-impose guild powers.<sup>23</sup> Thus, while the revolutionary decades were marked by significant assaults on the various court-backed monopolies and on entrenched elites within the chartered overseas trading companies that had caused so much debate before the Civil War, the period of the Civil War itself did not witness a wholesale abrogation of guild powers or a liberalisation of industrial policy.<sup>24</sup> The Great Fire of 1666 has also been seen as a turning point in the history of London’s livery companies. The destruction by fire of five-sixths of the area within the walls, and the loss of 14,000 houses in addition to seventy-eight parish churches, the Guildhall, and St. Paul’s Cathedral destroyed much of the fabric of the social and economic life of the City and hit the livery companies particularly hard. Some forty-four of the halls were burnt down and much of the property from which the companies derived rental income was destroyed. Rebuilding the halls was to be a major task that would saddle the companies with huge debts for decades to come. Many of the companies were already in a parlous state, due to the burden of paying out money in taxes, loans, and aid to king, parliament, and the restored crown in the preceding twenty years. The rebuilding of the halls was achieved in a relatively short space of time, but for many companies the rapid completion of reconstruction was done at the expense of their long-term financial position. In addition, the movement of population to the suburbs led to fears of a decline in the City’s population, seemingly confirmed by a survey of 1673 that identified over 3,400 tenantless houses and shops. In an effort to rebuild quickly, the principle of guild restriction was broken in the building trades so as to encourage provincial craftsmen to take part in the reconstruction. Section 16 of the 1667 Act for the Rebuilding of the City of London gave all those engaged the same rights to work in the City as enjoyed by freemen of the companies, for a period of no less than seven years. Building craftsmen who exercised this right for a continuous period of seven years were granted the right to work in the City for life, subject to undertaking all the obligations of a freedom obtained in the normal ways. The City Corporation backed up the legislation by ordering the building guilds not to harass or prosecute the unfree craftsman. As a consequence, the city had more than enough workmen to rebuild most of the burnt-out area, a task largely complete by the end of the seven-year period. But by temporarily lifting guild restrictions, the rebuilding legislation, at least in the short term, infringed on the principle of guild control and appears to have marked a crucial turning point in the power of the guilds.<sup>25</sup> Nonetheless, the evidence adduced for guild decline in this period is ambiguous. Although it is undoubtedly true that the guilds were in a weakened position by the end of the seventeenth century, it is impossible as yet to confirm claims that this loss of regulatory powers was continuous or complete by 1700. Internal disputes over elections, and complaints that the government of the companies had fallen into the hands of merchant oligarchies, which had little interest in enforcement, were recurrent features of the internal life of the companies during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Although taken by some historians as a signal of the break-up of the guild system, the recurrence of these disputes within virtually every major company more or less every generation suggests that these quarrels were endemic to the functioning of guilds. Even the Great Fire, which resulted in a liberalisation of the building trades and the general impoverishment of the livery companies, may not have been as important to the long-term loss of regulatory powers as has been thought. Although it no doubt created indebtedness, the rapid reconstruction of the halls provided a focus for the resumption of guild functions. It should also be remembered that the lifting of restrictions on the building trades applied to that sector only, and had no immediately appreciable effects on other guild-controlled sectors of London’s economy. In addition, efforts taken by the City Corporation to induce non-freemen to live in the City and take up the freedom in the aftermath of the fire resulted in over ten thousand new admissions to the freedom by 1680.<sup>26</sup> In the most crucial aspects of guild regulation, the period after the Fire can be seen as a time of reassertion of guild authority rather than of dissolution. As Joseph Ward’s recent study of the role of the livery companies in the newly built suburbs has demonstrated, powers of inspection as manifested in the search of goods were being carried out with regularity by guilds such as the Weavers, Brewers, Coopers, Saddlers, and others right down to the end of the seventeenth century and beyond.<sup>27</sup> Widespread rioting by London’s weavers in August 1675 over the spread of engine looms and the threat they posed to employment brought about a reassertion of the Weavers Company’s powers of inspection.<sup>28</sup> With the exception of the twelve great livery companies, dominated as they were by the city’s mercantile elite, most of the guilds continued to exercise regulatory powers in one form or another down to the end of the seventeenth century. An important element in the traditional historiography of guild decline has been the supposed resistance of guild members to the introduction of new technology. Yet it is worth recalling all those newly incorporated guilds whose trades embraced essentially new products, technologies, and skills. In London and elsewhere, the expansion of the new industries led to the formation of guilds devoted to the regulation of spectacle makers, clock and watch makers, gun makers, tobacco pipe makers, tin plate workers, framework knitters and coach makers. The high point of this process of new incorporation was reached between the 1620s and the 1670s.<sup>29</sup> By the end of the century attempts at incorporation by groups of artisans and labourers were being refused by the City Corporation, often at the behest of already established guilds, which argued that these new organisations were composed of wage labourers intent on driving up wages. The refusal of the City in 1670 to incorporate the sawyers at the request of the Carpenters’, Joiners’, and Shipwrights’ Companies was interpreted by Unwin as indicating the incipient rise of the secret combinations, which were to form such an important part of eighteenthcentury industrial relations.<sup>30</sup> But they may also indicate the ebbing away of support for the ideas of incorporation: similar petitions for incorporation were later refused to groups of sailmakers and ropemakers and a group of masters and journeymen of white and painted earthen wares at the beginning of the eighteenth century.<sup>31</sup> Alternatively, the denial of livery privileges to aspiring entrants could suggest the continuing interest of the established companies in exerting control over industry. What is notable about the new incorporations is that they represented the coming together of groups of specialist practitioners, often breaking away from an established older livery company on the basis of a novel type of luxury manufacture. While several of the new incorporations were in fact monopolies set up by wealthy undertakers using groups of artisans as a front to gain official recognition, others represented the coming together of practitioners with a distinct and innovative set of skills. New guilds such as the Clockmakers, Gunmakers, Spectacle Makers, and Coachmakers represented substantially new crafts, in which an advanced division of labour and domestic system of production, often using new mechanical devices, played important parts. The supposedly negative impact of the spread of domestic production to guild authority is also difficult to sustain in these instances. The clock and watch making trades reached a high point of technical proficiency during the eighteenth century, using a very elaborate domestic division of labour and new technology, such as fusee engines, which centred on a concentration of workshops in suburban Clerkenwell. Yet the trade continued to be dominated by members of the London Clockmakers Company. In these instances guild structures did not act so much as hindrances to the accumulation of industrial capital as adjuncts to it. The fact that the Europe-wide reputation of London-made coaches, clocks, watches, and scientific and navigational instruments during the eighteenth century arose against the background of these relatively new craft organisations suggests that the guilds were not the great stumbling blocks to technological advance that they have traditionally been made out to be.<sup>32</sup> There is a further historiographical point to be made here. Recent studies of industrial development in eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century England have stressed that technological advance was rather more cumulative and piecemeal than the traditional term ‘Industrial Revolution’ suggests.<sup>33</sup> While not denying the significance of the changes that occurred, it has been stressed that there was no cataclysmic break in technological development after 1780, but rather that the period was dependent on an extremely long lead-in time of accretive and sometimes haphazard experimentation, stretching back well into the seventeenth century. If so, it follows that the guilds did not stifle this process, as they experienced no uniform process of decline at this time. In other words, no causal link can be established between waning guild influence and technological innovation. In some instances a contrary argument could be put forward. In innovating crafts such as clock making, it was precisely the corporate ethos of pride in skill, combined with the creation of a coherent framework for sharing skills through apprenticeship training, that assisted the advance of the trade. It remains to be seen when regulatory powers were finally fully lost. In the first half of the eighteenth century, the London companies managed to survive by altering their by-laws and securing Acts of the Common Council of the City, which effectively liberalised restrictions on apprenticeship and undermined the position of journeymen members of the Companies.<sup>34</sup> Rather than being the result of the working out of the unseen hand of some new economic order, the abandonment of powers of control was the effect of deliberate action by the mercantile and industrial elites in the companies themselves. It was this social stratum that controlled the mechanisms of guild and civic government, and it was their increasing reluctance to enforce such mechanisms that led to loss of guild control. This abrogation of authority did not go uncontested. The middle decades of the eighteenth century were marked by a series of internal disputes, legal decisions, and industrial protests that significantly altered the role of guilds in metropolitan society. Many of the companies ceased to take part in the traditional tasks of enforcement. Instead many companies began to act as foci for lobbying Parliament concerning legislation that affected the trade of members, particularly with regard to imports and fiscal policies.<sup>35</sup> Economic regulation was allowed to lapse, as many of the craft guilds effectively became associations of employers. Ranged against them were journeymen artisans, organised in ad hoc and semi-clandestine clubs and ‘combinations’.<sup>36</sup> The 1750s saw the climax of a process by which journeymen artisans struggled to maintain guild controls by means of strikes and petitions to Parliament against the opposition of guild governors. These disputes were marked by subtle redefinitions by the governors of the significance of guild membership. Guild governors complained that journeymen organisations intended to subvert the meanings of guild membership to their own ends. The concept of the guilds as free associations was deeply contested within the guilds themselves. The Common Council Act of 1750, which allowed the licensing of non-freemen, was especially important in this regard. Portrayed by Kellet as a means of perpetuating guild controls of trade at a time when the expansion of the suburbs of London threatened to undermine the significance of membership in the livery companies, the machinations behind the act can be seen as part of the emerging role of the companies as de facto employers’ organisations. Pressure for the new act came from the masters within the various companies, and was directed at the supposedly restrictive practices of journeymen freemen. The language used in the various masters’ petitions, couched as an attack on plebeian rebellion, reveals how the abrogation of the old regulatory system came about as a result of actions by the employers within the livery companies. As a petition by the masters for the new Act stated: That the greatest part of the Free Journeymen presuming on this exclusive Right [of Exercising Handicraft and Retail Trades within this City] are become Idle and Debauched, Negligent in their Callings, Exorbitant in their Demands, and Disrespectful to their Superiors, often entering into unlawful Combinations and busying themselves more to prevent others from Working than to procure or Deserve Employment for themselves<sup>37</sup> The response of the journeymen freemen to this attack on their longcherished rights was couched in a language that looked back in many ways to seventeenth-century discourse about the rights of the freeborn Englishman. As a journeyman pamphlet argued, ‘the privileges and all the advantages we enjoy as freemen and citizens of this great metropolis are endeavoured to be torn from us; when our brethren would strip us of our birthright, and place us on a level with foreigners; when the wealthy of every art would confine the privileges of the city to themselves, to the prejudice of men equally entitled to the enjoyment of them’.<sup>38</sup> The masters’ attack on idleness, ‘debauchery’, and insubordination used the same language as the various campaigns for the reformation of manners then being pursued by the metropolitan middle classes. It was also used in disputes within the livery companies. In 1753 the Court of the Coachmakers’ Company sought to lift its by-law that limited numbers of apprentices, because ‘the best hands of the Journeymen in the said trades–instead of making a just and proper use of the care and indulgence of the said Company towards them . . . have risen to such an intolerable, insufferable, insupportable height of self sufficiency and disobedience in behaviour towards the Masters’. The journeymen were accused of demanding ‘unusual and unwarrantable wages, losing the time of their said masters by continued Rioting, Drunkenness and Debauchery’. Exactly the same complaint (‘rioting, drunkenness, debauchery, combinations and confederacies together’) was used by the governors of the Gold and Silver Wire Drawers as justification for liberalising limits on numbers of apprentices.<sup>39</sup> The use of this stereotyped language, combining moral complaint with economic interest, suggests a coordinated campaign by employers within the companies to abrogate guild controls as means of pushing down wages. The governing bodies of some of the livery companies thus intervened in relations between masters and journeymen right down to the final triumph of free trade legislation in the early nineteenth century. The Curriers’ Company regularly brought legal action against journeymen combinations in the period, acting in conjunction with the Tanners and Cordwainers in a joint committee to regulate the trade.<sup>40</sup> After the ‘great turn-out’ or strike of 1803, the Cordwainers appointed a trade committee that drew up a scale of prices that was observed throughout London and some provincial centres. After another ‘turn out’ in 1805, the Company obtained convictions against the ringleaders and successfully suppressed the strike.<sup>41</sup> Other companies, such as the Feltmakers, Tinplate Workers and others, also initiated prosecutions against illegal combinations. The Coachmakers’ Company periodically intervened in the operation of its local labour market, drawing up sets of prices for piece work and altering its own by-laws restricting numbers of apprentices as a means to restrain wage demands of journeymen. As late as 1804 the Company decided to abrogate limits of apprentice numbers, justifying this in terms of upholding corporate interests: ‘There is now and for some times past hath been a great want of hands or journeymen in the art trade or mystery of a coachmaker to the great hurt and prejudice of the same, to the great inconvenience of the members and to the injury of the public.’<sup>42</sup> When in 1809 the Company was approached by the journeymen with a request for support for a bill regulating the trade, the governors turned them down, stating that ‘this Court will recommend to the Masters of the trade to oppose the bill to be brought in all its stages’.<sup>43</sup> In the case of the Wheelwrights, the Clerk to the Company told the Municipal Corporations Commission in 1835 that ‘speaking the sentiments of the present members . . . from the altered circumstances of the Trade, the Court exercise no control over it, excepting in so directing prosecutions of illegal combinations of journeymen, for upwards of fifty years, from the conviction that it would fetter and injure, rather than promote the advantage of either the trade and public’.<sup>44</sup> Action against striking journeymen was not the only way in which the livery companies of later Georgian London sought to maintain the links with their nominal occupations. Many procured special Acts of Common Council requiring all those practicing a trade to enrol as members. Failure to do so could result in legal action. Several of the companies successfully used such acts to cajole and encourage practitioners to take up company membership.<sup>45</sup> For others, membership of a company continued to confer social respectability. Particular groups of tradesmen and craftsmen, perhaps especially those servicing a luxury market where reputation was an important means of attracting and retaining clientele, appear to have gravitated towards membership of their respective livery companies because it was considered to be ‘honourable’. The Clerk of the Bakers’ Company reportedly told the Municipal Corporations Commission that the great majority of the company were ‘practical bakers’, as ‘journeymen are desirous of coming into the Company, as the freedom is considered as conferring a certain degree of respectability’.<sup>46</sup> Although all powers of compelling membership of the Coachworkers’ Company were reported in 1837 to be ‘long since disused’, in practice ‘coachmakers of respectability in or near London usually become free of the Company’ as a result of which a majority of the Company were members of the craft. Of the Saddlers, a medieval guild that vigorously upheld powers of inspection well into the nineteenth century, it was said that ‘the Company retains its original character to a considerable extent, inasmuch as Saddlers usually prefer entering this Company.’<sup>47</sup> This continuing trade link contrasts with several of the older companies, particularly those connected to the building trades. The Carpenters reported that ‘the majority of Masters of the Company are not Carpenters by Trade. There are persons of most other trades belonging to this Company, and persons of business, and private gentlemen’; of the Joiners’ Company it was reported that ‘persons of that trade do not prefer the Company, and in fact very few belong to it’.<sup>48</sup> Guilds with nominal oversight over petty commodity production appear to have found it particularly hard to maintain connection with working members. Of the Combmakers it was said that ‘the Freedom of this Company is open to all trades, and no particular class of persons appear to be more desirous than others to become members of the Company; but it still contains a proportion, though small, of real practical Comb Makers . . . the working class of Comb-Makers belonging to the City are generally very poor’. The Glovers, Patten Makers, Needlemakers, Wax Chandlers made similar comments. 49 Several companies retained a state or civic sanction to act as a licensing authority, either through registration, training, and examination of new practitioners or through monitoring and inspection of goods and products. Best known was the national power of inspection of weights exercised by the Goldsmiths, and the Stationers’ authority to register new titles of books. The Society of Apothecaries retained extensive provision for the training and examination of new entrants to the profession through a special court of examination or Licentiateship of the society. This provision included a chemical laboratory, regular botanical expeditions, and the famous Chelsea physic garden. The Society also maintained a co-partnership arrangement for the purchase of stock for supplying the Royal Navy with medical supplies. All these regulatory functions survived nineteenth-century laissez-faire.<sup>50</sup> The Gunmakers’ Company continued to operate a proof house at Whitechapel well into the nineteenth century and some of its regulatory power was re-enforced by legislation in 1813.<sup>51</sup> The Butchers’ Company acted as vehicle for the meat trade well into the era of liberalisation, petitioning parliament regarding meat imports and opposing the removal of the main metropolitan cattle market from Smithfield.<sup>52</sup> The Bakers’ Company had a Master Bakers’ committee that deliberated on trade matters and continued to interest itself in the Assize of Bread down to the abolition of the Corn Laws.<sup>53</sup> In addition to continuing to carry out these residual powers of regulation, some of the livery companies had an interest in monitoring the progress of new inventions, belying the received image of guild antipathy to technological change. The Coachmakers’ Company, an incorporation of the late Stuart period, maintained a receptive attitude to new technology. Like the clock and watch industry, coach making was characterised by a high division of labour and extensive subcontracting. According to one source, coach making was divided into more than eight different trades.<sup>54</sup> As discussed above, the Company pursued a policy of liberalising its own by-laws with regard to apprenticeship, while vigorously upholding its corporate rights and powers to enrol those practising as masters.<sup>55</sup> Its individual members, including several of its leading elected officers, were energetic patentees of new inventions. John Hatchett, Master of the Company in 1785 and one of London’s most famous coach makers, held at least five separate patents. The Company appears to have made a point of collecting patents of its members and others, including the leading patentee Joseph Jacob, of contributing to the growing technical literature on coach construction, and of reporting the results of experiments with new designs.<sup>56</sup> Similarly, the Clockmakers’ Company maintained an intense interest in the industry well beyond the period of supposed guild decline. The Company ran committees that monitored trade matters, suppressed malpractices, campaigned against illicit imports, collected copies of patents, and offered prizes to apprentices right down to the collapse of the London industry in the mid–nineteenth century caused by the lifting of tariffs on imported Swiss watches and clocks.<sup>57</sup> Although the activities of these guilds do not suggest organisations in decline, they should not obscure the larger numbers that appear to have lost or abrogated their regulatory powers. By the time of the Municipal Corporations Commissions’ investigations, the majority of the livery companies were reported to have ceased to operate the older powers of regulation, and a number seem to have lost all connections with their trades. Ancient companies such as the Weavers, Founders, Coopers, Joiners, and Fishmongers, among others, reported in 1837 that their powers had ceased to be exercised. Some of the more ancient and obscure companies were clearly in difficulty. The Long Bow String Makers were said to be ‘at present . . . expiring’ and the Woodmongers, Fishermen, and Starch-Makers were said to be ‘extinct’ or unknown. Others either elicited no details of any trade connections or failed to reply to the Commissions’ queries. However, even in those instances where the livery company had ceased to enforce its regulatory powers, the reasons given for this loss of authority varied from Company to Company. Many dated their loss of power to the distant past. The Spectacle Makers’ powers had ‘long since, far beyond memory, been discontinued by the Company’; the Combmakers’ powers had ‘not been exercised for many years past’. The Farriers responded that ‘the increase in population and the alteration in the habits of society since the charter was granted and Bye-laws, render, it is said, such exercise inexpedient’.<sup>58</sup> A standard response to the 1837 enquiry was that regulatory powers were not exercised but had not been formally abandoned. The Wax Chandlers stated that control of the trade ‘has fallen into disuse, rather for want of sufficient powers to enforce the regulations which had been adopted, than from an abandonment by the Company’.<sup>59</sup> Many of the livery companies were able to pinpoint the specific moment when regulatory powers were lost. The most famous case was that of the Framework Knitters, whose powers were quashed as result of an adverse decision of the House of Commons in 1753, discussed elsewhere in this volume.<sup>60</sup> The Feltmakers pointed to the rise of a Hatters’ union, which was alleged to have ‘greatly injured’ the trade, while the Weavers referred to the loss of powers to collect fines under the Spitalfields Act of 1776, which regulated piecework prices in the silk weaving industry. The powers of the Pewterers were undermined in 1770, when ‘doubts and difficulties’ arose over its powers of search, and when the Attorney General’s views had been ‘not very encouraging’ to the exercise of its powers.<sup>61</sup> Thus, far from experiencing a long ‘natural’ decline, the regulatory mechanisms of many of the companies were abrogated as a result of historical conjunctions and circumstances unique to each trade. As the eighteenth century progressed, the guilds underwent a subtle alteration in their corporate identities. As guild control over the economy waned, the members of guilds looked increasingly to new forms of social organisation to represent their economic interests. This development did not necessarily mean that membership in the guild was abandoned entirely. Association with a guild still had tangible benefits to those able to take part in urban elections, meetings, and corporate ceremonies and festivities.<sup>62</sup> But as new types of civic organisation were created in the course of the eighteenth century, guild membership was becoming only one aspect of an increasingly plural social identity of urban merchants, tradesmen, and artisans. ## Guilds and Social Change What was the relationship between guilds and the new social institutions of the eighteenth century? The past twenty years has generated a new body of work on the role of the state in relation to civil society in eighteenthcentury England, which may help to elucidate the changing role of the guilds. A crucial feature of these debates has been the attention paid to the unreformed nature of the state and the continuing importance of earlier forms of government structures, both at the local and the national level.<sup>63</sup> Historians increasingly locate the distinctive character of this period in the apparent contradiction of an expanding capitalist society ruled and governed by means of a political system inherited from previous eras of state formation, paternalist absolutism, and parliamentary rebellion. Far from being ‘archaic’, these social and political forms, enshrined in the 1689 settlement, helped to shape a dynamically developing economy and society, which in turn served to perpetuate the restored social and political polity, after its temporary dissolution in the revolutionary upheavals of the 1640s and 1650s. The eighteenth century has been characterised as an age of social stasis, in which the traditionalism of state structures legitimated and helped to construct a naturalised social sphere of the economic, which provided the necessary social stability for the development of capitalism through sanctification in law of a particular view of ‘freedom’ and ‘liberty’, weighted heavily in favour of private property. This sphere was not uncontested, and the claims of those displaced by claims of property, now redefined by law as ‘free labour’, found expression in a vigorous plebeian popular culture, which itself drew upon a traditional language of custom, resistance, and revolt. At the same time eighteenth-century urban society was characterised by a proliferation of new societies, clubs, and institutions formed for a myriad of different economic, social, cultural, and political purposes.<sup>64</sup> Membership in these organisations often developed directly out of membership in guilds. Guild structures influenced the forms of internal procedure and cultural norms of these new institutions. The social forms of the guilds, their rituals of conviviality, annual dinners, initiation ceremonies, and other rites helped shape the collective mentalities and social practices of many forms of organisation, from the aristocratic lodges of the freemasons to humbler tradesmen and artisans clubs. The complex relationship between the guilds and trade unionism has received much attention in English labour history. The proliferation of artisan clubs and trade societies formed to defend the interests of urban artisans closely followed the abolition of guild economic regulation. These new institutions were heavily influenced by the social ethos of the guilds. For example, one of the most important legacies of the guilds was the adoption by the new artisan organisations of the concept of skill as a form of collectively possessed property right.<sup>65</sup> Guild rituals, the use of banners, processions, and initiation ceremonies can be seen as influencing the sense of shared occupational identity of the early trade unions, reinforcing a sense of social solidarity and collective identity among urban artisans.<sup>66</sup> The ending of the guilds’ effective role in regulating the urban economy in the second half of the eighteenth century did not diminish their importance as a focus of political activities. In those cities and towns where charters of incorporation granted the members of guilds a role in civic elections and assemblies, guild membership gave expression to social divisions within urban society. Within the unreformed urban polity of the eighteenth century, continuing divisions within the guild hierarchy between freemen and burgesses, freemen and aldermen fed into broader social and political conflicts between commercial elites and small tradesmen and artisans. The freemen of the city of London and of the other guildated towns and cities were deeply involved in the radical and reform movements, which developed from the 1760s onwards. Opposition to civic oligarchy was matched by an assertion of the traditional rights of freemen as electors. New political organisations, pressing for constitutional and social reform, mobilised the freemen electors to oppose the entrenched oligarchies that dominated urban governments. The political rhetoric of these new groups was imbued with a patriotic language of ancestral ‘liberties’ and ‘freedoms’ based on reinvented traditions of English history, which were derived in part from the older language of guild life. Urban radical and reform movements deliberately drew on the seventeenth-century invention of a mythic period of social solidarity existing before the introduction of rigid class and status distinctions after the Norman Conquest. This use of earlier narratives of the ‘Norman Yoke’ and of the ‘free born Englishman’ would have found resonance in the collective memory of the guilds and companies, which had invoked the myth of the ‘Norman Yoke’ during their internal conflicts in the mid–seventeenth century. This appeal to, and revival of, an ‘ancient constitution’ could also be deployed by opponents of reform, such as the anti-radical ‘patriotic’ movements formed in reaction to the onset of the American and French revolutions and the Napoleonic wars. In this period the guilds’ role in the ‘ancient constitution’ was mobilised in defence of the established social system. Guilds provided venues for meetings of, and subscriptions to, voluntary militias, compiled ‘humble addresses’ of loyalty to the monarchy in its hour of danger, and participated in ceremonial celebrations of military victories and treaties of peace. The language of loyalty temporarily drowned out the language of patriotic reform as a defence of traditional rights inherited from the earlier history of the guilds.<sup>67</sup> Just as the guilds influenced the cultural forms of the new eighteenthcentury social institutions, guild members became acculturated to the changing patterns of interaction within the Georgian metropolis. For the wealthier guilds, the abandonment of economic controls was accompanied by their transformation into gentlemen’s dining clubs, often with extensive property and charitable functions attached. Among the greater merchants of Georgian London, membership of one of the ‘twelve great’ livery companies – which allowed the occupant to ascend to the office of Alderman – continued to be an essential element of their position at the top of the City’s economic and social hierarchy. Increasing emphasis was placed on convivial dinners and social occasions, rather than on the older forms of ritual feasts and processions, and such events were characterised by increasing informality in deportment and forms of ritual. At the same time the wealthier guilds, with their elaborate halls, became the focus for meetings of new social institutions such as charities, societies for the reformation of manners, bible subscription societies, and organisations of provincial merchants. The wealthier London guilds and companies contributed regularly to the support of the new religious and charitable institutions, and participated in the formation of lotteries, insurance schemes, and religious missionary ventures. Guild conviviality thus provided a basis for new forms of lay sociability.<sup>68</sup> Such changes have been also associated with the changing mentalities of English political and social elites, emulated by the burgeoning middle class, which based social interaction on notions of utility and elective affinity in which a new cult of sociability contrasted with the ritualism and hierarchy of older forms of guild life. Thus the updated medievalism of guild membership helped to convey legitimacy on the commercial society of Georgian London, providing ‘cultural capital’ for the emerging economic order. If the eighteenth century is seen as a period when the ‘archaic’ aspects of social and political structures such as the guilds were perpetuated by their altering to suit changing circumstances, then the guilds became an accepted part of the new society that they had helped to create. The City livery companies may have lost or given up their powers to regulate the commercial life of the world’s centre of the new industrial society, but their continuing role as part of the traditional face of civic government helped to confer legitimacy on the economic system that they no longer sought to formally control. It is perhaps one of the most striking features of the City’s economic and social history that a polity that was essentially pre-modern in origin governed the central site for the triumph of the liberal market.<sup>69</sup> Aachen, wool manufacturing centre, 49 affluent masters, 82, 91 agency costs, 30, 36. See also guilds and craft guilds Alpine mining, 61 Alps, cotton processing north of, 50 Altena, scythe makers in, 137 Amiens, guild obscurantism proof, 65 Amsterdam craft training, 10 glass bead manufacturing, 211 labour mobility, 16 market for paintings, 146–148, 161–162, 165 and membership regulations, 154 painters’ guild, 152–154 tailors guild, 8 Ancien R´egime guilds, 22 Antwerp building trades, 91 clothing industry, 15–16, 89n dyeing industry, 96 linen weaving, 106 linen weaving industry and guilds, 106, 111 silk weaving, 105, 109, 180n woolen clothes, 95 collaborative painting, 93 furniture manufacturing, 93 labor migration, 74 luxury goods manufacturing, 105, 167 market for paintings, 146–147, 149 decline, 152 painters’ guild, 162 apprenticeship, 7, 9, 26, 237, 239, 279, 281, 282, 316 alternatives to guild-based, 10 and apprentices’ opportunism, 61 and guilds, 7 and rate of attrition, 9 and skills provision, 56, 63 contracts, 156, 191, 197, 214 female apprentices, 116n patterns of, 323 rights of apprentices, 62 apprenticeship rules, 59, 60, 212 apprenticing laws, 56 armor making Cologne and Nuremberg, 85 armourers groups, comprise of, 91 Arte della Seta (silk makers’ guild), 42 artisan entrepreneurs commodity production, 12 effect of economic progress, 316 entrepreneurial masters, 60 exclusion from wholesale trade, 98–99 exploitation of, 187 financial aids from authorities, 249–250 impact of frauds by rivals, 299–300 impact of patents, 221–222, 261 initiatives for industrial development, 110–111, 251, 255, 258–259 membership in craft guilds, 32 migration, 17, 74–75, 78, 141–142 impact of political turmoil, 217–218 opposition to innovations, 67 production risk, 12 punishments on quality issues, 41 and putting-out system, 85–86, 109, 228 quality control measures, 45, 308 restrictions on gains, 40, 82 and subcontracting, 83–84, 87–95, 100–107 trade unionism, 339 artisan migration, technological and skills transfer, 75. See also skilled labor mobility, in pre-industrial Europe Asian silk textiles, 210 astronomical clock dial, making of, 265 Augsburg, 17, 48 clock making in, 267 master weavers in, 103 ribbon weavers and their decline, 183, 184 silk ribbon masters, 180 success and decline of dial making in, 286 textile journeymen in, 121, 122, 125, 133 travelling goldsmiths in, 122, 123 autonomous masters, 91 balance makers, in Paris, 268 Basel compositional practices, 138 non-guilded industries, 188–192 papermaking craft, 134 silk ribbon weaving industry, 47, 49, 182, 194 bead making, 219n Berlin weavers, 116 Bielefeld, industrial centre, 49 Black Death (1348–1350), 62 Black Forest, 99, 121, 141 Blois, clock making in, 267 Bohemia glass industry, 134–134n, 207, 225–226, 226n labour mobility, 121, 125 linen weaving, 38–39, 49 Bologna, 27 leather industry in, 11 silk industry in, 33, 97 Bosch, Hieronymus, 146 Brabant, Duchy of, 100 painters from, 146 brassware production, 85 Braunschweig brassware production in, 85 master clothiers, 103 Breckerfeld guild for smiths, 37 steel production in, 37 Britain craft guilds of, 4 instrument making in, 267 brocade making, conflicts diffusion policy due to, 253 introduction of flying shuttle, 254 issues related to secrecy, 256, 257 priority issues, due to, 254, 256 record keeping issues, 254, 255 registration practices issues, 255, 256 subcontracting, due to, 253 vertical conflicts, 257, 260 Brueghel, Pieter, 146 Bruges, 90, 100, 146, 162, 167 cloth industry and manufacturers, 100 fustian weaving and guilds, 109 zingas, famous for, 106 building trades, subcontracting urban industry, 90 Butterfield, Michael, 271 Caj´es, Eugenio, 167 calico-printing establishments, 29 calicos, printed, 174 capital-intensive trades, 90 case makers’ guild, 41 catasto or tax survey of, 1425–27, 97 cercle, 22 charitable institutions, 10 clock and watch making Augsburg clock making, decline, 279 different mechanisms in, 264, 265, 269 guild opposition to innovations, 269 apprenticeship and transfer of skills, 278, 279 Clay, Charles, case of, 274, 275, 276 Huygen, Christiaan, case of, 269, 271 Marshall, John, case of, 272, 274 pattern of opposition, 274 views of David Landes and Klaus Maurice, 276 introduction of pendulums, 269, 270 purpose of, 265 relation with horology and instrument-making, 266 trade regulation in the industry, 266, 267 vs. instrument making, 267, 269 Clockmakers’ Company, 274, 329–30 clock making industry and guilds, 5, 14 cloth finishers’ guild, 96 cloth industry catasto or tax survey of 1425–27, 97 dominated by trading firms, 97 manufacturing groups in, 101 coach making, and guilds, 12 coal mining, 88 collaborative painting, 93 collective contracts, 39. See also Craft guilds Cologne armour making in, 85 bans of 1685 and 1719, 183 centres for production of silk ribbons, 180, 182 craft guilds in, 37 in late medieval time, 102 opposition to Dutch looms in, 47 ribbon weaving in, 48, 190, 192, 196 silk industry of, 189 silk ribbon masters, 180 tanners shows, 94 trading centre of, 91 wool weavers, 104 Common Council, in London, 98 construction work, and division of labour, 14 Continental Europe, guilds abolition in, 3 conventers vs. proletarianised masters, 100 corporate framework, 82 County of Flanders, 100 craft guilds, 1, 6, 32, 53. See also guilds, decline of; craft guilds, demise/abolition of process acceptance and techniques, 65 ## Index and putting-out and subcontracting arrangements in, 88 and technical secret, 77 as rent-seekers, 78 control on agency costs and co-ordination issues, 41, 47 economic effects of, 3, 25, 27, 34 for delegated monitoring, 36–38 drafting collective contracts, 38 for transmitting skills, 64 impact on costs, 48 impact on economic growth, 82 imperial cities and Roman Empire, 179 in late eighteenth century, 25 in London, 13, 98 conditions for success, 306–309, 311, 312 disagreements in the guild, 185, 186 Goldsmiths’ and the Pewterers’ companies, 293, 294, 296–299, 301 incorporation in provinces, 291–293 and national jurisdictions, 288, 290 of Painters and Stainers, 168 and riots, 186, 187 Stationers’ company and company of framework knitters, 301–305 stratas, 184, 185 in promotion of human capital, 26 in twelfth and thirteenth centuries, 66 incremental evolution from to firms, 49 key functions associated with, 53, 54, 56 multiple measurement and vertical integration of production, 40, 44 political influence in middle ages, 84 response to technological developments, 46, 47 technological transfer and, 75 urban and rural, 36 vs. political guilds, 32 raft guilds, demise/abolition of, 172 ban in German Imperial cities, 181, 182, 183, 184 dissolution of guilds, 173 emergence of non-guilded industries, 188, 189, 190, 192 internal structure of craft guilds, 178, 179 London craft guilds’ dissolution, 184, 185, 186, 187 political influence, 179 response to technology, 177 and employment structure changes, 177 costs and market segmentation, 176, 177 industrial and product upgrading, 175, 176 type of technological innovation, 177, 178 craft industry, oligopolistic structure of, 60n craft-based corporations in Paris, 89 subcontracting configurations in, 84, 88, 95 craft-based entrepreneurship, 104 craft-based invention and technological diffusion and sources, 74–77, 131–139 crafts and tacit knowledge, 14 approach for investment in capital-intensive machinery, 66 innovation and gains from, 70 labour migration, 10 masters, regional and national associations, 63 opposition to capital-intensive innovations by poor, 67 production and contribution of guilds, 11 production characteristics, 5 craft-specific skills, 61 credit management, by guilds, 38 crystal working, 219n Curriers’ Company, 333 cutlery manufacture, Passau, 85 D’Abbaco, Iseppo, 229 Datini, the, 97 David, Gerard, 146, 166 Del Bene, the, 97 Delft guild, 148, 164 masters, 165 dial making, success and decline of, 285, 286 Dijck, Antonie van, 169 Dortmund, in fourteenth-century, 103 draw looms, 240 drawing instruments, 265 Dutch golden age, of paintings, 144, 146 Dutch guilds artistic history, 144–146 membership regulations, 154, 157, 171 painters’ guilds, 14 restrictive policies, 68 shipbuilding and windmill technology, 73 tailors’ guilds, 8 Dutch loom, in Cologne, 47 Dutch Republic, 21 Dutch Republic’s Golden Age, 73 Dutch shipbuilding, 3n, 18, 73 Edinburgh, clock making in, 267 El Greco, 167 enforcement costs, 30 engine loom technology, 173 and apogee of Baroque court culture, 174 ban of engine loom products, 180, 181 consequences of state-wise campaigns, 182, 184 rationale, 181 state-wise campaigns, 182 first phase of diffusion process for European silk industry, 173, 174 in silk ribbon production, 175 introduction of multiple looms, 173 supply shifts, 174 England. See also London apprentices, 8 features of, 70 guilds, 1, 22 decline of, 21, 111 painting industry in, 168, 169 entrepreneurial master artisans, see artisan entrepreneurs Europe, 288n clothing trade in, 15 countryside and proto-industry emergence, 20 in pre-modern time and guilds subcontracting practices, 87 urban industries and guilds dominance, 5 export-oriented crafts and guilds, 92, 102 export-oriented industries and trades, 27 putting-out and subcontracting role, 84, 85, 86, 88 Eyck, Jan van, 146, 166 fabrique, 34, 35 female workers, migration pattern of, 121 firms as centralised organisation, 31 concepts and structure of, 29, 30 modern theory of, 29 monitoring in, 30 multiple measurement and vertica integration, 30 Flanders, 27 painters from, 146 wool cloth towns, 33 wool textile industry, 36 Flax cultivation, 106 Florence, 59 silk guild, statutes of, 75n silk industry in, 97 fluitschip (flute ship), contribution to Dutch trade, 15 forced migration, 134 France, See also silk industry; Lyon and abolishment of, 1 commercial administration, 236 engine loom in, 195 glassmaking in, 219 guilds, 236 silk trade in, 238 Frankfurt cow-hide tanners, 116 Franson, Nicolaus, 123 Fugger, family, 96 furniture making, and subcontracting networks, 93 fustian weaving and weavers, 132 Gelderland (Netherlands), linen weavers guilds in, 40 Geneva clock making in, 267 guilds in, 41, 42, 43 manufacturing centres of, 28 watch making, 41 Genoa, silk industry in, 97 German Hanseatic League, 104 German historical school, 28 German Imperial towns, 179 German master wool weavers, 102 German weavers, 133 Germany, 16 geschenkte crafts, 118–119, 130, 136–139 Glasgow, clock making in, 267 glass industries, 4, 5, 19 Goes, Hugo van der, 146 goldsmith guilds, 13 goldsmith works, in Lucca, 85 Goyen, Jan van, 147 Grande Fabrique, 232, 235, 237 guild-based apprenticeship, and alternatives to, 10 guild-based export industries, 94 subcontracting in, 111 guild-based export trades, 82, 88, 109 and subcontracting influence, 88 guild-based production and sub-contracting, 12 guild-based ribbon makers, 47 guild-based subcontracting, 86 guild-based textile trades, 97 master artisans as entrepreneurs, 100, 107 merchant capital and subcontracting, 95, 100 guild-induced sclerosis, 72 guild-ridden Europe, 20 guilds, See also craft guilds; crafts abolishment in France, 1 administrative limitations and disagreements in, 64 alternatives to charitable institutions, 10 Civic Orphanage, 10 organisation, 4 and labour mobility, 16 and objection to new techniques, 74 and political favors, 33 and role of their environment, 45 and technological conservatism, 17, 18 and pre-industrial economy, 7 apprenticeship arrangements, 7, 9 artisan emigration banned by, 75 artisans and journeyman migration effects, 78 as rent-seeking institutions, 54 autonomous regulation vs. state control, 34 coercion by, 60 conservatism approach, 69 and impact on Italian economy, 72 coordination by, 13 differentiation process, 33 dominance to proto-industry, 20 economic functions, 4, 11 foundations, 21 innovation theory, 66 knowledge, protection and sharing, 14 male domination of, 9 membership and influence of origin and religion, 9, 10 negative aspects of, 1, 55 non-collective social benefits, 55 produced and adopted innovations, 73 protectionism by, 69 regulations for product specifications and quality for goods, 40 relationship with state, 68 response to technological innovations, 64–66 role and support in promoting innovation, 7, 76 significance to urban life, 2 smiths, promoting steel production, 37 state-sponsored and state-regulated, 35 for reducing production problems, 44 types of alternatives to, 20, 24 urban vs. rural, 36 virtues and weaknesses of, 49 welfare-enhancing functions of, 55 uilds, decline of, 80n, 316 civil war impact, 325, 326 Great Fire impact, 327, 328 historiography of decline, 325 abuses in regulation of urban markets, 319, 320 andCommonCouncil Act of 1750, 331 case of Coachmakers’ Company, 335, 336 companies role, 335, 336, 337, 338 different companies role, 335 due to economic regulations, 323, 324 guild regulatory powers’ role, 321 impact of Great Reform Act of 1832, 318 industrial development, 330 laissez faire capitalism, 317, 318, 319 patterns of apprenticeships, 323 practice of licensing, 335 refusal to form incorporation of groups, 329, 330 regulatory powers’ role, 322, 323 resistance to new technology, 328, 329, 330 state interventions, 320, 321 trade unions role, 318, 319 works of Unwin George, 320, 321 impact of social change, 338, 339, 340, 341 ups and downs in guild regulation, 325, 326, 327, 338 gunnery and architecture instruments, 265 Haarlem, 190 apprentices in, 155–157 art market in, 146, 165 corporations of, 154 famous for marine and landscape painters, 165 painters guilds in, 151, 155, 158, 159, 162, 164 engine loom use for silk weaving, 174 statutes in artistic training, 157 Hague, The, art market in, 164–165 Hamburg tanners, 116 Hammermen’s corporation and clock-making industry, 267 hammer-smiths, in Siegerland, 136 Hautefeuille, Jean de, 271 Hayes, Walter, 286 heavy metal industry, 88 Hening, Johann C., 123 high-quality masonry skills, 61 Holland shipwrights, 18 Holy Roman Empire, 16, 99. See also Germany Hooke, Robert, 271 H ˆopital de la Trinit´e, Paris, 10 horology in early modern Europe, 265 household-workshop system, 82 Huguenot migrations, 74 Huygens, Christiaan innovation of balance-spring regulator, 270 introduction of pendulum, 14, 269, 270 other innovations, 271 trade octroy or privil\`ege for pendulum, 269 in France, 270 in London, 270 Huygens-type microscopes, 271 Imperial cities, German, 179, 180 Augsburg, 180 decline of engine loom use, 183, 184 decline of guild-based ribbon manufacturing, 183, 184 Cologne, 180, 182 decline of engine loom use, 183 establishment of silk ribbon industry, 182 statutes for engine loom use, 183 Nuremberg, 180 Industrial Revolution and demise of guild, 22 role of skilled craftsmen and innovators, 80 instrument makers’ guilds, 14 instrument making control of industry by guild, 280 by Pascal vs. Rouen guild, 281 effects of guild control in trade, 284 guild opposition to innovation, 268, 269, 286 case of Clay, 274, 276 case of Huygens, Christiaan, 269, 271 case of Jodin, Jean, 277, 278 case of Marshall, John, 272, 274 case of Tompian, Thomas, 276, 277 division of labour, 282, 284 pattern of opposition, 274 related to apprentices training and skills transmission, 278, 279, 281, 282 views of David Landes and Klaus Maurice, 276 in Britain, 267 in European countries, 4 in Nuremberg, 268 innovations, 271, 272 success and decline of dial making in Nuremberg, 284, 285 vs. clock and watch making, 267 intra-firm contracts, 30 Ireland, 27 iron bars production, 35 iron goods industries, north-western Germany, 36 iron-making, 61 Italy, 17. See also Venice; Milan; Florence manufacturing towns in, 28 Milanese woollen producers in, 72n skilled labour migration in, 133 jewelers guilds, 41 journeymen, 82 role in guild decline, 330, 331 attack on Common Council Act of 1750, 331, 332 legal actions against strikes, 333, 334 wage demands and rights, 332, 333 journeymen organisations, in various places, 63 Knibbergen, Francois, 147 knowledge sharing, 14 Krakow painters, 117 Krefeld non-guilded industries, 188–192 silk-ribbon weaving industry, 47 labour-intensive export trades, 108, 109 land surveying instruments, 265 Landes, David, 2 Languedoc, wool weaving areas of, 28 lavoranti, 97 leather industry, in Bologna, 11 Leiden, textile industry, 109 light drapery industry, 101, 102 Lille, municipal authorities, 102 linen, 106 linen-weaving industry, 122, 190 in eighteenth-century Antwerp, 106, 111 weavers guilds, in Gelderland (Netherlands), 40 Liverymen, London craft guild, 185 London, 59 clock making in, 267 company of clock-makers, sundial makers, 264 craft guilds. See craft guilds, in London London Goldsmiths’ Company, 13, 16 London livery companies, 323, 325, 326, 327 L ¨ubeck, candlemakers, 117 Lucca, silk industry in, 97 L¨uneburg shoemakers, 117 luxury trades, subcontracting arrangements, 91 Lyon, 232 apprenticeship, journeymanship and masterpiece, 237 brocade making, innovation in, 240, 241 collective practices of innovation, 248–251, 253; patterns, 251 horizontal conflicts, 253–257 negotiation of technical utility, 245, 246, 248 public support management, 242–245 vertical conflicts, 257, 260 capital investments, 239 clock making in, 267 guilds and innovation, 234, 236 institutionalization of silk fabrics, 237 inventors, poor and high quality, 249 making of silk brocades, 240, 241, 242 manufacturing centres, 28 manufacturing of silk, 15, 22, 48 mechanical engineering sector, 252 merchandising of products, 239, 240 regulations, 238 silk cloth weaving and, 33 silk industry, 232 sub-contracted workers, 237, 238 success, 232, 233 Mander, Karel van, 150 master artisans, 82 and access to foreign markets, 84 and guild-based restrictions, 82 and subcontracting networks, 84, 86 categories of, 82 master clothiers, in Braunschweig, 103 master ebony woodworker, 94 master silk weavers, 98 master tailors, 16 master weaver, as entrepreneurs, see artisan entrepreneurs master wool weavers, late medieval Cologne in, 102 mathematical artisans, 265n Memling, Hans, 166 Mendelschen Zw¨olfbr ¨uderstiftung manuscript, 137 merchant-entrepreneurs, 12, 97 merchants, 82 metal industry, 5 Berg, and semi-autonomous guilds, 35 industries and rural guilds, 37 metal trades, putting-out and subcontracting networks in fourteenth century, 85 metal working craft (Metall Fabrique), 137 metal working, and division of labour, 14 Meyer, Dietrich, 16 Michelangelo, 166 microscope, 271 Middleburg, art market in, 165 migration, See crafts; skilled immigrants Milan silk industry in, 97 wool trades in, 33 mining, and division of labour, 14 mirror makers’ guild split, 219n modern European textile manufacture, 173 modern London apprentice, 65 Mokyr, Joel, view about guilds, 2 Moreelse, Paulus, 156 multiple Jacquard loom, 194 navigation instruments, 265 n´egociants (major trading companies), 105 negotiation costs, 30 Netherlands, 14 Netherlandish painters, 165 Netherlandish paintings, 146 Neuss, Peter, 123 non-guild professional institutions, 10 Normandy, 27 North, Douglass, institutional economics, 4 northern Netherlands, guilds in, 45 Nuremberg armour making, 85 clock and instrument making, 266, 268 Compassmachers, 284 decline in, 285–286 cutlery production, 138 geschenkte crafts, 136, 137 influence of local politics, 99 instrument making in, 268 labour mobility, 115, 122n, 123, 127 technological diffusion via travel, 131, 134, 136–137 linen and fustian manufacturing, 38 production of silk ribbons, 180 prohibition on horizontal subcontracting by guildsmen, 99 success and decline of dial making in, 284, 285, 287 wire makers in, 71n oligopolistic firms, 60n one-off protectionism, by guilds, 69 orphanages, training by, 11 outsourcing practices, 12 Pacheco, Francisco, 168 painting industry, 146, 147 Brabantine painting, 146 collapse, 150 customers, 148, 150 export, 149 Flemish painting, 146 in Holland, 4 market for, 147 Netherlandish painting, 146 painters’ guild, 151, 154 apprenticeship contracts, 156 Brabant and Flanders, 166 Delft guild, 164 Dutch guilds, 154 Flemish guild, 167 London’s guild of Painters and Stainers, 168 role in controlling the market, 154, 158, 161 role in promoting quality, 164, 169 role in stimulating demand, 161, 164 Seville’s community of painters, 168 Spanish art, 165, 167 Utrecht, 156 productivity of Dutch painters, 147, 148 themes, 148 Pandten, 166 Paris, H ˆopital de la Trinit´e in, 10 Parisian clothing trade, 15 Passau, cutlery industry in, 85 Passemant, Claude Sim´eon, 271 pendulum clock, 14 Philippe Danfrie’s graphometer, 272 Porcellis, Jan, 147 portable sundial making, 284 pre-industrial crafts, and transferable skills in, 57 pre-industrial economy guilds role and, 7 pre-industrial Europe, 17 industrial innovation process, 5 subcontracting in, 107 pre-industrial products, 6 pre-industrial urban economies, subcontracting significance, 83 pre-modern Europe guild-based export trades in, 108 pre-modern industries, in traded goods, 5 printing industry, 5 proletarianised masters, 82, 91 propositional knowledge, 6 proto-industrialisation, 28, 78, 79 and guild’s role, 11 early regional export industries, 28 public authorities, 82 putting-out system, 49, 79, 85 advantages of, 86 concept of, 83 influence in rural areas, 85 vs. modern firms, 32 Quare, Daniel, patent for portable barometers, 274 QWERTY phenomena, 74 reflecting telescopes, 271 Reichsst¨adte, 32 rent-seeking guilds, 47 Rhineland journeymen, statutes of (Rheinische Knechteordnung), 118 ribbon-making, Dutch or engine, looms, 67 R¨omer, Lukas, 123 Rouen, clock making in, 267 Rox, Peter, 123 Royal Academy of Arts, 169 Saint Lucas guilds, 151 sayetteurs, the, 101 Schetz, 96 scythe makers in, Altena, 137 Sectoral guilds vs. guilds of individual trades, 33 semi-finished goods, 31 Seville, community of painters, 168 ship-building industry, 5, 61. See also Dutch ship building and division of labour, 14 in Dutch, 73 shipwrights’ guilds, 18 innovation in, 18 shoemakers’ guilds, 11 Siegerland, hammer-smiths in, 136 silk fabrics, Lyon, 232 guilds and innovation, 234–236 success factor, 232 technical innovations, 233 silk industry, See also textile industry loom invention in seventeenth-century, 68 Lyon, 4, 48, 105 merchant-entrepreneurs’ and putting-out system, 97 ribbon production in Basel, 47 in Lyonnais, 48 silk makers’ guild and, 42 silk weavers, 98, 105 wage tariffs in, 212n weavers’ guild and, 19 silk ribbon industry, 173 ban on, by German Imperial cities, 180–184 Besel merchants, 188, 189 Cologne silk industry, 189 Krefeld, 191, 192 Lyon, 192 introduction of engine loom technology, 193 late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, 192 product differentiation, 194 role of French producers, 193, 194 St´ephanois, 194 resistance to engine loom, by London craft guilds, 187 Rhine, 190 role of Leyen, Adolf von der, 190 silversmith guilds, 13 skilled immigrants, 17 skilled labor mobility, in pre-industrial Europe apprentices vs. skilled workers, 116 lower strata of society, 115 Nuremberg, 115 organization and pattern of travel bans, 118 clothing and drinking patterns, 118 construction workers, 125, 127 craft workers, 127, 128 distinction between geschenkte and ungeschenkte, 118 food and product traders, 128 formation of associations, 118 goldsmith journeyman, 123 hatmakers, 119 journeymen in Munich, 119 labourers involved in basic necessities, 128, 129 labourers involved in specialized crafts, 129, 130 married journeymen, 127–130 migration in catchment area, 119 seasonal migration, 125 sixteenth-century ‘price revolution’, 130 textile journeyman, 119, 121, 122 tramping and, 125 urban anxiety, 117 pre-modern Germans, 114 Strasbourg, 115 technological diffusion via travel abortive transfers, 135 closed (gesperrte) and geschenkte crafts, 136 diffusion by radiation and migration, 132 English cloth-preparers and cloth-dyers, 134 Italy, 133 metal craft industry, 137 permanent vs. voluntary migration, 131, 132 printing industry, 138, 139 through recruitment or enticement of craft labour, 132, 135 Venetian migrants, 134 views on, 131 tramping, 116, 117 useful inhabitants, 115 skilled workers’ scarcity, 63 skill-intensive trades horizontal subcontracting in, 90 skills training, 6 small masters, 82 small-scale markets and less formal arrangements, 54 Smith, Adam, 1 Society of Apothecaries, 335 Solingen, and abolition of the guilds, 23 Southern Germany linen and worsted industries, 36 trading firms, 86 Spain, painting industry, 165, 167 Spanish art and painters, 167, 168 Spectacle-Makers’ Company, 268 Spinning or milling process, 33 state-controlled guilds, 34 Statute of Artificers, 21, 58 Strasbourg woollen weavers, 117 Strozzi, 97 sub-contracting practices and networks, 12, 85, 86 advantages of, 86 aid for master artisans, 88 and factors influencing, 83 impact on economy, 94 vertical and horizontal forms, 84, 88 sundials, making of, 264, 265 Sutton, Henry, 286 Swabia, 27, 133 fustian manufacturing in, 26 proto-industries, textile-journeymen in, 122 textile industry, 121 Swabianhill (Schwabenberg), 133 Switzerland, 27 tacit knowledge, 6 tacit skills, 132n tanners’ guilds, 11 technological innovations, 14 guild support for, 76 technological transfer via diffusion role of Italy, 133–134 telai di grazia, 209 textile fabrics, 5 textile industry exception to vertical subcontracting, 89 merchant-entrepreneurs’ control on, 97 relationship among labour-intensive guilded branches of, 104 textile journeymen, migration patterns of, 121, 122 Allg¨au, 122 Augsburg, 121 linen-weaving region of Urach, 121 Swabian proto-industries, 122 Ulm, 122 weavers in Loden industry, 119 textile manufacturing, cloth making, 85 textile trades, urban, 95 textiles bales and role of crafts guilds, 26 Thuret, Isaac, 271 Tramping (Wanderschaft), 116, 123, 125 economic function of system or Geschenk, 130n Trana, Heinrich, 123 transaction costs, 4, 26, 29, 30 transferable skills, 26, 60n. See also crafts guilds travel patterns in skilled labors, in pre-industrial Europe, 118 migration patterns construction workers, 127 goldsmith journeyman, 123 in hatmakers, 119 journeymen in Munich, 119 textile journeyman, 119, 121, 122 Tyrolese laborers, migratory pattern of, 125, 126 umbrella guilds, 33 in Bologna, 42 ungeschenkte (ungifted) crafts, 118 united provinces, merchant capitalism of, 109 Urach, textile journeymen in, 121 urban master artisans, in export-oriented industries, 82 urban textile trades and significance of subcontracting in, 84, 95, 108 urban vs. rural guilds, 36 useful and reliable knowledge’ (URK), 5n van Bombergen, 96 van der Goes, Hugo, 146 van der Weyden, Rogier, 146, 166 van Dijck, Antonie, 169 van Eyck, Jan, 146 van Goyen, Jan, 147 van Mander, Karel, 150 Velazquez, Diego de, 168 Venetian guilds, 72 Venice, 207 economy in seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century, 201–203 expansion of the non-corporate workforce, 228 glass industry, 204, 205, 225n global competition, 207, 210, 211 labour composition and production techniques, 206 guild regulations, 228 historiography, 200 inter- and intra-guild conflict, 227, 229 labour structure, 211 change of careers of labourers, 216, 217 composition of labour, 211, 213 gendered division of labour, 213, 214 guild conflict and technological innovation, 217–221 highly skilled workmanship, 215, 216 statutes, patents and secrecy, 221–227 migrants, 134 political set up seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century, 201, 203 silk industry, 4, 19, 97, 203–207 global competition, 207, 210 guild, 223n statutes, 207–209 women, exploitation of, 230 Verlagssystem, 31, 86, 173, 188 Verleger, 86 vertical integration, of production stages, 31 Vienna, survey 1742, 16 watch makers’ guilds, 41, 43 watches, and clocks production, 12 weavers’ guilds, 98, 99, 104 weighing and measuring instruments, 265 Welser, 96 Werkmeistergericht, 42 Western Europe guild-based export trades subcontracting in, 108 proto-industries in, 27 Westphalia, Mark of, 34 Weyden, Rogier van der, 146 Willaerts, Abraham, 156 Winchester, weavers’ conditions in, 98 windmill technology, in Netherlands, 73 window-makers’ guild, 219n Wollenamt, 103 wool carding, 96 wool industry, and guilds’ role in, 103 wool weavers, 103 in fifteenth-century Cologne, 104 woolen industry, 99 cloth towns for, 33 Languedoc, weaving areas of, 28 manufacturing of wool, 49 master wool weavers, 102 trades in Milan, 33 weavers, 104 wool textile industry, 36 W ¨urttemberg Black Forest worsted-weaving guild in, 48, 99 W ¨urttemberg, Duchy of, 20 Zeisig, Nicolaus, 123 zingas, 106 Zunftkauf technique, 36, 38 Zurich, 17