# BIBLIOGRAPHY A. Writings about Venturi and Rauch B. Writings by Robert Venturi C. Writings by Denise Scott Brown D. Writings by Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown E. Writings by Denise Scott Brown and Robert Venturi F. Writings by Others at Venturi and Rauch # A. WRITINGS ABOUT VENTURI AND RAUCH From Repainting to Redesign."Architectural Forum. January 1960. pp. 122-130. (Duke House, New York University.) "NYU-Duke House,"Interiors, March 1960, pp. 120-125. ## 1961 "New Talent USA-Architecture," Art in .Imerica, vol. 49. No. 1. 1961, p. 63. (Article concerns Robert Venturi; discusses 2 architectural projects.) Rowan, Jan C., "Wanting to Be: The Philadelphia School." Progressite Architecture, April 1961, pp. 131-163. ## 1963 "FDR Memorial Competition: Discussion," Casabella, November 1963, pp. 12-13. High Stvle for a Campus Eatery." Progressive .Architecture. December 1963, pp. 132-136. (Grand's Restaurant.) ## 1964 "Americans to Watch in 1964: Architecture-Robert Venturi," Pageant, February 1964, p. 72. Moore, Charles, "Houses: The Architect Speaks to Man's Needs," Progressive Architecture, May 1964, pp. 124ff. ## 1965 Architectural League of New York: Architecture and the Arts Awards, 1965. (Venturi House: Honorable Mention.) Charette Pennsylvania Journal of Architecture, November 1965. (Cover: Venturi House.) "Complexities and Contradictions," Progressive Architecture, May 1965, pp. 168-174. Love, Nancy, "The Architectural Rat Race," Greater Philadelphia Magazine, December 1965, pp. 55ff. Osborn, Michelle (in consultation with Romaldo Giurgola), "A Personal Kind of House." The Philadelphia Evening Bulletin, October 15, 1965, p. 55. (Venturi House.) "Paths of Younger Architects," The Philadelphia Inquirer Magazine, March 3, 1965. "Robert Venturi," Arts and Architecture, April 1965, p. 22. Venturi's Philadelphia Fountain Exemplifies Vernacular Urban Scale," South Carolina AIA Review of Architecture, 1965, pp. 29-31. ## 1966 "Are Young Architects Designing Prototypes of Your Future Models?" American Builder, October 1966, pp. 60-71. (Venturi House.) "Dynamic Design with Angular Planes," House and Garden Building Guide, Spring/Summer 1966, pp. 132-135. McCoy, Esther, "Young Architects: The Small Office," Arts and Architecture, February-March 1966, p. 28. Scott Brown, Denise, "Team 10, Perspecta 10 and the Present State of Architectural Theory"(see Section C). Scully. Vincent, America's Architectural Nightmare: The Motorized Megalopolis," Holiday, March 1966, pp. 94ff. Stern, Robert A. M., 40 under 40, Architectural League of New York, 1966. (Catalog for exhibit at the Architectural League of New York.) "Review of L'architecture d'aujourd'hui Issue on USA '65," Progressive Architecture, May 1966, pp. 256, 266. "Venturi House Mannerist',"Architectural Revieu, February 1966, p. 49. 1967 Blake, Peter, Architectural Forum, June 1967, pp. 56-57. (Review of Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture; discussion, July 1967, p. 16.) Colquhoun, Alan, "Robert Venturi," Architectural Design, August 1967,p.362. "L.'Architecture en tant qu'espace, l'architecture en tant que symbole." L'Architectare duumuni hui. September 1968. pp. 36-37. "Fourteenth Annual Design Awards," Progressite .Arcitecture, January 1967,pp. 144-154. Journal of the Imerican Institute of Architects. June 1967. p. 94. (Review of Complexity and Contradiction.) "Maison R. Venturi." L'Architecture d'atjourd'hti. January 1967. p. 26. Miller, N., Journal of the Society of.Architectural Historians. December 1967. pp. 381-389. (Review of Complexity and Contradiction.) New-Old Guild House Apartments." Progressite Architecrure. May 1967,pp. 133-137. "New Schools for New Towns." Design Fete II. School of Architecture, Rice University, Houston, Texas, 1967. Pile, J. F., Interiors. July 1967. p. 24. Review of Complexity and Contradiction.) Ramsgard. Birgitte. "Complexity and Contradiction" "Om Kompleksitet i Arkitektinen"), Arkitekten, 1967, pp. 608-609. Rykwert. J.. Domas. August 1967. p. 23. (Review of Complexity and Contradiction.) "The Permissiveness of Supermannerism." Progressite Architecture. October 1967, pp. 169-173. "Three Projects," Perspecta 11, 1967, pp. 103-111. Wellemeyer, Marilyn. "An Inspired Renaissance in Indiana." Life. November 17, 1967, pp. 74-84. Whiffen, M.. Journal or the Sociery of .Architectural Historians. October 1967. pp. 198-199. (Review of Complexity and Conrradicrio».) Young American Architects." Zodiac 17. 1967. pp. 13S-151. ## 1968 "Less is Bore." Toshi-Jukatu: A Monthly Journah of Urban Hoasing. June 1968, pp. 42-46ff. Lobell, John, "Both-And: A New Architectural Concept," Arts, February 1968, pp. 12-13. McCoy, Esther, Buildings in the United States," Lotus, vol. 4, 1967/8, pp. 15-123. Norberg-Schulz, Christian, "Less or More?," Architectural Review, April 1968, p. 257-258. Osborn, Michelle, "Dilemma in a Time of Change," The Philadelphia Evening Bulletin, April 26, 1968. (Brighton Beach.) "Pop Architecture," Architecture Canada, October 1968. Record of Submissions and Awards, Competition for Middle Income Housing at Brighton Beach, HDA, City of New York, Brooklyn, 1968. (Jury comments.) "Two New Buildings by Venturi and Rauch," Progressive Architecture, November 1968, pp. 116-123. (Fire Station =4, Columbus, Indiana, and the Medical Office Building, Bridgeton, N.J.) ## 1969 Berson, Lenore, "South Street Insurrection." Philadelphia Magazine, September 1969, pp. 87-91ff. "Education and Extension," Art Gallery of Ontario Annual Report 1969-70. (On Bauhaus Lectures by Venturi.) Huxtable, Ada Louise, "The Case for Chaos," The New York Times, January 26. 1969, Section 2. Reprinted in Will They Ever Finish Bruckner Boulevard?, 1970. Jencks, Charles, "Points of View," Architectural Design, December 1969. (Football Hall of Fame.) Jenson, Robert, "Resort Hotels: Symbols and Associations in Their Design,"Architectural Record, December 1969, pp. 119-123. Love, Nancy, "The Deflatable Fair," Philadelphia Magazine, April 1969, pp. 137-140. (Denise Scott Brown and Robert Venturi on the Bicentennial.) Richard, Paul, "Learning from Las Vegas," The Washington Post, January 19, 1969, The Arts, pp. k1, k8. , "Iearning from Las Vegas," Today's Family Digest, November 1969,pp. 12-17. Scully, Vincent. "A Search for Principle Between Two Wars," Journal of the Royal Institute of British Architects, June 1969, pp. 240-247. (A discussion of architecwural aesthetics. philosophy. etc., with reierence to Venturi.) . Amarican Architecture and Urlranism. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, Inc., 1969. Stern. Rober A. M., New Directions in Imeriran .Architsctre. New York: Georze Braziller, 1969..Chapter on Venturi. pp. 50-59.. Watson. Donald, \*LLV. LLV:? VVV." No: tm: Orgamum 5. New Haven: Yale School oi Art and Architecture. 1969. Review of Las Vegas studio.) Wolfe. Tom. Electrozraphic Architecture." Architestural Design.July 1969,pp. 380-382. 1970 A Ouestion of Values."4merican Herin:ge. August 1970). p. 119. On planning for South Street.) Academic Village: State University C.llege. Purchase, New York: Social Science and Humanities Building."Architecrural Forum, November 1970, pp. 38-39. Annual Reperr 1970 of the Direcror of Unitersity Derelopment, Yale University. New Haven. Connecticut, 1970. pp. 19.23. (Yale Mathematics Building.) Berkeley, Elien Perry. "Mathematics at Yale." Archirec:ura' Forum. July Augus: 1970. pp. 62-67. See readers' response, October 1970. Berson. Lenore. "Dreams for a New South Street are Spun at Theatre Meetings," Center City Philadelphia, February 1970. "Choosing a Non-Monument," .Architec:ural Foram. June 1970. p. 22. (Yale Mathematics Building.) Competition-Winning Building to Provide Yale Mathematicians with New Quarters." Jourrnal or the American Instituie of Architects. July 1970,p. 8. "Co-op City Controversy." Progessire Archirecnure. April 1970, p. 9. tSee also letters to the editor on "Co-op City: Learning to Like It," ibid., February 1970.) Davis, Douglas. "Architect of Joy." Neus:.eck. November 2. 1970. pp. 103-106. (Article about Morris Lapidus.) Eberhard. John P.. "American Architecture and Urbanism."Joura! o. the America: Instirute of .Irchitects. August 1970. pp. 64-66. Huxtable, Ada Louise. "Heroics are Out, Ordinary is In." The Neu York Times, January 18, 1970, Section 2. , Will They Ever Finish Bruckner Boulevard?, New York: Macmillan Company, 1970, pp. 186-187. "In Defense of the Strip," Journal of the American Institute of Architects, December 1970, p. 64. (On Las Vegas.) Jacobs, Jay, "A Commitment to Excellence," The Art Gallery, December 1970, pp. 17-32. Kurtz, Stephen A., "Toward an Urban Vernacular," Progressive Architecture, July 1970, pp. 100-105. Mathematics at Yale: Readers' Response,"Architectural Forum, October 1970, pp. 64-66. See also "Your Point of View," Progressive Architecture, November 1970. Ordinary as Artform," Progressive Architecture, April 1970, pp. 106- 109. (Lieb House.) Osborn, Michelle, "The Ugly American Architect," Philadelphia Magazine, April 1970, pp. 52-56. Pawley, Martin, "Leading from the Rear," Architectural Design, January 1970, p. 45. (See also reply to Pawley, Architectural Design, July 1970.) Reif, Rita, "A Family Who Built a 'Real Dumb House'in a 'Banal Environment'," The Vew York Times, August 17, 1970, p. 22L. (Lieb House.) Saint Francis de Sales Church,"Liturgical Arts, August 1970, pp. 124- 126. Schulze, Franz, Chaos as Architecture," Art in America, July/August 1970, pp. 88-96. (Discussion of the philosophy and work of Venturi and Rauch. Reply, November 1970.) Seventeenth Annual Progressive Architecture Design Awards," Progressive Architecture, January 1970, pp. 76-135. (Robert Venturi juror.) Sica, Paolo, L’immagine della città da Sparta a Las l'egas. Bari: Laterza, 1970. Smith, C. Ray, "Electric Demolition, A Milestone in Church Art: St. Francis de Sales, Philadelphia," Progressive Architecture, September 1970,pp. 92-95. "Zoning Rebuilds the Theatre," Progressive Architecture, December 1970, pp. 76ff. 1971 "A House on Long Beach Island." Internatioral .Asbestos Cement Review, April 1971, pp. 6-8. Architecture for the Arts: The State U'nirersity ofNeu York College ar Purchase. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1971. Cliff, Ursula, Are the Venturis Putting Us On?" Design and E»ironment, Summer 1971, pp. 52-59ff. Davis. Douglas. "New Architecture: Building for Man." Neusueek. April 19, 1971, pp. 78-90. Eisenman, Peter, et al., "The City as an Artifact." Casabella. Vol. 35. No. 359 360, December 1971. See articles by Eisenman, Rvkwer. Ellis. Anderson. Schumacher, and Frampton. and reply by Scoti Brown.) Glueck. Grace. "Don't Knock Sprawl." The Neu York Times. Ociober 10,1971,p.16D. Goldberger, Paul. "Less is More Mies van der Rohe. Less is a Bore-Robert Venturi." The Nea York Times Magazine. Oc:ober 19. 1971. pp. 34-37ff. Goodman. Robert. Arter the Planners. New York: Simon & Schuster. 1971. Huxtable, Ada Louise, "Celebrating 'Dumb, Ordinary Architecture." The New York Times, October 1, 1971, p. 43. . "Plastic Flowers are Almost All Right." The Neu York Times. October 10, 1971, p. 22D. Jensen. Robert. "Images for a New Cal City." Archiiec:ural Record. June 1971, pp. 117-120. Kauffman. Herbert H.. “A Sophisticated Seuting for Two Suburban G.P.'s."Medical Economics, December 6, 1971. pp. 88-90. Kay. June Holtz. "Champions of Messy Vitality." The Bosron Sunday Globe, October 24, 1971, p. 25A. McLaughlin. Patsy. "Ms. Scott Brown Keeps Her Own Taste to Herself." The Pennsy':ania Gazette, December 1971.p. 58. Nelson. Nels, Bonkers Over Billboards-and Very Cereus." The Philadelphia Daily News, September 24, 1971, p. 3F. Osbom, Michelle, "The Crosstown is Dead. Long Live the Crosstown." Architectural Forum, October 1971, pp. 38-42. Papachristou, Tician, and Jamnes Stewart Polshek, "Venturi: Style, not Substance," The New York Times, November 14, 1971, p. 24D. “Robert Nenturi," Architecture and U'rbanism, Japan, October 1971. (Issue devoted to the work of Venturi and Rauch.) "Robert Venturi," Kenchiku Bunka, March 1971, Pp. 84-94. Scully, Vincent, "The Work of Venturi and Rauch, Architects and Planners," Whitney Museum of American Art, September 1971. (Exhibit pamphlet.) "Venturi and Rauch," L'architecture d'aujourd'hui, December-January 1971-1972, pp. 84-10-4 and cover. (Plans 196-4-1970; Yale Mathematics Building; Trubek and Wislocki houses; Crosstown Community; California City.) "Venturi and Rauch Projects Shown in New York," Architectural Record, November 1971,p. 37. Vrchota, Janet, "Bye, Bye Bauhaus," Print, September/October 1971, pp. 66-67. (On Venturi and Rauch exhibit at Whitney Museum.) "Yale Mathematics Building," .Irchitectural Design, February 1971, p.115. "Aprendiendo de 'Todas Las Cosas," Arte Y Comento, Bilbao, November 20, 1972. "Arquitectura Pop," El Comercio, Lima, Aberlardo Oquerdo, April 16, 1972. (Review of Aprendiendo.) Blasi, Cesare and Gabriella, "Venturi," Casabella, No. 364, April 1972, pp. 15-19. "Brown, D.S., y Venturi, R.; 'Aprendiendo de Todas Las Cosas'," .1BC, Miguel Perer Ferrero, Madrid, April 26, 1972. Corrigan, Peter, “Reflection on a New American Architecture: The Venturis,".1rchitecture in .1ustralia, February 1972, pp. 55-66. Cuadernos de Irquitectura, Bacclona, January 1972. (Review of Aprendiendo.) Davis, Douglas, "From Forum to Strip," Ncwsweek, October 1972, p. 38. Donohoe, Victoria, "Buildings: Good and Bad," The Philadelphia Inquirer, June 30, 1972, p. 18. Drew, Philip, Third Generation: The Changing Meaning of Architecture. New York: Praeger Publishers, 1972, pp. 35, 42, 48, 152ff, 160, 162. Published in German as Die Dritte Generation: Architektur zuish en Produkt und Prozess. Stutigart: Verlag Gerd Hatje, 1972. Flanagan, Barbard, "Venturi and Venturi, Architectural Anti-Heroes," 34th Street Magazine, April 13, 1972, pp. 1,4. Friedman, Mildred S., ed., "Urban Redevelopment: 19th Century Vision, 20th Century Version," Design Quarterly, no. 85, 1972. Groat, Linda, "Interview: Denise Scott Brown," Networks 1, California Institute of the Arts, 1972, pp. 49-55. Hoffman, Donald, "Monuments and the Strip," The Kansas City Star, December 10, 1972, p. 11). (Review of Lcarning /rom Las I'cgas.) Holmes, Ann, "Art Circles," Houston Chronicle, May 7, 1972. Huxtable, Ada Louise, "Architecture in 71: Lively Confusion," The New York Times, January 4, 1972, p. 26L. Jackson, J. B., “An Architect Learns from Las Vegas," Ihe Hlarrard Independent, November 30, 1972. Jellinek, Roger, "In Praise (!) of Las Vegas," The Neu York Times, Books of the Times, December 29, 1972, p. 23L. "Learning from Las Vegas by Robert Venturi, Denise Soott Brown and Steven Izenour," The Neu Republic, Book Reviews, December 2, 1972. Maldonado, Thomas. La Speranza progettuale, ambiente e socicta, Nuovo Politeenico 35. Turin: Einaudi, 1970. In English, Design, Nature, and Revolution. Toward a Critical Ecology, tans. Mario Domandi. New York: Harper & Row, 1972. Marvel, Bill, "Can McDonald's, Chartres Find Happiness?" The Miami Herald, February 20, 1972, pp. 49K-50K. ,"Do You Like the Arches? Sure, Easy, I Love Them!" The Na tional Observer, February 12, 1972, pp. 1, 24. McQuade, Walter, "Giving Them What They Want: The Venturi Influ ence," Life Magazine, April 14, 1972, p. 17. Plous, Phyllis, "The Architecture of Venturi and Rauch," .1rtircck Santa Barbara, November 1972, p. 3. "Renovation of St. Francis de Sales, Philadelphia, 1968," .Irchitedt ural Design, June 1972, p. 379. Robinson, Lydia, "Learning from Las \egas," Ihe Harrard Crmson, December 4, 1972, p. 2. Schwartz, Marty, "Radical-Radical Confrontation: I.V. Is Almost All Right," UCSB Daily News, November 16, 1972, p. 5. Sealander, John. "Appreciating the Architectural UGLY," The Highlander, University of California at Riverside, November 30, 1972. "Unas notas sobre, ‘Aprendiendo de todas las cosas,’ de Robert Venturi," Gerardo Delgado, Jose Ramon Sierra, El Correo de Andalusia, May 2, 1972. "Un diseño per al consumisme," Serra D'Or, Oriul Bohigas, February 1972, p. 18. (Review of Aprendiendo.) Vandevanter, Peter, "Unorthodox Architect," Princeton Alumni Weekly, Alumni Adventures, December 12, 1972, p. 15. "Venturi: Controversial Philadelphia Architect," The Daily Princetonian, February 26, 1972, p. 5ff. Vermel, Ann, On the Scene, Hartford Stage Company, January 1972, pp. 1-2. Waroff, Deborah, "The Venturis—American Selection,"Building Design, no. 113, August 4, 1972, pp. 12-13. Wines, James, "The Case for the Big Duck: Another View,"Architectural Forum, April 1972, pp. 60-61, 72. ## 1973 "Award of Merit," House and Home, May 1973, pp. 116-117. "Best Houses of 1973," American Home, September 1973, p. 52. Blanton, John, "Learning from Las Vegas," Journal of the American Institute of Architects, February 1973, pp. 56ff. Carney, Francis, "The Summa Popologica of Robert ('Call Me Vegas') Venturi," Journal of the Royal Institute of British Architects, May 1973, pp. 242-244. Cook, John W. and Klotz, Heinrich, Conversations With Architects. New York: Praeger Publishers, Inc., 1973. Interview with Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown, reprinted as "Ugly is Beautiful: The Main Street School of Architecture," The Atlantic Monthly, May 1973, pp. 33-43. "En Passant Par Las Vegas," Architecture, Mouvement, Continuité, September 1973, pp. 28-34. (Review of Learning from Las V'egas.) Fowler, Sigrid H., "Learning from Las Vegas," Journal of Popular Culture, Vol. 7, No. 2, 1973, pp. 425-433. French, Philip, "The World's Most Celebrated Oasis," The Times (London), February 26, 1973. (Review of Learning from Las l'egas.) Glixon, Neil, "Is This Art?" Scholastic Voice, November 29, 1973, pp. 2-8. Hack, Gary, "Venturi View of the Strip Leads to Las Vagueness," Landscape Architecture, July 1973, pp. 376-378. Holland, Laurence B., “Rear-guard Rebellion," The Yale Review, Spring 1973, pp. 456-461. (Review of Learning from Las Vegas.) Huxtable, Ada Louise, "In Love with Times Square," The New York Review of Books, October 18, 1973, pp. 45-48. (Review of Learning from Las Vegas.) Kemper, Alfred M., Sam Mori, and Jacqueline Thompson, Drawings by American Architects, New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1973, pp. 564- 567. Kurtz, Stephen A., W'asteland: Building the American Dream. New York: Praeger Publishers, 1973, pp. 11ff. Levine, Stuart G., "Architectural Populism," American Studies (urban issue), Spring 1973, pp. 135-136. (Review of Learning from Las Vegas.) McCoy, Esther, "Learning from Las Vegas," Historic Preservation, January-March 1973, pp. 44-46. Matsushita, Kazuyuki, "Learning from Las Vegas," Architecture and Urbanism, Japan, April 1973, p. 116. Merkel, Jayne, "Las Vegas as Architecture," The Cincinnati Enquirer, December 16, 1973, p. 6-G. Moore, Charles, "Learning from Adam's House,"Architectural Record, August 1973, p. 43. (Review of Learning from Las Vegas.) Neil, J. Meredith, "Las Vegas on My Mind," Journal of Popular Culture, Vol. 7, No. 2, 1973, pp. 379-386. Neuman, David J., "Learning from Las Vegas," Journal of Popular Culture, Spring 1973, p. 873. Pawley, Martin, "Miraculous Expanding Tits versus Lacquered Nipples," Architectural Design, February 1973, p. 80. (Review of Learning from Las Vegas.) 197.1 Silver, Nathan, "Learning from Las Negas," The Nee York Times Book Review, April 29, 1973, pp. 5-6. "Some Decorated Sheds or 'Towards an Old Architecture," Progressive Architecture, May 1973, pp. 86-89. Stern, Robert, "Stompin' at thc Savoye," Architectural Forum, May 1973,pp. 46-48. "Strip Building," Times Literary Supplement, April 6, 1973, p. 366. von Moos, Stamislaus, "Learning from Las Negas/Nenturi et al.," Neue Züricher Zeitung, September 1973. Wolf, Gary, Review of Learning from Ias Vegas, Journal of the Society of Architectural Iistorians, October 1973, pp. 258-260. Wright, L., "Robert Venturi and Anti-Architecture," Architectural Review, April 1973, pp. 262-264. "A Pair of Seaside Summer Cottages," Second Home, Spring-Summer 1974, pp. 68-71. Allen, Gerald, "Venturi and Rauch's Hlumanities Building tor the Purchase Campus of the State University of New York," Architectural Record, October 1974, pp. 120-124. Batt, Margaret, "Iistorical Foundation Picks Strand Planners," The Galveston Daily News, Sunday, November 24, 1974, p. 1. Beadsley, Monroe, "Learning from Las Negas," The Journal of Iesthetics and Art Criticism, Winter 1974, pp. 245-246. Cambell, Robert, "Yale Sums Up State of the Arts," The Boston Globe, Sunday, December 22, 1974, p. 26A. Ciucci, Giorgio, "Walt Disncy Woild," Irchitecture, Mouvement, Continuité, December 1974, pp. 42-51. Cohen, Stuart, "Physical Contest/Cultural Contest: Including It All," Oppositions 2, January 4, 1974, pp. 1-40. DeSeta, Cesare, "Robert Venturi, dissacratore e provocatore," Casabella, No. 394, October 1974, pp. 2-5. Faghih, Nasrine, "Sémiologie du signe sans message," Architecture, Mouvement, Continuité, December 1974, pp. 35-40. Farney, Dennis, "The School of 'Messy Vitality'," The Wall Street Journal, January 4, 1974, p. 20. Fitch, James Marston, "Single Point Perspective," .1rchitectural Forum, March 1974. (Review of Learning from Las Vegas.) Garau, Piero, “Robert Venturi: architetto della strada," .Imericana, May-June 1974, pp. 37-40. Hall, Petei, "Lcarnmng from Las Vegas," Regional Studies, Nol. 8, No. 1, 1974, pp. 98-99. (Review.) Hine, Thomas, "City Planmners Often Forget That People Must Live There," The Philadelphia Inquirer, May 6, 1974, p. 11E. ,"Franklin Shrine to Center on Abstract 'Ghost' House," Philadelphia Inquirer, July 19, 1974, pp. 1-D, 3-D. "Learning from Levittown's Suburban Sprawl," The Philadelphia Inquirer, February 17, 1974, Section H,I. Holmes, Ann, "The Pop Artist Who Isn't Kidding Plans to Give Vitality to the Strand," Houston Chronicle, Sunday, November 24, 1974, Part A, Section 4. Kay, Jane Holtz. "Learning from Las Vegas," The Nation, January 12, 1974. Koetter, Fred, "On Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown and Steven Izenour's Learning from Las Vegas." Oppositions 3, May 1974, pp. 98- 104. Kramer, Paul R., "Wir lernen vom Rom und Las Vegas," Werk. Architektur und Kunst, February 1974, pp. 202-212. (Interview with Robert Venturi.) Kuhns, William. "Learning from Las Negas," Neae Orlcans Recicu, Fall 1974, p. 394. Moore, Charles W., and Nicholas Pyle, eds.. Ihe Yale Mathematics Building Competition. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1974. Navone, Paola and Bruno Orlandoni, Irchitettura "radicale. " Milan: Casabella, 1974, pp. 33ff. "Nears Final Design," Ihe Hartford limes, June 1974. (Hartford Stage Company.) Ravnor. Vivien, "Women in Professions, Architecture," III'1, May 1974, pp. 30-31. Redini, Maria Caterina. and Carla Saggioro, "Il tema della decorazione architettonica nell'America degli anni 60 attraverso Perspecta. The Yale Architectural Journal," Rassegna dell'Istituto di architettura e urbanistica, University of Rome, August-December, 1974, pp. 99-125. Schmertz, Mildred F., "Vincent Scully versus Charles Moore,"Architectural Record, December 1974, p. 45. Schulze, Franz, "Toward an 'Impure' Architecture," Dialogue, Vol. 7, No. 3, 1974, pp. 54-63. Scully, Vincent, The Shingle Style Today. New York: Braziller, 1974. Sky, Alison, "On Iconology," On Site 5/6 On Energy, 1974. (Interview with Denise Scott Brown.) Sorkin, Michael, "Robert Venturi and the Function of Architecture at the Present Time," Architectural Association Quarterly, Vol. 6, No. 2, 1974, pp. 31-35. (See also letters in Vol. 7, No. 1.) Tafuri, Manfredo, "L'Architecture dans le boudoir: The Language of Criticism and the Criticism of Language," Oppositions 3, May 1974, pp. 37-62. Treu, Piera Gentile, Della complessità in architettura: Problemi di composizione urbana nella teorica di Robert Venturi. Padua: Tipografia "La Garangola,"1974. "21st Awards Program: A Year of Issues," Progressive Architecture, January 1974, pp. 52-89. (Denise Scott Brown juror.) "Venturi," Architecture Plus, March/April 1974, p. 80. "Venturi and Rauch 1970-74," Architecture and Urbanism, Japan, November 1974. (Issue devoted to the work of Venturi and Rauch.) Zobl, Engelbert, “Architektur USA East II: Robert Venturi John Rauch,"Architektur Aktuell Fach Journal, April 1974, pp. 17-18. Berliner, Donna Israel and David C., "Thirty-six Women with Real Power Who Can Help You," Cosmopolitan, April 1975, pp. 195-196. Goldberger, Paul, "Tract House, Celebrated," The New York Times Magazine, September 14, 1975, pp. 68-69, 74. (On the Brant house.) Hine, 'Thomas, "East Poplar's Curious 'Victory'," Philadelphia Inquirer, June 29, 1975. (Fairmount Manor and Poplar Community project.) , "Pretzel-Land Welcomes the World," The Philadelphia Inquirer, Today Magazine, Sunday, April 13, 1975, pp. 35-42. (On the City Edges Project.) Polak, Maralyn Lois, "Architect for Pop Culture." The Philadelphia Inquirer, Today Magazine, June 8, 1975, p. 8. (Interview with Denise Scott Brown.) "Robert Venturi," Current Biography, July, 1975. Rykwert. Joseph, "Ornament is No Crime," Studio, September 1975, pp. 95-97. von Moos, Stanislaus, "Las Vegas, et cetera," and "Lachen, um nicht zu weinen," with French translation, .Archithese 13. 1975. pp. 5-32. 1976 Beck, Haig, "Letter from London." Architectural Design, February 1976, p. 121. Dixon, John, "Show Us the Wav." editorial, Progressice .Irchitecture, June 1976. See alo "Views" and "News Report: Scully Refuses AIA Honors," pp. 6, 8, 32, 39. Forgey, Benjamin, "Keeping the Cities' Insight," The Washington Star, February 29, 1976, pp. 1, 24c. (Review of \*Signs of Life: Symbols in the American City," a Bicentennial exhibition, Renwick Gallery, National Collection of Fine Arts of the Smithsonian Institution. Washington, D.C.) "Franklin Court." Progressire .Architecture, April 1976, pp. 69-70). (Ihi、 issue is devoted to the "Philadelphia Story": Venturi and Rauch mentioned throughout.) Futagaws, Yukio teditor and photographer), Globa. .Architecture 39: I'enturi and Rauch, Tokvo: A.D.A. EDIIA. 1976. (Text by Paul Goldberger.) Geddes, Jean. "I Your House Crawling with Urban Symbolism?", Forecast, May 1976, pp. 40-41. (Review of "Signs of Life" exhibit.1 Hess, Thoma、 B., "White Slave Iraffic." Nea York. April 5. 1976. pp. 62.63. (Review of \*200 Years of American Sculpture." Whitney Museum, 1976.) Hoclterhotf. Manuela. "A Lirtle. of Everything at the Whitney." The Wall Street Journal, June 9, 1976. Hoffman, Donald, "Art Talk," The Kansas City Star, Feburary 8, 1976, p. 3D. (Exhibition at Kansas City Art Institute.) Hughes, Robert, "Overdressing for the Occasion," Timne, April 5, 1976, pp. 42, 47. (Review of "200 Years of American Sculpture.") Huxtable, Ada Louise, "The Fall and Rise of Main Street," The New York Times Magazine, May 30, 1976, pp. 12-14. (Includes Galveston project.) "The Gospel According to Giedion and Gropius is under Attack," The New York Times, June 27, 1976, pp. 1, 29, Section 2. "The Pop World of the Strip and the Sprawl," The New York Times, March 21, 1976, p. 28D. (Review of "Signs of Life.") Kleihues, Josef Paul (Organizer), Dortmunder Architekturausstellung 1976. Dortmund: Dortmunder Architekturhefte No. 3, 1976. (Catalog of an architecture exhibition that includes work of Venturi and Rauch.) Kramer, Hilton, "A Monumental Muddle of American Sculpture," The New York Times, March 28, 1976, pp. 1, 34D. (Review of "200 Years of American Sculpture.") Kron, Joan, "Photo Finishes," New York, March 22, 1976, pp. 56-57. Lebensztejn, Jean-Claude, "Hyperéalisme, Kitsch et 'Venturi'," Critique, February 1976, pp. 99-135. Lipstadt, Helene R., "Interview with R. Venturi and D. Scott Brown," Architecture, Mouvement, Continuité, in press. Marvel, Bill, "On Reading the American Cityscape," National Observer, April 19, 1976. (Review of "Signs of Life.") Miller, Robert I., "New Haven's Dixwell Fire Station by Venturi and Rauch,"Architectural Record, June 1976, pp. 111-116. Morton, David, "Venturi and Rauch, Brant House, Greenwich, Conn.," Progressive Architecture, August 1976, pp. 50-53. Off the Skyline and into the Museum," Newsday, April 14, 1976, pp. 4-5 A. Orth, Maureen, with Lucy Howard, "Schlock Is Beautiful," Newsweek, March 8, 1976, p. 56. (Review of "Signs of Life.") Pfister, Harold, "Exhibitions," The Decorative Arts Newsletter, Society of Architectural Historians, Summer 1976, pp. 3-5. Quinn, Jim, "Dumb is Beautiful," "Learning from Our Living Rooms," Philadelphia Magazine, October 1976, pp. 156ff. Quinn. Michael C.. and Paul H. Tucker. "Dixwell Fire Station." Drauings for Moderr: Public Irchitecture in Nea Haven. New Haven: Yale University Art Gallery, 1976. pp. 19-24. (Exhibition catalog.) Reichlin. Bruno, and Martin Steinman. eds.. .Archithese 19, issue on Realism. Richard, Paul, "Rooms with a View on Life." The Washington Post, April 13, 1976, pp. 1-2 B. (Review of "Signs of Life.") Rosenblatt, Roger. "The Pure Soldier." The Neu: Republic, March 27. 1976, p. 32. (Musings on "Signs of Life.") Russell, Beverly. "Real Life: It's Beautiful." House and Garden, August 1976, pp. 79ff. Rvan, Barbara Haddad, "Gaudy Reality of American Landscape Shines in Renwick Show." Den:er Post, May 9. 1976. (Review of "Signs of Life.") Stein, Benjamin. "The Art Forms oi Everyday Life." The Wall Street Journal, April 22, 1976. (Review of "Signs of Life.") Stephens. Suzanne. "Signs and Symbols as Show Stoppers." Progressite Architecture, May 1976, p. 37. (Review of "Signs of Life.") "Symbols." The Nea Yorker. March 15. 1976, pp. 27-29. (\*Signs of Life.") Von Eckhardt, Wolf. "Signs of an Urban Vernacular," The Washington Post. February 28, 1976. pp. 1. 3C. (Review of Signs of Life.") Von Moos. S. "Americana: Zwei Ausstellungen in Washington," Nene Zurcher Zeitung. July 17-18. 1976. (Review of "Signs of Life.") ## B. WRITINGS BY ROBERT VENTURI 1953 "The Campidoglio: A Case Study." The Architectural Reriew. May 1953, pp. 333-334. "Project for a Beach House.".Arch::ectura! Design, November 1960. Weekend House." Progressire Architecture. April 1961, pp. 156-157. “Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture," Perspecta 9-10, 1965, pp. 17-56. (Extract.) 1966 Complexity and Contradiction In Architecture. New York: Museum of Modern Art and Graham Foundation, 1966. Translated into Japanese, 1969; into French, 1971; into Spanish, 1972. 1967 "Selection from: Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture," Zodiac 17, 1967, pp. 123-126. "Three Projects: Architecture and Landscape, Architecture and Sculpture, Architecture and City Planning," Perspecta 11, 1967, pp. 103- 106. "Trois bâtiments pour une ville de l'Ohio," L'Architecture d'aujourd'hui, December 1967-January 1968, pp. 37-39. 1968 "A Bill-Ding Board Involving Movies, Relics and Space,"Architectural Forum, April 1968, pp. 74-76. (Football Hall of Fame Competition.) "On Architecture," L'Architecture d'aujourd'hui, September 1968, pp. 36-39. 1975 "Architecture as Shelter with Decoration on It, and a Plea for a Symbolism of the Ordinary in Architecture," 1975. (Unpublished.) 1976 "Plain and Fancy Architecture by Cass Gilbert at Oberlin,"Apollo, February 1976, pp. 6-9. ## C. WRITINGS BY DENISE SCOTT BROWN ## 1962 "Form, Design and the City," Journal of the American Institute of Planners, November 1962. (Film review.) 1963 “City Planning and What It Means to Me to Be a City Planner," March 1963. Unpublished. “Report on the Neighborhood Garden Association," Philadelphia, March 1963. Unpublished. ## 1964 "Natal Plans," Journal of the American Institute of Planners, May 1964, pp. 161-166. (On planning in South Africa.) ## 1965 "The Meaningful City," Journal of the American Institute of Architects, January 1965, pp. 27-32. (Reprinted in Connection, Spring 1967.) 1966 "Development Proposal for Dodge House Park.".Arts and Architecture, April 1966, p. 16. "Will Salvation Spoil the Dodge House?".1rchitectural Forum, October 1966, pp. 68-71. ## 1967 The Function of a Table."Architectural Design, April 1967. Housing 1863." Journal of the American Institute of Planners, May 1967. "The People's Architects," Landscape, Spring 1967, p. 38. (Review of The People's Architects, ed. H. S. Ransome.) "Planning the Expo." Journal of the American Institute of Planners, July 1967, pp. 268-272. "Planning the Powder Room." Journal of the American Institute of Architects, April 1967, pp. 81-83. Teaching Architectural History."Arts and .Architecture, May 1967. Team 10. Perspecta 10. and the Present State of Architectural Theory." Journa! of the American Institute of Planners, January 1967, pp. 42-50. ## 1968 "The Bicentennial's Fantasy Stage." The Philadelphia Evening Bulletin, March 8, 1968. "Little Magazines in Architecture and Urbanism." Journal of The American Institute of Planners, July 1968, pp. 223-233. Mapping the City: Symbols and Systems," Landscape, Spring 1968, pp. 22-25. (Review of Passoneau and Wurman, U'rban .Atlas.) Taming Megalopolis."Architectural Design, November 1968, p. 512. (Review of Taming Megalopolis, ed. H. Wentworth Eldridge.) Uiban Stuctuing," .Ir hitectural Design. January 1968, p. 7. (Rexiew ot U'rban Structuring: Studies of .Alison and Peter Smithson.) "U'ibino," Journal of the Imerican Institute of Planners, September 1968, pp. 344-46. (Review of Giancarlo de Carlo, Urbino.) ## 1969 "On Pop An, Permissixeness and Planning," Journal of the .Imerican Institute of Planners, May 1969, pp. 184-186. ## 1970 "Lducation in the 1970's Teaching for an Altered Reality,".Irchiteetural Record, October 1970. "On Analysis and Design," unpublished, 1970. “Repl to Sibyl Moholy Nagy and Ulridh Fianzen," umpublished, September 4, 1970, p. 6. (Co-op City controversy.) ## 1971 "Leauning from Pop," and \*Reply to Frampton," Casabella, 389/360, Mas June 1971, pp. 14 16. (Reprinted in Journal o/ Popular Culture, Fall 1973, pp. 387-401.) ## 1974 "Exaluation ol the Humanities Building at Purchase" (with Elizabeth and Steven Izenour), Architectural Record, October 1974, p. 122. "Giox amni Maria Coseo, 192b-1973," Rassegna dell' Istituto di Architettura e Urbanistica, University of Rome, August-December 1974, pp. 127-129. ## 1975 "On Formail Analysis as Design Research, With Some Notes on Studio Pedagogy," unpublished, 1975. "Sexism and the Star System in Architecture,"unpublished, 1975. "Sxmbol, Signs and Aesthetios: Anchitectural laste in a Pluralist Society," unpublished, 1975. ## 1976 "House Langnage" (with Fhzabeth Izenou, Miss Maxwell, and Janet Schueren), American Home, August 1976. (On "Signs of Life.") "On Architectural Formalism and Social Concern: A Discourse for Social Plammers and Radic al Chie Aidhiteets," Oppositions 5, Summer 1976, pp. 99-112. Ses ot iute: Svmtmis mn the Ameri. s Ce" wth Ebzabeth Laenoor. Sesen Lremmmn Miey Matwedl. Iasre Ssbueren. and Rober: Venturi). Text for . Birenteanial eshibit n. Renwetk Gallery, Natonal C-llec. thon of Fine Ans. Seaih、 nian Insututmon, Wasmnenn. D.C., 1976. Sigs of Lir Symkalr The Imaoee Cre Joth Sicven Lmoto New York: Aperture Inc., 1976. (Exhibition catalog.) "Suhurben Sowe. S ale ad Symbol" (with Ellsabeh Izenour. Misy Mavsel. asd Jasss Shueren). T. Uhiveshy of Pennslere. 1976 (Excerpts from "Signs of Life.") "The Symmvihe AncnettureC the Amentan Suturb." in cataleg inr Suhurtee Alivressme Il teecree Proyeat. the Amenren Armiter turdl Lahitiiae tr the 19r6 Venne Blennale. TExrerpis Emm "Siens of Life.") "Zekhen des Letess. Seses de Vie." An etbne 10. 1976. ## D.WRITINGS BY ROBERT VENTURI AND DENISE SCOTT BROWN ## 1965 "A S anin asee ie AkP Parkine Lons. or Leaming trom L. Vezzs." Intew Pe-am. Mash 19os. pp 37.4m. Reprmedim Lat. To4A. pp.r91. C.en taonditoo, Were, Apml (9k9. pp. Iin 3hh. ## 1969 "eamine lmm Layee" Jearrel sld Royd Mtrirare af Bneah Anhazrt. Auc.1 rHay. pu. 3i).54. (Rejoinien to the Smiihs ms interpretation of Sir Edwin Lutyens.) Miss Commumientloes n the Pe cte Freemay. or. Piranesi is Too Faw." Aease /. tsis. es 4y it. Iln sonjun rtom wih Bruce Adams; third year studio project at Yale.) ## 19:0 -Reole to Peales leadm Ie he Rear." Ircilacsrel Dongn. July d970, pp-. 170. Regiy ao "Lesding trom the Ress." irkses rural Design. January 1970.) ## 19:1 "S me E i Ml Riputd: A Dsourse ank Ap ingia n Re.ent Hinees d Veues and Ramh." Preorre 1nr4. 1971, ps. e 20l. "U'aly and Ordmury Archtetture. ur the Deoorated Shed." Pert I. Irehowreed Parws. Xeveshrs 197l. pp. 64-67: Pert 1. Decembe: 1971. pp. 48-53. (Discussion. January 1972, p. 12.)