"Yale Mathematics Building," unpublished, 1971. 1972 Learning from Las l'egas (with Steven Izenour). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1972. 1973 “Bicentenaire de L'Indépendence Américaine," L'architecture d’aujourd'hui, November 1973, pp. 63-69. 1974 "Functionalism, Yes, But ..." in Architecture and Urbanism, November 1974, pp. 33-34, and in .Architecturas Bis, January 1975, pp. 1-2. 1977 Learning from Las V'egas: The Forgotten Symbolism ofArchitectural Form, revised edition (with Steven Izenour). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1977. # E. WRITINGS BY DENISE SCOTT BROWN AND ROBERT VENTURI 1968 "On Ducks and Decoration," Architecture Canada, October 1968, p. 48. 1969 "The Bicentennial Commemoration 1976."Architectural Forum, October 1969, pp. 66-69. "Venturi v. Gowan," Architectural Design, January 1969, pp. 31-36. 1970 "Co-op City: Learning to Like It," Progressive Architecture, February 1970, pp. 64-73. The Highway," Philadelphia, Institute of Contemporary Art, 1970. (Text to the catalog for the exhibit by the Institute of Contemporary Art, in collaboration with Rice University and the Akron Art Institute.) Aprendiendo de Todas Las Cosas. Barcelona: Tusquets Editor, 1971. (Compilation of articles; reviews are listed under 1972 in Section A.) ## F.WRITINGS BY OTHERS AT VENTURI AND RAUCH Carroll. Virginia, Denise Scott Brown, and Robert Venturi. "Levittown et Apres." Lurchitecture daujaurd'h.:. no. l6ß. August-September 1972, pp. 38-42. Carroll. Virginia, Denise Scott Brown. and Rubert Venturi. "S:vling. or These houses are exactly the same. They just lnok different.'" Lorus 9. 1975.In Ialian and English:extract frnm Leurming from Letitfown. a study in progress.) Hirshom. Paul, and Steven Izenour. "Learing frum Hamburgers: The Architecture nf White Towers." Architrcture Plus, June 197S. pp. 46-55. Izenour. Steven, "Education in the 1970's-Teaching fnr an Altered Reality,"Architectural Record, October 1970. "Civic Center Crmpetitinn for Thousand Ouks. Caliiernia: Entry by Venturi and Rauch in Assuciation with Steven Izenour and Tony Pen."Irchitr.rural Deig. February 1971. pp.113-114. ## CREDITS In Part I, photographs not credited were taken by faculty and students of the Learning from Las Vegas studio, Yale University. 1. Denise Scott Brown 2. Douglas Southworth 7. Allan D'Arcangelo 8. Glen Hodges 12. Glen Hodges 13. United Aerial Survey 14. Reproduced by permission of Holt. Rinehart and Winston, Publishers, from Peter Blake, God's Own Junkyard. Copyright 1964 by Peter Blake. 15. Robert Venturi 16. Glen Hodges 17. Giovanni Battista Nolli, Nuova Pianta di Roma Data in Luce da Giambattista Nolli, L’Anno MDCCXL VIII, Rome, 1748. Plate 19. 18. Landis Aerial Surveys 19,20. Douglas Southworth 21, 22. Ralph Carlson, Tony Farmer 24-27. Ralph Carlson, Tony Farmer 23. Douglas Southworth 28. Ron Filson, Martha Wagner 29. Ralph Carlson, Tony Farmer 30, 33. Douglas Southworth 36. Las Vegas News Bureau 37-39. Photos from personal file of John F. Cahlan, Las Vegas, Nevada 40. Las Vegas News Bureau 41. Robert Venturi 42,43. Peter Hoyt 44. Las Vegas News Bureau 47-49. Peter Hoyt 51. Caesars Palace, Las Vegas 53. Robert Venturi 55, 56. Caesars Palace, Las Vegas 57. Deborah Marum 60. Piranesi, Ron Filson, Martha Wagner 68. Ron Filson, Martha Wagner 69. Robert Venturi 70. Victor Vasarely, Galérie Denise René, Paris 71. Las Vegas Chamber of Commerce 72. Glen Hodges 73. Reproduced by permission of Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Publishers, from Peter Blake's, God's Own Junkyard. Copyright 1964 by Peter Blake. 74. Standard Oil Co., New Jersey 75, 76. Robert Venturi 77. Reproduced by permission of Verlag Gerd Hatje GMBH, Stuttgart, from Schwab, The Architecture of Paul Rudolph, Robert Perron 78. William Watkins 87. Robert Venturi 79. Reproduced by permission of Progressive Architecture, May 1967 80. The office of Venturi and Rauch 81. Robert Perron 82-86. William Watkins 88. Jean Roubier, Paris 90, 91. Learning from Las Vegas studio, Yale University 92. Museo Vaticano, Rome 95. Chicago Architectural Photographing Company 96. Camera Center, Charlottesville, Virginia, or Dexter Press, Inc., West Nyack, N.Y. 99. Spencer Parsons 100. Reproduced by permission of the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Mies van der Rohe, House with Three Courts, project 1934 102,103. Charles Brickbauer 104-106. Learning from Las Vegas studio, Yale University 110. Learning from Las Vegas studio, Yale University 114. Moshe Safdie 115, 116. David Hirsch 117. William Watkins 118. Robert Venturi 119, 120. Reproduced by permission of Architectural Book Publishing Co., from George Nelson, Industrial Architecture of Albert Kahn 121. Reproduced by permission of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, from Sigfried Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture Moholy-Dessau 122. Reproduced by permission of Architectural Press Ltd., London, from Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture 124. Reproduced by permission of Architectural Press Ltd., London, from J. M. Richards, The Functional Tradition in Early Industrial Buildings, Eric de Mare 125. Peter Kidson, Peter Murray, and Paul Thompson, A History of English Architecture, Penguin Books 126. Reproduced by permission of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, from Sigfried Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture 127. Reproduced by permission of Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., copyright 1967, from Peter Cook, Architecture: Action and Plan, Tchernikov's 101 Fantasies from R. Buckminster Fuller, Robert W. Marks, The Dymaxion World of Buckminster Fuller, copyright 1960 by R. Buckminster Fuller 130, 131. Reproduced by permission of Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., from G.E. Kidder-Smith, Italy Builds 132. Reproduced by permission of Verlag Gerd Hatje GMBH, Stuttgart, from Le Corbusier, Creation is a Patient Search 133. Henry-Russell Hitchcock, Jr. 134. Damora 136. George Cserna 137. Hellmuth, Obata and Kassabaum 138. Peter Papademetriou 139. Robert Venturi 140. Denise Scott Brown 141. Reproduced by permission of Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., copyright 1967, from Peter Cook, Architecture: Action and Plan 142. Learning from Levittown studio, Yale University, Robert Miller 143. Learning from Levittown studio, Yale University, Evan Lanman 144. Learning from Levittown studio, Yale University 145. Las Vegas News Bureau 146. Robert Venturi 295–\$9.95T ARCHITECTURE Learning from Las Vegas The Forgotten Symbolism of Architectural Form A reyised edition of Learning from Las Vegas by Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour ISBN 0 262 72006 X Learning from Las Vegas created a healthy controversy on its appearance in 1972, calling for architects to be more receptive to the tastes and values of "common" people and less immodest in their erections of “heroic," self-aggrandizing monuments. This revision includes the full texts of Part I of the original, on the Las Vegas Strip, and Part II, "Ugly and Ordinary Architecture, or the Decorated Shed." a generalization from the findings of the first part on symbolism in architecture and the iconography of urban sprawl. (The final part of the first edition, on the architectural work of the firm Venturi and Rauch, is not included in the revision.) The new paperback edition has a smaller format, fewer pictures, and a considerably lower price than the original. There are an added preface by Scott Brown and a bibliography of writings by the members of Venturi and Rauch and about the firm's work. Here are some of the comments about the book that followed its first publication: "I will go clearly on the record by saying that I think these studies are brilliant .. . . "Their insight and analysis, reasoned back through the history of style and symbolism and forward to the recognition of a new kind of building that responds directly to speed, mobility, the superhighway and changing life styles, is the kind of art history and theory that is rarely produced. The rapid evolution of modern architecture from Le Corbusier to Brazil to Miami to the roadside motel in a brief 40-year span, with all of the behavioral esthetics involved, is something neither architect nor historian has deigned to notice...."-Ada Louise Huxtable, The New York Times "It is a challenging, sound position which should help continue the expansion of architecture in positive directions. "For the historian, Learning from Las Vegas is a brilliant document of the times, a review of our architectural heritage from a theoretical standpoint, and a work which uses history knowledgeably, skillfully, and creatively: a rarity. It is a book to be disagreed with, to be challenged, to be read. The small moot points of contention spiral into philosopnical queries of the nature of architecture itself."-Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians "These designers have launched an assault-professionally informed, competitivelyastute, and perversely brilliant-on the dominant modes of modernism in architecture."-The Yale Review "Venturi has written a dangerous book.... It inverts the ideas that many have based their professional lives upon. It threatens those things that we use to distinguish the difference between us, the cultured, and them, the vulgar. It is difficult to accept the idea of the citizens of our 'know-nothing culture' knowing more about the world they live in than the trained cultured architect and their insolence in preferring it."-The Ohio Review ## The MIT Press Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142