ART INSTITUTE OF ATLANTA 型

# The Fashioned Body # Fashion, Dress and Modern Social Theory Joanne Entwistle Polity Press ## Copyright © Joanne Entwistle 2000 The right of Joanne Entwistle to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. First published in 2000 by Polity Press in association with Blackwell Publishers Ltd. Editorial office: Polity Press 65 Bridge Street Cambridge CB2 1UR, UK Marketing and production: Blackwell Publishers Ltd 108 Cowley Road Oxford OX4 1JF, UK Published in the USA by Blackwell Publishers Inc. Commerce Place 350 Main Street Malden, MA 02148, USA All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes of criticism and review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher. Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser. ISBN 0-7456-2006-XISBN 0-7456-2007-8 (pbk) A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library and has been applied for from the Library of Congress. Typeset in 10.5 on 12pt Plantin by Kolam Information Services Pvt. Ltd, Pondicherry, India Printed in Great Britain by T. J. International, Padstow, Cornwall This book is printed on acid-free paper. ## Contents Acknowledgements vi Introduction 1 Addressing the Body 6 2 Theorizing Fashion and Dress 40 3 Fashion, Dress and Social Change 78 4 Fashion and Identity 112 5 Fashion and Gender 140 Fashion, Adornment and Sexuality 181 The Fashion Industry 208 Conclusion 237 Bibliography 240 Index 253