# Acknowledgements This book could not have been completed without the help and support of a number of people who played a significant part in my life during the time it took to write it. I am grateful to the University of North London for supporting the research from the beginning and for giving me study leave in spring/summer 1999 to complete the manuscript. I am grateful also to my colleagues at UNL for their support during this time: in particular, Elizabeth Wilson, who kindly read early versions of this book and supported the research throughout; and also Milly Williamson and Des Freedman for picking up the pieces I left behind. I would also like to thank the students at UNL for their lively engagement with the material in seminars. Further thanks must go to Reina Lewis and Sean Nixon for their support, advice and intellectual companionship, especially in the early days of research at the British Library. Since some of the ideas in this book stem from my Ph.D. thesis, I wish to thank the staff at Goldsmiths' College for their encouragement. I am especially grateful to Helen Thomas for supervising the research and for her intellectual guidance and constant support. I am also grateful to Paul Filmer, Ros Gill, Chris Jenks, Celia Lury, Angela McRobbie and Mica Nava for their helpful comments and to Ruth Thackeray for her careful editorial advice. The staff at the picture library at the Victoria and Albert Museum kindly helped me locate some of the illustrations. Finally, I am indebted to Don Slater for his guidance, intellectual companionship and editorial advice from beginning to end as well as for cooking so many excellent good dinners throughout. His support and encouragement can never be repaid but will never be forgotten.