# Introduction Fashion is about bodies: it is produced, promoted and worn by bodies. It is the body that fashion speaks to and it is the body that must be dressed in almost all social encounters. Within the west, and increasingly beyond as well, fashion structures much of our experience of dress, although, as I argue in this book, it is not the only factor influencing dress in everyday life since other factors, such as sex, class, income and tradition, play their part. Fashionable dress is dress that embodies the latest aesthetic; it is dress defined at a given moment as desirable, beautiful, popular. In articulating the latest aesthetic, and in making available certain kinds of clothes, fashion provides the 'raw material' of daily dress, produced by a multitude of bodies operating across a variety of sites. Understanding fashion requires understanding the relationship between these different bodies operating within the fashion system: fashion colleges and students, designers and design houses, tailors and seamstresses, models and photographers, as well as fashion editors, distributors, retailers, fashion buyers, shops and consumers. In other words, studying fashion involves moving from production to distribution and consumption: without the countless seamstresses and tailors there would be no clothes to consume; without the promotion of fashion by cultural intermediaries, such as fashion journalists, fashion' as the latest style would not be transmitted very far; and without the acceptance of consumers, fashionable dress would lie unworn in factories, shops, wardrobes. Thus, when we speak of fashion we speak simultaneously of a number of overlapping and interconnecting bodies involved in the production and promotion of dress as well as the actions of individuals acting on their bodies when‘getting dressed'. In their account of fashion, Fine and Leopold (1993; also Leopold 1992) argue that fashion is a ‘hybrid subject': the study of fashion requires understanding the interrelationship between highly fragmented forms of production and equally diverse and often volatile patterns of demand (Fine and Leopold 1993: 93). Thus, the study of fashion covers the 'dual concept' of fashion as a cultural phenomenon and as an aspect of manufacturing with the accent on production technology'(Leopold 1992: 101). However this hybridity is not generally acknowledged by the literature which tends towards one or other aspect of fashion without acknowledging the relationships between the different elements of production and consumption. According to Leopold (1992: 101), this duality has resulted in a separation in which the histories of consumption and production plough largely separate and parallel furrows'. The histories of consumption trace the rise and fall of demand of a product and link this to social developments. It tends to focus attention on individual psychology and/or the fashionable object itself, exploring it as 'the embodiment of cultural and social values prevailing at a specified time and place' (Fine and Leopold 1993: 93). Within this literature, production becomes passive, explained not only as a reflection of consumer or individual demands, but more often than not, as reflecting the fluctuating (and irrational) desirès of women. The second study of fashion on the production side grapples with industrial history and deals also with the history of supply. This literature charts the innovations in technology, as well as the growth and organization of labour within the fashion industry. It makes general assumptions about the reasons for growth in demand but does not look at the specifics of it, nor the specific characteristics of demand in particular clothing markets. Thus, as Leopold argues (1992: 101), the history of clothing production has made little contribution to an understanding of the fashion system'. Moreover, these different bodies of literature do not connect with each other to provide an integrated approach. Both Fine and Leopold put forward a case for a materialist analysis of fashion. They point to the need for historical specificity in the analysis of the fashion system, arguing that within the fashion system itself there are differences in the provision of clothes. There is no one 'fashion system' but a number of systems producing clothes for different markets. Alongside mass production, small systems of 'made to measure' clothing persist in haute couture and bespoke tailoring which operate with rather different modes of production, marketing, distribution and consumption than does factory production for the high street. A full account of fashion needs to acknowledge the different practices within the fashion industry and also bring together the crucially linked and overlapping practices of production and consumption. However, so far little attempt has been made by social theory to bridge the gulf between production and consumption. Sociology, cultural studies and psychology have tended to focus on the consumption side, while economic theory, marketing and industrial history have tended to examine the development of production. This book provides a summary of this literature and, in doing so, explores both the literature on consumption and production, although it considers the former in rather more detail. The reason for this lies in the contemporary significance of this work, which has grown exponentially since the 1980s in comparison to literature on production. This means that this book replicates to some extent the division between literature on consumption and production: only chapter 7 deals specifically with the literature on production, while the other chapters focus more on the consumption and meanings of fashion. However, I agree with Fine and Leopold that this division is an artificial one and that new studies on fashion and dress need to address the interconnections between production and consumption. I therefore argue in this book that a sociological account of fashion and dress must acknowledge the connections between production and consumption, considering the relationship between different agencies, institutions, individuals and practices. I also argue that such a study needs to connect fashion to everyday dress, since the two are also crucially linked to one another. Fashion is an important determinant on everyday dress but fashion becomes widelv recognized only when it is translated into dress on the part of individuals. However, here again, a division exists within the literature between studies of fashion (as a system, idea or aesthetic) and studies of dress (as in the meanings given to particular practices of clothing and adornment). The literature on fashion produced by sociology, cultural studies, costume history and psychology tends to be theoretical in scope and does not examine the mechanisms by which fashion translates into dress in everyday life. In much of this literature 'fashion'tends to be studied as an abstract system, and theoretical explanations are sought to explain its mysterious movements. Studies of dress, on the other hand, produced mainly by anthropologists, tend to be empirical in scope, examining dress in everyday life within particular communities and by particular individuals, and since they focus mainly on non-western and traditional communities have little to say about fashion as it exists in the west. Accounts of dress by psychologists are also limited as they tend to be individualistic rather than social in their analysis of dress practices. I argue in this book that this division between fashion and dress is as problematic as the division between production and consumption and suggest that a sociology of fashion/dress is needed which bridges the gap between these various bodies of literature and which looks at the way in which fashion determines dress and dress interprets fashion. Such an account would overcome the tendency to reify fashion and treat it as an abstract system which, as I argue in chapter 2, leads to over-generalization and simplification that ignores the complexity of fashion. This overly theoretical literature neglects to examine the way in which fashion is situated in culture and the way in which it is interpreted, accepted or rejected by people in their everyday experiences of dress. In other words, these explanations have little relevance to the experience of fashion in people's everyday lives. Chapter 1 introduces and develops the concept of ‘situated bodily practice'as a framework for bridging the gap between fashion and dress. This framework insists on understanding fashion as a structuring determinant on dress but examines the way in which fashion is translated into everyday dress. In doing so, it focuses attention on the body as the link between the two: fashion articulates the body, producing discourses on the body which are translated into dress through the bodily practices of dressing on the part of individuals. In other words, in everyday life, fashion becomes embodied. This positioning of the body at the centre of the analysis of fashion/dress allows us to examine practices and strategies from the micro-level of the individual experience of dress, through to the macro-level of the fashion industry, corporate strategies and marketing, which must keep the body in mind when designing, promoting and selling fashion. This book is primarily concerned with detailing the way in which fashion has been thought of and written about. It therefore focuses on the attitude of intellectuals to fashion, examining how social theorists have tended to ignore the body (and by implication fashion); when they have looked at fashion/dress, they tend to disembody it. Intellectuals who have written about fashion have tended to leave the body out and to concentrate on other aspects such as fashion writing (Barthes 1985), fashion photographs (Ewen 1976, Evans and Thornton 1989, Lewis and Rolley 1997) or general theory, for instance, ‘emulation' and status competition (Simmel 1971, Veblen 1953) or the ‘shifting erogenous zone'(Laver 1950, 1995). There are some exceptions to this: Tseëlon (1997), Wilson (1985, 1992), and Wright (1992), for example, explore the way in which fashion operates on the body. But, on the whole, the specific ways in which fashion speaks of the body have been ignored. So, too, has the relationship between discourses on the body and embodiment. Even the literature which takes account of the body tends to focus on the textual or discursive body and not the lived, experiential body that is articulated through practices of dress. Dress in everyday life is about the experience of living in and acting on the body, but this embodied aspect of dress has been little discussed in the literature, as I argue in chapters 1 and 2. This book offers a summary of the existing literature on fashion and dress, concerning itself with the (largely inadequate) ways in which they have been conceived. However, in proposing a study of fashion/dress as situated bodily practice, it also aims to set out a framework for future sociological analysis, as discussed in chapters 1 and 2. Chapter 1 also sets out the theoretical resources for such a study of fashion/dress from the point of view of the body and embodiment. The remaining chapters outline some of the major preoccupations and themes with which theorists working across a range of disciplines have been concerned. Most of the literature in these chapters, as noted above, focuses on consumption rather than production. In particular, it often seeks to explain fashion as a specific modern form of dress; the emergence of this tendency is detailed in chapter 3. Much of the literature draws attention to the way in which fashion articulates identity in modernity and postmodernity, and this theme is examined in chapter 4. Two related issues to do with identity - and, indeed, the body - namely gender and sexuality, are discussed in detail in chapters 5 and 6. In critiquing the literature from the perspective of situated bodily practice, the book aims not only to show some of the ways in which the body and the idea of situated practice can be brought into account in this literature, but to point the direction for a future sociology of fashion/dress.