# The Fashion Industry ## Introduction If, as Leopold (1992: 101) argues, fashion is a ‘hybrid'subject, any analysis of fashion has to consider the various agents, institutions and practices which intersect to produce fashion. It is both an industry with particular relations of production and consumption and a discursive arena on such topics as identity, gender and sexuality. Having discussed the latter issues in the preceding chapters, I now turn attention to the fact that fashion is an industry of major economic, environmental and cultural significance. Fashion has been significant to the industrial and economic development of a number of countries, such as Britain, where the development of the textile industry set in motion the Industrial Revolution. However, fashion has also played a significant role in global relations between nations. The expansion of capitalism in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries depended upon the exploitation of resources in developing nations, with devastating effects on their indigenous populations and environment. The extension of 'free-market' capitalism in recent years has meant a continuing search for greater profit by textile and clothing manufacturers, which depends on finding and exploiting the cheapest labour in developing nations, as well as the indigenous immigrant populations at home. The history of the fashion industry is, therefore, a shameful one. Fashion production has fed off the labour of the most vulnerable workers - working-class women and children and new immigrant populations. In the twentieth century, class, gender and race became so interconnected that it is impossible to provide an account of clothing production which does not take account of the ways in which these intersect to make the garment industry one of the poorest in terms of pay and conditions. When taking into account this history, a great disparity opens up between fashion as freedom of expression, playful and fun, and fashion as an oppressive system of production. In this respect, the body of the wearer contrasts strongly with the body of the worker who is almost invariably unable to afford the clothes she makes. In order to maintain an image of glamour, fashion houses have to distance themselves from some very shady, oppressive labour practices. This has to some extent been achieved, with varying levels of success: in recent years, some multi-nationals have been exposed as profiting from the exploitation of female and child labour abroad. However, as Fine and Leopold (1993) argue, the literature on production tends not to connect with the literature on consumption and vice versa. Within the literature on fashion there is a tendency to privilege either production or consumption and to look to one or the other as the primary agent in determining fashion. This has meant that while economists, historians and sociologists of work and production look at the economic, industrial and technological development of fashion, cultural studies and much cultural sociology focuses attention on fashion as text and discourse. The division is, however, a false one since neither production nor consumption operates independently from each other. Before production can be translated into consumption, income has to be generated, habits formed and products marketed; production is tied closely to consumption, but consumption practices alone do not determine entirely the relations of production. According to Fine and Leopold, 'these chains in the link between production and consumption confirm the problems of defining a single model, either for dependence or consumption upon production'(1993: 72). There are distinct imperatives organizing the production and consumption of different sets of commodities - food, shelter, clothing which leads Fine and Leopold to argue for 'systems of provision approach', which focuses attention on the way in which patterns of production and consumption intersect in any given commodity market. Braham argues something similar when he says that ‘it is much more compelling to try to consider fashion in terms of both its cultural and its economic aspects than to deal with one aspect or the other, though it has to be recognised that this approach does not fit well within established disciplinary boundaries' (1997:133). In this chapter I examine the literature on fashion as system (more correctly, systems) for the production of clothing, bearing in mind the tendency within the literature to separate production and consumption. I begin with a discussion of the history of textile and clothing production in terms of technological developments and the organization and exploitation of labour and then move on to examine recent research on the contemporary fashion industry which has shown how fashion production continues to be organized along lines of class, race and sexual exploitation. However, production is only one part of the story of fashion and, if it is seen as inextricably linked to consumption, attention needs to be given to the agents who provide the crucial link between the two. As Fine and Leopold argue, the provision of clothes within the fashion industries ‘owes as much to the emergence of agents mediating supply and demand (like distribution networks in the clothing industry) as to the development of either set of forces on its own'(1993: 95-6). 'Middlemen'first appeared in the 1880s, supplying fabric to small manufacturers on a contract basis; around the First World War the jobber' or stock house in the United States played an important part in defining the shape of women's apparel. Today, many cultural intermediaries play a crucial part in defining fashion – fashion designers, journalists and magazine editors, fashion buyers and retailers, to name but a few. The fashion industry has always been associated with glamour and the work of journalists; photographers and models are therefore important to the process of defining fashion. In a world saturated with images, the image of a fashion house or label has to be carefully manufactured across a number of economic and cultural sites - advertising, marketing, magazines, shop design. The role of these agents therefore needs consideration in a 'systems of provision approach. The complex interactions between these various agents and institutions of fashion need to be examined in terms of their temporal and spatial relations to one another. Time is crucial to some markets (womenswear for example) and not to others. Space, in particular, retail space, is relevant not only to the social relations of fashion but to the manufacture of the fashion image of a corporation, so the chapter ends by exploring the nature of the spatial locations of fashion - markets, shops, department stores and shopping centres. ## Historical Development of the Fashion Industry Britain was the first nation to industrialize and textile production, in particular cotton production, was the motor behind this development. Cotton had become fashionable from the eighteenth century as a versatile fabric for household linens and later, as a dress fabric (Wilson 1985). The British cotton industry grew exponentially in the nineteenth century and Britain became a vast consumer of the natural resources of their colonies in the Indian subcontinent, thereby destroying the indigenous market. Chhacchi (1984) argues that British rule led to the destruction of traditional handicrafts and handloom production in India, turning one of the oldest textile countries in the world into an importer of textile goods from Britain. The same industry that squandered resources abroad depended upon the extensive exploitation of labour at home. Images of the dangerous and noisy mills and overcrowded, unhygienic sweatshops have come to stand as one of the defining features of production during the Industrial Revolution in Britain in the nineteenth century. As Howard argues: the apparel industry has long been plagued by a noxious creature known as the sweatshop. The word conjures up images of sweltering tenements and dark lofts, of women and children toiling into the night for wages that will barely keep them alive ... It is the peculiar nature of this industry that such conditions can be found today more or less as they existed a hundred years ago. (1997: 151) Howard goes on to quote the economist John R. Commons, who in 1901 offered the following definition: the term ‘sweating' or ‘sweating system,' originally denoted a system of subcontract wherein the work is let out to contractors to be done in small shops or homes ... the system to be contrasted with the sweating system is the 'factory system,'wherein the manufacturer employs his own workmen, under the management of his own foreman or superintendent, in his own building. (1997: 152) The reason for the development of this subcontracting chain lies in the ‘peculiar nature'of fashion according to Howard. More than most cultural products, clothing, especially for women, is very unpredictable: seasonal changes and movement of fashion mean that the production of clothes for women is particularly risky (as discussed in more detail below). No trader wants to be left with garments they cannot shift and so 'the industry has historically dealt with this unpredictability by pushing risk down through the production chain: from retailer to manufacturer to contractor and subcontractor and ultimately into the worker's home'(Howard 1997: 15). The result of this 'dog eat dog'approach to subcontracting is poor pay and conditions for those at the very end of the chain, the women who sew the fabric and put the garments together. The existence of sweated labour today shows how incomplete the process of industrialization has been within the textile and garment industries. If, as was thought in the nineteenth century and the early twentieth, technology is progress, one would expect that new inventions for the spinning of yarn and the cutting or sewing of cloth would have brought improvements for workers. At the very least, such technology might speed up the process of making garments. However, compared with other industries, clothing manufacture is much less mechanized and technological developments have not eliminated the basic unit of production, the woman at a sewing machine. ## An Imperfect Industry The history of industrialization within the clothing and textile industry is a history inextricably linked to colonial exploitation abroad as well as the exploitation of labour at home. Patterns of industrial relations based on inequality established in the nineteenth century are reproduced in today's textile and clothing industries. To unpack the fashion industry, according to Phizacklea (1990) is to unpack the interconnections between class, gender, race and ethnicity, connections which have deep historical roots. These patterns have their origins in pre-industrial times: in their,'analysis of gender relations in the textile and garment industry, Lown and Chenut argue that 'built into the process of industrial and technological change were many notions concerning the appropriate gender behaviour of women workers, and many fears about the implications of any changes in the familiar patterns of gender roles'(1984: 25). They examine the structure of textile production prevalent in pre-industrial Britain under the cottage system (also known as the ‘putting out' system), according to which wool production was organized by the husband/father in the home: merchants distributed wool to a male in the household responsible for supervising the spinning, which was done by women and children. Weaving was a job largely performed by men and acquired a higher status than spinning. Although some women were weavers, by the eighteenth century they had been gradually eased out by male weavers who, increasingly insecure about their position, established guilds to exclude women and children. With the coming of mechanized means to produce fabric (silk looms were the first to be mechanized, followed in 1718 by the first water-powered mill in Derby and later by steam-driven machines), production was moved out of the home and into the factories. Under the factory system existing gender roles were reproduced – women and children were employed to operate power looms and men supervised. This division of labour was also a division of pay and status since men were rewarded with higher wages than women who were usually paid on a piece rate (i.e. by the amount of spun yarn produced). Industrialization therefore reproduced unequal gender relations characteristic of pre-industrial times as well as the gendered division between ‘skilled' and ‘unskilled': tasks associated with men were awarded the higher status of ‘skilled' than tasks associated with women. While there is nothing 'natural' about these divisions, ideas about the ‘natural' capacities of men and women were employed to legitimate this arrangement. As Elson (1984) argues, myths abound about women in the textile and clothing industry: for example, women are not technically minded; they have 'nimble fingers'; they don't need to earn as much as men since they are dependent upon men. Elson also argues that such myths are still perpetuated in the developing world by governments who sell these ideas about their female workforce in order to attract multinational companies to produce in their countries. She then explores how these myths are underpinned by assumptions about male and female skills. Female skills are seen to just happen'; they are 'natural' and therefore without any real art or technique since, as Phizacklea (1990) argues, the acquisition of skill is located in the domestic arena and largely 'hidden' from public view and therefore from recognition. Thus, say Chapkis and Enloe (1984), rather than being 'cheap' women's labour is cheapened by cultural attitudes that fail to recognize it or give it adequate status and reward. New technologies for making clothes which developed over the nineteenth century did not elevate these conditions since technology alone does not produce cultural change. Marx's prediction that the use of the sewing-machine would, with other progress forces, do away with‘the murderous, meaningless caprices of fashion' has not come about (Fine and Leopold 1993: 100). The sewing-machine has remained the primary piece of technology in clothing production in the twentieth century and this dynamic makes clothing production at odds with other forms of mass production, for example the car industry. Instead of large-scale machinery gradually replacing individual workers, the individual worker at an individual machine remains the staple of clothing production, even as the relationship was made increasingly more automatic. While the sewing-machine stimulated factory production and speeded up the time it took to make clothes, ‘it also served to reinforce rather than undermine the craft basis of production'(1993: 102). As Fine and Leopold note, by 1882 there were sixty-eight different stitches in use by tailors with greater skill. The sewing-machine may have been designed as a labour-saving device but is also served to heighten what was expected in a dress, so that dressmakers were under pressure to produce more elaborate clothing. However, there was a parallel movement towards the reduction of skill: sewing tasks were broken down as technologies such as the buttonholing machine developed. Thus, say Fine and Leopold, while these inventions speeded up the pace of tailoring tasks, they did not increase the number of garments that could be made up simultaneously. An early exception to this was the introduction in the 1870s of a steam-powered cutting machine, which could cut up to twenty-four layers of cloth at a time. New technologies are adapted to fit culture rather than bring about change, as some people expect or hope. Existing myths about gender form part of the calculation of companies about what machinery to use and what labour to target. According to Lown and Chenut (1984), in the nineteenth century the textile company Courtaulds deliberately designed machinery that could be operated by young female hands, and sought out female labour in areas were poverty levels were high. They decided on Halstead in Essex because it was a depressed farming area that had suffered greatly not only as a result of industrialization but through the movement of the wool trade to Lancashire. This provided Courtaulds with a ready-made pool of exploitable labour. Lown and Chenut also examine the similarities and differences between textile production in France, the United States and India. For example, in the United States in the nineteenth century young women from rural communities formed the bulk of textile workers. Relocated from the countryside to factory towns, these girls and young women were expected to send home the vast proportion of their wages. Later in the century immigrant labour from Eastern Europe was exploited. As Howard notes, 'between 1880 and 1900, more than 3 million European immigrants poured into our cities, Jews fleeing the pogroms of Russia, Italians and Slavs and other workers...desperate for work at almost any wage'(1997: 152). As a major gateway to the 'New World', New York was fed by this steady stream of immigrants and soon developed as a major centre for garment manufacture. Today this pattern continues with poor immigrant women from South America making up the vast proportion of workers in the garment industry in the United States - each new wave of immigration providing a new group of vulnerable workers whose labour can be exploited. ## Gender, Class and Ethnic Relations in the Fashion Industry As noted earlier, inequality in the textile and clothing industry does not just run along class and gender lines but along the axis of race and ethnicity as well. As Chapkis and Enloe (1984) and Phizacklea (1990) argue, at any particular time the women targeted for recruitment into textile industries tend to be from particular ethnic groupings. Thus racism and ethnocentrism operate globally as western companies legitimize their move to countries in the southern hemisphere by arguing that Asian women are naturally willing to work for longer, naturally more inclined to do repetitive work. Women in developed countries are encouraged to blame other women in the developing world, particularly Latin American and Asian women, for reduction in wages and poor conditions in their own work. As Chapkis and Enloe argue, ‘Third world women - so the racist/sexist explanation goes - are “naturally willing" to work for less and “naturally tolerant"of harsher working conditions'(1984: 3). The link between ethnicity and sexism is complex: according to Enloe (1984), when ethnic groups are organized into a hierarchy, women tend to be pushed into less desirable jobs. This is confirmed by Phizacklea (1990) who examines the interconnections between class, gender, race and ethnicity in the textile and clothing industries across Europe. She describes how the system of subcontracting takes different forms in different countries: in Germany, for example, retailers tend to subcontract to producers in Asian countries whereas in Britain it is generally entrepreneurs at home who co-ordinate the production of short-run clothes. These British firms are predominantly run by ethnic minority men at the end of the ‘dog eat dog' subcontracting chain. The chain can mean up to 200 per cent mark up on British goods and paltry sums for the subcontractors and workers, predominantly women. Predominance of ethnic minority men in this industry is an important factor. As traditional jobs decline, many of these men have little option but to pursue an entrepreneurial route but, says Phizacklea (1990), if ethnic men have low status, women are positioned even lower. In fact, she encountered no female entrepreneur in preparing her study. In such firms the work is sometimes carried out in conditions not unlike the sweated' conditions of the nineteenth century - in small and cramped rooms around the East End of London, for example. However, an even'cheaper'form of production now readily used in Britain and other developed countries is home-working, were the labour is performed in the home and the home-worker pays the fixed costs of fuel, lighting and so on. The status of these women is not helped by their social position vis-à-vis immigration legislation in many countries where immigrant women enter as the ‘chattel' of their male partner/breadwinner and therefore acquire secondary status in the labour market (Phizacklea 1990). Moreover, fear of racial attack makes home-working safer for such women. In this respect, their status and conditions of existence are tied to other power relations, not least widespread and pervasive racism that is frequently institutionalized. As waves of immigrants are excluded from mainstream job opportunities, they become concentrated in those sectors with poor pay and conditions, largely ‘hidden'from view and therefore vulnerable to exploitation. This naked exploitation of poor working-class women and ethnic minorities has not been met passively: the history of the textile and garment industries is littered with stories of resistance. As Andrew Ross notes, 'because these industries have seen some of the worst labor excesses, they have also been associated with historic victories for labour, and hold a prominent symbolic spot on the landscape of labor iconography'(1997: 11). For example, Lown and Chenut (1984) note how in 1860 women at Courtaulds went on strike when the company tried to reduce piece rate. Although they were forced back to work after lockout, they were more successful in the following decadè when employers, fearful of losing female workers to domestic service, had to improve pay and conditions. Female garment workers were at the fore of industrial action in the United States at the turn of the century when a series of strikes among garment workers left their mark on labour relations. The focus of industrial action was the eradication of the sweatshop which did drop out of view temporarily, although, as Ross notes, it never really disappeared. Perhaps the most famous piece of industrial action in the garment industry is the Triangle Shirtwaist Company walkout of 1909, which sparked widespread strike action among 20,000 shirtwaist makers across the country. This was followed in 1910 by 60,000 cloak makers going on strike. This led to the Protocol of Peace', which 'required employers to recognise the union and a union shop, set up a grievance procedure and a Joint Board of Sanitary Control to police health conditions in the shops' (Howard 1997: 153). The optimism of this Protocol was quickly dispelled when 146 workers died six months later in the Triangle Shirtwaist factory. The Protocol led many manufacturers to close down their shops and contract their work out, thereby passing on the liability to monitor working conditions to the subcontractor. As Howard notes, this situation only served to push the sweatshop further to the margins, putting an artificial distance between the manufacturer and the subcontractor which undermined the ability to maintain legal standards in the shops. However, in 1926 a commission was set up in New York to examine the conditions of work in the garment industry, intended to ensure that the manufacturer (or ‘jobber') could not escape liability but must share joint liability' with the contractor. This did result in a steady rise in pay and conditions, so that by the mid-1960s more than half of the 1.2 million workers in the apparel industry were organised and real wages had been rising for decades'(1997: 155). While it is often thought that such naked exploitation has since been eradicated, the ‘basic dynamic has not changed in a hundred years'(Howard 1997: 151). Today, garment workers all over the world are at the mercy of a volatile market which is highly recession sensitive. They are disposable labour, brought in cheaply when there is work and laid off when the market slows down. What has changed to some extent is the location of sweatshops in today's global economy. It is also the case that new relations of exploitation have been built on race and ethnic difference as well as gender. Sweated labour can now be found in developing countries such as those of the Asian subcontinent; they can also be found among the immigrant populations of developed countries in the west. As Ross (1997) notes, the high hopes of the New Deal in the 1960s have been increasingly undermined by political and economic changes since the 1970s as recession, neo-liberalism and laissez-faire economics, under the banner of ‘free trade', have put increasing pressure on producers in the garment industry to search for ever cheaper labour. Today in the garment industry one finds the most vulnerable and exploited workers whose pay and conditions are the first to go in this global battle. In addition, home-working has returned as a mode of production which keeps costs down and profits up for big corporations. More shocking is the discovery of indentured labour on US soil - in 1995 the contractors El Monte were found to have imported Thai women to work in its Californian factory were they had little freedom and were little more than wage slaves (Su 1997). These relations of exploitation need situating within the context of the clothing industry in general, and women's clothing production in particular. ## The Textile and Clothing Industries Conditions for the production of clothing are heavily dependent upon a wide range of social, political, economic and cultural factors. Moreover, when we speak of clothing production it is important to note that there are not one, but a number of industries producing clothes, each of them differently organized according to context and whether the industry is orientated towards a mass market or not. As Fine and Leopold (1993) argue, the history of fashion is a history of different ‘systems of provision'. Made to measure clothing in the form of bespoke tailoring and haute couture still exist alongside mass-produced clothing, which is fragmented into different market segments. Clothing provision has had to meet demands of naturally segmented markets - those for children, men and women - as well as markets of different sizes, with each of these developing different strategies for managing production. Each industry, each subsector, has its own dynamics linking a wide range of agents in the process. According to Fine and Leopold, if one can generalize about the directions taken by the clothing industry in the last 200 years, one can say that it has transformed from consumption of essential items of dress designed to last, to the purchase of multiple garments, bought cheaply and replaced frequently. In this way it has begun to mimic the food industry, where goods are marketed as perishable. Timing is critical in women's fashion, which emphasizes change and new lines, and this makes turnaround from design to manufacture and distribution very fast. As Fine and Leopold (1993) note, in the 1920s the women's clothing industry was still operating under primitive levels of development compared with other consumer industries like cars and indeed in contrast to men's fashions where production has long been geared towards ‘staples' such as suits, jackets, overcoats and the like. This leads Fine and Leopold to ask whether or not the women's clothing industry ever achieved full mass production, and to argue that fashion, as in rapidly changing styles, has come to serve as a compensation for the failure to achieve mass production within women's clothing. As shown above, the story of fashion is largely told as the story of women's clothing and its rapid changing aesthetic. However, according to Fine and Leopold, explanations which see this as emanating from some essential feminine psychological impulse are highly implausible. Instead they argue that the evolution of the fashion system represented an attempt to accommodate the failure to achieve mass production fully. Thus, fashion’ serves to supply the seeming anarchic and rapidly changing proliferation of women's clothes, a feature that distinguishes it not just from other industries but from other branches of the clothing industry as well, served as a substitute for technical innovation, arising not in response to a rise in incomes or changes in consumer preferences or to the exhaustion of possibilities arising from mass production but rather from the industry's failure ever to fully embrace mass production. (Fine and Leopold 1993: 95) Leopold (1992) further undermines the arguments (discussed in chapter 5) which link fashion to the essential frivolity or vanity of women, shifting attention away from the psychology of the consumer to the dynamics of the industry. Fashion as transient, fast changing style has become the motor of women's clothing and this explains why clothing production leads to some of the worst labour conditions for workers. Fast turnover of style puts pressure on manufacturers to work quickly and at low cost to reduce the risk of over-production for clothing which, once ready, is no longer in' fashion. Producers are therefore more likely to rely on subcontracting which can seek out the most flexible' workforce, i.e. the one that can be picked up and laid off at will, with no demand for sickness benefits, maternity leave and the like. In the United States and Britain, successive neo-liberal governments over the years have driven down wage costs, and produced a ready-made pool of such labour at home willing to work for paltry sums. Demographic factors have also played an important part in the development of mass production in men's clothing: in particular, the movement of populations to the west served to stimulate clothing production for men whose requirements were not for fashionable but for practical clothing. Throughout the eighteenth century Europe exerted an influence over fashions in the United States with merchants importing clothes from London and Paris. However, the growth in settlers in the Midwest swelled the population of rural dwellers. As railways and waterways pushed westwards, this expanding population of male workers needed rugged and protective clothing, their demands spurring technical change in clothing production to increase availability of garments. As a result, tools and materials were adapted from engineering work to clothing production (for example, the use of rivets instead of the hand-sewn seam). Fine and Leopold (1993) argue that the link between new patterns of work and new clothes is shown in the cowboy, who, working in dusty conditions, required strong and protective clothing: a hat to protect his eyes, a bandanna to shield his mouth and so on. Sailors and slaves also required clothing that was hard wearing and tough and these large groups of male workers acted as a stimulus for massproduced clothes. The spur to industrialization and mass production came from the fact that these early markets were large and uniform while the newly built railroads and waterways also helped to open up new distribution channels for domestic clothing production of menswear. The Civil War also aided this process by encouraging the development of the first standardized sizing in men's clothing to aid the production of uniforms. This was a significant development since standard sizing is crucial for the advancement of ready-made clothing. Women's clothing was hardly affected by such developments: female work did not demand particular kinds of dress and women's culturally acquired skills for sewing meant that many clothes were produced at home. Indeed, the sewing-machine, while stimulating some factory production, also facilitated home dressmaking, spurring the development of commercial patterns made by companies such as Buttericks. Women's factory made clothes did not begin to appear until the beginning of the twentieth century, corresponding to the increasing participation of women in the labour market among other factors. Yet even by the close of the First World War the industrial development of women's clothing continued to lag behind men's 'displaying characteristics increasingly at odds with those conducive to the spread of mass production'(Fine and Leopold 1993: 101). ## Fashion as a Cultural Industry The discussion above suggests that in order to understand fashion it is necessary to go beyond a discussion of pure aesthetics, since what is defined and comes to be recognized as fashion'is the product of a chain of activities which are industrial, economic and cultural, as well as aesthetic. As Peter Braham argues: what is distinctive about the fashion code is that it must pass through the filter of the fashion industry. Thus the suggested code modifications displayed on the catwalks of Paris stand to be rejected, toned down or embraced not only by a host of publicists, critics, journalists and fashion leaders, but also by garment manufacturers and store buyers. (1997: 134) At each stage, choices are made by manufacturers, fashion buyers, and retail outlets as to what will sell. Fashion journalists and fashion leaders play their role in the progress of a particular fashion and all these agents point to how a new fashion 'does not merely stand in aesthetic relation to previous fashions, it also has a material relationship to the cost and complexity of its design, manufacture and distribution’(Braham 1997: 135). Thus, like Fine and Leopold, Braham argues that fashion is not just culture but industry, not just about consumption but about production. One way to think of fashion is as a culture industry. Fashion is the product of a complex set of interactions between various agents set in temporal and spatial relations to one another - between design houses, fabric and clothing manufacturers and retailers and the fashion-buying public. The connections between these agents are so complex that it is sometimes difficult to separate them - some manufacturers have no factories, such as Marks and Spencer in the UK, while some fashion designers are not the producers of the items that bear their name but give a manufacturer the licence to use their name, as is the case with Calvin Klein underwear, for example. If we understand fashion to be a complex culture industry, a whole series of questions open up about the relationship between the production and consumption and the chains of dissemination and distribution that link the two. Who defines what is fashion', the designer, the manufacturer, the retailer or the consumer? Who are the key players and what precisely is their role? Where do we need to look to find ‘fashion', the design house and catwalk or the street? Does production follow consumer demand or vice versa? Given constraints of time, how does production meet consumer demand for a particular fashion? These questions focus attention on fashion as a socio-economic practice and not as some discrete aesthetic discourse. They also point away from overarching theories of fashion (argued in chapters 2 and 3 as being reductive) to the day-to-day workings of the fashion industry. Braham (1997) gives a comprehensive overview of the literature on fashion as a culture industry and argues that in order to understand fashion we need to move away from emulation or the ‘trickle-down' model which has formed the basis of much discussion of fashion and its dissemination. He summarizes the main debate between the trickle-down'model of fashion as proposed by Simmel (discussed in chapters 2 and 3) and looks at more recent reinterpretations of fashion as the outcome of complex socio-economic processes. As Braham notes, Simmel's argument about the diffusion of fashion from elite to majority has formed the basis of much subsequent debate among theorists. In chapters 2 and 3 I argue that this emulation model is too simplistic to be true and that it confuses consequence with intention: wearing of the latest fashion may not, in fact, be an expression of the desire to be like one's ‘betters' but some other desire, possibly the desire to be seen as ‘modern' and ‘in' with the times (Campbell 1989, 1993). However, one can critique Simmel's theory further by examining empirical data on the fashion industry and the operations, decisions and selections that see a style come to be defined as ‘fashion'. Emulation is too reductive a model to account for the complex interactions between different bodies in the fashion system who produce a style as fashion. Herbert Blumer has argued that a style becomes fashion not when the elite wear it, but when it corresponds to ‘the incipient taste of fashion-consuming public'(in Braham 1997: 139). An elite may influence the direction of taste but they do not control it and attempts made to co-ordinate popular taste can fail. It is true that diffusion of this collective taste may owe much to fashion leaders and innovators who legitimate the taste, but they cannot entirely determine it. The fact that there is something mysterious about this ‘incipient taste', but it is difficult to find its origins, does not mean that it is fictitious. However, despite the difficulty of pinning this taste down, Blumer (1969) proposes some of the elements we need to consider when understanding the formation of fashion. He suggests that fashions are in part the product of selective choices made by designers (who choose what garments to show in their collections) and by journalists and buyers (who select some items as the look'for a particular season and not others). Designers are aware that their garments will be filtered through these cultural mediators but can never predict what garments will be picked up by buyers and journalists. Blumer also notes that there is a remarkable similarity between all the buyers and journalists as to what elements they'select and this he puts down to the fact that these cultural mediators àre so immersed in the world of fashion, and so trained to spot trends, that they usually pick up on the same garments. Indeed, the success of any store buyer depends on the ability to spot the latest trend. The same can be said about the remarkable similarities between the ready-to-wear' collections each season in Milan, New York, Paris and London, where one can find similar lines and colours across different design houses. Here again, this can be explained by the fact that, as cultural innovators or mediators, designers occupy the same universe and search for inspiration in the same locations - the high street, popular culture and music as well as ‘high'art. Each individual designer and stylist wants to be seen to catch the mood of the time and, in doing so, taps into the same cultural trends. Fashion' is therefore the product of interactions between these cultural mediators and their sources of inspiration, as well as the result of the internal dynamics of fashion itself. It can be argued that of all these complex elements, closely interconnected as they clearly are, the most obvious is also the most important, namely the way in which a new, would-be fashion relates to the fashion that is in mode. That is to say, the new fashion seeks – inevitably – to extend, qualify, comment on or contradict the existing fashion. While fashion designers, manufacturers and retailers depend upon picking up the latest trends, it is altogether more demanding to begin to delineate the precise contents of this communication or to trace its operation'(Braham 1997: 142). We can, however, examine the relationship between the various agents in the process and consider how a style becomes defined as fashion through the processes of selection. This approach, as Braham correctly notes, requires us to move away from a ‘trickle-down' model and look at a number of key players in the fashion process and at the crucial connections between production, distribution and retail. Braham considers a number of these key players, in particular, couturiers, retailers and fashion buyers. He also examines a number of recent developments in the production of fashion, most notably the emergence of niche marketing and justin-time'production characteristic of the flexible specialization'said to have arisen to cope with market instability. I now examine what Braham has to say about each of these. As Braham notes, haute couture has lost its place at the centre of fashion, no longer dictating the directions of fashion. Paris has been de-centred by a host of developments in the twentieth century, especially the rise of mass production, ready-to-wear collections and the influence of pop music and youth cultures as sources of fashion style, which are now said to 'bubble up' from high street to fashion catwalk (Polhemus 1994). These developments have served to blur the division between high fashion and everyday fashion; the latter hardly lags behind ‘high'fashion and in many cases dictates the trends that are only later picked up by couture. With new sources of fashion coming up from the street, the orderly dissemination of high fashion from couture collections each season is no longer viable. This leads Braham to argue that we now have 'multiple fashions systems': fashion moves up, down and along from various starting-points and in several directions, rather than emanating from a single source or trickling down'from the elite to the majority (1997: 145). This decline in the role of the couture as the central fashion innovator has not meant that couture is irrelevant to contemporary fashion. Indeed, one of the striking features of fashion in recent years is the degree to which couture designs have become part of the everyday currency of fashion. Thus, says Braham, just because designers look to the street does not mean to say there is no reason to be interested in high fashion. First, this borrowing from the street may actually enhance the prestige of designers. Second, while Paris may no longer be the centre of fashion, the Parisian couture houses have become important as major players in the prêt-à-porter collections. Compelling evidence of the influence of designers also lies in the vast economic scope of these fashion houses which are owned by multi-million dollar conglomerates operating on a global scale. As Braham (quoting Davis) acknowledges, the concerns of such multi-national financial backers serve to constrain designers by insisting that some of their designs should be popular and simple enough to be easily translated into massproduced high-street designs. This economic imperative blurs the line between high fashion and everyday fashion and can be seen in the large number of franchising agreements between fashion houses and manufacturers (of sunglasses, underwear, perfume and cosmetics etc.). For example, the High Fashion Industry Accord, signed in Italy in 1971, shows how important alliances between design houses, fabric and garment manufacturers and financial backers have become. Under this Accord, Italian couturiers receive subsidy if their new lines conform to guidelines agreed with major garment manufacturers who can easily reproduce their designs for mass markets. These examples provide evidence of the degree to which the couture designer is now much more part of the everyday world of commodity culture than the exclusive world of elite fashion. In Britain, the other factor which needs consideration in any discussion of fashion is the art school or college, which plays an influential role in the training of designers. Since the 1960s and the rise of celebrity youth designers such as Mary Quant and later, Vivienne Westwood, British fashion design has become world renowned for its imagination and innovation. This continued in the 1990s with the British invasion' of Parisian couture: John Galliano first at Givenchy and now at Christian Dior, Alexander McQueen at Givenchy, Stella McCartney at Chloe. According to Angela McRobbie, these designers are examples of a relatively new phenomenon, the designer as auteur, a phenomenon fuelled by fashion magazines which play on the idea of the designer as genius. However, they represent the smallest minority of fashion designers, most of whom do not go on to achieve celebrity status but have to carve out work for themselves in an increasingly crowded market. McRobbie (1998: 1) considers the way in which these designers constitute a ‘new cultural worker'; in some ways prime examples'of ‘Thatcher's children' who are enterprising' in their ability to sell their skills, either freelancing for corporate chains such as Next or C&A, or as independent designers selling direct to the public through market stalls. With the growth of subcultures, many young designers since the 1960s have found they can service these through small outlets and market stalls, resulting in a rise of ‘subcultural entrepreneurialism': this ‘self-generated, selfemployment demonstrated the existence of a sprawling network of micro-economies initially inside the youth subcultures, and then extending far beyond them'(McRobbie 1998: 8). The socio-economic context is important for understanding this expansion. Many theorists have commented upon the growth of consumption and the fragmentation of the market into more and more differentiated 'taste markets'. This has served to stimulate the emergence of 'niche marketing' to capitalize on new tastes; an apparently unending growth of symbolic material and images from advertising, marketing and retail design work to weave meanings around commodities to the point where, according to Baudrillard (1983), the thing consumed is the image not the commodity. Such developments, including the increasing globalization of production and consumption, have been characterized under the rubric post-Fordism'. In terms of its impact upon fashion, 'the expanded market for images has created the need for a new workforce of image makers and, once again, the cultural intermediaries step in to play this role (McRobbie 1998: 4). ## Fashion retailing Whether they are intended for corporate design houses or for a market stall, fashion designs have to be sold through some mechanism or another. In this way, retail plays a crucial role in defining fashion and indeed, Braham (1997) argues that large retailers such as Marks and Spencer or Next might exert even more influence on fashion than manufacturers and designers. As Braham notes, in advanced industrial countries the trend is for retailing to be concentrated in major chains: in the UK Marks and Spencer and the Burton group constitute approximately 25 per cent of all clothes sold. Both have had to respond to pressure of market forces for faster turnaround of stock and have to keep pace with the rapidity of fashion change. In the 1980s the trend in retail moved towards ‘lifestyle' consumption, which is characterized by small niche markets directed towards an increasingly segmented market of consumers whose identity (age, income bracket, taste etc.) is under constant scrutiny by marketing personnel. The term lifestyle' designates a particular approach to marketing, but Shields argues that it can also be used to describe ‘affective groupings...which emerge through the medium of shared systems of symbolic codes of stylized behaviour, adornment, taste and habitus'(1992: 14). 'Lifestyle'marketing has subtly altered the way in which not only fashion, but such commodities as food are produced, distributed, marketed and sold. In the case of Burton, niche marketing led to the creation of distinctly different retail outlets catering for particular market segments: Principles, Top Shop, Top Man and Burton (Nixon 1996). The increasing importance of keeping pace with fashion also led to an emphasis on shorter runs to reduce the risk of over-production and waste. The concern with short runs is also known as ‘flexible specialization'(see below). Braham is careful not to assign too much significance to this shift. Given Fine's and Leopold's argument (1993) that mass production, particularly in women's fashion, was never successfully implemented, Braham asks whether the shift towards flexible small batch production is as dramatic as it might at first appear. However, one feature that does distinguish contemporary fashion is the emergence of just-in-time' production, which is supported by the deployment of new computer technologies. Just-in-time'production incorporates all the features of 'flexible specialization'- short runs produced quickly through the chain of subcontracting that in the UK draws heavily on the 'flexibility' of home working. However, what characterizes ‘just-in-time'production is the use of the latest technologies, particularly communication technologies which collate data on sales between manufacturer and retailer, enabling both to operate with minimal levels of inventory. The goods arrive as and when they are necessary, as well as allowing production to be undertaken and completed, as far as is possible, only on the basis of firm orders from retailers'(Braham 1997: 156). This system of provision is most effectively deployed by the Benetton Group, whose production, distribution and retail strategy bring together traditional patterns of production, such as subcontracting, with the latest technologies for the production of clothes, such as advanced dyeing techniques, and the latest in communications technologies for the tracking of sales and the effective distribution of fashion garments just-in-time'. However, as Belussi argues in her study of Benetton, technology alone cannot explain the group's success; instead, she focuses her discussion on the ‘business milieu in which it occurred' and on the firm strategy employed (in du Gay 1997: 169). In other words, Benetton's success lies in its increasing domination in the market and in the strong links it has forged among the agents involved in the production and distribution systems (suppliers, subcontractors, agents, retailers). It is in the context of this strategy that new technologies are deployed which have contributed to Benetton's latest and most intense development. The Benetton Group, started by Luciano and Guiliana Benetton, is a collection of franchises with each shop paying no royalties to Benetton but adhering to strict policies of shop design and layout. Since the global collection of retail outlets is managed locally, Benetton has little in the way of staff and fixed costs to bear. Further, the effective utilization of subcontractors enables Benetton to keep the costs of production down. With low' skilled tasks devolved to manufacturers and to retailers, Benetton concentrates its activities on product development and image management. The investments made by Benetton come in the form of capital investments in new technologies for product innovation (such as the introduction of new dyeing processes), the overall design of garments with an emphasis on ‘quality', and the development of information technology that allows the retailers to track customer demand and respond quickly. As Belussi notes, patterns of sales and extent of re-orders are regularly fed back from the shops to Benetton, and in this way the time required for the final decision of distribution among subcontractors is markedly reduced’(in du Gay 1997: 174). The close connection to demand enables Benetton to reduce risk: the garments are displayed in the shop and are not stored in warehouses. Overall control of the company's image is carefully maintained by shop design and layout, high-profile marketing and controversial advertising campaigns. As the above argument shows, fashion' or (more precisely, given market segmentation) ‘fashions' are the outcome of a range of intersecting practices: market and economic practices, labour relations and practices, technological developments and a range of more cultural' practices such as marketing and design. These activities overlap since in some cases, ‘producers' as in the Benetton Group, co-ordinate marketing and design. Thus the distinction, traditionally made in fashion literature between production and consumption, is an artificial one that does not shed much light on the crucial relations between the two. Furthermore, as du Gay argues, while we commonly think of ‘business'and 'culture'as incompatible concepts, in recent years, companies and business have begun to think and talk aboutculture': it has come to be seen as a crucial means of ensuring organizational success because it is held that if you can effectively manage meaning' at work, so that people come to conceive of and conduct themselves in such a way as to maximize their involvement in, and hence their contribution to, the organization for which they work, you are more likely to have a profitable, effective and successful firm. (1997: 1) du Gay uses the term ‘cultural economy'to describe the way in which culture and economics intersect in so complex a way that neither sphere dominates or determines the other. Instead, du Gay argues that 'culture' and'economics'are 'hybrids',mutually constitutive' of one another (1997: 2). On the one hand, no activity is purely ‘economic' since all economic decisions involve cultural ones; on the other, all‘culture'is ‘manufactured' in some way, much of it mass produced, and therefore the product of economic decisionmaking. ‘'Meaning', says du Gay, ‘is produced at"economic"sites (at work, in shops) and circulated through economic processes and practices ... through adverts, marketing materials and the very design of products) no less than in other domains of existence in modern societies'(1997: 4). The ‘economic'practices he refers to could equally be described as ‘cultural'practices (indeed, advertisements are often analysed within cultural studies as cultural rather than economic; see, for example, Williamson 1978). As discussed above, cultural intermediaries, such as journalists and fashion buyers, mediate between production and consumption. These practitioners play a pivotal role in articulating production with consumption by attempting to associate goods and services with particular cultural meanings and to address these values to prospective buyers'(du Gay 1997: 5). By heralding ‘brown as the new black', or ‘grey as the new black', as fashion journalists did in the winters of 1997 and 1998 respectively, cultural commentators can help to promote a style, colour or designer. From this perspective, we can view a range of practices important to the production of fashion without making the false distinction between seeing them as either purely' economic or cultural. The practices I now examine shed further light on the relationship between economy and culture as they come together in the fashion experience, namely, retailing locations such as the market, the shop, the department store and the shopping centre. All these spaces blur the distinction between the cultural and the economic since shopping is both an economic activity and a cultural one. ## Fashion Locations Given the argument that fashion is both an economic and cultural form, the shop (the department store, the shopping centre, the secondhand market) can be seen as the space which links these practices very explicitly. The shop is a place where economic exchange is clearly culturally embedded: shops and markets are spaces of economic activity – buying and selling - that are rooted in a whole series of other everyday practices and activities. Indeed, one can consume without purchasing anything, as the term 'window shopping' suggests; the items consumed are not material goods but the spectacle of the shop itself. There are now many studies of spaces of consumption, ranging from the market, the department store and, more recently, the shopping centre and out-of-town warehouse designer villages'(e.g. Shields 1992, Slater 1993, 1997). The spatial organization of these sites is said to be implicated in the constitution of 'modern' and postmodern' identities. These spaces are not only prime sites for the consumption of goods and images, they play a crucial role in the articulation of desire, identity and subjectivity in modern, and some would say, postmodern culture. As Foucault (1977) demonstrates in his work on the prison, space is never inert or simply 'there' but active in the constitution of social relations. The layout of a building and the spatial arrangement of streets impact upon the movement of bodies, directing the individual and organizing the flow of the crowd to particular sorts of activities, relations and patterns. In recent years, attention has been focused on aspects of shopping such as shop design and display that direct the gaze of the modern-day flâneur. Slater suggests that these spaces of consumption carry an ‘enormous ideological load in the modern period and again today: the image of a thriving civil society'(1993: 188–9). ## Markets, shops and department stores Shops occupy an important place within the economic and cultural life of the town and the city. Braudel argues that without a market, a town is inconceivable'(in Slater 1993: 191). The market (open air or closed) is the earliest form of shopping space and is a crucial location for the sale of second-hand clothing. Until the early twentieth century when ready-to-wear fashion became available to the vast majority of the population, working-class people wore second-hand clothes purchased at markets in addition to clothes made at home. Clothing was a considerable expense and this put fashion out of reach for most people, although out-of-date fashions could be bought at the secondhand market and‘at least enabled such clothes to be recycled, to outlive their role as fashion goods'(Fine and Leopold 1993: 131). Today, while old-style second-hand markets still exist, they do so alongside department stores, shopping centres and, more recently, out-of-town warehouses and ‘designer villages'which stock end-ofline fashions. The pursuit of second-hand clothing became popular once more in the 1960s and 1970s among the young, especially hippies who rejected consumerist lifestyle as wasteful and ecologically damaging. As McRobbie (1994b) notes, there are various interpretations of this style. She cites Hall (1977), for example, who argues that the hippy style indicates an ‘identification with the poor'as well as a rejection of middle-class style. However, second-hand style sets itself apart from middle-class values and the greyness of real poverty, a fact which leads some people (the novelist Angela Carter is acknowledged by McRobbie in this respect) to question whether rummaging through jumble sales makes light of those who search in need and not through choice. Whatever the reasons and whatever the interpretations made of second-hand clothing, the second-hand look has continued to be a popular one with many young people. McRobbie argues that most youth subcultures have relied on second-hand clothes for their style and that this style has influenced mainstream fashion and retail to the extent that shops aimed at young people often borrow from the tactics of the market traders when displaying their clothes. However, modern markets have also borrowed from the tactics of the shop, accepting credit as payment and not simply cash and sometimes fixing prices. Furthermore, the division between streetstyle and mainstream style has become increasingly blurred. McRobbie suggests that there are a number of cross-fertilizations between the two: mainstream fashion, for example, is parasitical on post-punk subcultures and also reworks the already recycled styles of the street markets. Writing about style in the mid-1980s, she suggests that the sharpest illustration of these overlaps and cross-fertilizations lies, at present, in the wardrobes of the so-called young professionals, male and female. The new items which now make-up his or her wardrobe were almost, to the last sock or stocking, discovered, restored and worn by the young men and women who worked in, or hung around Camden Market and a whole series of provincial ragmarkets in the late 1970s and early 1980s. (1994b: 138) McRobbie notes that the female suit announced as the big fashion item of summer 1988 is a reworking of the Chanel suit worn in the early 1960s by such celebrities as Jackie Kennedy, while the tea dresses advertised in the summers of 1987 and 1988 by Next and Laura Ashley are fashioned in the style of 1940s crepe dresses. She goes on to note that ‘second-hand style continually emphasises its distance from second-hand clothing'(1994b: 140) and involves the highly selective exercise of taste by the second-hand shopper. Markets are places of social meeting and interaction, of ‘heterogeneous activities'which attract crowds and naturally lend themselves to spectacle (Slater 1993). So too are shopping arcades which brought together a range of activities when they first appeared in the late eighteenth century and early nineteenth. Don Slater, referring to Walter Benjamin's work on arcades, notes how they bring together within a single image the idea that a market is, culturally, a gathering place for crowds, offering diverse points of focus for diverse and contingent interests'(1993: 192). Arcades are covered passageways, usually arched and with shops and cafés on one or both sides; in the eighteenth century they occasionally included brothels and other places of urban pleasure. The Palais Royal, built in Paris in 1780, contained one such arcade, considered emblematic in showing the roots of modern consumerism in the urban, spectacle-focused crowd' (1993: 193). According to Slater, the arcade brought together three forms of crowd-gathering: 'the pre-modern market, the leisure gatherings of “society", and the city itself'(1993: 193). Arcades thus constituted a space for consumption, part old, part new, which served to promote modern forms of retail and consumption. Unlike the oldstyle market, where tradespeople sold their wares directly to the public, they separated production from consumption. They therefore stimulated the rise of ‘middlemen', such as the shop or stall holder who mediated between producers and consumers. In gathering together a number of merchants, the arcade continued the tradition of the pre-modern market but depersonalized the relations between seller and shopper, for example by relying on fixed prices rather than haggling. The arcade was also a space where the fashionable of 'society' met to promenade. This served to stimulate 'the growth of specific consumer infrastructures, for example the modern shop and the commercialisation ofleisure'(1993: 194). A diverse range of social types such as financiers, flâneurs, dandies and prostitutes, each pursuing their own interests within the same space, could choose to attend concert halls or vaudeville, meeting rooms or clubs. Such a range of activities were later incorporated into big department stores which at one time housed reading rooms, rest rooms, restaurants and later, hair and beauty salons. As such, arcades were like cities in miniature, simulations of a city within the city itself, not unlike in the modern shopping centre. In recent years, shopping centres have sprung up on the outskirts of cities across the developed world; representative examples include, in Britain, the Arndale Centre in Manchester and, in the US, the Copley Center in Boston. Langman (1992) and Shields (1992) argue that the shopping centre has replaced the Gothic cathedral of feudal times and the factory of the industrial age to become the building/space par excellence of contemporary society. However, while seeming a new and ‘postmodern' space, as we can see from Slater's discussion (1993), the shopping centre incorporates many aspects of modern as well as pre-modern consumption. Shops have always enjoyed a special place in the city as spaces of pleasure, desire and fantasy. As Porter notes, 'the eighteenth century brought the emergence of high-class shops, in the City, in Piccadilly and Mayfair' (1990: 199). These shops opened up new pleasures and opportunities for'respectable' women previously denied the freedom to wander through the city, although their movements were still more restricted than that of their male counterparts (Nava 1992). Shopping could be a pleasurable activity for men too: as the poet Robert Southey wrote in a letter, ‘if I were to pass the remainder of my life in London...I think the shops would continue to amuse me. Something extraordinary or beautiful is forever to be seen in them'(in Porter 1990: 145-6). Shops were places to marvel at and enjoy: in the 'upmarket'shops of London, goods would be displayed seductively in the window. Shelley noted how'cunningly' women's fabric was displayed: whether they are silks, chintzes or muslins, they hang down in folds behind the fine high windows so that the effect of this or that material, as it would be in the ordinary folds of a woman's dress, can be studied ... Behind great glass windows absolutely everything one can think of is neatly, attractively displayed, and in such abundance of choice as almost to make one greedy. (in Porter 1990: 144) Drapery shops led the way in terms of shop-front design but it was the department store, such as the Bon Marché in Paris or Whiteley's in Bayswater, London, which was the 'great Victorian innovation' (Porter 1990: 201). Up until the 1830s, shops had tended to be highly specialist but some shopkeepers, particularly drapers, such as William Whiteley, saw the potential of expanding their product range and clientele (the prices in many such stores were beyond the reach of most people). By including more goods in one space, and by clearly pricing them, the expanding drapery shops of the mid-nineteenth century could afford cheaper prices and enable shoppers to see at a glance the cost of items without the embarrassment of having to ask the price of something. These drapery shops constituted protodepartment stores built along the lines of indoor markets that were developed in the 1830s in such cities as Newcastle, where the Grainger market (completed in 1835) housed butchers, greengrocers and fancy goods stalls and ‘acted as a magnet to this city redevelopment' (Lancaster 1995: 8). By taking ‘the fear out of shopping' through clear pricing, these new stores grew alongside the new lower middleclass household (Porter 1990). According to Lancaster, the origins of the British department store are firmly rooted in the twin processes of industrialisation and urbanisation'(1995: 7), although he acknowledges that such shops have roots which go back further than this. The first department stores in Britain sprang up in the north, for example in Manchester and Newcastle. Whiteley's, founded in 1864, was the first such store to open in London, initially as a drapers but expanding rapidly to provide jewellery, furs and other fancy goods. Soon after, large stores such as Dickins and Jones moved to Regent Street and expanded to become a department store in the 1890s, while the Army and Navy stores began business in 1871. The novelty of these proto-department stores and the later big department stores was their provision of a wide range of goods and services, including restaurants and rest rooms. They were also places in which to to sit around and dream, and this was nowhere more apparent than in Aristide Boucicaut's Bon Marché in Paris, founded in 1852. In style, the Bon Marché borrowed from the international exhibitions: the Great Exhibition in Crystal Palace, London (1851), and later the Exposition Universelle in Paris (1855) and the world fairs of Chicago (1893) and St. Louis (1904). Not only were prices clearly displayed as they had been at the Paris exhibition, but the shop's whole environment was created to be a spectacle, encouraging leisurely browsing. One did not necessarily have to consume anything except the spectacle itself, although one was encouraged to imagine ownership of the goods displayed. The store was built on a grand scale, facilitating a new kind of freedom: anyone could enter, browse in departments, wander from floor to floor, without spending a centime. The earliest proto-department stores had been too small and formal to offer such anonymity'(Lancaster 1995: 18). By reducing fears about shopping and stimulating desires, the department store became a showcase for an expanding market of goods and commodities to a larger number of people than ever before. Innovative shop design, window dressing and interior displays facilitated the spectacle of the drapery shop and the department store. While the eighteenth century had designed the seductive shop-front'what was lacking until the nineteenth century, says Porter, was good lighting. Giant shops like Swan and Edgar's which sprang up in the West End of London had great gas-lit windows that could serve as showcases for commodities (Porter 1990). 'Thus, new forms of lighting revolutionized modern architecture: as the architectural historian Reyner Baham put it,'the sheer abundance of light...effectively reversed all established visual habits by which buildings were seen'(in Leach 1989: 104). Nowhere was the zest for display more apparent than in the big city department stores of the United States: ‘unlike Europeans, who often articulated aesthetic desires in high art, Americans channeled their desires almost entirely ...into the creation of mass commercial forms'(Leach 1989: 100). The commercial designers in the US worked to generate ‘theatrical effects'and‘enchantment', ‘interpreting and dramatizing commodities and commodity environments in ways that disguised and transformed them into what they were not'(Leach 1989: 100). Not only did these designers have new forms of lighting at their disposal, they could exploit new materials and techniques, for example, new ways of using glass to create etchings, glazes and frosting as well as new kinds of colour produced by aniline dyes, all with the aim of enticing and dazzling those who entered. Shop display became increasingly important in the late nineteenth century and it is ‘appropriate that the first significant advocate of display was the greatest of all American fairy-tale writers, L. Frank Baum, creator of the Land of $\mathrm { O z ^ { , } }$ (Leach 1989: 107). Baum's philosophy, evident in his fairy-tales and his interest in merchandizing, celebrated consumption, display and artificial spectacle. As well as writing, dabbling in photography and film and working in retail and marketing, he founded the first magazine devoted to display, Shop Window, and assembled the first National Association of Window Trimmers. According to Leach, for Baum 'display was fantasy, childhood, theater, technological play, and selling all rolled into one' (1989: 10). He saw the importance of display in attracting the attention of passers-by and in stimulating desire for consumption; in doing so, he raised the status of the shop window to first place among advertising strategies'(1989: 110). What is at stake in all this is the production of a world of fantasy premised on the consumption of goods and commodities. Between the late nineteenth century and the early twentieth, America became the 'Land of Desire', a place which stimulated the consumption of commodities. This was a world that emphasized individuality and individual satisfaction, an increasingly secular world of leisure and consumption which played on hedonism, the libido, dreams and longings. It is no surprise therefore to find that the 'metaphor of consumption as a "dreamworld"dominated nineteenth-century discussions of consumption'(Slater 1993: 196). The emphasis on spectacle is still a feature of large shops and department stores, especially over Christmas, when goods are extravagantly displayed, often in dreamscapes and fantasy settings. Shop display has become an important component in retailing practice: the modern department store as well as many shops are well versed in strategies for attracting the gaze and directing the feet of consumers through space and time. In today's shop interiors ‘polished wood, solid-metal finishings, large plate-glass windows, dressing mirrors, show cards, props, spotlighting and so on' call on shoppers to partake in a spectacle, thus organizing ‘ways of looking for consumers' (Nixon 1996: 61). In his analysis of the construction of masculinity in the 1980s, Nixon examines the ways in which retailing practices, such as shop design and interiors, orchestrated the selling of menswear in shops such as Next and Top Man. For Nixon, the design innovations taking place in menswear in the 1980s were shaped ‘by their insertion within a set of practices of selling'(1996: 47). In other words, an important part of the selling of new styles for men was their location in particular sites of consumption that were consciously designed. Nixon's account of menswear, unlike other studies that examine fashion by abstracting it and treating it to textual or semiotic analysis, insists that the consumption of a particular fashion is not separate from retail practice; from such things as shop design and layout. These practices are important in the process of marking out particular styles and particular subjectivities associated with them, in this case, the 'new man'. In this respect, Nixon considers the way in which shop design and fashion retailing (along with magazines such as Arena) operated in conjunction with each other to produce forms of spectatorship for men in relation to the ‘new man' of the 1980s. The same could be said of many contemporary big-name department stores and high-street shops which carefully manufacture the environment of the shop to create the appropriate look. When Ralph Lauren introduced Polo' to Selfridges in the mid-1990s in London, the layout was carefully orchestrated by designers from the fashion house to ensure the appropriate image was created for the label. It is apparent that fashion exists not simply as an abstract force or idea, but is put into practice through the actions of individual agents, producers, buyers, magazine editors, journalists, retailers and consumers within the various subsections of the fashion system/s. Fashion has to be translated and made meaningful, a process that cuts across economic and cultural practices to the extent that it is impossible to separate the economic from the cultural since, as du Gay (1997) argues, these do not exist in isolation but mutually constitute each other. However, as Leopold (1992) and Fine and Leopold (1993) argue, this is not recognized in the literature, which tends to focus on either consumption or production, without examining the ways in which they intersect. What is left implicit but unspoken by du Gay and Fine and Leopold is that the body is the prime object of fashion. As argued throughout this book, fashion is an important site for discourses on the body and identity produced across various sites and practices, ranging from designers who design on the body, models who wear and help promote the fashions, to journalists and retailers who interpret the body styles through text and image. The seamstresses who sew the garments cannot be ignored since fashion is produced through the labour (and exploitation) of these individuals. Consumers cannot be left out of the picture since fashions become popular only once they are consumed and worn: in other words, through the active articulation and interpretation of fashion in everyday dress produced at the level of the individual body. Understanding fashion requires understanding the interconnections between these various bodies: the discursive, the textual and the lived body and between the actions of agents who are themselves embodied.