# Conclusion Fashion and dress articulate the body in culture: fashion produces discourses on the body and how to adorn it, dress is the translation of fashion into everyday practice. The fashion magazine, for example, sets out styles of dress and makes such styles meaningful: 'this winter, brown is the new black', for example, as in the winter of 1997. In doing so it often sets out fashion in terms of systems of oppositions, for example: Spring is on its way and the mood is fresh and simple. Winter's minimalism has given way to an eclectic combination of the feminine with the sporty. On the one hand, there are clothes that are pretty but wholesome; on the other, is a new utilitarian look. They may seem to sit at opposite ends of the spectrum, but they share an essential simplicity and a relaxed silhouette. (Walker 1999: 107) The pairing of 'pretty' with ‘sporty' and 'utilitarian', and the 'essential simplicity' of these opposing styles, offer the reader a map for making sense of the choices of clothes available at any one time. In setting out choices in this way, fashion magazines not only play a role in promoting certain looks, but in making sense of fashion for potential consumers. The fashion magazine is therefore one example of the way in which ‘fashion'- as an abstract idea and aesthetic discourse - and ‘fashion'- as the actual clothing made available for purchase each season - connects with everyday dress. The advice offered by fashion journalists and editors plays a part in framing the choices of consumers in their everyday dress. Advice about the 'best buys'on the high street or how to translate haute couture styles can now be found everywhere, in newspapers and on television style programmes as well glossy fashion magazines. These texts do not programme consumers to purchase certain things: fashions can and do fail to take off even when they are promoted extensively (stiletto heels promoted by fashion magazines at the end of the 1990s took several seasons of promotion before they could be seen in any significant number to have replaced the large, chunky heels popular on the high street). However, cultural intermediaries, such as journalists, are an important link in the chain of fashion which runs from producer to retailer and consumer. Thus, ‘fashion', as it exists in magazines and other texts, enjoys a complex relationship to everyday‘dress'. Fashion sets the parameters around dress, while dress is the embodiment of fashion, since only when they are worn in sufficient numbers can a style be said to be fashionable. It is impossible to explain exactly why some fashions are successful while others fail, except, as Braham (1997) suggests, by referring to Blumer's idea of ‘incipient taste'(1969). A successful fashion captures a 'mood' or emerging ‘taste'. If one is to look for ways of connecting fashion and dress, one must trace the connections between producers, distributors and consumers. One obvious place to start is with cultural intermediaries such as journalists and fashion buyers who articulate and promote fashion and in doing so move between producers and consumers. This book has only touched on the role of such intermediaries, an area for future research. I have aimed here to provide the reader with an overview of the ways in which fashion and dress have been thought and written about. In doing so, I have argued that one needs to examine the way in which fashion, as discourse and practice, articulates the body, making it social and identifiable, and how this making of the body through dress is of considerable importance to the development of modern society. The literature on fashion and dress has generally overlooked the body, choosing instead to abstract fashion from embodiment and the complex social world in which bodies operate. The literature has also tended to draw an artificial divide between the bodies that make fashion and the bodies that wear it, as Leopold forcefully argues. I have tried to suggest that it is important to make connections between production and consumption and link theories of fashion with practices of dress. One way to do this, as discussed in chapter 7, is to examine fashion as a cultural industry and to look at the practices of cultural intermediaries as the link between production and consumption. I have also suggested that the body provides the missing link between the two. Again, I would argue that understanding the body in culture requires understanding both how the textual body (the body articulated in discourses produced by texts, such as the fashion magazine) relates to the experience of embodiment (the body articulated in everyday life through experiences and practices of dress). Understanding fashion and dress requires understanding the relationship between various bodies within the fashion industry, such as the producers and cultural mediators, and the actions and decisions taken by individuals on and with their bodies. To study dress as a situated bodily practice is to study the negotiations that take place between ‘fashion' and‘dress'. It means examining the way in which fashion gets translated into dress, the way in which the textual body of the fashion magazine is interpreted and embodied in the practical experience of ‘getting dressed'. Such a framework suggests the need to explore the way in which a textual discourse on the body might be translated into an actual dressed body. To return to the passage quoted at the beginning of this Conclusion: in order to understand the relationship between fashion texts/discourses and practices, we need to ask, how did the utilitarian style promoted by Marie Claire in 1999 translate into a style worn by women? What women picked up this style and why? What are the demographics of this style: is it worn by women of a particular age, class, race, ethnicity? How is this style adapted by women and what factors influence its adaptation? On what occasions would this style be worn (to work, on holiday, out clubbing?) and on what occasions would it not be worn (a job interview, a funeral?). Are there occasions when it might bewatered down' or mixed with other styles (perhaps even with thepretty' style) and, if so, why? All these complex negotiations are part and parcel of the everyday experience of fashion in people's daily dress and yet there is little or no recognition of these in academic studies of fashion. In this book I have argued for the need to make these connections, between fashion and dress and between production and consumption, and in laying out the framework of situated bodily practice, I hope to have suggested what such a study involves and therefore how a sociology of fashion and dress might proceed.