# List of All the Key Takeaways ## Key Takeaways for Putting Indigenous First 1. Figure out your positionality vis-à-vis Indigenous sovereignty over the land. You must understand your own positioning in relation to the specifics of your local settler colonial state. What is the specific configuration of native-settler-slave of your country? Which identities are enmeshed in those structural relationships? If your positionality is native, the work you need to do is different than if it is chattel slave or settler. This work requires a tremendous amount of humility. For those readers outside of North America and Australia, ask yourself questions such as who are the Indigenous Peoples of your lands? (There are Indigenous people all around the world.) Who have been the powerful and who have been the structurally excluded populations of the land? Who has been brought in to provide excess labor? What does it mean for you, as an individual and collectively as a community, to build your “good life” in the place where you are living and/or working? 2. Learn the colonial histories of the places where you are. Practices such as land acknowledgments may at first seem superficial, but they won't be if they are the first steps of learning the history of the land and Indigenous relationships to the land before colonization and within continued colonization. Decolonization is about the land. If you do not understand the land, you will not be engaged in decolonization. For those outside of North America and Australia, what have been the histories of migration within your lands? Where did the wealth of your nation come from? Was it built from extracting the lands and resources of other peoples? 3. Make mistakes, but also make real amends. You will make mistakes. Having authentic relationships with Indigenous Peoples is the only way of being able to hold yourself accountable for your colonial ways. But understand that each mistake you make with them will cause them harm. If they trust you, they will tell you what you did and what can be done to make amends. You should follow those directives to repair the relationships and open an opportunity for healing. This will be easier for us racialized folks than for white folks, because of the histories of broken treaties between Indigenous and white people. For those outside of North America and Australia, what harms have been done to populations who have been structurally excluded from wealth, health, education, and other resources in your country? In what ways are you or are you not contributing to their sovereignty? 4. Design objects that can transmit liberatory joy to the body and community. ## Key Takeaways for Dismantling the Tech Bias of the European Modernist Project ## MVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVV 1. Accept that what you have been told about the modernist project improving the lives of the masses through technological progress is a lie. 2. Realize that this lie hides the real and continuous harm done to European workers, Indigenous lands and people, enslaved Black Africans and their descendants, and all of the people who were displaced by colonization through mass-produced technologies. 3. Understand that the underlying relationship between us and many of our high technologies is that of a master and slaves. 4. Technology could achieve its decolonial promise if design technology is based on principles of abolition and done with the consciousness of Indigenous Peoples who practice “all my relations.” ## Key Takeaways for Dismantling the Racist Bias of the European Modernist Project ## w 1. First and foremost, white folks must do the work of healing their own intergenerational trauma because the work of decolonization is their work. They created the conditions of colonization. They are the ones who must overcome their addiction to the benefits of white supremacy and dismantle it. 2. Those of us who have been excluded from the modernist project in design must continue to claim and reclaim our stories of making. The long list of names that I dropped are so that we can respectfully seek out, care, and share in each other's cultures, histories, and new possibilities of making. It is the flourishing of these stories that gives me the most hope. 3. Design firms and institutions, community organizations, and leaders need to cede space and power to Indigenous, Black, Asian, Latinx, Middle Eastern, and others originally framed as nonwhite, Christian, affluent and cis-male gendered. For those outside of the context of North America and Australia which I describe, this means ceding space to those who have been structurally excluded from institutions by their various forms of difference from the mainstream norms. ## Key Takeaways for Making Amends through More than Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion 1. Make sure you are focused on decolonization by putting Indigenous demands first in your DEI hiring plans. 2. Stop seeking the supertoken and focus instead on addressing systemic exclusion, which only allows supertokens to get through your systems. 3. Accept that your firm's or institution's culture and practices will change because you are ceding power to those who have different experiences, lifestyles, and attitudes. 4. Write a call that embraces the community you are seeking to include by focusing on their interests, not yours. 5. Change your criteria of evaluation to include other ways in which individuals have flourished outside of your normal systems. This is where you will find creativity and innovation from their deep diversity. ## The Key Takeaways for Reprioritizing Existing Resources to Decolonize ## 16666666666666666666666 1. We all owe a debt to Indigenous people for being on their land and that debt has hard financial as well as symbolic costs. Pay them what we owe them. If you are not on Indigenous land as a settler, consider where the wealth comes from in your country and to whom you might be indebted for that wealth. 2. The ethos of decolonization is stronger when you have to give up something precious in your existing budget in order to support it. But additional monies to support decolonizing are fine too. 3. There is no amount of money that will compensate the IBPOC communities for what they have lost through colonization, slavery, and systems of white supremacy. But you still need to pay up so that these communities can gain economic self-sufficiency.