# in troduction Since the first edition of Thinking with Type appeared in 2004, this book has been widely adopted in design programs around the world. Whenever a young designer hands me a battered copy of Thinking with Type to sign at a lecture or event, I am warmed with joy from serif to stem. Those scuffed covers and dinged corners are evidence that typography is thriving in the hands and minds of the next generation. I’ve put on some weight since 2004, and so has this book. For the new edition, I decided to let out the seams and give the content more room to breathe. If you—like most graphic designers—like to sweat the little stuff, you’ll find a lot to love, honor, and worry about in the pages that follow. Finicky matters such as kerning, small capitals, non-lining numerals, punctuation, alignment, and baseline grids that were touched on briefly in the first edition are developed here in more detail, along with new topics that were previously omitted, such as how to style a drop capital, what you need to know about optical sizes, and when to say “typeface” instead of “font” at your next AIGA wine-and-carrot-stick party. This new book has more of everything: more fonts, more exercises, more examples, a more bodacious index, and best of all, more type crimes—more disgraceful “don’ts” to complement the dignified “do’s.” I was inspired to write the first edition of this book while searching for a textbook for my own type classes, which I have been teaching at Maryland Institute College of Art (MICA) since 1997. Some books on typography focus on the classical page; others are vast and encyclopedic, overflowing with facts and details. Some rely heavily on illustrations of their authors’ own work, providing narrow views of a diverse practice, while others are chatty and dumbed down, presented in a condescending tone. I sought a book that is serene and intelligible, a volume where design and text gently collaborate to enhance understanding. I sought a work that is small and compact, economical yet well constructed—a handbook designed for the hands. I sought a book that reflects the diversity of typographic life, past and present, exposing my students to history, theory, and ideas. Finally, I sought a book that would be relevant across the media of visual design, from the printed page to the glowing screen. I found no alternative but to write the book myself. Thinking with Type is assembled in three sections: letter, text, and grid, building from the basic atom of the letterform to the organization of words into coherent bodies and flexible systems. Each section opens with a narrative essay about the cultural and theoretical issues that fuel typographic design across a range of media. The demonstration pages that follow each essay show not just how typography is structured, but why, asserting the functional and cultural basis for design habits and conventions. Throughout the book, examples of design practice demonstrate the elasticity of the typographic system, whose rules can (nearly) all be broken. The first section, letter, reveals how early typefaces referred to the body, emulating the work of the hand. The abstractions of neoclassicism bred the strange progeny of nineteenth-century commercial typography. In the twentieth century, avant-garde artists and designers explored the alphabet as a theoretical system. With the rise of digital design tools, typography revived its connections with the body. The second section, text, considers the massing of letters into larger bodies. Text is a field or texture whose grain, color, density, and silhouette can be endlessly adjusted. Technology has shaped the design of typographic space, from the concrete physicality of metal type to the flexibility—and constraints—offered by digital media. Text has evolved from a closed, stable body to a fluid and open ecology. The third section, grid, looks at spatial organization. In the early twentieth century, Dada and Futurist artists attacked the rectilinear constraints of metal type and exposed the mechanical grid of letterpress. Swiss designers in the 1940s and 1950s created design’s first total methodology by rationalizing the grid. Their work, which introduced programmatic thinking to a field governed by taste and convention, remains profoundly relevant to the systematic thinking required when designing for multimedia. This book is about thinking with typography—in the end, the emphasis falls on with. Typography is a tool for doing things with: shaping content, giving language a physical body, enabling the social flow of messages. Typography is an ongoing tradition that connects you with other designers, past and future. Type is with you everywhere you go—the street, the mall, the web, your apartment. This book aims to speak to, and with, all the readers and writers, designers and producers, teachers and students, whose work engages the ordered yet unpredictable life of the visible word.