# CHALDAICÁE PARAPHRASIS-TRANSLATIO. biblia polyglotta Book spread, 1568. Printed by Christopher Plantin, Antwerp. Plantin’s polyglot Bible is zoned for five different translations (Hebrew, Greek, Aramaic, Syriac, and Latin). Each zone is proportioned to accommodate the typographic texture of a particular script. The page is a dense rectangle cut into parts. The pieces— though highly individualized— fit together into a unified whole. Reproduced from William Dana Orcutt, In Quest of the Perfect Book (New York: Little, Brown and Co., 1926). #

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History\02-Books\Ellen Lupton：《Thinking with Type》，2004\06-GRID\06-GRID\auto\06-GRID.md

## CHALDAICÁE PARAPHRASIS-TRANSLATIO. biblia polyglotta Book spread, 1568. Printed by Christopher Plantin, Antwerp. Plantin’s polyglot Bible is zoned for five different translations (Hebrew, Greek, Aramaic, Syriac, and Latin). Each zone is proportioned to accommodate the typographic texture of a particular script. The page is a dense rectangle cut into parts. The pieces— though highly individualized— fit together into a unified whole. Reproduced from William Dana Orcutt, In Quest of the Perfect Book (New York: Little, Brown and Co., 1926). #

pour quelle raifon elle porte le nom de Pompée : je croirois volontiess que celt par quelqae erreur popalaire. Plufieurs voiageurs en ont parlé, tous » portionné à la groffeur de la colonne, mais fait d'une piece feparée. ## supplement au livre de l’antiquitè (left) Book page, Paris, 1724. The twocolumn grid devised for this bilingual book provides a large, single-column block for the French text, with two columns below for the Latin. The quotation marks serve as a frame along the left edge of the quoted passage. the illustrated london news (right) Newspaper page, 1861. Early newspaper advertisements were designed by the paper’s printer, not supplied by the client or an advertising agency. This dense field of entries occupies a fourcolumn grid, with ruled lines to create order. the imperial family bible (next spread) Book, 1854. In this unusual book structure, the notes appear in the center of the page rather than along the bottom or the edges. The margin has moved from outside to inside. <table><tr><td>G L N PaTEt B</td></tr></table> AE THEERA M

