## letter Bartram, Alan. Five Hundred Years of Book Design. London: British Library, 2001. Benjamin, Walter. One Way Street and Other Writings. London: Verso, 1978. Blackwell, Lewis. Twentieth-Century Type. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004. Boyarski, Dan, Christine Neuwirth, Jodi Forlizzi, and Susan Harkness Regli. “A Study of Fonts Designed for Screen Display.” CHI 98 (April 1998): 18–23. Broos, Kees, and Paul Hefting. Dutch Graphic Design: A Century. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1993. Burke, Christopher. Paul Renner: The Art of Typography. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1998. Clouse, Doug and Angela Voulangas. The Handy Book of Artistic Printing. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009. Christin, Anne-Marie. A History of Writing, from Hieroglyph to Multimedia. Paris: Flammarion, 2002. Crouwel, Wim. New Alphabet: An Introduction for a Programmed Typography. Amsterdam: Wim Crouwel/Total Design, 1967. \_, Kees Broos, and David Quay. Wim Crouwel: Alphabets. Amsterdam: BIS Publishers, 2003. Cruz, Andy, Ken Barber, and Rich Roat. House Industries. Berlin: Die Gestalten Verlag, 2004. De Jong, Cees, Alston W. Purvis, and Jan Tholenaar, eds. Type: A Visual History of Typefaces, Volume I, 1628–1900. Cologne: Taschen, 2009. Eason, Ron, and Sarah Rookledge. Rookledge’s International Directory of Type Designers: A Biographical Handbook. New York: Sarabande Press, 1994. Gray, Nicolete. A History of Lettering. Oxford: Phaidon Press, 1986. Heller, Steven, and Philip B. Meggs, eds. Texts on Type: Critical Writings on Typography. New York: Allworth Press, 2001. Johnston, Edward. Writing & Illuminating & Lettering. London: Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons, 1932. Kelly, Rob Roy. American Wood Type: 1828–1900. New York: Da Capo Press, 1969. Kinross, Robin. Unjustified Texts: Perspectives on Typography. London: Hyphen Press, 2002. Lawson, Alexander. Anatomy of a Typeface. Boston: David R. Godine, 1990. Lewis, John. Anatomy of Printing: The Influences of Art and History on its Design. New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 1970. . Typography: Basic Principles, Influences and Trends Since the Nineteenth Century. New York: Reinhold Publishing, 1963. McMurtrie, Douglas. The Book: The Story of Printing and Bookmaking. New York: Dorset Press, 1943. Morison, Stanley. Letter Forms. London: Nattali & Maurice, 1968. Noordzij, Gerrit. Letterletter: An Inconsistent Collection of Tentative Theories That Do Not Claim Any Authority Other Than That of Common Sense. Vancouver: Hartley and Marks, 2000. Pardoe, F. E. John Baskerville of Birmingham: Letter-Founder and Printer. London: Frederick Muller Limited, 1975. Perry, Michael. Hand Job: A Catalog of Type. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2007. Shelley, Mary. Frankenstein. New York: The Modern Library, 1999. First published 1831. Re, Margaret. Typographically Speaking: The Art of Matthew Carter. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2002. Triggs, Teal. The Typographic Experiment: Radical Innovation in Contemporary Type Design. London: Thames & Hudson, 2003. Updike, Daniel. Printing Types: Their History, Forms, and Use, Volumes I and II. New York: Dover Publications, 1980. VanderLans, Rudy, and Zuzana Licko. Emigre: Graphic Design into the Digital Realm. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993. Vanderlans, Rudy. Emigre No. 70: The Look Back Issue, Selections from Emigre Magazine, 1984–2009. Berkeley, CA: Gingko Press, 2009. Willen, Bruce and Nolen Strals. Lettering & Type: Creating Letters and Designing Typefaces. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009. ## text Armstrong, Helen. Graphic Design Theory: Readings from the Field. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009. Barthes, Roland. Image/Music/Text. Trans. Stephen Heath. New York: Hill and Wang, 1977. . Mythologies. Trans. Annette Lavers. New York: Hill and Wang, 1977. Baudrillard, Jean. For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign. St. Louis, MO: Telos Press, 1981. Benjamin, Walter. Reflections. Ed. Peter Demetz. New York: Schocken Books, 1978. Bierut, Michael. Forty Posters for the Yale School of Architecture. Cohoes, NY: Mohawk Fine Papers, 2007. Bolter, Jay David. Writing Space: Computers, Hypertext, and the Remediation of Print. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2001. Derrida, Jacques. Of Grammatology. Trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976. Diamond, Jared. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: W. W. Norton, 1997. Kaplan, Nancy. “Blake’s Problem and Ours: Some Reflections on the Image and the Word.” Readerly/Writerly Texts, 3.2 (Spring Summer 1996): 115–33. Gould, John D. et al. “Reading from CRT Displays Can Be as Fast as Reading from Paper.” Human Factors 29, 5 (1987): 497–517. Helfand, Jessica. Screen: Essays on Graphic Design, New Media, and Visual Culture. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2001. Lessig, Lawrence. Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and Control Creativity. New York: Penguin, 2004. Laurel, Brenda. Utopian Entrepreneur. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2001. Lunenfeld, Peter. Snap to Grid: A User’s Guide to Digital Arts, Media, and Cultures. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2001. Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2002. McCoy, Katherine and Michael McCoy. Cranbrook Design: The New Discourse. New York: Rizzoli, 1990. . “American Graphic Design Expression.” Design Quarterly 148 (1990): 4–22. McLuhan, Marshall. The Gutenberg Galaxy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1962. Millman, Debbie. The Essential Principles of Graphic Design. Cincinnati: How, 2008. Moulthrop, Stuart. “You Say You Want a Revolution? Hypertext and the Laws of Media” in The New Media Reader. Noah Wardrip Fruin and Nick Monfort, eds. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003. 691–703. Nielsen, Jakob. Designing Web Usability. Indianapolis: New Riders, 2000. Ong, Walter. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. New York: Methuen, 1982. Raskin, Jef. The Human Interface: New Directions for Designing Interactive Systems. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2000. Ronell, Avital. The Telephone Book: Technology, Schizophrenia, Electric Speech. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1989. ## grid Berners-Lee, Tim. Weaving the Web: The Original Design and Ultimate Destiny of the World Wide Web. New York: HarperCollins, 1999. Bosshard, Hans Rudolf. Der Typografische Raster/The Typographic Grid. Sulgen, Switzerland: Verlag Niggli, 2000. Cantz, Hatje. Karl Gerstner: Review of 5 x 10 Years of Graphic Design etc. Ostfildern-Ruit, Germany: Hatje Cantz Verlag, 2001. Elam, Kimberly. Geometry of Design. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2001. Gerstner, Karl. Designing Programmes. Sulgen, Switzerland: Arthur Niggli Ltd., 1964. Gibson, William. Neuromancer. New York: Ace Books, 1984 Higgins, Hannah P. The Grid Book. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2009. Hochuli, Jost, and Robin Kinross. Designing Books: Practice and Theory. London: Hyphen Press, 1996. Krauss, Rosalind. “Grids” in The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist Myths. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1985. 9–22. Küsters, Christian and Emily King. Restart: New Systems in Graphic Design. London: Thames and Hudson, 2002. Lidwell, William, Kritina Holden, and Jill Butler. Universal Principles of Design. Gloucester, MA: Rockport Publishers, 2003. Müller-Brockmann, Josef. The Graphic Artist and his Design Problems. Sulgen, Switzerland: Arthur Niggli Ltd., 1961. \_. Grid Systems in Graphic Design. Santa Monica: Ram Publications, 1996. First published in 1961. \_. A History of Graphic Communication. Sulgen, Switzerland: Arthur Niggli Ltd., 1971. Nicolai, Carsten. Grid Index. Berlin: Die Gestalten, 2009. Roberts, Lucienne, and Julia Shrift. The Designer and the Grid. East Sussex, UK: RotoVision, 2002. Rothschild, Deborah, Ellen Lupton, and Darra Goldstein. Graphic Design in the Mechanical Age: Selections from the Merrill C. Berman Collection. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1999. Ruder, Emil. Typography. Sulgen, Switzerland: Arthur Niggli Ltd., New York: Hastings House, 1981. First published in 1967. Rüegg, Ruedi. Basic Typography: Design with Letters. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1989. Samara, Timothy. Making and Breaking the Grid: A Graphic Design Layout Workshop. Gloucester, MA: Rockport Publishers, 2002. Tufte, Edward R. Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press, 1990. . The Cognitive Style of PowerPoint. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press, 2003. Zeldman, Jefrey with Ethan Marcotte. Designing with Web Standards, Third Edition. Berkeley, CA: New Riders, 2009. ## manuals and monographs Baines, Phil, and Andrew Haslam. Type and Typography. New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 2002. Bringhurst, Robert. The Elements of Typographic Style. Vancouver: Hartley and Marks, 1992, 1997. The Chicago Manual of Style, 15th Edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003. Dwiggins, W. A. Layout in Advertising. New York: Harper and Brothers Publishers, 1928. Eckersley, Richard et al. Glossary of Typesetting Terms. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994. Felton, Paul. Type Heresy: Breaking the Ten Commandments of Typography. London: Merrell, 2006. French, Nigel. InDesign Type: Professional Typography with Adobe InDesign CS2. Berkeley, CA: Peachpit Press, 2006. Jardi, Enric. Twenty-Two Tips on Typography (That Some Designers Will Never Reveal). Barcelona: Actar, 2007. Jury, David. About Face: Reviving the Rules of Typography. East Sussex, UK: RotoVision, 2001. Kane, John. A Type Primer. London: Laurence King, 2002. Kunz, Willi. Typography: Macro- and Micro-Aesthetics. Sulgen, Switzerland: Verlag Arthur Niggli, 1998. Lupton, Ellen and J. Abbott Miller. Design Writing Research: Writing on Graphic Design. London: Phaidon, 1999. Lupton, Ellen and Jennifer Cole Phillips. Graphic Design: The New Basics. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2008. Lynch, Patrick, and Sarah Horton. Web Style Guide: Basic Design Principles for Creating Web Sites. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001. Millman, Debbie. The Essential Principles of Graphic Design. Cincinnati: How, 2008. Rosendorf, Theodore. The Typographic Desk Reference. New Castle: Oak Knoll, 2008. Samara, Timothy. Typography Workbook: A Real-World Guide to Using Type in Graphic Design. Beverly, MA: Rockport, 2004. Scher, Paula. Make It Bigger. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2002. Spiekermann, Erik, and E. M. Ginger. Stop Stealing Sheep and Find Out How Type Works. Mountain View, CA: Adobe Press, 1993. Strizver, Ilene. Type Rules: The Designer's Guide to Professional Typography. Cincinnati: North Light Books, 2001. Strunk, William Jr. and E. B. White. The Elements of Style. Illustrated by Maira Kalman. New York: Penguin Press, 2005. Tschichold, Jan. The Form of the Book: Essays on the Morality of Good Design. Point Roberts, WA: Hartley & Marks, 1991.