# FLIGHT OF THE PHOENIX In February 1954, Robin Darwin – my predecessor as Rector of the Royal College of Art – gave a now-famous lecture at the Royal Society of Arts. Called The Dodo and The Phoenix’, the lecture contrasted the Dodo of old-style art and design education with the Phoenix of the new. An extinct creature, gently mocked in Alice in Wonderland, had made way, through natural selection, for a fabulous bird which, according to Greek legend, burned itself to ashes and rose again with new life. Something dead had become a symbol of everlasting renewal. Darwin, a direct descendant of Charles Darwin, concluded: It will not escape the attention of keen ornithologists, and quite ordinary persons besides, that the Dodo is, or at any rate was, a real bird, whereas the Phoenix was never more than a fantasy of the imagination. It may well be that in my enthusiasm for the College as it has risen from its ashes, I ascribe an equally mythical importance to it. If so, I hope I may be forgiven. But I do sincerely believe that just as the Dodo and Phoenix are not only different in species but in kind, so has the Royal College of Art changed in a like manner during the last few years ...’. The Phoenix soon became the unofficial symbol of the RCA. Richard Guyatt was commissioned to design a Phoenix motif for the Senior Common Room crockery. It was Robin's fantasy,’ he recently told me, he said he felt pictorially peckish.’Then came publications and menus and ceremonial robes and mosaics and eventually holograms and digital drawings: even the silver College yardstick’, still used on Convocation Day, has a Dodo at one end and a Phoenix at the other. Meanwhile, this bird of the imagination seemed to be becoming a symbol of national renewal as well, in the brave new world of post-war reconstruction. Sir Basil Spence, architect of the new Coventry Cathedral, called his book about its building Phoenix at Coventry and his pamphlet Out of the Ashes. It was Spence, incidentally who, on seeing the stained glass work of two young RCA students in their College studio one day, was excited beyond measure’ and immediately commissioned them to design the nave windows for his great project. About 30 years later, another Rector – Jocelyn Stevens – flamboyantly referred to the College under his style of management as finger-lickin’ Phoenix’ and to the Darwin era as the era of the Dodos’. So today’s Phoenix had become, by some law of the species, tomorrow's Dodo. The Bauhaus lasted 14 years. Other art and design schools have been centre stage for a while, then faded into the background. The RCA is over 150 years old, or over a century old if the clock is started in 1896 when it was granted permission to use the name – the longest continuous experiment in publicly funded art and design education anywhere in the world. This is the story of 100 years of flights of the Phoenix, of an institution which has almost by definition renewed itself over and over again. It is preceded by a Victorian prologue which outlines the thinking and practices of the College's earliest incarnations – the Government School of Design and the National Art Training School, from 1837 to 1896. The sourcebook you are reading is the result of teamwork. I co-ordinated the project, wrote the introductions, conducted the interviews and edited the texts of the theme and chronological spreads. Claire Catterall and her researchers, Juliet Bingham, Hannah Ford and Alistair O’Neill – all graduates of the RCA – compiled and drafted the spreads, wrote the captions, and selected the illustrations; very complex and timeconsuming processes. The illustrations show work completed and exhibited while the individuals concerned were still at the College or work completed during subsequent professional careers. Occasionally, work is attributed to a particular decade when in fact it was made earlier: this is because the work is a key reason why the individual was involved with the College in the later period. Every possible effort has been made to trace copyright holders, and to check dates and career details. The design was co-ordinated by Tony Cobb, Visiting Professor of Graphic Arts at the College; his vision, determination and flair turned the concept of this ambitious book into reality. The designer of the book is Anna Subirós – herself a successful recent graduate of Graphic Design at the RCA. Two aspects of the College's long history could not be fully acknowledged in a book of this format. The first is the fact that because the RCA is postgraduate – the only entirely postgraduate university of art and design on the planet – it depends to an unusual extent on the teaching, commitment and talent of staff and students on a multitude of undergraduate courses; not just in Britain but all over the world. The ex-students covered by this book are graduates of the RCA: in almost all cases, they also took first degrees or diplomas before they arrived there. Secondly, the work of a key School – the School of Humanities – which offers courses in the history, philosophy and criticism of art and design to all College students, and has done so in one form or another for the last half century, could not be illustrated in the same way as the work of the studios. And yet it has helped in many different ways to shape the culture and atmosphere of today's RCA. Three of the book's researchers graduated from the V&A/RCA joint course in the History of Design, one from the Visual Arts Administration course. So the teaching and research of the School of Humanities is at the heart of this book, too. Grateful thanks are due to the researchers, the designers and all the many graduates of the College, plus the arts organizations who have helped make this sourcebook possible. No one has ever before attempted a project on this scale about a single educational establishment, and it depended to an unusual extent on a network of contacts and supporters far too numerous to mention by name here. Very special thanks are due to Michael Frye CBE, who generously agreed to sponsor the book in the hope that the result would inspire future generations of young artists, craftspeople and designers. I hope so, too. The great fashion designer Issey Miyake once referred to the students of the RCA as ‘a nourishment to the world’. This sourcebook is dedicated to them all.