# VICTORIAN PROLOGUE You are to be in all things regulated and governed by fact. We hope to have, before long, a board of fact composed of commissioners of fact, who will force the people to be a people of fact, and of nothing but fact. You must discard the word fancy altogether.’ Emissary from the Government School of Design in Charles Dickens’ Hard Times, 1854 The biting satire on the Government School of Design in Charles Dickens’ Hard Times (written a couple of years after the Great Exhibition in 1851) is an accurate portrayal of the bureaucratic and restricting system of art and design education in the Victorian period. Founded in 1837, the Government School was a product of the British government's decision to make the training of designers for industry a national responsibility, for the first time ever. By the early 1850s, the School was determined to propagate, among many other things; the view that a pattern on a flat surface should not – by reason of its over-lushness or illusory qualities - destroy the beholders sense of its flatness. This was, it was felt, one of the hard lessons of the 1851 Great Exhibition. Advanced students at the School were to be told, with the aid of pictorial placards and with a high Victorian sense of infallibility, about false principles', such as the direct imitation of nature’and true principles’such as the application of conventional (meaning linear and geometrical) patterns to flat surfaces. Design was popularly viewed to be a kind of visual language which could be taught entirely through drawing: as a training in mechanical accuracy of hand and eye. If students spent several years learning and practising the grammar of that language, then one day they might be able to go out into the world and improve the quality of everyday products – which was the point of the exercise. According to the School's Art Superintendent, the painter and critic Richard Redgrave, design was an aid to perception and a language of explanation ... a means of treasuring facts and collecting stores of truths'. And so the course at the Government School of Design began with simple line exercises and geometrical shapes, progressed to drawing from flat examples, then from the round’ and then from nature and then went on to modelling with charcoal, before finally reaching composition in design’. In the middle stages, students were required to make endless copies of plaster casts, some of which are still to be seen in the Victoria and Albert Museum's Cast Court. In response to the criticism that this system did not give the students any direct knowledge of manufacturing processes or any understanding of how to think in three dimensions, another member of the School's staff Ralph Wornum – who taught a somewhat dull course on the principles of ornament, as well as being Keeper of the Casts – had recently replied that the purpose of the Government School of Design was not how to apply a design, but what to design. While the accomplished practice of an Art may be a matter of five years, the mere mechanical process of application is, in comparison, a mere matter of five hours.’ Design was something one did to things and the School was there to supply a complete and systematic course of education in relation to every kind of decorative work’. Successful students would be in a good position to apply their skills to a variety of manufactures. Like a visual poultice, perhaps. ## Henry Cole and the Journal of Design and Manufactures The system at the School of Design was masterminded by the indefatigable Henry Cole, one of the very few senior civil servants involved in British art and design education to have had an art education himself. He had studied watercolour painting with David Cox, had commissioned the first-ever Christmas card, had designed a prizewinning tea service (under the pseudonym of Felix Summerly) which Minton's manufactured for the rest of the century, and had a flair for publicity and drawing attention to himself that was unusual for his time. He was a pugnacious, rotund and easily caricatured fellow who was often pictured with his inseparable Yorkshire terrier Jim. That Charles Dickens had him in mind when he described the Government Officer’ in Hard Times, is revealed by the manuscript draft in which Cole’is listed among the cast of characters. In June 1854, Dickens wrote to Henry Cole to let him know that he was passing the summer in the society of your friend Mr Gradgrind’: I often say to Mr Gradgrind, that there is reason and good intention in much that he does – in fact, in all that he does – but that he overdoes it. Perhaps by dint of his going his way and my going mine, we shall meet at last at some halfway house where there are flowers on the carpets, and a little standing-room for Queen Mab’s chariot among the Steam Engines.' Cole had first let his outspoken views be publicly known in 1849, through the medium of his monthly Journal of Design and Manufactures – the first-ever periodical to be devoted to design. The Government School of Design, in its overcrowded base at Somerset House in the Strand, had, he wrote, started off well when it opened for business on 1 June 1837. A Select Committee of the House of Commons on Arts and Manufactures had reported in August of the previous year that, from the highest branches of poetical design down to the lowest connection between design and manufacture, the arts have received little encouragement in this country’. One way of improving Britain's poor performance relative to her overseas competitors (especially France, Prussia and Bavaria), in exporting the products of industries dependent on design, was to institute a School which would purvey not mere theoretical instruction only but the direct practical application of the Arts to Manufactures ... ’. In England such art education as existed, other than the tutoring of well-healed young people by itinerant drawing masters, seemed to be the monopoly of the Royal Academy Schools and was directed entirely towards fine art. But even at this very early stage, Cole noted, by referring to the fine arts as the highest branches', the Select Committee had sowed the seeds of future discord by implying that the decorative arts somehow fell into the lowest’ category. ## Early Dilemmas The founders of the School had known exactly what they didn't want: they didn't want any drawing from the human figure, since this might encourage young students to become artists rather than ornamentists; and they didn't want the School to be part of mainstream education, which in any case was in its infancy, so it would come under the aegis of the Board of Trade. But beyond these two negatives, they were working in a complete vácuum. There was no elementary training system on which to build and so, as one of the founders put it, we have established a university before we have any grammar schools’. Between 1842 and 1852, 21 branch schools’ were created or adapted from older foundations – Manchester, Coventry, Birmingham, York, Newcastle, Sheffield and Nottingham were among the earliest – following another recommendation of the Select Committee. The national system of art and design education in fact pre-dated the national system of any other kind of education, an indication of how seriously the early Victorians took the link in their minds between design’ and industrial performance. And yet, despite the well-meaning efforts of teachers such as the Aberdonian painter William Dyce (whose Drawing Book of the Government School became a standard text), the sculptor Alfred Stevens (who was appointed, as he said, Professor of everything’), and the young Richard Redgrave ARA, the course simply would not settle down. The collection of objects for students to copy soon took over most of the available space, evening classes proved far more successful than the daytime ones, there was too much emphasis on the laborious copying of architectural details, and the staff were divided into two warring aesthetic camps, the Nordic-Gothic tendency and the classical Italianizers. Most of the hapless students were, or aimed to be, skilled artisans, since this was the group targeted by the Select Committee as the key to design improvement in manufacturers. Many were in their teens, and some had been released from their apprenticeships by manufacturers who were only half convinced that the School could do better than their own factory floors; these manufacturers also seemed much more interested in establishing Academy-style art schools in their localities as a way of enhancing municipal prestige. The artisinal students preferred evening classes, the others preferred daytime. A student revolt in April 1845, said to be the first sit-in in the history of British higher education, not only led to the introduction of figure drawing, but encouraged the School's governing body to make the practice compulsory, it being found by practical experience that the accurate delineation of beautiful models of the human figure is a most efficient means of educating the hand and the eye’. The opposite, in other words, of what the founders had said with equal vehemence a mere eight years before. By the time Henry Cole entered the fray, a consensus was emerging that the future stability of the School depended on much more clear thinking about the science and principles of design’, and on the removal of the heaps of plaster casts and exemplars (there were 800 casts of architectural ornament alone) from the pressurized teaching spaces. This latter thought was indirectly to lead to the foundation of what is today the Victoria and Albert Museum. Cole was merciless in the Journal of Design and Manufactures. One of his editorials thundered that the School had only succeeded in taking skilled artisans or apprentices from the backstreets of England’s soot-black industrial cities and turning them after three or four years into unemployable facsimiles of fifteenth-century Florentines who normally cover dog kennels with crochets and finials ... and fall back on the dreary expedient of copying scroll and shell work .. ’. ## The First Generation Although Cole had described the teachers and administrators responsible for the ill-conceived programme as a bunch of dilettanti half-informed bunglers’, he was being less than fair to some of the early former students. Two of them, George Wallis and G. F. Duncombe, became his own personal assistants in the organization of the Great Exhibition: Wallis later became Keeper of Art in the South Kensington Museum. Another ex-student, Francis Moody, was made Instructor in Decorative Art responsible for supervising the decoration of the Museum's permanent buildings with mosaic panels stained glass and engraved cement, and the crowning of the Albert Hall with its classical frieze. Octavius Hudson had already designed the Honiton lace for Queen Victoria's wedding dress; Frederic Shields was to become well known as an illustrator and architectural ornamentist; Henry Hugh Armstead rose to become an eminent designer of metalwork and jewellery, as well as one of the sculptors of the Albert Memorial; C. P. Slocombe designed an iron and brass gas-lamp for Buckingham Palace; and Frederick Andrew designed the backs of countless Victorian playing cards. Even a wellknown painter, Edward Poynter, somehow managed to emerge from the early years of the School. But the star of the group, and the first man ever to be called an industrial designer, had been Christopher Dresser. Dresser first entered the School in 1847 at the age of 15 and five years later was awarded a scholarship: his prize designs on the final stages of his course included printed fabrics’, applying the principles taught by the School to a chintz’ and garment fabrics’. In 1852 he became a student-lecturer. Some of his visual aids – careful botanical drawings of the structure of plants, mounted on canvas – have survived, and they reveal that he was teaching art botany’ not as a form of surface decoration (nature as pattern and flatness), but as structure, the relationship of solid and void: he encouraged students to progress beyond copying to an understanding of form and fitness of purpose’. In one of his later lectures (he was to teach at the School until 1868), he argued that drawing schools’ had their place furnishing the Royal Academy with pupils’, but the real and still urgent need was for: a Royal Academy of decorative or applied art, wherein the highęst knowledge of design in all its branches as required by our various månufactures, be fully given. Let ornament be treated as a fine art ….’. For him, knowledge of design – the science and principles’ everyone was looking for – involved a mixture of the grammar of ornament, art botany, the study of type-forms, the history of ornament in Western and Eastern cultures, plus all technical knowledge necessary'. ## The Art Training School Cole had won his battle by the beginning of 1852. A new department of the Board of Trade, soon to be named the Department of Science and Art, was created with one permanent official at its head, Cole himself, assisted by one artist, and a Royal Academician at that, Richard Redgrave. New and slightly more spacious premises were secured on two floors of Marlborough House in St James’s, the Journal of Design and Manufactures ceased publication, and a less dilettante teaching team was assembled with a distinct bias towards aesthetic rationalism and economy of ornament: professors and lecturers included the architect and design theorist, Gottfried Semper; the author of the compendious Grammar of Ornament, Owen Jones; the scientific botanist and author of The Symmetry of Vegetation, John Lindley; and Christopher Dresser, all of whose ideas were later to have an acknowledged influence on the architectural thinking of Frank Lloyd Wright and beyond him on the digital design of today. The new regime was launched with maximum public exposure when staff and students were involved in the design of the Duke of Wellington's funeral carriage (1852) and of the post office's new hexagonal cast-iron pillar box (1856), the first to bear the initials VR’. And the School was successfully moved from Marlborough House (where there were by now 1,500 plaster casts lying buried in the cellars) to a new site in soggy Brompton which would eventually accommodate a new museum of decorative art linked to the School in what was to become leafy South Kensington'. So Charles Dickens was being less than fair when he wrote that the Government Officer was obsessed to the exclusion of everything else with a deadening system to force down the general throat like a bolus’. But what gave chapter two of Hard Times a particular punch was the behaviour of Cole and Redgrave in their first few years of office. Having taken the Government School apart, in print, for being a mere Drawing School’, Cole and Redgrave's first report declared that in futuregeneral elementary instruction in art' would be their main priority, with the improvement of manufactures' – through the media of museums and travelling exhibitions – a secondary consideration. Cole had, apparently, become convinced, and it must have seemed to the art establishment something akin to a Damascus Road experience, that state interference in any special technical teaching, founded upon the assumption of trade requirements, does not succeed’. The original concept for the School had, he added, probably been based on a clerical error: the French phrase école de dessin had been mistranslated as School of Design'when what it really meant wasDrawing School'. So the School would in future focus on drawing and be unrepentant about it. The Department of Science and Art became the responsibility of a Privy Council Committee on Education, the School's name was changed to The Central Training School for Art (1853) and then The National Art Training School (1863). Its prime function was announced as being totrain Art Masters and Mistresses’ and provide the printed materials for the ever-expanding, and ever-more-complex, national network of art schools. When Henry Cole took over, there were seventeen such branch schools’ with a total annual grant of £16,200; by the time he retired in 1873, there were nearly 150 regional schools with a total grant of £286, 252, plus five hundred night classes for artisans’ so that in all one hundred and eighty thousand boys and girls are now learning elementary drawing'. Certificates from the National Art Training School were a passport, the only passport, into this system, and so the emphasis in future would be on the teaching of drawing, colouring, the human figure, modelling, ornament and technical instruction'. South Kensington would become the Vatican from which exact and fundamental guidance and a methodically graded, 23-stage course for pupils of all ages would be propagated, and in time this South Kensington system' would be exported to the Empire', to Canada and the USA. To use a more secular image, Britain's art education was now run on a uniform gauge and South Kensington was the terminus: one of Cole's earlier crusades had, indeed, been on behalf of a uniform gauge for the railways. This was Charles Dickens's rule by the commissioners of fact'. At the same time, Cole and Redgrave increased revenue to the School by agreeing to admit private feepaying students without reference to preparation for any branch of manufacture’. The sons and daughters of gentlemen, as distinct from apprentices and skilled artisans, could now pick up an education in drawing and painting - an offer which proved so popular that throughout the 1850s and 1860s the majority of daytime students came under this category. One unfortunate sideeffect was that the integration of art and design, of the highest branches' and manufacture, made way for rich students studying art during the day, and poorer students studying design in the evenings. But, side by side with these developments, the School would still make an effort to instruct students in designing and c., to be applied to the requirements of trade and manufactures'and, with this in mind, Cole devoted virtually the entire departmental technical' budget to the South Kensington School in the expectation that the best design students from the branches' would apply there. Technical classes and workshops, at first co-ordinated by Gottfried Semper, were offered in ornamental metalwork, porcelain painting, woven textiles, furniture construction, enamelling, architectural decoration, casting and moulding (men only), wood engraving and lithography (women only). After Semper's departure, one of their main functions seems to have been to provide decoration for the new buildings of South Kensington – while the printmaking courses for female students supplied illustrations for the Museum's catalogues. ## Celebrated Artists and Successful Designers Successive annual reports noted three major fault-lines in the technical classes: they were too expensive, they focused on the luxury end of the industrial spectrum rather than its mass-production centre, and there were tensions between the teachers-in-training, who had an amateur attitude, and the specialized designers, who wanted more access to the facilities. In 1863, at least one of these difficulties was addressed with the introduction of national scholarships for advanced students who might give evidence [in the form of an elaborate hatched or stippled drawing from an ornamental cast] of a special aptitude in design, and who intended to become designers for industry'. Over the next 20 years, according to the official literature, 76 (out of 145) of these scholars were to work as designers after leaving the School, either inhouse or freelance. But there were to be some very spectacular counterexamples. Scholar Luke Fildes was advised to become a designer of ecclesiastical mosaics: instead he became one of the great narrative painters of his age, with works such as Applicants for Admission to a Casual Ward and The Doctor, which became a great popular image, through printed versions, of devotion to duty. George Clausen won a prize for the decoration of a horse-tramcar, but was also to become a very well-known painter of colourful rustic scenes and rural types such as Labourers after Dinner and The Girl at the Gate. Other former students who became celebrated artists included Hubert von Herkomer, whose The Last Muster was the most often exhibited painting of late Victorian England; Elizabeth Thompson (later Lady Butler) of The Roll Call and Scotland for Ever fame, whose popular depictions of the heroic ordinary British soldier became the standard representation in the quarter century before the First World War; and Henry Woods whose paintings of Venetian street life were almost as popular as the social realist works of his brother-in-law Luke Fildes. Lady Butler wrote about the public impact of such paintings, which, when exhibited, had to be railed off to protect them from the crowds of viewers: printed versions, she added, became a common accessory to the cluttered Victorian interior and she was torn betweengratitude for the appreciation of one's work by those who know, and the uncomfortable sense of an exaggerated popularity with the crowd’. Maybe her work had become a form of interior design after all. Other scholars who did take up a design career included Owen Jones's assistant Maria Edwards; Wedgwood designers Rowland Morris and Thomas Allen; three members of William Morris’ Firm in Queen Square; six designers and modellers (including Leon Solon) for Minton's; several stained glass specialists for churches and textile designers based in Halifax and Kidderminster; the chief medallist of the United States Mint at Philadelphia; the engraver to the Royal Mint; and Mr Harbutt of plasticine fame. They had shared studio space with students such as Kate Greenaway, whose prize-winning floral tile design of 1864 was bought by the School as a teaching aid, and who published her earliest fantasy book illustrations while still on her course; and Gertrude Jekyll whose garden designs were inspired by colour theories she first heard about in School lectures, and whose student sketchbook – full of ornamental motifs from Owen Jones – has survived. Jekyll, too, had one of her works used as a visual aid, when her comparative anatomy lecturer used a Jekyll drawing as a printed illustration in a textbook. Summarizing this period in a valedictory lecture he gave at Manchester School of Art in 1877, Henry Cole noted that, when we talk of a School of Art now, everybody understands that we really mean a School of Fine Art’. But the phrase School of Fine Art’ had a very particular meaning in this context: it meant training workmen to produce works of art for the whole people’. ## The French Influence In 1875, the painter of large-scale classical tableaux, Edward Poynter, had taken over from Richard Redgrave. He had been the very first Slade Professor of Fine Art and had strong views about ‘the study of the living model’ as distinct from the study of the antique’, views which he called the French system,' because of its resemblance to the atelier system of the École des Beaux-Arts. One of the ironies of art and design education at this time is that as French educators were coming to admire the British system more and more – because it was grounded in principles – the Department of Science and Art decided to turn to the French system of fine art education because it wasn’t. From now on, as a tired George Wallis put it, pictorial art is everything – ornamental art practically nothing'. But the pictorial art was of an academic kind. One of the characters in Daphne du Maurier's novel Trilby was based on Poynter, and for him there was never a modern – moderns didn't exist’: the Impressionists were a passing craze; history painting with a moral message was the real thing. Several of the old teachers left in a hurry, to be replaced by Alphonse Legros who would run the etching class, and Aimé-Jules Dalou (a refugee from the Paris Commune and Rodin's studio) who took over the modelling class. Both were practitioners of the atelier system. Edward Lantéri, who had been one of Dalou's pupils in France and who was to succeed him at South Kensington, later wrote that through his enthusiastic teaching and demonstrating, Dalou gave an extraordinary impetus to sculpture and modelling. The birth of The New Sculpture' movement in Britain started here, building on the foundations laid by Alfred Stevens. Of the sculptors who made significant contributions to it, no less than ten – including Alfred Drury, Francis Derwent Wood, Albert Toft, Florence Steele and Esther Moore - emerged from the Dalou/Lantéri class. Designers Edwin Lutyens and Detmar Blow, who would become important architects of the Edwardian era, were their fellow students. Lutyens in his late teens was already steeped in the writings of the Arts and Crafts Movement, and had a boyish interest in the vernacular architecture of Surrey; he won a national bronze medal for seven drawings of a country house’. There is a hoary old legend that Edwin Lutyens and Gertrude Jekyll – one of the great landscape and architecture partnerships - met as students at the School. In fact they were nearly a quarter of a century apart (Jekyll arrived in 1861, Lutyens in 1885), but met two years after Lutyens completed his course. An architect who was at South Kensington at about the same time as Jekyll was Herbert Gribble, who went on to design the Brompton Oratory. A painter who was there at the same time as Lutyens was Jack Yeats, who registered in 1887 at a stage in his career when he was adjusting from graphic art and illustration towards painting in watercolour and oils: he was attracted to the School as a way of getting away from design. ## The Birth of the RCA The last decade of the nineteenth century saw the School renamed as The Royal College of Art. It now had the right to award its own diplomas, which entitled the recipients to a specially designed hood and gown, and a qualification that ranked as a degree for educational purposes’. The decade also saw its restructuring under the belated influence of the Arts and Crafts Movement, and its transfer of responsibility to the Board of Education. Why Queen Victoria graciously granted permission for the change of style and title at this particular time is not clear. Was it because one of her daughters Princess Louise had studied modelling and sculpture at the School in 1868 at the age of 20 (the first princess to be educated publicly) and been guest of honour on prize day in 1888? Was it to bring the School into line with the other royal colleges of the South Kensington campus (royal’ in the sense of owing their origin to the vision of Prince Albert)? Queen Victoria had written to Princess Louise warning her about artists whomix with all classes of society and are therefore most dangerous'; she had added that sculpture wasunnatural’ for a lady, althoughwatercolours are always nice' – provided, of course, the Princess remained an amateur. So one implication of the change may not have appealed to Her Majesty personally. Whatever the reasons, the change was accompanied by some important reforms and by the hope – expressed in The Studio magazine – that the School would at last live up to its new title’. An official report had concluded with exasperation, how in the name of common sense can students be taught what is required for a special craft without the materials for that craft?’ How this Arts and Crafts philosophy would accommodate other meanings of Art' was still an open question.