# INTRODUCTION At Hyde Park Corner there are two memorials to the fallen in the First World War, both of which have associations with the RCA. One is a massive stone sculpture of a 9.2in howitzer gun, guarded by four bronze figures, on a pedęstal covered with elaborate reliefs: a memorial to soldiers of the Royal Artillery. The other is a nude male figure with his right hand on his hip and his left hand clutching a long sword: a memorial to the glorious heroes of the Machine Gun Corps’. The howitzer was by Charles Sargeant Jagger, who studied sculpture and modelling under Edward Lantéri between 1907 and 1911, and who then saw active service at Gallipoli and in the trenches of the Western Front. The nude was by Francis Derwent Wood, who had been a National Scholar at the National Art Training School in the late 1880s, before becoming Lantéri's successor as Professor of Sculpture at the RCA between 1918 and 1924. The art curator Ann Compton has baldly – and justly – contrasted these two Hyde Park Corner sculptures. The Jagger howitzer, she says, was more than just an example of uncompromising realism by a soldier-artist who had had personal experience of the horrors of war: it was also ‘a violent gesture of rebellion against the aesthetic cliché embodied by its neighbour, the langorous nude David by Derwent Wood, which commemorates, with sickening irrelevance, the dead of the Machine Gun Corps’. So, one of the great pieces of public sculpture in the realist tradition to be produced this century stood side by side with a formulaic and empty exercise in historical revival. Both were unveiled in 1925. The former student had evidently outgrown his Professor. When Jagger was a student and Derwent Wood a Professor, the College was still dominated by the Arts and Crafts philosophy. But by the time the Royal Artillery Memorial was unveiled, the atmosphere and the philosophy had changed. ## The New Spirit By the mid-20s, William Rothenstein had been Principal for five years and was personally running the Painting School (which he did again in 1930). He dropped the adjective decorative’, shifted the emphasis away from teacher-training, stated in his prospectus that the aim of the RCA was to give advanced students a full opportunity to equip themselves for the practice of Art’, and employed practising artists and designers (many of them part-time) as staff instead of the traditional career art masters’. Rothenstein's approach was a controversial departure from the historical mission of the RCA, and it took time to settle. The students of the transition period sometimes found the experience frustrating. The Principal, for his part, reflected that the new spirit [of the College] was trying ... God's work was no miracle to some students, who looked rather at Cézanne's and Picasso's’. Although Rothenstein had more direct control over the Painting School, it was the Sculpture School which was the more successful at keeping the new spirit' at bay. Under Derwent Wood, Ernest Cole (1924–26), Gilbert Ledward (1926–29) and Richard Garbe (1929–46), the School continued to emphasize modelling, enlarging and academic sculpture, and to try and ignore the rise of the avant-garde in London. Rothenstein was succeeded as Principal by the Post-Impressionist painter Percy Jowett, and wrote, the College was unlikely to become industrialized’. Gilbert Spencer (younger brother of Stanley) remained Professor of Painting and Richard Garbe remained Professor of Sculpture. Malcolm Osborne continued to run the Engraving School which he had taken over as Professor in 1924. The School had grown out of the etching class of the Arts and Crafts period, which Frank Short had directed from 1891 onwards. It had now become an environment where original prints were created, and where wood-engraving and lithography were offered as well – monochrome copies of the old masters (Turner was Short's favourite) had long since made way for more personal works in interwar colours. ## The Rise of the Phoenix Robin Darwin, who became Principal in 1948, was to contrast the post-war revival of the College (the Phoenix') with the dark days of Rothenstein and Jowett (the Dodo). His first priority was to turn the RCA into an institution with its own Council of Management and its own administration, in order to cut loose from the Ministry. The Dodo reference offended earlier generations of students – it still does - and Darwin's self-confidence in uttering it was helped by the fact that he was well connected in the higher echelons of the British establishment. Gilbert Spencer was asked to leave, making way for Rodrigo Moynihan. Frank Dobson took over from Richard Garbe, who had retired in 1946. And Robert Austin headed what was shortly to be called Printmaking rather than Engraving, in the footsteps of his teacher Malcolm Osborne – the last remaining link with the days of Lethaby and the Arts and Crafts. Darwin was well aware of the pre-war pressure to realign teaching at the College, and he had agreed with the Ministry of Education that to provide a training for the professional easel-painter' was emphatically not a priority. So it is paradoxical that the reforms of the Darwin era (1948–71) made the Fine Art areas a force to be reckoned with: Paradoxical, too, that a nonhierarchical division of subjects, with industrial and graphic design and painting effectively on a par with each other, should prove so stimulating to fine artists. Robin Darwin, a painter himself, proved an adept promoter of the College's distinctive contribution to painting, sculpture and printmaking at a time when many undergraduate art colleges were offering a broader, more diagnostic approach. If his public statements in the early years were mainly concerned with the training of the industrial designer’, he equally emphasized (in private or internal documents at first) that studies in painting and sculpture were not merely continuing on sufferance or for the sake of tradition’, but as an essential adjunct to studies in design. It was unthinkable, he wrote in successive annual reports, to have an institution devoted to teaching and research in design, in isolation from the plastic arts. Where students were concerned, according to Derrick Greaves – who was at the RCA in the transitional years from 1948 to 1952 – the staff at the College fell into two categories: chatters’ and teachers'. The teachers believed in instruction’, in teaching by demonstration, and in sitting with students while correcting their life drawings; while the chatters preferred a more discursive approach. ## The Beaux Arts Years The early to mid-1950s at the College have been dubbed The Beaux Arts Years’, because of the strong connections between the School and Helen Lessore's Beaux Arts Gallery, with its emphasis on up-and-coming figurative and realist painters. College artists who exhibited there included former students Jack Smith, Derrick Greaves, Edward Middleditch, John Bratby, Frank Auerbach and Leon Kossoff. Works by Francis Bacon, who was an unofficial artist-in-residence at the RCA at this time after his studio burned down, were also exhibited at the gallery. In his Dodo and Phoenix’ lecture of February 1954, Robin Darwin revealed that all the pictures in Mr. Francis Bacon's recent exhibitions have been painted in our studios’. Lessore later concluded that her great contribution was having concentrated into a little knot ... the best art of its time and place’. ## Carel Weight and Two-way Traffic Carel Weight succeeded Moynihan in 1957.A lively Fine Art Department’, he said ‘sparks off ideas.’ By the early 60s, his two-way traffic' was in full swing. The influential Young Contemporaries’ exhibitions showed the work of the so-called Pop generation, heralded by the autobiographical paintings of Peter Blake, the literary Symbolist paintings of R. B. Kitaj and important works by David Hockney, Peter Phillips, Allen Jones, Derek Boshier and Patrick Caulfield (who arrived a year later than the others). It has been written of these young contemporaries: Perhaps the traditional College connections with design influenced these particular students, perhaps also they picked up on a new feeling in the air and drew it into their work, adopting a career commitment which underlay all their actions.' Actually, they had less in common than it seemed But neo-romantic painter Keith Vaughan wrote that at last he understood how the stranded dinosaur must have felt’. ## Sculpture Revitalized In the Sculpture School, Bernard Meadows – who had been Henry Moore’s assistant – was appointed as Professor at exactly this time, to shake the subject up. New materials, new technologies, new approaches seemed to be happening elsewhere, and Meadows’ brief was somehow to give the School the kind of creative energy which painting had recently enjoyed. There was a move from figurative sculpture towards abstraction, and from formal teaching to students discovering their own aptitude, their own direction, their own individuality’. The modelling stands at last disappeared. Some found the transition difficult, but sculptors such as Tony Cragg, Nigel Hall, John Panting Roland Piché, Bill Pye and Alison Wilding were among the first generations to work as professional sculptors in significant numbers after leaving College. The Meadows philosophy has been inherited and developed by Phillip King (Professor from 1980 to 1990) and Glynn Williams (the current Professor). ## Revolution in Painting By the late 60s, the College had been granted the status of a university institution, and, under Peter de Francia (Professor from 1972 to 1986), the Painting Śchool was beginning seriously to reflect on whether the painters wanted the RCA to bewith it’, when a university's job was more usually to stand outside it. Under Darwin’, de Francia told the press, we were geared up to produce stars. We’re not in a period of stardom now.’ He added, in his inaugural lecture Mandarins and Luddites’, that the mandarins’of the art world includedthe important dealers, a horde of cultural entrepreneurs and the majority of critics’, while the Luddites’ included all those who were attacking the practice of painting – including conceptual artists. For de Francia, painting was something to be thought about. The art establishment was not happy, but was reassured with its thought that the Professor was passionate about the making of paintings. Work in mixed media (performance, video, installations) was banished to the upper floors of the Darwin Building at Kensington Gore. There was talk of culturäl workers'. The result was an almighty collision, with the College authorities asking the School in 1980 to infuse aesthetic standards and values for the designers’, and both staff and students of Painting replying that Fine Art could not be applied to design in this way – studied for its aesthetic standards and then put to something called practical use. The concept was very out of date where both art and design were concerned. Peter de Francia was succeeded by Paul Huxley in 1986, who in turn was succeeded by one of de Francia’s former students Graham Crowley – the current Professor – in 1998. The painting course moved in its entirety from Exhibition Road to the Kensington Gore site at the time of the changeover from de Francia to Huxley, and the transition from custom-made Victorian premises – with huge windows and a mural room – to new, smaller and lower-ceilinged studios was difficult: closer to the work of design and communications, yes, but no modern studio could hope to replicate those great spaces which went back to the days of Henry Cole. ## The Continuing Debate in Fine Art In 1986, the Printmaking course finally moved from within the ambit of Graphic Design to the School of Fine Art. Printmaking had been considered part of design’ ever since the Arts and Crafts era, if not before: equally it was, and is, the only department in the College with an unbroken chain, from Professor to former student to Professor, which goes right back to the 1890s. Even with the arrival of Chris Orr, as successor to the late Tim Mara in 1998. So the move toFine Art' was an historic one, just as the debates of 1980 about painting and design were historic – part of a series of reconfigurations of a central dilemma: how to teach art in a design environment and design in an art environment. There are, of course, no cut-and-dried answers, but the questions have continued to be very productive. The key, always, has been to balance, or collide, the orthodoxy of the moment with the innovations of successive young contemporaries: to know when the scaffolding can be taken away; or whether the student needed scaffolding in the first place, before finding his or her own way. The celebrated collision between Gavin Turk and the College authorities in summer 1991 – when Turk simply displayed at his final show a blue plaque which stated that Gavin Turk, Sculptor, worked here – symbolized an age-old dilemma, only with a very 1990s twist.