# FIART and see what to do," I thought. There were the shows of American painting at that time. I saw the Pollock show at the Whitechapel in about 1958. Not long after he died, actually. Very lively. It seemed to be the first big new art that was un-Picassoesque. You'd become aware that American painting was more exciting than Paris, you see. Remember, in Bradford, life-drawing dominated everything, four days a week. And suddenly you were in a much more sophisticated School where they weren't going to impose this on you. So, “What will you do?" Lively people had noticed these exhibitions. And you didn't want to seem old-fashioned. Remember, too, that art school training before that was dominated by Sickert, therefore French painting from Sickert's time. So it was a question of “I'll develop something else." After the abstract phase - well, anything on a flat surface is an abstraction, of course it is – but Ron Kitaj, who was the most serious student around, and about four years older than me,talked to me about dealing with the visible world and my own interests. Homosexuality was a big subject then. Taboo? Well, remember, in art schools it was a bit of a different world, a bohemian atmosphere. You didn't think quite like the rest of them. I remember Quentin Crisp was a model there, the first openly homosexual person I ever met. He would get up and make some amusing comments on people's drawings. And I'll tell you what I did. There used to be a student arts newspaper, just typed, and I did a review for it. There was this graffiti on the lavatory walls in 21 Cromwell Road, and you were always reading them, and so I did a review as though it was a gallery. One of the drawings I always remember was called“The Vomiting Cobra”, and the moment you mentioned it,