# DAVID HOCKNEY every male person knew what you were talking about. I called the review “The Latrine Gallery, SW7”. An influence at that time was Dubuffet – French art was still quite big – and he drew in a graffiti-like way. And I used graffiti a lot, realizing these were messages on a wall, meant to be read. For my “major task", between the second and third years, the subject I did was “The Birthday”, because I'd gone to New York on my 24th birthday, 9th July 1961, and that was a very exciting thing for me. I’d only been abroad once before, to Paris. The painting had “Queens” written on it, after the suburb of New York. I don't suppose they’d call anything “a major task” today. In New York you saw another life. It was much more open than London. Big gay bars you didn't have here. I remember going into a bar, and a popular song was Hats off to Larry and all these kids lifted their hats off. Stunning stuff, I thought. One or two students who had a bit more space used to work at home, but I never did because I never had enough. I only slept in my room in Earl's Court. And I’d arrive at Exhibition Road at seven to seven-thirty in the mornings, before Lyons had opened in South Kensington, and I used to make my own tea in there. Always Typhoo, my mother's favourite. Then Mrs Buckett would come round and serve a cup of tea at eleven o'clock in the morning and three o’clock in the afternoon. You had to sign in in the morning. Everybody was on a grant, therefore you had to comply with the rules. You were taking their money. And you just signed in; lots of students weren't serious about it, some were working all the time. For instance, to get all the Painting School together – there were about 90 students – a notice would have to be put up at least a week before to make sure they’d all see it. And once they put up a notice: “All the School will meet in Studio D – very important. Signed Roger de Grey." And nobody knew what it was about, even I didn't know. And I used to work till ten o’clock at night, and I must admit occasionally I’d go into Carel Weight's office and look at the mail. I was known as “our man in the staff-room”. Because it was wide open. So I knew about certain things going on. But even I didn’t know what that notice was about. The staff would walk around the studios, but if they saw you were working away, they tended to leave you alone. There were always people painting flowers in the top corridor, in the old art school way, and usually they'd spend more time talking to them. And Carel Weight always had little girlfriends, favourites, who painted little flowerpots. Slowly, you know. I'll never forget Richard Hamilton, who was teaching in Interior Design – he did this unofficial crit one afternoon and he was very excited by what was going on: he saw straightaway, and the students recognized he saw what was evolving there. The way Carel Weight and Roger de Grey probably didn't. They didn't know quite what was going on with us. They threw out Allen Jones at the end of the first year, and a lot of students were told their situation would be reviewed. But I always got on quite well, because I would spend time drawing in the life rooms. I always assumed modern art was confusing them in a way, and that's why they introduced the new system of General Studies when I was there. They didn't have a policy or any clear idea how to deal with it, so they left it to the students. It was a very lively place, with some bright students, so I suppose it didn't matter, if it was working fine. You can have teachers who are very influential on you, who fight with you, or ones you fight against. Either can work, as long as there's something stimulating. Argument is stimulating, just as long as there's an argument, not authority saying “this must be this". Actually, they encouraged the argument, they really did, which is one reason why it was lively. When they said they were giving me a gold medal, I did laugh at that. I didn't think life was about prizes, but in the end you have to be gracious. What you do is what counts. Painting is still not an academic subject; on the other hand you do need schools for it. But I went out and bought a gold lamé jacket. People thought I’d worn it every day, but I only ever wore it twice, believe it or not – orice for that gold medal and once for some photographs Snowdon took. My mother thought it was an official jacket that you got for getting a medal. Remember all young artists – anybody who is doing anything – naturally want to attract attention. It's a perfectly natural thing. And I always say, “Well, the lively ones will do that, whether someone's complaining about it or not." I'd seen the jacket in the window of Cecil Gee's in Shaftesbury Avenue. Student clothes were dingy then, really. This was for a bandleader – but overtones of Elvis, don't you think? Those years when you're at College are very formative. I went there when I was 22 and left at 25. Those three years make a big difference: you’re going to move quite quickly really. Looking back, I thoroughly enjoyed it and realized I'd learnt a great deal, coming into contact with a wider range of people. At that time they began to be interested in the young, what they called “The Young Contemporaries”. And with the paintings I did for those exhibitions, I became aware as an artist rather than as a student. The College was a very alive place, and in a way the staff didn't hinder that – in the end they encouraged it. And they did pick the students in the first place. So you realized they were quite aware. I mean, they can't have been just blind.’