# DESIGN about was having the opportunity to make interesting modern hats – that was my goal. I was the only student at the time, so there wasn't really a designated course for me – we did have outside tuition from various designers in the industry, but it was pretty loose - there was tuition one day a week and the rest of the time we were there to work. I had my own space. A tiny little room. And at the end of my first year, Isabella Blow introduced me to John Galliano, and he asked me if I'd be interested in making some hats with the lady who made his hats. So I persuaded Alan Couldridge to have Shirley come and teach for one day a week. Motivation has never been a problem in my approach. I never really agreed with the students feeling “the world owed them a living". I think the most important thing for a student to realize in any educational establishment is that it's up to you – here's your chance – now you have an opportunity to do what you do, in the case of the RCA, in a fantastic environment. It just changed everything for me. At the end of my first year I made the hats for about eight different second-year students for their final show. The most disconcerting thing about initially going to the RCA was the wealth and levelof talent that surrounded you, whereas on other diploma or degree courses there's a number of students doing a course for the sake of doing a course. At the RCA, you are with a lot of extremely talented students, and the standard of what I considered to be good just rose and rose. It's a competitive world out there, – I'm not sure about other courses, but fashion courses tend to be competitive. It's the nature of the business, and when you graduate it gets worse! A lot of the students worked with other departments - I didn't, really, I had complete tunnel vision about