# PHILIP TREACY where I was going. I did love the history of art course with Madeleine Ginsberg, who was incredible, and some of my most memorable moments happened on her course. Some students would just say, “Oh, it's a distraction”, but they were wrong. One very interesting thing at the RCA was the good relationship we had with commercial outlets such as Harrods. So in my first year I was running a business through the College – through Harrods hat department – which was how my whole thing started, in addition to the Galliano arrangement. They asked me to create my own hats, which makes it exciting. It was a fantastic link for students to have, really reassuring. Until you start doing the business side of fashion yourself, you don't really learn how to do it properly. I had set out to make hats, not be a businessman. But I’ve had to develop business skills as a result. The fashion show was held at the College in those days. While I was still at the RCA, the person who'd sponsored the hat course became my backer – I was incredibly naive about backing or anything like that – and he said to me, “When you finish, maybe we'll do something together." I didn't even think about it; I didn't think, “right". I just thought that what he was offering was what all this was about. He was a friend of Alan's. Straight from one to the other. It was easy – no, not easy, but it did just happen. I think it's important to use every opportunity one is given, and at the RCA the opportunities I was given were incredible – the people I met, the lectures we had. I came from a very good course in Dublin, but a provincial fashion course – when I came to the RCA we would have Valentino and Armani come and lecture us – it made you have a totally different outlook. All the projects we did were very commercial, which I personally found quite difficult, but I didn't suffer from it When final exams came along, I remember the external examiner was Nicole Farhi, and she looked at me very blankly and said, “Why are you here?" “What do you mean, why am I here – I'm here because ." So then the tutor called her aside and whispered in her ear.“Why are you here?" she said. Imagine. What she meant was, “This is a Fashion course – why's this person showing these hats?" It was a bit frightening I must say, but I’ve never been too deterred by that sort of thing. When Sheilagh Brown said “make hats”, in a way it was a risky piece of advice in the late 80s, but that's what I found so exciting. It was much more of a challenge to have an opportunity to change people's perception of hats and hat design and hat-making than it was to do something that everyone was used to. Did the hat thing come from Ireland, and looking at rows of hats in church? Well, they do cover their heads more there. But I think there's more of a hat consciousness here: hats are about Englishness – they're a part of the culture. I did grow up with a very religious, Catholic background, so hats and head covering was definitely a part of it, but it wasn't réally something that made me want to make hats. I like hats because I like to make things, I like to work with my hands, and hats is one of the few areas where you get to make the actual piece yourself: with clothing, you design it, but you don't usually make it. The satisfaction of having produced something with your own hands – that's the prize, not the glory afterwards. I’m always meeting RCA people – it's like a private club. There are people working all over the world who have been to the College: there's a huge professional network. And we were treated as young professionals, normal people, when we were there, not like students. It wasn't a tutor-student situation where everyone did their work because they were told to. Just by being there we were learning, everyone was intelligent enough to understand that.'