# INTRODUCTION Walter Crane was sufficiently impressed by the work of some of the students of the new RCA to use it as illustrative material in his collection of essays Ideals In Art (1905), and other polemics about the Arts and Crafts philosophy. But these were students of Design’ and Modelling'. At this time, there were still no specific courses in illustration, poster art or graphic design: the phrase graphic design’ was to be coined in America in the mid-20s, and did not achieve common currency in Britain until some 20 years later. A few students from the Crane era happened to specialize in these subjects after leaving the College: Harry Oakley designed posters for LNER, HMV and Bird's Custard; Sylvia Pankhurst, who hoped the RCA would teach her how to decorate halls where people would foregather in the movement to run the new world, and make banners for meetings and processions’, decided at the end of her decorative painting course in 1906 to become the official artist of the Women's Social and Political Union, run by her mother. ## The Birth of the Commercial Artist As with Fine Art, the beginning of the William Rothenstein era coincided with a chemistry between students and staff – and a receptive market – which led to important new developments. The students were from the Painting and Design schools, and tutor Paul Nash called them an outbreak of talent’: they included Eric Ravilious, Edward Bawden, Helen Binyon, Enid Marx and the painters Douglas Percy Bliss and Charles Tunnicliffe. Rothenstein's policy was to encourage fine artists and designers to mix in architecture and drawing classes as part of a general education through the arts’. Bliss recalled, however, that We used to say “designers do bad drawings and mount them beautifully. We do good drawings and don't bother about mounts”. [Us painters] felt ourselves to be the Elect.’ Despite the traditional attitudes, these were the first students to make their names in the worlds of illustration and commercial art. They were preceded by John Gilroy who joined the Decorative Painting’ course (as it was still called) in 1919 and missed a Prix de Rome by one vote in 1922. Gilroy produced illustrations for the RCA student magazine and, while still a student, designed a promotional leaflet commissioned by the Hydraulic Engineering Company. Shortly after leaving the College, he joined the agency S. H. Benson and, as one of their inhouse designers, worked on the Guinness account for over 30 years. Pevsner was to observe in 1936 that much British design was less serious than its continental – and especially German – counterpart: Gilroy's menagerie of ostriches, toucans and seals for Guiness advertizing posters remain excellent proof. By the mid-20s, the high spot of the design students’ week was, however, Paul Nash day', when, as Helen Binyon was to recall, Nash would ‘wear a bow tie and dark suit and look almost too smart for an artist. He would wander down the long room, looking carefully at what the students had to show him; he was witty and jokey.’ He was particularly encouraging about watercolour painting, book illustration, woodengraving and lino-cutting. And, together with his students, he rediscovered the work of Samuel Palmer and William Blake. It was certainly imaginative of the Principal to appoint a well-known painter as a consultant to designers’: Paul Nash was never, in fact, to teach the Fine Art students at the College. But then again, this was the era when Paul Nash produced his semi-abstract treatment, The Rye Marshes, which was attáched to the sides of petrol lorries as they hurtled around the Home Counties, bearing the lithographed message, Everywhere You Go You Can Be Sure of Shell’. This was an era when art invaded commerce’, and especially corporate advertizing, in no hole-and-corner way', (as Richard Guyatt was to observe) but with all the prestige of the avant garde.’ Jack Beddington at Shell and Frank Pick at London Transport commissioned staff and ex-students of the College to create some of the most memorable interwar public images. For a brief period in the late 20s, there was even a poster design’ option within the design course. Bawden designed a poster for the London Underground while still a student; Barnett Freedman did so after leaving, and later became an instructor himself in 1930. The student generation which immediately succeeded these pioneering students, had a more demanding attitude towards the design programme, and a much stronger sense of political commitment. James Boswell contributed Grosz-inspired caricatures to The Left Review (of which he was art editor); Peggy Angus drew political cartoons for the women's page of The Daily Worker; and Percy Horton sold his portrait drawings in aid of the anti-Fascist course, while helping to found the Marxist group, Artists International, which later became the Artists International Association (AIA). In spring 1935, for the Silver Jubilee of King George V, while Eric Ravilious was supervising design students as they turned Ludgate Hill Bridge into a baroque arch, the late 20s graduates put up an AIA banner declaring 25 years of Hunger and War’ across the Strand. Barnett Freedman, meanwhile, designed a special postage stamp for the occasion – the subject of a GPO documentary, The King's Stamp, the first film to be devoted to the děsign work of the College. ## Post-war Transformations When Robin Darwin introduced a major post-war exhibition of student work in 1950, he referred to the School of Graphic Design under Professor Richard Guyatt (with tutors Edward Bawden, Abram Games and John Nash) as one of the largest and most important in the College: It is a multi-purpose School’, he went on, which aims to produce professional designers in commercial art, typography, lettering, bookbinding and – not least – illustration.’ It had already come a long way since the reforms of two years before. Guyatt, who masterminded the transformation, rather touchingly was to recall: It was only after an article appeared in The Times rapping the College over the knuckles for the vulgarity of such a concept as “Publicity Design”, that a serious quest for a name was made. With a sense of relief, but not much conviction, the name “Graphic Design” was chosen. No one was quite sure what it meant, but it had a purposeful ring to it ...’. He wrote this in a catalogue called Graphics RCA, published in 1963 to accompany a major touring exhibition celebrating 15 years' work in the School. Both were intended to show the results of the post-1948 emphasis on ‘specialized, professionalized courses’, and to promote them in France and Germany. Specialization was proving to be a spectacular success with several generations of ambitious, more mature students, who enjoyed the two-way traffic with the Painting School in the Exhibition Road studios. The show also demonstrated how the College itself was getting better and better at selfpromotion. Critic Bryan Robertson has referred to the faintly old-fashioned smartness within the College Corporate Style which hovered halfway between Heal's and the old Faber and Faber house style when Barnett Freedman designed charming dust jackets for Walter de la Mare anthologies.’ But there was nothing old-fashioned about the student work itself, which by now included Printmaking (It is through the fine arts that the “useful” arts of design are invigorated’ wrote Guyatt), Film and Television Design, the Lion and Unicorn Press, the student magazine Ark and photographic services. Graphics RCA now looks like a comprehensive history of British communications design from 1948 to 1963: posters and illustrations by David Gentleman, Michael Foreman and Brian Tattersfield; book covers, advertisements and bus streamers by Alan Fletcher; a cookery strip by Len Deighton; the set for BBC television's Quatermass and the Pit by Cliff Hatts; Bernard Lodge's titles for Z Cars; a still from Ridley Scott's student film Boy on a Bicycle; or the covers of Ark magazine 1–33. Mark Boxer (by then editor of The Sunday Times colour section) contrasted the pallid early days of Ark, when page after page was devoted to wet English romanticism and Betjemanesque collections of old trains’, with Ark issues from the late 50s onwards when the concern has been for images and patterns of life today’: photographic covers featuring Brigitte Bardot and bottles of Coca Cola, celebrations of New York streetlife, a linkup with the concerns of the Independent Group at the ICA and an end to latter-day Victorianism’. This contrast has recently been called the early development of a postmodern sensibility’: Pop Art/Pop Graphics; Uptown Pop/Downtown Pop; grainy blow-ups/the origins of the colour supplements. Boxer continued: Often wilful, sometimes seriously naive, this is at its best one of the most hopeful performances on the English visual scene.’ Some pages of Ark 22 had been printed in invisible lettering on brown wrapping paper and dayglo ink on cellophane – about which Robin Darwin commented, ‘The more generally unintelligible Ark becomes both in matter and presentation, the better it sells.’ Eventually, Ark would go down in the 70s with a review of the RCA drag-queen contest which began with the words: Life is decomposing in front of our eyes ... the first to be corrupted are bound to be the artists, because they are the ones who are aware and will accept first.' As Darwin wrote in his Foreword to Graphics RCA, the School had become a focus for – and a way of getting into focus – the entire College. This early ... postmodern sensibility' coexisted comfortably with the old school approach of most of the staff: Edward Bawden was still a tutor, Printmaking was settled within the Graphics area, and the conviction was in the air that easel-painting-was-good-for-you’ and thatthe-restwould-follow-of-course'. Tutors, such as Bobby Gill, who had experience of Madison Avenue’ were especially influential. However, it is as well to remember that many of these images emerged from a social world where Gordon Russell, of the Design Council, could – in his occasional moments of doubt – be reassured that all was well with the world when he received through the post the pink wine list, illustrated by tutor in Printmaking Edward Ardizzone, of the RCA's Senior Common Room. ## Graphic Arts in the 90s Later in the 60s, the umbrella School of Graphic Arts evolved into a series of free-standing departments: Illustration, Film and Television, Graphic Design, Photography and Printmaking. Under the gentle guidance of Quentin Blake, who became head of Illustration in 1978 after many years’ involvement, this small face-toface department produced a succession of influential illustrators including Dan Fern (who succeeded Blake in 1986), Nicola Bayley, Su Huntley, lan Pollock and Russell Mills. A branch called Natural History Illustration, under John Norris Wood (a graduate from the Len Deighton era), began to specialize in drawing and studying the natural world – increasingly with an ecological emphasis. Film and Television, which started life as a design unit and continued to offer a lively specialism in film design’, added animation to its portfolio and came to focus on production, direction and cinematography. Graphic Design developed an important research unit in the 70s under Herbert Spencer, examiningthe readability of print'. Photography under Professor John Hedgecoe combined commercial work (photojournalism and advertizing) with a documentary tradition, before playing a key role in the rise of the artist-photographer of the 80s: eventually and inevitably, the course moved into the School of Fine Art, as did Printmaking. The Guyatt philosophy of Fine Arts inspiring the applied arts’now happened in less literal, more complex and convergent ways than it had in the 60s. All have come to terms over the last 15 years with the implications of digital design, and with what used to be known asthe new technologies’. Walter Benjamin's famous essay on the work of art in the age of mechanical reproducibility’ has been revisited and reworked from a variety of new visual perspectives. The Graphics RCA generations may have established the basic structure, but the teaching – and the relationship with the ecstasy of communication, with which young designers have grown up, and which they take for granted – have changed beyond all recognition. Graphic Design now touches, at its outer edges, industrial design in the post-black-box era, the presentation of performance, three-dimensional imagemaking and installation work, as well as digital versions of the more traditional skills. The borderlines between illustration, photographic image and text are constantly shifting. As photography pushes the frontiers of digital manipulation, the old chemical processes begin to occupy similar artistic ground to the old printmaking processes. Graphics and Illustration are converging again, under Dan Fern, while a freestanding Animation course combines traditional modelmaking with multimedia. Meanwhile graduates have successfully created spaces for themselves (often as teams) in and around the cultural industries’. Walter Benjamin was one of the first to coin this phrase, in the 30s, only he intended it as a pejorative: now the phrase describes one of the fastest growing sectors of the economy today.