# COMMUNI-CATIONS All of them were covered, so I didn't know who did what. Eventually the master would come in – whoever it happened to be – and say, “this row" and all the covers came off, and I gawped at the level of professionalism. And it was a wake-up call. I really think the most value was how much of a wake-up call it was: the level of professionalism around me, and above all things the level of competition. In some ways, it was a good thing to be left to your own devices. I remember one of the tasks was about the Festival of Britain, another was to think of a scheme for IBM. With the race to get in, you are so experienced and practised after four years in a provincial art school, that by the time you arrive, what can a member of staff really say? It has to be all abóut encouragement and evolution, if the person is clearly skilled already. By the second year I was beginning to leak into the Photography Department whenever I could, and it was quite difficult getting into it, so you had to spend a bit of time chatting everybody up, to allow you to go into that darkroom. The most valuable thing I did was to buy a camera and start on a real photographic vigil, so I was out every weekend, all weekend, taking pictures. Then the big trick was getting into the dark-room to do serious blocks of time. I loved photography. I was already thinking, “I’ve no idea how to get into film, but I think I can." I've still got the shots I took, which I put into my final year exhibition, funnily enough, and actually they were, and are, pretty bloody good. I was influenced at College by George Haslam, who ran Television and Film Design. There was no film instruction in those days, but I liked George as a teacher and I loved his passion for his job. He was a practising designer in a very successful