# RIDLEY SCOTT television show, made at Teddington Lock studio. And George would give us scripts, and then we would flick through them and come back with a solution for a piece of set design and models if we wanted to. I was doing graphic design, but by then I was already into the Television Department as well, which was a one-year course. In that there was a steel wardrobe, inside of which was a wind-up clockwork camera and an instruction book and a light meter and, if we had to use it, we had to sign out for the camera – but we had to show George a script first. And that's finally how I got to have a shot at making a little movie. With Boy on a Bicycle, I may have been the first-ever student to submit a film for the Diploma examination. I managed to have, for £65, a 16mm film which ran half an hour, had a mix and had title on. It's about a kid who takes a day off school, and I introduced my brother Tony to film-making with it, by ruining his summer when he was a kid. He's six years younger than I am. I had no idea that the process of making a film was so painstakingly slow, particularly when there's just you and the actor who is also the chief bottle-washer and equipment carrier. But you never forget that process. My dad was in the film as well, in the sequence on the beach What I liked in the mix at the College, which I think left its stamp, was in that corridor where there was the tea wagon at 11 o'clock and again in the afternoon. There would be the engravers coming out smelling of paint and turpentine, there would be the painters wandering around and smoking in the corner, so there was always a bohemian, Fine Art atmosphere – that was the real meat and potatoes of the Exhibition Road environment. The odd men out were the graphic designers – and I think the mix was very interesting. With the earlier generation of people teaching graphic design, there could have been big collisions, but there weren't. Richard Guyatt was a very genial man and a lot of the staff had been war artists. Herbert Spencer was very approachable, though he, too, was of another generation. So an American character like Bob Gill coming in with button-down shirts, thick crêpe soles, tight black suits, and talking in this incredibly sleek, New York, advertizing, Madison Avenue way, was incredibly attractive. I got a travelling scholarship, so after leaving I went to the United States for nearly a year and then ended up working with a film-maker. Cliff Hatts of the BBC had come to my final exhibition - there were a lot of connections between the RCA and the BBC at the time. I went to see Dick Leven with Cliff Hatts who basically said, “There's a job here for you." I said, “Well, I'm going to New York." I'd never been, of course. Mecca. And they said, “We’ll keep the job open for you," and they did. But it was at College that I learned to write visual music. Definitely. I use it every day now. I do my own storyboards every day. It's like writing music. Because I find I can pre-visualize better. You stick a piece of paper in a typewriter and start and it just comes out. I think the creative process of art school is so organic, in every direction, because suddenly you discover music, you read different things. The healthy thing is meeting all these different kinds of people. When I went to the RCA, my world really opened up, whereas I think in the provinces the art school – whilst it was passion, it was wonderful – was more insular. The RCA suddenly was the big arena, there was a lot of competition, a lot of motherfuckers kicking around, who all knew exactly what they were doing, so it was like major league. And I'd go back home sweating. Oh, my God! It forced the pace. And that's where I discovered there's always a solution. It depends on how long you’re prepared to fiddle with the canvas, and scrape it out, or start again. I was hopeless academically at school and I woke up when I went to art school.'