# DESIGN produced this joint which just clicked together beautifully. Interior Design I found much more fascinating, though, dealing in these very large three-dimensional spaces. Two years into the Interiors course, I discovered Buckminster Fuller. Everyone else used to fall asleep in Tony Hunt's lectures on structures, but I found them riveting. And I had no inclination at all before this to be an engineer. I mean, I hated maths at school and hadn't got physics. Suddenly I became enthralled by structures, why they fall down and how you calculate stresses and so on - a very odd move for me. At first I saw it in the context of architecture, and Buckminster Fuller was a hero; so was everyone else who did space frame structures. This was before the time that Norman Foster and others started using them; in fact, the only example in England was an aluminium structure at the Rotork factory in Bath, which was a very designconscious company. I was doing a project for Joan Littlewood at Stratford East, in my second year in Interior Design. I'd already done some rather silly things with her at the City of London Festival, Tower Precinct, and she started talking about a new type of open-air children's theatre she planned to build next to the Theatre Royal. So I designed this mushroom-shaped homage to Buckminster Fuller, which Tony Hunt engineered for me, and then I went down to Bath to see the founder-chairman of Rotork, Jeremy Fry, to ask him for some money. He didn't give me any money, but was quite interested in the project; then he asked me to do one or two small design jobs, which I did, and then the Seatruck, the landing-craft which I spent the rest of my second year doing, though it was really an engineering product design job. The Cassons did get a bit worried at one point – they had Jeremy Fry to lunch, and he had to reassure them. And then, at the end of my second year, they built a prototype of the boat, started testing it and, since it was evidently working, I then more or less decided that at the end of my College time I’d go and manage that business – the sales, the design and the manufacture. Jeremy Fry was quite happy to wait to the end of my final year. During that year I developed a water-wheel that skidded at high speed across the water and drove a vehicle, theoretically a jeep. So my final project in the Interior Design Department was this strange engineering development. Plus my boat. And they gave me a degree. That was the good thing about the 60s, there weren't really any rules. I was offered various jobs but I really wanted to get into commerce myself for some reason. God knows why, it's a mad thing to do. I think I had this idea then that I still have, that I wanted to be a manufacturer completely controlling my product. I really couldn't bear the idea of someone else making it and making a hash of it. Or someone else selling it and misrepresenting it. Or someone else changing my design. Or being a consultant in an office where someone comes along and asks you to do something. So I was already a bit of a control freak, even when I was at the College. At heart, I really wanted to be a Brunel or a Buckminster Fuller. And I had sort of made my own course at the College to start achieving that. I was a pretty studious student, and I used the Royal College to the hilt. There were some seminal moments for me. We were doing a project in the first term of the first year, designing a four-room exhibition on the theme of “The Four Seasons”. And we all got into free-form full flow. And I’ll always remember Bernard Myers, a rather dapper tutor with a bow-tie, coming up to me and saying, “One thing about design is that it has always got to have a purpose: there has to be a reason." So I felt suitably chastened by this extraordinary piece of advice. He said it quite angrily to me, obviously annoyed by what I'd done. And I was tremendously impressed. At the same time, they were doing the QE2 in the Department, which looked frightfully glamorous, and we could see what was going on there. The staff were John Miller, Margaret Dent and Tony Hunt, who was key for me. In a curious way I wasn't attracted by Industrial Design. I went into the studio and in fact worked there for part of my very first year. But I didn't really connect with the concept of styling and still don't, to be truthful. I didn't see the meat in it. And the College's engineering course with Imperial College was very much a thing of the future. No, what riveted me was the concept of these huge buildings with engineering structures. No one was lecturing me about Bucky Fuller, though. The person who introduced me to this idea was another Interior Design student, Anton Furst, who used to sit in a room on his own designing a holographic theatre with a Fuller Dome on it. We were busy working through the holidays, too, and also we were all living on grants and running clapped-out old cars and things like that. So I supplied wine to the College Union – I was a sort of wine dealer. It was the start of the wine era, and a friend of mine was importing wine, bottling it and selling it to restaurants unlabelled. I would fill a van with cases of this unmarked stuff and supply it to quite a lot of the tutors as well as the Union. It took no time at all. A couple of cases to Bernard Myers, a couple to Hugh Casson, that sort of thing. The most important things I got out of the College, apart from Bernard ticking me off, were things you take for granted throughout the rest of your life. Meeting professional designers or architects, even though not from professions I'd necessarily chosen to follow; seeing that they are surviving and watching how they operate; the fact that the thing they care most about is the design and function of what they're doing. Getting that from live practitioners is terribly important. Another thing you take for granted during your time at the College is the excitement you feel every time you walk into the building. When you've done that dreadful tube journey, and then you walk into the building, it is always uplifting. There's a huge vibrancy at the College now, as there was in the 60s. The RCA had just become very famous immediately after the Hockney era, and the Darwin Building was quite new. There was always this great moment at about five to one when the fashion students arrived in their little green bus, wearing wonderful clothes. There was the excitement of going round the Dip. show and watching the films in the theatre. All these elements you tend to forget. Just taking it all in, absorbing it, every day. I spent four years at the RCA, so it provided my entire design training. It taught me the importance of making things well, of making prototypes to prove ideas in action, and above all it gave me the confidence to dream.