# DESIGN passion, by the way: it sounds “let's be a little more poetic about this” to me, which annoys me. I much prefer “container” or “pot”. So I had a pretty terrible first year, feeling guilty that I had this opportunity and wasn't taking it up. To be honest, the “pastoral” side wasn't strong with that gang of blokes. We certainly weren't spoon-fed! But if you badly weren't getting on with it, they'd start to look worried and stand round your desk in droves. Carol McNicoll was in my year, and I became very friendly with her; and Jacqui Poncelet who was in the year above. Liz Fritsch had finished, but she was still around. It was friendly, and we supported each other; the staff were terrific, too, but you had to learn howto get something from them. I found an awful lot in Hans Coper. He came in once a week but was beginning to get ill; the journey was getting more difficult for him. I’d look forward so much to that day – he was a wonderful tutor – but it was a year before I discovered that. The course was very, very good for me – anguishing but good: growing up, getting away from the girlish and “nice” work I'd done before, and starting again – by trying to be funny in a way: the tiles I did were quite cartoony. I already knew Quentin Blake, so I developed strong links with the Illustration Department, and that may have been another reason why the drawing bit of my work developed – drawing on tiles with pen and manganese. Memorable advice? Well, I can remember David Queensberry saying to me, “the trouble with art, Alison, is that you have to be so awfully good at it" – implying, I supposed, that I would never be good enough. But he gave me a lot, not in an overt teaching way, but in an encouragement and interest sort of way. With Hans Coper, there were no nuggety