# ALISON BRITTON sentences, but it was like a gentle drift towards helping you to find out what you wanted and who you were: a subtle dialogue and long, sensitive conversations which would always lead you somewhere useful. I wrote my Humanities essay on the overlap between art and decoration, and I asked for external supervision which led me on to one stunning tutorial with Ernst Gombrich. He was writing A Sense of Order and he lent me the notes of an initial lecture series. A lot of what I was reading was nineteenth-century stuff – Dresser, Lewis Day and others – and I got a prize for the essay. What I was really worrying about was exactly where I fitted in. I didn’t really want to be a dyed-in-the-wool craftsperson or a designer. It was suggested at one stage that I team up with someone in interior design, but I couldn't develop it because it was all hypothetical, because the work wasn't in front of me. I tried to design peppermint green tiles, or was it lime green? But it's all got to be on the table for me. Some Ceramics students got quite involved in the Union while I was there, and we had a bit of sitting-in and stuff. I remember anxious debates about feminism, because we were reading The Female Eunuch, which was putting words around things we had felt but never articulated. But the Student Union view was, “we can't deal with that now, it will have to come afterwards." Class first, then gender. And that was annoying. I realized afterwards, about my education, that something subconsciously was preventing me from going into Fine Art, and that something was gender. I might have gone into sculpture if it had looked more welcoming. If the student bar was going to be smashed to pieces – which it was quite often in those days – it would always either be sculptors or printmakers. Some of those lads got really plastered, and violent. Which may have made it a less easy area to go into at that time. The girls that did, like Alison Wilding, looked heroic. When we left, it didn't feel nearly so difficult as it does to students leaving now. Carol and I thought we'd share somewhere, and we gaily said, “Well, if it doesn't work we'll get a job." It seemed so straightforward. We had a studio in the 401 group workshop in Wandsworth, where some College people were already working. Because it was like a little commune in a way – 20 people – we got to see how each other worked and also to see that there was something new in the air and interconnections. I'd sold quite well at my show, which was mostly tiles and a green baize table with about ten objects on it, all handbuilt and drawn on. But I realized that tile commissions and trying to make people happy wasn't quite satisfying or three-dimensional enough. The Crafts Council was just coming into being, and we were the people they looked at first. We were lucky. The students as they leave now are much more clued up than we were. And they work a lot harder, too. It's a completely different place – more teaching, more engagement, more projects, less time and space. What the College did for me, was to give me a chance to start again. And it changed me in a way that I was really pleased with. A lot of the people I met and got to like then are still my friends now. That's over 25 years, isn't it?’