The present contradictions of political institutions straddling economic and ecological notions of 'sustainability' (most overtly expressed via 'sustainablc development') are incscapably refractcd through this history.

There are two further issucs to acknowledge. The first is that design and the ecological havc to break free of a biocentric configuration - sustain-ability depends on ecologics of the artificial, mind and image as well as the natural. And second, democratic design as it is currently understood, depends to a largc degree, on socio-political orders in which democracy has currency. This means its ability to become adopted outside such rcgimes is, if not impossible, certainly questionable.

In contrast to trying t work in the domains of democratic design and sustainability' while ignoring or just glossing over thc problems of a dysfunctional binary, there are other options. For instance, Isabella Stengers elegantly elaborates the notion of political ecology 'as a politicization of “positive" knowledge-related issues or practicc concerning things'.9

This is an abstracted ccho of the kind of arguments that this book turns on – which is the remaking of design as a key force of redircction toward sustainability in order to move from 'sustainable development' (and all it stands on) to the development of the Sustainmcnt'.

## On Redirection

The duo that powers this move is design redirected to become a redirective practice. Wħat this actually adds up to is taking back the power of design and reorienting it. It is not consensual, it is participatory, but not in a popularist sense, and it is political, although on the basis of a common cause rather than a political idcology, and it is an alternative to those forms of action that travel under the banncr of democratic design. By its very character, redirective practice can never be universal or theorctically generalized -it can only ever be situated and circumstantially reactive.

Almost in a martial arts sense, some forms of redirection need to be viewed as deflective rather than confrontational. In this respect, and at the most general, it can takc the energy from the existing momentum of a particular forcc and bring it to a means of change. But equally redircction is a process of establishing new signposting systems that first indicate the error of following those existing pathways of thought and action as they serve to defuture all that is vital for viable futures (at both the level of mind or mattcr). And second, such systems point to new forms of knowlcdge and action that have sustainability.

Redirection, of course, always has to go to the actor and the acted upon. It certainly cannot simply rest upon those overplayed and vague notions of 'attitudinal change' posited with individuals that are so often evoked by idealist reformers. Such a notion of change implies an inflated faith in the ability of the will of these individuals to altcr the nature of cultural, economic and institutional structures. Rather, redirection requires an ontological shift in the mode of being of the actor. The value of what one knows and does may have to he fundamentally altered. So, for instance, a grcat deal of knowlcdge that historically has been acquired as the corpus of thc discipline underpinning a profession, and the manner of its deployment, could well need to be discarded and replaced in order for any real ability of the remade professional' to drive affirmative change. By implication this means that the being of professional identity and conduct is radically and structurally changed.

The issucs flowing from these remarks will of course be elaborated as the content of the book unfolds.

## On Design Intelligence10

lesign intelligence (not to be confuscd with intelligent dcsign') is one of thosc terms bandicd about at certain kinds of dcsign events, with thc assumption of a common understanding. Not only does this assumption invite contestation, but, importantly, the very notion actually begs elaboration and exposition.

To understand design in its full complexity actually requires recognizing an intelligence, which is neither constituted within the modes of cognition of the sciences nor thc liberal arts, this notwithstanding the efforts of design science or cultural theory. Currently, this intelligence can only be claimed to exist, and be capable of being communicated, in very underdeveloped forms that centre on starting to recognizc the act of prefguration and the independcnt agency of 'things' in the world that have been prefigured. In this respect, it is an exploration of how things come into being and act beyond their mere function as material or immaterial objccts.

Rather than illuminating fundamental questions about design, human beings and the making and unmaking worlds, most design theory has a very narrow, reductive focus. It is dominated by focus upon the act of designing by designers and what they design, thereby folding into how design is currently economically and culturally positioned. But another kind of design theory is needed, one able to deal with human bcings making ever greater demands on the environments of their depcndence. As damage to the planet's ecological systems – triggered by human actions – continually increases, therc is a prcssing need for the way we human beings live, act and engage the world around us, to change. Such change is characterized by thc notion of the development of an age and process of the Sustainment as the basis of our redirected, but plural, future. Essential for the creation of this possibility is design remadc with sustain-ability, but in order for this to happen design intelligence needs to be developed.

The realization of design intelligence would mean that having the ability to read the qualities of the form and content of the designed environment in which one exists, would be a mođe of literacy acquired by every educated person. In incrcasingly more unsustainable worlds, design intelligence would deliver the means to make crucial judgements about actions that could incrcase or decrease futuring potential. Just as alpha-numeric literacy became an essential requirement for individuals wishing to function in the modern world, so now in the present cpoch design intelligence will need to become a lifc skill. Its potential is the provision of an ecology of mind able to provide a way of reading, knowing and informing actions in the world of unsettiement that unsustainability is sending us. Adapting to coming conditions will be as a much a mental as a physical imperative. Design intelligence could and should inform all education and practice, leading it away from content that inducts learners into unsustainable ways of thinking and acting. To grasp its importance is to recognize that design intelligence needs to be elemental to education in general. Rather than it being, as with environmental education, a slot in the curriculum, it would need to be structurally integral to almost everything in it. bviously, this approach would clearly cut across the current way design is thought, not least in relation to practice, production, consumption and environment.

Although directive of cvery kind of design activity, from informing a sense of what nceds t• be designcd, to the act of designing, the nature of the design object, and thcn on to consequences of its actions in the world (immediately and over a considerable expanse of time), design intelligence has to occupy a larger frame. It has, in fact, to fold into intelligence per se. What it names is thinking about design-in-action in both the worlds that exist and the worlds that have to be brought into being if we humans are to have more than just a very limited future. Design inteiligence would not be created out of a void – besides drawing on the prefigurative disposition that all human beings share by degree, it can build on sediments of knowledgc which already exist, as we shall see in a moment. At the same time, its creation is a huge project demanding the efforts of many minds over an expanse of time. Design Futuring aspires to be both a contribution and spur to this project.

## Registering the Archaeology of the Idea

Proto forms of design intelligence have been implicit in craft practices well before design was constituted as a discourse. This iscvident across all cultures. Certainly, in the West, design intelligence was evident from the rise of the first machine age in the eighteenth century. By the early nineteenth century the ability to identify and resolve design problems within a practice had become a highly refined tacit knowledge - the performance and appearance of Henry Maudsley'smachine tools are primcexamples ofthis attainnment. The emergence of a design literature was all about 'capturing' this intelligcn ce.1Yet nonc of the contributors to this body of knowledge developed a comprehensive theory of