active being-in-the-world, which dissolves the binary relation between being structured and structuring. In so doing, the totality of practice strives to regulate, replicate and modify our domain of habitation ('our' world). Yet collectively, we have arrived at a moment whcrcin all that humanity attempts to regulate is at odds with the world that actually regulates us.² It is not just that many contemporary practices harm the world of our dependence but also that so few of them deliver the means to actually know the consequences of their activities beyond a horizon of immediate concern.

## On Design and Action

'The designed' has become more discernibly visible and integral to the character of structuring of habicus in and of the modern worłd. In so doiig, it has infused every aspect of human conduct at the most basic level. It is not just that we are born into a designcd world but that our intcraction with this world is also designed – our built environment, forms of work, modes of transport, manufactured products, media, infrastructure systems and myriad other things are all designed in relation to use. In actuality, design is one of the main operative agents of the social, cultural and economic functioning and dysfunctioning of humanity's made world.

Ironically, in an age of hegemonic technology and capitalism, the practice of design has itsclf become subject to functional direction (pragmatically and symbolically). Increasingly design, as a service, acts on instnuctions rather than taking action in the original sense (the Greck verh archein originally defined acting as commencement, leading and completing). So whenever design action is evoked or implied in this and subsequent chapters, this is done recalling its Greek origin.

Mostly, design action, exercised through a desigıer responding to the direction of a commercial brief, brings objectified things into being without the designer recognizing that what has been realized is world making or negating. This is to say, that consequences go welł beyond the environmental impacts that better informed designers now take into account. The general lack of a sense of how design makes or breaks worlds is a major aspect of the political amnesia of the design professions. Such a limited horizon of responsibility conforms to a problem that Hannah Arendt characterized as a substitution of making for acting'.³ The slide in agency she identifies occurs in a culture where politics has degenerated into means that have lost sight of ethical ends and the vision which should prefgure a political agenda. Dominantly, the ontologically designing character of contemporary design(ing) and designed things' works to obscure those agendas that, beyond the most immediate concerns, would make designers fully accountable for what design brings into being.4 Optimistically, Arendt asserts that instrumentalization and the degcneration of politics never fully eliminate the possibility of action.⁵ Unless one fatalistically abandons oneself and evcrything to which one is attached, therc is no choice but to subscribe to this view. Design action has become diminished. Driven by a deterministic economic imperative, design serves an instrumental mode of maling that brings things into being without hnowing what the consequences will be.

There are, for example, now well over 700 products on the global market that contain unregulated and unlabelled nanoscale particles – this notwithstanding considerable international concern, including the United Kingdom's Royal Society recommenling that the manufacture and release of nanoparticles be prohibited until more is known about their impact.6 Likewise, Swiss Re, one of the world's largest reinsurance companies, asserted that no expense should be spared in assessing the risk' of this technology.7 What is being let loose are materials that may act in the material world as viruses do in the immaterial world. Synthetic nanobiological technology is, moreover, an cven bigger risk.

At thc behest of the call for profit, so many industrics, with the support of design practices, negate the future as they fabricate the form and economy of the present. This process of negation feeds the ruling global regime of unsustainability as it exists now and as a condition of imminence. To understand this situation is to grasp that design practice cannot simply add sustainable practices' ontoits flawed foundations. Rather, the nature of design practice has to fundamentally change – it has to bc redesigned. These remarks return us to considering the relations between making and action, but in proximity to an engagement with prαxis.

The Greeks bonded the idea of praxis to action (remcnıbcring that action meant rchein) - thus the concern was with what action created beyond what it instrumentally directed. As such, action can be understood as that which forms humanity as collective, as community, as society, as polis, as particular identities and as difference. Action, as prαxis, is futural in so far as it secures being. ln contrast, making, fabrication (poiesis), can never make what is absolutcly vital for humanity's continuity (which is why, in the end, 'sustainability' can never be created as a product of technology). However, poiesis should not be thought of as completely partitioncd from prxis in that once 'made things' enter the world of human affairs, a relation is established in which they may be completed as praxis (Aristotle actually confrms the ability of poiesis to become praxis in his Nicorαchean Ethics).8

ln our epoch, clear distinctions between making, artcfactual things, artificiality, technology and the human become ever more difficult to discern - the synthetic exists around, and increasingly, within us. The implication is that an engagement with prαxis is becoming critical. It is a key perspectivc in evaluating: what created things' do; thc growing breakdown between 'the human' and 'human designed artificc and artefacts;' and questions associated with the meanings we give to ourselves'. ln this context, and along with the regime of unsustainability, new practices able to engage and transform those structures that structure (habitus) with futural potential will become vital. Design, so remade, would bc inverted. It would have direction (time and orientation) as its primary objective, with form (objectified function) its secondary consideration.

## Design Practice and the Imperative of Knowing

To bring design remade into view within and beyond the design community initially requires the development of new knowledge, interpretative skills, objects of experiential encounter and objects of critical reflection. Central to all of this activity, as has already been indicated, is recasting how acting and making are observed, understood and engaged as (design) practice bonded to praxis.9

As has been pointed out, action and/as practice always exists amid our structuring via habitus. But in our acts of making, we are also always unmakers. In our desire and need to create, we human beings fell trees, break eggs, kill animals, level mountains and damage ecologies. Such is the blind power of our anthropocentric drive that so many of our practices conceal this omnipresent urnaking. What actually needs to be faced is that while our 'being destructiveness' is unavoidable, how much, and what is destroyed demands to be visualized prior to the act of destruction. This needs to happen so that action can more become a matter of ethical judgement and socioenvironmental accountability.

Marx famously observed: 'Men make their own history, but not of their own free will; not under circumstances they themselves have chosen but under the given and inherited circumstances with which they are directly confronted."• Irrcspective of one's view of Marx, this statement remains salient. Yet it is equally true if inverted – as comments on design, practice, maling and uninaking indicatc – men arc equally made by their historical and material circumstances'.

Designers design, but how they are themselves designed, and what is designed by the designing of what they design is rarely recognized or understood. What will be advocated as we proceed is a practicc to be embedded in all design practices that exposes design's world-making and unmaking. This practice is effectively a bringing forth of design as appearance (eidos), knowledge and skill (techne) and action (pravis). Without this practice becoming integral to all design practices, humanity (in its plurality) will lack the ability to give a form to futures able to sustain humans, non-humans and all else that we and they depend upon.