a lot more that just technologically fixing-up the planetary damage we have done and continue to do. lt is not a project of a few years or decades. Rather, it is a project that has to exist as long as we exist - the degree to which we embrace it will actually determine how long we survive as a species. For this reason, we need a way of naming this projcct, as it rejects and transcends the exhaustcd, and in many quartcrs, discredited rhetoric of Brundtland-style sustainability'. We mark this difference with the name of'the Sustainment'.

The Sustainnient is not a fixed state; ratlier the reverse is the case. It is thc arrival of a moment of continual material and cultural change to keep what sustains in dominance. Supported by all modes of sustain-ability, as thcy negate unsustainability in its existing and emergent forms, the Sustainment requires a continual identifcation of what needs to be destroyed or changcd. Thereafter, such identification has to give way to forms of appropriatc sustainable action across every dimension of the common and situated differences of our existence (for example, our relations of material and interpersonal exchange; what we make, how we make it andfrom what; the way we live and organize our ways of life; what we valuc; how wc trcat cach other collectively at every level from thc local to the international). The Sustainment has to be sought, circumstantially, in many different ways, be they in the face of the varied manifestations of environmental and atmospheric damage, conflict and incquity.

## Change and Design

The directional change toward the Sustainment will not occur of itself; it can only occur by design. The conceptual space between this general evocation of design and the activity of professionally recognized design practices is, of course, huge. Likewise, the manner in which design is mobilized in language to signify intentional action and a comprehension by thc population at large of what design practices can or could do is another great dividc.

In order for the kind of changes that the Sustainment requires to come to be, all design practices have to change and break from exclusive service to the status quo. For this transformation of the economic and cultural role of design to occur, a great deal of design thinking, process and practice has to be signficantly redirected toward giving substance to the futuring power of 'sustain-ability'. So framed, sustain-ability can be understood as the ethical and conceptual underpinning of all practices (including design) redirecting and remaking material and intellectual means to advance the momcnt and process that is the Sustainment.

Implied in the position outlined is that designers place the current needs of the market in second place to the politico-ethical project of gaining sustain-ability. This is not to unrealistically suggest that all commercial considerations are abandoned but rather that they are strategically and economically repositioned under the inıperative of working toward gaining sustain-ability. The magnitude of these changes is not going to be instantly embraced, comprehended and implemented. It is going to take time and a cadre of design leaders, strong advocates and progressive educators to deliver tangible results.

## Letting Go and Taking Hold: The Question of Redirection

Redirection toward the Sustainıment requires a double movement. First is the redirection of all those practices tliat act to maintain the unsustainable qualities and trajectory of the status quo (in modest and fragmented forms, this activity has commenced). Second is the application of the newly redirected practices to redirect the status quo toward an economy, social structure, culture and political order of the Sustainment (this is the challenge that extends from now to the coming decades). Without question, the project of redirection is a manmoth task equal to, if not exceeding, the making of the modern world, While of a scale beyond its capability alone, design redirected can make a very large and crucial contribution to sustain-ability while also triggering a wider debate on forms of futuring towards the Sustainnent. As indicated, redirection is not instant economic dislocation. It does not mcan, or aim to create, a total rupture from the status quo. Rather, it means identifying what needs to be redirected, commencing redirective activity and working to establish the rise and dominance of agents of futuring. So understood, it is more radical than reform but less disruptive than revolution.

## Redirection, Practice, Design and the Political

Rcdirection is a profoundly political proposition. Ultimately, it implies a restructuring of habitus by design, this leading to major cultural transformations. And while revolution is refuscd, the radicality of what is actually proposed, if it is to gain any substantial foothold, requires mobilizing powerful arguments, delivering practical results and overcoming considerable resistancc.

Redirection obviously rcquires the personal, political conversion of many practitioners, not least architects and designers, to become redirective practitioners. The starting point is thus an act of self-redircction based on remaking the ground, and much of the contcnt, of one's own knowlcdge, combined with acquiring the underpinning, collective, political ontology of the sustain-able activist working in their difference toward the common goal. The pursuit of this end has three major implications for the individual: a willingness to accept responsibility for being anthropocentric; a wish to 'lead against the grain'; a striving to establish conditions of solidarity amongst redirective practitioners and a new practice-centred politics.

The Sustainment redefnes and reanimates the importance of 'the common good' - it places the condition bcyond the ownership of any particular political ideology, takes it out of thc realm of idcalism and situates it in the domain of nccessity. Sustain-ability extends action for 'the common good' beyond the human. The common good cannot simply be viewed and addressed anthropocentrically, or just in terms of 'the natural'. The commonality has to span the human and non-human, the natural and the artificial, the animate and inanimate for they are all inter-relationally intertwined. As a past neglected and futural ethical ground of politics, the sustaining ability of the common good cannot be accommodated into currently existing democratic politics as it functions to uphold the existing economic status quo.

Politically, there are but two current positions occupied by all forms of ruling political regimes: (1) a defuturing politics that refuses or neglects to fimdamentally serve the common good and secure the well being of society as a whole – as this would weaken its grip on power; and (2) an expedient politics committed to sustaining the unsustainable (be it in the domains of thc biophysical, social or economic) so it may continue to sustain itself. There has to be another way, a politics of sustain-ability wherein the futural and immediate common good becomes the overriding priority. De facto, there has to be a dictatorship of Sustainment. Let's be quite clear, this is not a statement of ecological fascism, but simply a forceful reiteration of the statement that 'without sustain-ability we have nothing'. It proclaims that it is not a mattcr of the imperative of sustain-ability being balanced with other political demands but rather that it rules them as sovereign. Without this rule, as with the rule of law, 'we' will have none of thosc freedoms that substitute for freedom per se. Lest the dismissal of democracy is thought to bc shoclking, there are two things to recall.

First, it should be acknowledged that what mostly travels undcr the name of democracy is not democratic. As long ago as 1921, Max Weber in 'Politics is a Vocation' (in his seminal book Economy and Society) powerfully argued that modern parliamentary democracy and its system of government, is inhcrently undemocratic.² To years later his former student, Carl Schmitt, published The Crisis of Parliamentary Democracy, a radical critique, which returned to the moment of democracy's political birth.³ Essentially the critique of both Weber and Schmitt centred on the ease with which the system of reprcsentative parliamentary dcmocracy slid from representation of the interest of the people to those of powcrful intercsts. Unsurprisingly, the tradition of criticism of democracy has been unbroken, and, in large part, is based on showing the sham that is masked by the name. Jacques Rancière's Hatred ofDemocracy, a polemic against the exportofdcmocracy' by violence, is a recent case in point.⁴

Second, democracy as we know it cannot delivcr sustain-ability. The dccisions that need to be taken to correct global structural economic imbalances; the sacrifces that have to be made to secure the common good;

and the speed at which industrial, infrastructural, educational and lifestyle changes have to take place – such things just cannot happen in a system in which the political options put to thc pcople' are determined by the dictates of 'consumer sovereignty'. Such politics diminishes freedom to little more than making choices in a market placc of competing products (of which 'sustainability'is but one). It follows that because this kind of 'democratic' politics turns on popularist marketing, crucial challenges are absolutely avoided. Thc imperativc to change, however, cannot wait for an uncertain moment of distant political enlightenment.

If the dictatorship of Sustainment arrives, it is not going to come out of a blinding flash that illuminates the true way ahead, an awakening of new political spirit within our political leaders, or a cathartic moment in which the existing political edifice is reduced to rubble. Rather its most likely arrival will be from an ever growing number of redirective actions from modcst to major acts of practice that fuse into an unstoppablc materialized force of change, to which the political regimes will have no choice but to respond. This moment, if it comes, will amount to humanity commencing another chapter of its worldly occupation out of the still unprcdictablc duration of the age of unsettlement'. We can charactcrize the current era in this way because not only is humanity starting to be physically unsettled by geo-climatic change, with an accompanying, slowly growing and wider psychological destabilization but also becausc institutional politics is increasingly disengaged from the forces that are shaping futures.

Redirective practitioners will certainly not be of one political shade, travel at the same pace or be equal in capability. The ability to cope with change will vary. Some people will adopt large ambitious projects, others will takc small tentative steps, a significant number will resist. What counts is that a sufficient critical mass accumulates and advances towards the realization of the project of sustain-ability. At this point it is important to make two acknowledgements.

The first is that the ambition of redirective practice being voiced here, is no mere wishful tlhinking, but actually has a material basis. The ideaofredirective practice is already in circulation globally. There are already architects and