is reduced while overall volume produced significantly increases, with the consequence that total impact goes on rising). The corporation thus claims its products are 'green', but any advance towards sustain-ability is negated by market growth. Another instance is when a product that humanity and the global cnvironment could wcll do without, is 'greened' to give it a competitive edge.

Another demand-reactive mcchanism of changing desiging comes from the notion of user centredness. This can span an ergonomic approach that informs the development of product usability to notions of 'univcrsality' or the emotional character'of products but without the fundamental environmental performancc of the product improving. A far more intimate set of rclations between corporations, design and 'the user' is established by thc employment of anthropology (often in its most reductive ethnographic form) to get inside the user's lifc or head. Users are observed at work or home using products – this to gather information for product development or to assist in identit ying situations able to prompt new product possibilities. Likewise, anthropology is also deployed t burrow into cveryday life to disclose things like 'brand loyalty' and 'exactly what consumers want' (from products).

The changes just mentioned - corporate sustainability and user-centred design - are partly a reaction to another more longstanding change, which is the intensification of aestheticizcd design since the late 1980s, manifested throughout the rise of designcr products, art typography, fashion as art and postmodern high-style architecture,

## Framing Design as a Redirective Practice

Of course, the kinds of changes this book is exploring go well beyond those just noted. They are led by redircctive practice, rathcr than it being the sum of these changes. Redirective practice elevates the scriousness, importance and futuring potential of design. There is a good deal to lose but far more to gain. It takes design beyond a disciplinary model. Currently design and architecture are regarded as dlisciplinary domains constituted from a number of subdisciplines (architectural design and architectural science; industrial design and fashion design being reprcsentative examples). These disciplines exist within a rationalist model of divisions of knowledge and skills. Having earlier (in Chapter 2) put forward a critique of reason from the pcrspective of relationality, this now needs to be connected to the question of the adequacy of disciplines as organizational regimes of contained knowledge. Disciplinary thinking, by its very nature, is exclusory, and thus has a limited ability to comprehend and cngage the relational complexity of unsustainability and thc creation of sustainment. But the suggestion is not that we dispense with disciplincs but rather they need bridging by a meta-discipline that facilitates an exchange of knowledge and dialogue based on a common language of engagcment, while also amassing collective knowledge in their own right. This thinking is not the same as either the synthesis of 'multi-disciplines' or the dialogue of inter-disciplines'. Redirective practice names the meta-discipline. What redirective practice enables is a practical transformation of knowledge in action. In the case of design needing to be redesigned, it is not a matter of somehow abstracting this activity. Rather, it is a matter of having redirective practice in formation and process so that the redesign of design can occur in the course of working on a specific projcct.

As meta-practices, many practices can converge on, and subscribe to, the redirective agenda. In fact, any discipline with a prefigurative or analytical relation t• the form and operation of the material world could find ways to create cooperative working relations with redirective action and redirective practitioners.

Certainly, redirective practice does imply the acquisition of some new knowledge – this to give more sustain-able purchase to a particular practice. Sustain-ability clearly demands new understanding and values as well as new professional and political alignments to neutralize the defuturing content of what one already knows and does. New knowledge gained in the frame of redirective practice can also bring greater authority to the application of one's practice, this not least because of the support gained from other voices speaking similar messages, and other practitioners delivering projects informed by the same imperatives.

Redirective practice has gone beyond merely being promoted as an idca; it is now in a formative stage. There are alrcady people around the world who now think of, and prescnt, themselves as redirective practitioners, and it is also now arriving in design education. It affords many possibilities, including establishing levels of cooperation across previously impossible cconomic, political and cultural divides. Above all, an agreement on thc absolute imperative of sustain-ability provides the basis for a practitioner led creation of 'commonalitics in differencc'. So said, therc is a baseline requiring general agreement on a number of fundamental points, between all who decide to be redirective practitioners. These beg a brief revicw.

## The Redirective Base Line

Redircctive practice brought to a design project means that associated activity may not just be confined to design, or that the only disciplines engagcd to work on it will be design based or design related. What actually determines the knowledgc deemed appropriate to bring to the project is what a relational analysis rcveals to be needed.

No matter the designcr or design approach, there has to be a willingness t accept responsibility for what is designed as unfinished and thus in continual process – this understanding, based on grasping that everything designcd goes on designing, is an essential frame of ethical evaluation.

Understanding that design is political – which is to say that it always serves a particular ideological master (be it scrving the political economy that underpins the status quo) – is a prerequisite for anyone wishing to redirect design. Likewise, and unambiguously, to evoke the dictatorship of Sustainment – is to cvoke a political ideology that redirective practitioncrs cannot be equivocal about. Of course, as already implied, a word like 'dictatorship' rings alarm bells, conjuring up images of the actions of some of the most tyrannical figures of human history – this not what is being proposed. What is being suggcstcd is more akin to the way capitalism, in its present hegemonic and all pcrvasive state, is cxperienced. It's important to remember here that hegemony (being a dictatorship of the consensual) refers to imposition that is not perceived as such.² This is to say that the rule of capital is taken to be simply how the world works. Yet as measured against the historicity of humanity's earthly presence, capitalism is a very recent phenomenon with an unknown duration. Even when this observation is intellectually understood, it mostly escapes existential recognition.

Such qualifications do not dilute the stark reality of the politics of change towards the Sustainmcnt- it has no moderate or balanced position. It's change or nothing. Sustainment has to dictatc; it has to be hegcmonic. At the samc time, the path to the Sustainment is ncither singular, nor straight. Neither is it to be followed under the direction of politically correct dictates. Like 'freedom', justice' or equity', it is illusive, abstractly known, felt and sensed as the other of its opposite, but nonetheless ranks as an absolute political objective.

The problems tħat redirective practice confronts arc never simply handeddown or handed-over problems. They are certainly ncver just design problcms. Likewise, design is never just 'a problcm-solving activity' (the most exhausted cliché of design theory). Rather the first act always has to be to actually idcntify what the problem is, from the basis of causality rather than by trite definition. This cannot be predicated upon the problenm being assumed to bc a dcsign problem. To stand any rcal chance of actually disclosing the causality of a problem, a circumstantial analysis lias to be engaged relationally. There are a number of key analytical questions essential to the task of redirection. Fundamental among these is asking and answeringthe question what, in this context, is unsustainable?' Unless this is d'isclosed, nothing is solved. Thereafter, it becomespossible to determine if and how design can contribute to the delivery of a solution.

No matter the name it ends up travelling under, all architects, designers and their clients will end up with the stark choice of embracing redirective practice or giving way to defuturing – the negation of time.Redirective practice, as expounded here, is akin to a new kind of (design) leadership, underpinned by a combination of creating new (and gathering old) knowledge directed at advancing means of sustain-ability while also politically contesting