Development was not just a political and economic imposition but also a project that deployed culture as a vehicle of modcrnization (led, in the UN, by UNESCO). This deployment of culture was often tagged as 'cultural imperialism' and as such was indivisible from ethnocide. Actions mobilized against tradition included the displacement of: oral culture by functional literacy, traditional building formns by Wcstern architecture and indigenous cultural practices by modern cultural commodities. In this field of activities, the agendas of trans-national agencies, corporations and non-government organizations often contradicted each other, with cultural conservation and destruction both happening under the auspices of development.

## Culture, Dominance and Resistance

The history of developmcnt, as it folds into the overarching project of modernity, is clearly more complex than so far characterized. We need to both widen the frame and look at some detail within it.

For the West, the development of a modern world goes back as far the Enlightenment's notion of modernity, which was in fact a diverse project directed toward the creation of the modern state, science, civil society and the modern social subject. In each case, the artificial was mobilized against the domination of natural forces. Retrospectively, the modern world can be seen as a mega-design project of human construction marked by a dramatic escalation in the fabrication of material and immaterial conditions of human existencc. As such, it dramatically incrcased the human propensity to be unsustainable. Unknowingly, forms of 'world making' were initiatcd that were equally forms of unmaking. This can be seen in examples as diverse as deforestation on a massive scale and thc iron and shipbuilding industries of Europe between the sixtccnth and late eighteenth centuries.

Of course the Enlightenmcnt was not cxclusively a European phenomenon. Certainly the Enlightenment of the Middle East had a different and overlapping vision of the future – the consequences of which flow through to the present conflicts in Islamic culture between 'dogmatic traditionalists and liberalizing progressives'. In particular, Islamic science was not only well in advance of Western science prior to thc Wcstcrn Enlightenment but Western science itself, in areas like astronomy, optics, mathematics and medicine, took liberally from it.

Likewise, Chinese civilization was in advance of the West in the applied arts and social organization for millennia. As evcnts of the nineteenth century indicate, the conflict between development versus tradition' in China was incredibly violent.

The impetus to modernize China came from two sources: humiliation from its conflicts with European powers during the Opium Wars, not least the foreign occupation of Beijing in 186; and the horrendous internal rcbellions of the 185s and 186s, the most devastating being the Taiping rcbellion conducted by armed peasant groups and secret societies against the ing regime. The rebellion lasted twenty years and cost between twenty and thirty million lives. Not only did the Taiping rebellion cost more lives than any other civil war before or since but it also tragically coincided with a period of drought and famine in which another thirty million people perished. The Qing govermcnt never recovered and was displaced by the rise of the Han elite. At its most basic, the rebellion was a conflict over China either returning to values of the past or moving forward towards modernity.

By 1864, the rebellion was spent but the nation, especially the educated classes, had been shaken to their core. The conflict of idcas, together with catastrophic wars, had enormous and tragic consequenccs for China that went well beyond the numbcrs of lives lost. China's self-image and modern politi'cal history cannot actually be separated from this period of national trauma, nor from Mao Zedong's cultural revolution' of the 196●s- which was another massive assault on tradition and the past. In both cases, thc view was that the cultural values and practices of the past blocked the way to the future, hence Mao's notion that 'the suppression of the old by the new is a gcncral, eternal and inviolable law of thc universe'.⁵

China's rapid economic development over the past few decades and its 'one nation, two systems' policy not only stands on the foundation of thesc events but rctains an objective that connects modern Chinese politics to its ancient regimes. The objective of every political regime has always been the maintenance of the means to administer such a large, complex, culturally diversc nation and its huge population (many of whom have been locked into a struggłc for survival irrespective of whatcver rcgime was in power).

## Contemporary Development: Another Face of the Unsustainable

As said, globalization represents a continuation of the totalizing goals of modernity, this notwithstanding the rise of the UN's shift towards thc notion of human developmcnt' during the 1980s as registered by its Human Dcvclopment Reports. At lcast sincc the carly 1990s, humanist, 'soft-edge' conccpts of development have co-existcd with 'hard-edge' market-driven models. Although there are projects that clearly have made a positive ¿ifference to the lives of an enormous number of people, the human impacts of conflict, the extent of globally embedded poverty, thc undersidc of rapid urbanization, the ravages of AIDS, and now, the displaccment of populations arising from climate change, alladd up to an enormous volume of human suffcringglobally. The situation is graphically illustrated by UNDP HumanDevelopment Report 2005.

This report gives an account of the rise of a new global middle class (not least in China and India) and the nature of global poverty (again in China and India). It points out that worldwide, 10.7 million children never rcach the age of five, that the infant mortality rate among the black community of Washington, DC, is higher than in many Indian cities and that global income inequality is increasing for 80 per cent of the world's population. It goes on to state that almost half a billion of the world's poor are worse off than they were in 1990, 1 billion peoplc livc on less than US1 a day and that 1 billion people lack access to fresh drinking watcr. It also summarizes the stillrampant scourge of HIV/AIDS, most graphically by noting that life expectancy in Botswana is 31 years of age.

The centre/periphery, First World/Third World model of dcvelopment that structured perceptions of the world order for so many decades has crumbled. Rather than 'uneven development' being a characteristic of 'developing nations, it is now part of almost every nation. With the exception of 'dysfunctional nations', which are defacto written out of the world order, the global outsourcing of production and services, the dynamics of the international labourmarket, the abandonment (and often statistical erasure) of under classes within rich and poor nations, the rise of 'affluent cosmopolitan centres', with their accompanying class in large cities across the globe, are all factors that fracture any simple correlation between poverty and geography. The arrival of what Manuel Castells calls the 'informational mode of development' layers onto this picture. Unlike the IT globalizing optimists, Castells does not see this tcchnology as the panacca of world poverty.6

## Revisiting Sustainable Development

All the remarks made on development flow back into earlier critical comment on sustainable development. At one extreme, such development simply aims to make forms of national and global development less environmentally damaging, and at the other, it supports capital's exploitation of the environmental crisis'. Either way, sustainable development is just not suffcient to deal with the multiple faces of defuturing unsustainability.7 It certainly cannot deal with the central problem that unsustainability is grounded in anthropocentrism, or with capitalism being a sourcc of unequal exchange and thus inequity, or with the causes of conflict. Nor can the modest, slow-moving agenđa of sustainable development counter the rapidly worsening climatic situation triggered by global warming with its prospect of vast numbers of environmental refugees instigating major population redistribution.

Obviously, none of us should resign ourselves to the bleakest scenarios; hopefully the problems that arrive will fall short of the worst predictions hut this might not be the case. The only responsible action to take in these circumstances is to act from a precautionary perspectivc. The costs, by any