measure, of little or insufficient action would be unquestionably greater than any overspecification within a precautionary approach.

## Reconnecting to Design

The notion of design in support of (world) dcvelopment has becn around for a long time. It was inherent in E. F. Schumacher's applied economic theory as it informed appropriate technical transfer via the formation of the Intermediate Technology Development Group in the 196s.8 Lilewise, it was a significant part of Victor Papanek's thinking when he wrote Design for the Rel World.9 In both cases, the idea was to put 'underdeveloped countries' on an affordable path to industrialization. The mainstream view was that conventional 'technology transfcr' would be a key driver of this process. Schumacher and Papanek thus represented a softer approach that favoured 'alternative technologies' that supported local economies and communities rather than sweeping them asidc. However, exposure to thc commodity world of the West, via tourism and the media, has meant that populations of 'underdeveloped' nations came to want the same products and technologies as the pcople of advantaged nations - despite the contribution of alternative tcchnologies in areas like water, sanitation and energy.

Both the mainstream and alternative approaches, of course, have their foundation in Western technical rationalism, andboth posited afaith in science and technology to solve problems instrumentally or economically. Both underestinated the consequences of the displacement of local economies and the cultures they sustained, including changing thc symbolic status of craft skills and the people who possessed them.

Design is never culturally neutral - it always transports socio-cultural values. Equally, what it bringsinto beingalways designs beyond mere function. Design is thus a means as well as a product of cultural production, as the history of botl architecture and technology confirm.

Design has acted in the service of the culture and economy of modcrnity and its metropolitan and global extension. It has been deeply implicated in the universalization of modernization and unsustainability.

Design futuring, in contrast to ethnocentrically configured forms of 'sustainable modernization', nceds to be circumstantially and critically responsive to the minds, dreams, feclings, material conditions, dispositions, values and beliefs of people within the world thcy inhabit. At the sane tine, there are now almost no people on the face of the planct who are not exposed to the products of a globalized economy and its accompanying culture. In this situation, the question of what can provide sustain-ability is vital to explore and to connect with localized remade desires for viable futures. ●ne key option is to mobilize knowledge of the past and present to create culturally and materially situated necds that marginalize or displace imported wants. Such activity directs us to creatc cxciting and exemplary commonality to express rcdircctive forns.

## Redirection from Design Otherwise'

Design otherwise aims to contribute to breaking the postcolonial double bind (not being able t go back or forward) in which many subordinated cultures find themselves. It proposes a forn of design leadership, linked to redirective practice, which stratcgically joins with cultures working against neocolonialism. The form of this activity would always have to be spccific and localized. So said, certain charactcristics of 'the development of sustainability' against sustainable development' can be sketched; the first of thcse clustcr around the formation of a new social ecology.

There are many examples of how, traditionally, labour was expended so that comnunities could subsist, reproducc thcir social structures and transfer their material culture to future generations. In many situations, like communalbuilding construction, people worked togcthcr as producer communities with establishcd cooperative practices, including fornis of ritualized design and construction. When activities interconnect and reinforce each other for the good of the whole they advance the creation of a robust social ecology. Such activity travelled in many directions: the cultivation and production of local renewable rcsources, the induction of the young into the craft practices that would sustain thcm and their community; communicating traditional practical knowledge via the making and content of aesthetic forms. Thus within traditional societies, such everyday practices were means of futuring. In the wake of colonialism, so many of these kinds of activities have been destroyed, abandoned or neglected. Yct, sometimes, an archive rcmains - in traccs of memory, residual skills and artefactual things – and bcgs rigorous interrogation.

Thc external world of comniodities arrives and so often undermines sustaining characteristics of the present and blocks the recovery of viable sustaining characteristics of the past. Of course, commoditics do not arrive as mere objects but as projected desires deemed to be able to convert dreams to reality. They are directed at thc young, many of whom have lost respect for a culture they have only experienced in the form of its damaged afterlife. The young want a future but often rccoil destructively in anti-social or self-abusing ways when they encounter fragmcnts of what once were sustaining traditions, which have been abandoned by their parent's generation. Thc nostalgia of elders offers them nothing. In such a setting, the prospect of recovering the past as thc future seems neither viable nor attractive. Yet the past remde anew as thc sustainable has real potential.

This remaking requires intervention by cultural leaders to expose tradition as a product of incremental change, thus opening the possibility of it being available for future innovation (as somc indigenous art practices have demonstrated). Across the range of built forms, food production, the making of clothing, craft practiccs, furniture making, horticulture, music and so on - things that all initially arrived out of responses to particular environments - therc is often the possibility of innovation and reinvention ta king traditional forms as a starting point. What is bcing evoked here is nothing to do with the manufacture of commodities for sale in the existing markct place but a far more ambitious project: the rematcrialization of the culture by making new forms, knowledge and values from the old that, above al, recreatc a sustaining social ecology as a foundation of change.

The proposition that developed nations have to confront is that they will not bc able to engineer themselves out of the unsustainable and into a futuring condition. Nor will forms of economic determinism, like carbon trading, have the integrity or power to drive fundamental change. In this situation, lessons from marginalized cultures of various kinds could well become key sources of modes of adaptation and sustain-ability. Against the accumulation of such attainments, the arrogance of reason and Eurocentrism may well have to give way to humility and a totally new admission of difference.