an option among options, but an imperative to be vigorously engaged for the very condition of making choices to be possible.

## Designers

Individually, and collectively via their profcssional bodies, designers are the constituency that many people would assume to be the authoritative voice on design. But with some notable exceptions, what designers say is mostly uncritical, often inflated and very much within the frame of design as a service and the intcrnal dialogue of the 'profession'. The way that design issues are mostly conmunicated, espccially in the public sphere, arc dominantly visual and complicit with the media's reduction of design to aesthetic appearance or function. The focus of attention goes to iconic structures, objects, images and heroic designers. Likewise, this usually reinforces a celebratory relation between design and technology. These ways of presenting design pcrmeate TV coverage, magazines, thc press, design award events and professional conferences. While there is a small minority of aware' designers who recognize their social and environmcntal responsibilities, their voices are lost in the corporate-orientated, commercially driven sensibility of the industry.

Question: How do almost all designers manage to becone so interpellated (called into compliance) that they are unable to think what design does beyond the functional, economic and restricted understandings of the symıbolic - is it that they are dumb, seduced by money, just want to please clients, really think that meeting unsustainable user needs is ●K, don't care so long as they are comnercially successful, or what?

## The Media

The popular medias characterization of design seldom goes beyond style or crass ways of embellishing hyped technology. Notwithstanding the rise of 'designer products', the media reinforce perceptions of a designer as a creative capitalist nerd delivering sexy looking things'. Even more significant, the media never get to the point of realizing that design is a medium though which the made world can be rendered legible and open to critical engagement. Neither does it realize that oftcn the most important design decisions have been made even before the designer comes on the scene (thereby concealing the design and power nexus). Given the highly circumscribed way it covers design, the media contributes to keeping the public ill informed, and so ill equipped to make design decisions in their daily lives. ln turn, this means that the public demand for 'good design' (aesthetically, functionally, economically and environmentally) is weak and underdcveloped.

Thc cultivation of design criticism and knowledge of design is neither on the agenda of most designers nor the media. Designers mostly lack the ability to talk about design in informed critical ways, they mostly articulate what they do in banalities, and above all, have a very limited understanding of the consequences of what they create. Of course, this criticism of them as socio-cultural subjects is morc so a criticism of design education (whether tertiary, professional or autodidactically managed) and of the limited amount of critical writing on design available.

Question: We are surroundcd by the designed – every elemcnt of our built environmcnts and every artefact in thcm; our urban and rural iudustries and all they produce; all our institutions, military and civil, and all the systems that enable them to function; all communication media and everything created by the entertainment industry; all forms of representation and all perceptions prefigured by these representations - so why is that we are blind to all almost all of this?

## Educators

Design educators, who may equally be designers, design theorists or design promoters, also obviously speak on and for design, most notably to prospective designcrs. Therc are undoubtedly a lot of committed and good cducators. Unfortunately, there are even more bad or mediocrc teachers of design who reduce it to technique. Researchers and authors of Design History, Design

Studies, Theory, Management and Philosophy may also occupy positions in institutions of design cducation; they also may equally well be practitioners. Whilc such remarks are and can be directed toward design education, they can also be depìoyed to engage other disciplincs and audiences beyond the academy. Non-designer promoters of design, cspecially marketcrs of product, interior and fashion design (who are often miscast in the media as design critics') can bc accused not only of trivialization but also of contributing to the general arrcsted dcvelopment of the understanding of dcsign by the public at large.

Question: Would not all design educators say they share the objective of wishing to improve what is designcd, no matter what it is, by educating designers to think more carefully and design to an evcr higher standard? Yet why have so few of these educators learnt that what they are teaching is an education in error (an education in defuturing, cven in the name of sustainability)?

## Authors of Design Discourses

Therc are significant historical and theoretical discourses on design. Design Historyhas delivered valuable insights into the rise of design as a practice, its social and economic history. But rather than broadening the view of its object of study so that design is politically, socially and historically contextualized, such history mostly presents design as historically decontextualized. Thus, design is viewed as a particularist conccrn, grounded in acsthetic or historicist predilections bascd on connoisseurship, or it is implicated in a popular cultural celebration of kitsch, stylc or fetishized ohjects. The vast bulk of Design History just does not recognize how design has been a significant agent of historical change beyond micro-impacts. It also lacks a sense of how design intlects futures, which by implication means it is history without a theory of history. While Design Studies overlaps with Design History, it operates with a broader, pluralist agenda. While eclectically it throws up interesting material, which examines design in a broader frame of reference, structurally its multidircctional and pluralist character mcans it is unable to provide any clear senseof dircction or purpose. Design Theory (including Design Rescarch) is predominantly an instrumental discourse, uncritically embracing science. It is totally preoccupied with design process, design methods and empirical studies of design in use. Design Philosophy is the least established and is thus a still inchoate area of design scholarship. Iłowever, it has the ability to ask the most critical questions of the nature of the design, its practices and above all, its past and present futuring agency in the world. Lilewise, it also has the potential to considerably increase the dialogue with other disciplines, not least on the issues of ethics. More than any other area of the study of the feld, design philosophy can ask questions of other ways of understanding, thinking and dcploying design without being subordinate to design's institutionalized cultural and economic structures of support. It can thus not only open up discussions of design futures (or design's future) but can interrogate the very notions of both the future and design.

Design Management speaks from and to managerialism. It provides a conduit between dcsign expertise and corporatc conmercial objectives. In so doing, it has supported corporate avant-gardism pioneered by corporate design stratcgies, and extended design's ability to be a 'value adding' agency. It has equally promoted the strategi'c application of dcsign to, for example, user-centred design studies, the creation of customer-centred organizations, the loading of design with emotional value' and design as a fcature of core corporate philosophy. All these are indicators of design's progressive and instrumental induction into 'corporate capital logic'.

Question: Why is it that while design prefgures so much in our world and how it operates, that not only is it so poorly understood by the population at large but also by those who purport to study it?

## An Unavoidable Position

No matter who we are, we either support the status quo or oppose it. There is no fence to sit on. Unless you, the reader, work toward sustaining your self and the creation of a Culturc of Sustainnent (no more than a solution in the making) then you are part of the problem of giving legitimacy to the conditions of unsustainability that requires to be surmounted. m