## Times They Are A-changing

Influenced by discussions and writing on redirective practice by Team D/E/S, a conversation on the topic began informally in Gall & Medek practice meetings. Effectively, the process of adopting redirective practice as a basis for staff development was initiated, with the lead being taken by Jim Gall. This led to a number of projects, Boonah Two, discussed earlier in Chapter 4, being one of them. There was general recognition that redirective practice was a substantial concept that had the potential to differentiate Gall & Medek from their competition.

The transition is still ‘a work in progress'. Generalizing and acknowledging that people move at variable paces, it can be said that interest in, and commitment to, redirective practice is evidentin workproduced. Theintellectual leap to a new kind of thinking is still partial, while the ontological shift to a new sensibility has been slower. The reasons for this are more structural than personal; they connect to problems of organizational change in general and to the professional culture of architecture in particular, The nature of the economics of a service provider is also a factor.

Change within any form of organization, including the home, can generate insecurity among people. This is sometimes spoken, but most often it is silent. This is understandable, for change often equals an abandonment of attachments to the familiar. It can be resisted even when it is unambiguously clear that the advantages of changing outweigh whatever has to be sacrificed. Obviously, when the consequences of change are not altogether evident, insecurity deepens. Architects, like other professionals - perhaps more so - have deep attachments {to their professional identity and the profession's status; to architectural objects and aesthetics; to their own creative and technical processes and more). These attachments are indivisible from the nature of architectural education and architectural journalism, with its focus on heroic architects and iconic buildings. Against this backdrop, to imply, or directly say, that becoming a redirective practitioner requires subordinating architecture is going to generate drag', with movement weighted down with baggage that needs dumping.

The resistance can take two forms: (1] a suppressed rejection whereby the rhetoric of redirective practice is strategically embraced within the dynamics of the office, but is not actually felt as a need for change; or (2) minimal engagement and silent subversion within which the status quo is aggressively adhered to. Doubt, producing a reluctance to commit without evidence that the gains are going to exceed the losses, is viewed as appropriate. This is to be expected and should not be confused with resistance.

Based on the experience of critically encountering the education of architects, as a teacher, a visiting speaker and an examination jurist in several countries, it seems to me to remain perpetually problematic. To explore this view at length would stray too far from this case study, but there are some relevant general observations to make.

In many institutions, architectural education becomes an island unto itself wherein what is taught is neither grounded in the actualdemandsand problems of practice nor in those areas of critical knowledge that give the architect sufficient intellectual capital to adequately understand the context in which architectural forms sit. Anthropology, sociology, economic and social history, and even philosophyare some of these areas. This is not to say the architect has to be some kind of super polymath, but he or she needs to have a sufficiently broad knowledge to grasp something of the past, present and futuring complexity of architecture. It is not that architects should be able to solve all problems encountered, but that they should have the capability of identifying them. The sad fact is that for architecture and many other disciplines, there is a lag between forms of learning that replicate unsustainability as thought and action -what could be called 'education in error' - and the introduction of knowledge in the service of futuring. Any claim that a good deal of education is neutral invites challenge.

Writ large, this means not just an induction into learning how to design the unsustainable but that the unsustainable (as a range of designed forms from large houses to high-end tourist resorts) becomes established as what is regarded as (aesthetically} desirable to design. Here, not only is the unsustainable not named as such, but it can even arrive under the banner of 'sustainable design'. For instance, sustainability' can be reduced to purely instrumental issues of building performance, while the totally unsustainable activity that the building housesis overlooked because this is deemed 'outside the remit of the architect' - an oft-voiced, pragmatic position of service provision that negates the ethical.

Notwithstanding the length of time it often takes to gain an architectural degree, what many experienced architects point out is: that the exposure to the discipline's intellectual and cultural history is now being neglected by many architectural schools; that the young architect's induction into the search for knowledge is slight, resulting in research that is frequently superficial and instrumental (but presented with opinionated conviction) and that the understanding of design gained is very limited and object focussed. One can add that some of the areas of knowledge becoming central to contemporary architecture, like sustainable or ecological' design, exist within courses merely as elective subjects.

More specifically, there is the error of conceptualizing complex projects without their complexity ever being adequately identified. An architect acquaintance of mine, for example, was invited to run a project for a group of advanced students on the design of an opera house. His first question to the group was: who has ever been to an opera? Answer: nobody. His second question: who has ever listened to a recording of an opera orwatched one on TV? Answer: nobody. The last question: who thinks the absences of experience of opera presents a design problem?Answer: nobody. Theunstatedassumption (and as the Sydney Opera House has demonstrated): the architecture is what's important, and anyway it's the acoustic engineer's job to get the place to sound OK.

One of the most fundamental problems with architectural education is that it is very successful in inducting proto-architects into a disposition of error that lasts a lifetime - unless intellectually or experientially challenged. This disposition manifests itself in different ways, like reducing design problems to: {1] a series of technical issues to be practically and economically resolved; and (2) the resolution of the aesthetics of a project to the satisfaction of the architect and their peers. Effectively, a great void exists between the poles of the instrumental and the aesthetics (which itself only exists in an impoverished formalist sensel. Vital knowledge on the actual 'being of the building' is absent.

These absences add up to an inappropriate and false sense of what archì tecture is, and a lack of knowledge of how design acts as a structuring element of not just particular environments, but equally of socio-cultural futures. So, while to a lesser or greater extent, graduates acquire skills, instrumental knowledge and an aesthetically refined sensibility, all of this exists in a limited frame of understanding, imagination and action. At the same time, the culture of architectural education - particularly its duration and forms of pedagogic practice - ensures that a very substantial investment of the self is made in this condition of delimitation (which can mean that a very defensive subject is constituted). Effectively, a particular way of viewing the material world is created that restricts how the world, as a complex interrelation of ecologies and environment is seen. What has this brief critique of architectural education got to do with Gall & Medek? A great deal - it partly explains why change is slow and difficult work.

The problem of making the transition to redirective practice does not arise because staff are especially hostile to the idea - nor is it aproblem of specifically reactionary personalities {though the issue of personality is present in every workplacel. Rather, as the comments on architectural education suggests, the obstacle is the ontological investment (the sense of being an architect) travelling with the afterlife of architectural education. The problem has to be thus engaged at the level of the ontology of subjects inducted into error (a problem we all share]. Education for sustain-ability has yet to arrive - which means we are dealing. by degree, with problems of our selves as well as others. Thus there is no error-free position of moral superiority.

As well as the structural {ontological) presence of resistance, neither expressed nor felt as such, redirective practice currently competes with the market forces of a busy practice (the pressure to get jobs out the door]. What is remarkable is how much has been achieved in these circumstances, but redirective projects alone are not enough. To go beyond this, to gain serious momentum, to have the ability to recognize and create substantial opportunities, and to been seen to be establishing a position of professional leadership.

something has to change. Time and money have to be invested to establish a change platform that will generate a new ethos, design ontology, internally generated and externally supported projects and market profile.

The change platform has to be established in a way that can be seen and felt to be different from the everyday life of the practice by all involved. It has to be built with care as a space of internal experimentation and affirmative competition between the old and the new. It has to be a space to which people and resources can migrate as momentum gathers. It would require aiming to making all architecture projects redirective while, more ambitiously, developing purely redirective projects, As a starting place these activities requires to be given an inviolate time and space. Realistically, for a practice like Gall &Medek, this would need to be of the order of say four hours a week by two rotating facilitators, with all other staff involved between four and eight hours per month.