practice. Not only is this challenge evident in terms of the amount of research required, but also in plotting relational questions and finding ways to appropriately respond. Effectively, the current restricted view of design as a professional domain with specific practices addressing delineated objects - structures, products, images and so forth – has to be subsumed within a larger frame.

## Design Scenarios (Conventionally Progressive) versus Scenarios of Design (Radical)

As we have argued, the kinds of changes indicated by redirective practice in gencral, and designing from 'the future to the present' in particular, are not going to occur spontaneously. Most of the design community is not going to immediately transform its commercially grounded practice and embrace radically new ways of thinking about desigı. The hype and ontology of 'managerialism', ideas of 'new creativity', uncritical views of 'globalization', the 'romance with technology', the vacuous world of fashion - none of these features of the current world of design' are going to evaporate. Yet, as we argued, being elemental to the unsustainable they have to fall by the wayside. If the rate of expansion of the unsustainable is to be curbed and surmounted then design conduct and practicc has to change.

The pressing question of 'where is the agent of change going to come from?' again reasserts itself. Certainly, it will not come from one source, but from the strategic actions of uncoordinated and convergent fragmcnts - this is another way of saying it will come from thc commonalityin differcnce' of design within an amassed body of redirective practitioners who while acting independently, and in different ways, are all oriented to the same goal of sustainment. Obviously, this development docs not depend on every architect and designer marching in step to the samc tune. All that actually matters is that a sufficient number head in the same direction (toward sustainment), using whatever methods come to hand. As soon as links are made between these redirective practitioners, a culture of learning starts to form. The takeup of redirective practice and debate around futuring scenarios hasalready started.²The debate on the future and scenarios traverses a movement between design sccnarios (projcctions of possibilities by design as currently understood) and scenarios of design (an exploration ol' how design could be other than it is). Rather than affording confrontation, this debate opens dialoguc on the possibility of objects of common and critical focus.

Design scenarios while not new, and although taking many forms, have been given increased momentun in the past decadc by a concern with 'sustainability'. Most notable has been Sustainable Everyday: Scenarios of U'rban Life – an exhibition with a major book/catalogue publication.3 The project was led by Ezio Manzini and François Jégou. The exhibition formed part of La Triennale di Milano in 2003 under the patronage of the United Nations Environmental Programme. The content of Sustainable Everyday was generated by a series of rolling workshops held in ten developed and developing countries. The approach was framcd by the Brundtland notion of Sustainable Development and its social agenda of inter-generational equity - an orientation that we have already criticized – plus the natural resourcc reduction target of 'factor ten'.

Sustainable Everyday's approach follows the mainstream and dominant 'have your cake and eat it' model of sustainability and sustainable design whereby improvement in welbeing' and the quality of life' come via the market place and the extension of capital logic via new developmental modes. The pitch strategicaly underplays the scale and naturc of the problems to overcome (bad news deters!) and plays up sustainability as a 'good news story'. This approach is increasingly common among promoters of sustainable development and it smacks of soft-sell marketing. Without suggesting the project was undertaken with anything but honourable intent, onc has to ask if such a strategy is, in reality, inept or actually even ethical. f course, the fundamcntal problem with a project that depends on large-scale grant funding is that there are few, if any, major funding sources that will fund projects that are actually progressive, rigorous and radical. Such projects would occupy a counter position which says that unlcss the extent of thc problems of unsustainability are attempted to be squarely faced, put in the public sphere, and rccognized as causally human, then there is little chance that appropriate responsive actions can be taken.

The actual substance of the Sustainable Everyday: Scenarios of Urban life approach is socially pluralist, scmi-technocratic and favours conventional sustainability mechanisms: waste reduction and recycling; renewable energy; consumption demand reduction. This delimits the scope of the scenarios that came out of the workshops, like, for instance: a rooftop-based clothes washing and drying service (China); time-share offices workspace (Japan and USA); community networking (Korea); bicycle-centric cities (China); computer call-up bus service (Italy); and a home-made food service for office workers (India).\* The project presented many more examples and it is clear that for workshop participants it was a rich learning experience, but overall, one has to say, that what was finally presented was not very exciting and not the kind of stuff to spark imaginations or motivate activism. The 'solutions' paled in front of the scale of the problem, evcn on a let a million fowers blossom' model of change and action. There were also thrce massive absenccs: productivism and population (thc capitalist mantra of growth inscribed in all economic activity amplified by the still rapidly growing global population); the gigantic global explosion of squatter cities and thcir informal economies that often manifest extraordinarily creative sustaining design solutions and the crucial interface with the rural.

As an object of common focus Scenarios of Design can initially facilitate the gathering of conjunctural forces (like, situated crisis, critical actors and transformative knowledge) and people wishing to be change agents (be they architects, designers or others who design by default). In such a context, Scenarios of Design have the potential to provide a political frame forlearning and an affirnative confrontation with ethical responsibility. Such activity can be posed in relation to forms of local, organizational, singlc-issue or political party activism that, when well conducted, can engage whatevcr is dcemed in need of changc with a scenario able to voice and visualize constructive options to the resisted direction – this as an alternative to traditional forms of political opposition.

Scenarios of Design can also be mobilized by progressive staff and activist students against the kinds of institutional stasis common in architectural and design schools that remain locked into feeding the supply chain of architect/ designer service providers. Likewise, they can also be used as an cxploratory instrument by platform builders' within organizations who have initiatcd a change process, or as a vehicle of professional devclopmcnt, or both.

Effectively, Scenarios of Design can provide a mechanism for politicopractice in which ideas can be given a concrcte form and dialogues or narrativcs of change can be rehearsed in ways that enable participants to re-educate themselves via critical confrontations with things as they are versus how thcy could be. For this to happen, sccnario creation needs to be prefigured by:

1. A coherent change agenda - understanding what is desired to be changed from/to with the scenario being a means t• articulate this change.

2. The structuring of modes of cooperatiomn – the dymumics of the group working on the scenario itself begs design rather than chance.

3. The use of a deconstructive methodology able to undercut working from existing uncxamined foundations of thought.

4. A rigorous understanding of the problems that prompt the scenario (negotiating this activity itself can be socially and conceptually constructive) and an identification of hunan and non-human (object/things) change agents that the scenario would requirefor its realization.

It is from these pcrspectives that a Scenario ofDesign can expose and examine what design could be as a remade and remaking' applied intellectual practice created by forging conceptual and operational connections to redircctive thought and practice. Such scenarios could be considered as profoundly antiutopian means to extcnd and develop critical facility, intellectual influence and add political muscle to the existing and slowly growing, if fragmented, critical design community. All this is to say that rather than just devising a desired destination (utopian) the sccnarios cqually focus on how toget there. Scenarios of Design could also be employcd more widely to generte dynamic