beings in our failure to recognize that we are unknowingly throwing problems into the future while failing to deal with problems of thc present.

The fact that the philosophy of technology' has disclosed much about the character of technology is negated by the reality of it being uncritically embraced by the broader culture. At the same time, voices critical of technology havc increasingly been contained within its ever-shrinking academic enclave.⁵ Technological progress was once romanticized and celebrated. Now it is completely naturalized. In this respect, all technology is immersive. Certainly there are no visions of futures that are not technologically inflected – the point here is to understand that less technology is not necessarily antitechnology. We are already technological beings. Technology is like food – we cannot survive without it but we equally cannot survive with too much of it. In getting the diet balanced, we need to critically confront what technology is, what it does and how we exist in its shadow.

The challenge before us is how we can induce and maintain sufficient 'alienation' to negotiate new relations with technology that are more sustainable. This does not simply mean more environmental technologies, but rather, the arrival of a level of technological literacy within a regime of design intelligence' based on responsibility rather than mastery. Without this literacy, the ability to redirect anything technological would be at best very limited, at worst, non-existent.

## Design for Sustainability

So much of what travels under the various headings of 'design for sustainability'focuses on just the designed object itself – the materials from which it is made, the amount of energy embodied in it, its ability to be recycled, and so on. Now, these things are significant, but they do not ensure that a contribution to sustaining ability' is being made by the object. This can only happen if the object being designed is overdetermined by the design of the relations in which it is to be situated. The task thus becomes the designing of the object of design' so that it, in turn, can design sustaining 'relations and effects', to which form and function are subordinatc. From this position, we can consider, for instance, a 'grcen building' and an 'eco-designcd' product.

There is now a substantial tradition in the design of 'green buildings', accompanied by a plethora of green rating schemes that 'measure' a building's environmental performance. The US LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmcntal Design) schcme developed and run by memhers of the US Green Building Council is pcrhaps the best known internationally. Now, wlhile buildings that have been designed to take energy and environmental performancc into account arc unquestionably superior to those that do not, this does not mean they are sustainable. For the ability to sustain turns on three things: the nature of the building itself; how building uscrs use it; and what the building is used for.

While a building can be designcd to gain the highest possible grcen performance rating (in terms of energy efficiency, water conservation technologies, low impact materials and so forth) this does not determine that its users will realize its performative capability. At onc extremc, the building may have an electronically controlled building management system that takes away the control of intcrnal environments from the building users. Such systems can produce either passivity or resistance depending on, for instance, the setting of lighting levels or thermal comfort. Being in an office in which it is not possible to turn lights on or off, open the window or alter the temperature docs not exactly win people over to'sustainability'. Likewise, buildings with operable systems t• control air flows, light, heat and cooling only 'work' if users understand the system and use it appropriately. As is now being rccognizcd, beyond spccialist building services industry research, a building's performance can be as much determined by how it is commissioncd as by how it is designed. The key point is that people can make a 'green' building unsustainable and likewise an unsustainable building can contribute to sustainment by the way, and for what, it is used. This last observation takes us to the overwhclming factor in the cvaluation of a building's sustaining ability.

The key factor is what a building is uscd for. If occupied by an organization using it to extend the unsustainable by its productive, institutional or commercial activities then the sustaining contribution is negated - in this situation the building, despite its environmental performance, sustains the unsustainable. f course, the reaction by the designer and builder of such a building is that its use is beyond their control – an observation that returns us to relational design, redirective practice and the team.

However inconvenient and complex, if sustainment is the objective, then design problems just have to be addressed relationally. ●bviously this means, in the case of buildings, the establishment of structures that bring the commercial interests of developers, building owners, building users, architects, builders, engineers under the umbrella of redirective practice. It means a new design discourse, new kinds of teams and forms of collaboration that transcend base commercial interest. No matter how hard this is, to capitulate to the tunsustainable is the only other, and a worse, option. ●f course, as we shall see, this kind of activity requires a shift in economic paradigms.

Briefly turning to eco-designed products, let's consider, say a remanufactured photocopier (a photocopier refurbished after 'take-back' by its initial maker to give it a second life) and a boardroom table and chairs custommade from recycled red-gum flooring after the demolition of a wool store warehouse. Again these objects are unambiguously of environmcntal value – they reduce the takeup of natural resources and energy, while at the same time providing employment. Yet again they are only able to properly contribute to sustainment if configured within a set of relations that compound toward realizing the same end.

The most ‘advanced' model of eco-design is the ‘cradle to cradle' approach.7

This positions a product in a closed (autopoietic) loop characterized by a material metabolism – it becomes its own boundary for the dynamic circulation of its material elements (cyclical recycling). lor example, imagine a vacuum-injected plastic garden chair that, at the end of its life, could be traded in for a new one exactly the same, while the old chair is ground up. Accumulated volumes of this material are returned to the manufacturer who uses it to produce chairs identical with the original. While this model, based on mimicking the cycling of nutrients in organic systems is progressive, in itself it is no solution. In fact it can even obstruct perceptions of relational connections because it does not question what is producedand what, in turn, the product itself might design. Moreover, the kind of thinking that underpins this approach can again so easily fold into 'sustaining thc unsustainable' and support a continual growth capitalist economy. While products may be cradle to cradle' this in no way limits the volume of products produced, nor does it deal with the need to make distinctions betwecn short-life products (for which the approach is appropriatc) or etcrnal' products (for which it is far less relevant). But above all, it is not framed by thc need to decide if a product should or should not be eliminated by design.

In both the case of the building and thc product, relational design, managed via rcdircctive practice, inscribcs the designed with a futuring agency. While they are designed to meet functional requirements, what they essentially exist to deliver is time

ne understanding of dcsign resonates throughout this book: 'whatevcr is designcd and brought into being goes on designing'. lesign, again in all its shades from urban to fashion, from products to software, cannot contribute to the advancement of sustainment without fully comprehendingthe implications of 'the designing of the designcd'.

## From Products to Services⁸

Hopes were high over a decadc ago with thc arrival of the idea of scrvices and sharing (washing machines, cars, power tools, lawn mowers) or immaterialization (email, e-books) replacing many of the material products of everyday life. The argumcnt for services and sharing displacing products is not over yet but none of it is as easy as expectcd. Issucs of convcniencc, and tbe fact that demand is not evenly spread but bunched into particular time zones, are a problcm. For example mowing thc lawn at the weckend, or needing a car in the school holidays. Likewise computcr-based forms of immaterialization proved not to be quite what they seemcd once it was cxposed just how much energy it took to kecp the massive servers that support web-based activities up and running. Questions of taking responsibility for the maintenance ofshared