in a world made inhospitable. While this situation may not yet be inevitable, humanity's future is perilously balanced.

The establishment of the Sustai nmcnt is beyon d the reach of technology and our technological being. As has been made clear in many ways, sustain-ability is as much a cultural as a technological project. The nature of technology is inherently dialectical - it is both unsustainable and sustaining; it briřgs what we depend on into being and it takes it away. To have any chance of dealing with this, and our mostly uncritical relationship with technology, there need to be cultures in which it is possible to counter the now overwhelming ontological designing of our technological being.

## The Sustainment and the Enlightenment

As we have seen, 'sustainability' is mainly presented as a discoursc within the realm of technology. As such, it is lodged in an Enlightenment paradigm epitomized by Francis Bacon's Norun Organum of 1620 - a work that positioned nature as that ●ther' over which humanity, via technology, could incrcasc its power. Overt, direct violencc against 'the natural' has diminished. Yet it still continues indirectly as the collateral' damage from our very being – the rampant felling of native forests and land clearing still happens on a vast scale; new and seemingly more benign toxicforms of elimination have arrived (indirectly from industrial emissions, industrial and domestic waste, and directly via the deliberate application of chemicals like pesticides); complex chemical compounds not known in nature accumulate invisibly in the fatty tissues of many creatures, with concentrations in the food chain triggering defects and mutations (many still poorly understood). At the same time, technology has been employed to constitute a world of artifice, the scale and complexity of which has fused the natural and the artificial. We humans have not, of course, simply been bystanders watching the events of technological modernity unfold. We have been both active causal agents of technological developments and victims of them. It is, however, a mistake to assume that we have remained the same while technology has continually changed, for in reality, to reiterate, technology has profoundly changed us in body and mind. We see and understood the world technologically, not least via the 'worldpicturing' consequenccs of the televisual.

The more technology has proliferated, fused with information and structured the activitics of everyday life, the more it has evaporated as an object of anxiety (in the 150s there were still people frightened to use the telephone; 100 years ago there was fear of automobiles running out of control and 150 years ago the fear was of steam trains sctting thc countryside ablaze). Although technology has become so naturalized, the view persists that it is still under human control. It is still not generally grasped that there is now no longer a clear dlistinction between technology and us. Morcover, those theoretically informed critical positions that expose the contradictions and psycho-cultural complexity of technology are universally becoming rarer.

Interestingły, the critics of technology of the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s came from both left and right, popular culture and rigorous philosophy. For example, Theodor Adorno and Max lorkheimcr cite The Rockefeller Foundation Revie of 1943 in their seminal collection of essays, Dialectic of Enlghtenment (which they wrote during the Second World War) – The supreme question which confronts our generation today – the question to which all other problcms are merely corollaries – is whether technology can be brought under control ... Nobody can be sure of the formula by which this end can be achieved ... We must draw on all the resources to which access can be had ...²

The 'supreme question' did not spark a major public debate. The situation in which humanity now finds itself did not arrive accidentally but via the inscription of material forms of the world we' ourselves designed and created. The process continues. Education, for instance, has bccome as much an induction into the operational and metaphysical sphere of technology as it is an induction into a culture of live learning.

We need to remind oursclves that the Sustainment as an opening moment and process is posed against functionalist and ever more linguistically evacuated uses of the concept of sustainability. Increasingly, onc sees and hears sustainability evoked as if its meaning was self-evident (thc triple bottom line' rhetoric of environmcntal, social andeconomic sustainability has clearly added to the gestural use of the term). What and how to identify the unsustainable, and what exactly needs to be sustained, just cannot be addressed by this rhetoric. In the frame of these remarks, thc Sustainment is offered as a prefigurative idea demanding realization through design. It demands what needs to be unlearncd and learned in order to enable us, individually and collectively, to sustain ourselves. It is not just a qucstion of more knowledge but thc crasure of what we have formally and informally learnt in error. It demands a shift away from forms of exchangc disengaged from the processes of foundational exchange of interdependent ecologies.

The reality of the current situation is that commodities (materials and artcfacts) that are exchanged within an economy have either a benign or negative relation to the generaleconomy' – which is the very ground of all that is substance, ecology and environmcnt. Neither the relation of commodities to the general economy nor the actual nature of that economy is adequatcly understood (for instance, an environmental impact' may be identified, but the systemic consequences of that impact may not be understood or even recognized). As the dialectic of sustainment' articulates, human action will always be destructivc; thcre is, however, an enormous dividc bctwccn not knowing and knowing this fact and thereafter making critical dccisions in the light of this knowledge. The Sustainment also demands the incredibly challenging abandonment of wealth generated by the current economic model, based as it is, on pcrpetual growth.

Mecting all these demands does not equate to a single political ideology or an orthodoxy of forms'. Such demands can only bc rcalized through a circumstantially directed, paradigmatic shift in thc collective condition of humanity as the move from settlement to unsettlement (the age, as was said earlier, that is coming) ruptures a sense of the world remaining the same. With the arrival of the traumatic circumstances of unsettlement, different kinds of situated action, based on the imperative of sustainment would both test 'our' continued will to be' and our ability to act in common toward the common good.

It is worth remembering here that the Enlightenment was a prefigurativc project driven by a profound dissatisfaction with 'the state of the world' and the nature of knowledge about it. Its ambition was to establish a mode of thought and inquiry (reason) against the unrcason of the mythic that would become widcspread and eventually naturalized. In so doing, two modes of inquiry emerged (the Arts and the Science) as divisions of knowledge within philosophy. What the Enlightenmcnt failed to recognize was the value of embedded wisdom carried by many of the traditions and narrativcs that were labelled as ignorancc and superstition. Equally, it overlooked reason itself becoming a mythic article of faith, notwithstanding it becoming the West's naturalized mode of thought, which it globally mobilized with enormous intellectual and instrumental power. lt is widely recognized that through the creation of thc institutions of reason (science, law, politics and so on) the Enlightenment advanccd the goal of dclivering the means of human emancipation from superstition and the 'ravages of nature'. But it also becamc clear that the foundations of thought upon which reason stood werc neither totally firm nor faultless (not lcast in relation to anthropocentrism).3

ln support of the magnitudc of the propositions put forward, it is worth remembering that the Enlightenment existed as a promoted idea prior to becoming a generalized cultural condition of knowledge directing the successes as well as the limitations of the modern world. A key Enlightenment thinker, lmmanuel Kant, posed and answered the question 'What is Enlightenment?' within the milieu of a group of German Enlightenment thinkers (the Society of the Friends of Truth - a gathering of kindred spirits who had adoptcd the motto Dare to know'from Ars Poetica by the Roman Lyric poet, Horace). For Kant, daring to know becamc daring to reason, with reason coming to be viewed as a power of human emancipation (freeing a bcing from the tutelage of the will of others).

An enormous amount has been written on the success and failure of the Enlightenment, not least in relation to idealisin and the hollow victory of reason now manifest in the hegemony of technology. ur aim at this point is simply to assert the historical precedent and transformative power of a big idea' and to asscrt the necd to go beyond a critiquc (postmodcrnism) of those past ideas that drove modernity, with its unsustainable core, to an idea of future worldly habitation – the Sustainment. Yet irrespective of the strength of the idca of