sustainment, it is not sufficient in itsclf - there also has to be the desire to sustain grounded through the qualities of what is designated to be sustained. Rather than a foriri of utopian dreaming, the desire for Sustainment cannot bo for anything other than a work – one requiring a protracted political project, a great deal of labour and much courage. Contrary to the unsustainable being surmounted by the arrival of a solution delivered by a product, a technology or system, the whole notion of redirection is based on recognizing that thc task is a continual labour intrinsic to our being – the unsustainable is part of the price of our existence. As stated in various ways, all we can possibly do is to make time.

## The Dialectic of Sustainment

The Sustainment speaks to the thinking, desiguing and making of sustainabilities in the face of defuturing. This task is extraordinarily difficult to grasp as an overall vision of process, but nonctheless it is vital to embrace. To help do this, let's revisit and further elaborate the concept of the dialectic of sustainment'.

To start with, it is not possible to evoke the notion of the dialectic without introducing complexity, controversy and a brief history. As a methiod of forcing knowledge to reveal itself in a dialogue based on questions and answers, dialectics was demonstrated by Socrates and in the dialogical style of thought of Plato, who asscrted in the Republic that it delivered supreme knowledge. However, dialectics seems to have been first systematically used in the third century Bc by the founder of Stoic philosophy, Zeno, a followcr of Parmcnides. Aristotle later incorporated dialectics into his method of logic, defining it as reasoning from the basis of probabilities. ●ut of this history, dialectics becamc frmly lodged in the rise of Western thought, and as such re-emerged as an object of engagement at various moments in the history of philosophy. lor instance, it reappeared in the twelfth century in the writings of Scholastic philosopher Abelard, who employed a mode of argument based on putting a casc both for and against his postulated proposition. Equally, a concern with dialectics was part of Enlightenment thought - lmmanuel Kant viewed dialectics as flawed reasoning that led to specious argument. In contrast, Hegel, its greatest champion, claimed it as a specific logic of thought, generally, but inadequately, characterized as a process in which contradiction and thcn the reconciliation of contradiction occurs by working through thcsis, antithesis and finally, synthesis.

Arguments over forms of dialectics continued into the nineteenth and twentieth centuries – the most overt example being Karl Marx who claimed to have turned 'Hegel on his head', dialectical (historical) materialism supposedly usurping its idealist form. Notwithstanding the shadow of Hegel, no consensus on the meaning of dialectics can be given. The very notion goes to the core of the relation between concepts, meaning and language. As Theodor Adorno observed, 'the name of dialectics says no more, to begin with, than most objects do not go into their concepts without leaving a remainder, that then comes to contradict . .."4

By implication, whatever we name, whatever we identify, there is also that which evades, escapes, is other and supplementary. Truth is thus never simply a victory over untruth but a perpetual struggle with its own internal negation. Long before deconstruction arrivcd and embraced this idea, dialectical thought had acknowledged such a condition. It follows that dialectics itself is not free, and cannot be liberated, from the condition of limitation it speaks.\$

ne cannot think 'the dialectic of sustainment' outside of the implications of such thinking. And one cannot think 'the dialectic of sustainment' scicntifically, for in its enfolding of contradiction dialectics is profoundly unscientific. Dialectically, sustainment depends upon the creation of nonscientific thought beyond the limitation and exhaustion of the humanities. Sustainment means nothing without grasping its unbreakable bond to unsustainment, which is its very ground – this is one reason why so much of the rhetoric of sustainability, with its quietism on (or assumptions about) unsustainability, lacks the possibility of ethical decision.

Recasting the earlier observation on the dialecticai character of sustainment, one can say: destruction and creation are indivisibly implicated in each other – the onc always coexisting with the other. What is created or what is destroyed can be comprehended as negation or affirmation. To bring something into existence is to create a force that can, slowly or rapidly, sustain or undermine the very essence of being itself. Likewise, whatever we destroy, can open or close the possibility of affirmative creation. To take this analysis to the project of advancing the Sustainment requires identifying what has to be destroyed as wcll as what has to be created and thereafter finding the appropriate means to do both.

Brought to the relation between ethics and practice, responsibility is actually enacted by deciding what to materially and symbolically make and what to destroy. As settlement becomes unsettlement, such acts of redirective decision are preconditions for establishing the epochal shift that the Sustainment names. Designing directed by the decision of what needs to be destroyed and created' should not be viewed as just the means by which immaterial and material things are positively changed but, more fundamentally, as part of the ground of redirective practices which all redirective practitioners need to occupy as they strive to advaice sustain-ability thougl tleir material and symbolic actions. Grasping the nature and application of the dialectic of sustainment' recasts the importance and application of 'design for elimination as this decision depends upon a very clear understanding of what needs to be created and sustained. In kceping with how the dialectic of sustainment' has been characterized, we should understand that the disclosure of negation – although providing a focus for what bas to be eliminated, destroyed or unmade – may also bring t• light what sustains, or what can be remade as sustainable by a redirective intervention.

## On Remaking

Sitting between the task of elimination and creation (of tbe new) is the huge challenge of remaking what already exists so that it is able to be transformed into an agency of sustain-ability.

Remaking, so framed, embraces not solely material changes, like retroftting but also the intellectual project of exposing the foundations of thought to remake thinking (a very different exercise from 'rethinking' with the way we already think) in ordcr to think with sustain-ability. While remaking can mean a literal disassembly and re-creation of some thing, it can equally leave an objcct-thing totally untouched, but rather transform how it is viewed and used by radically changing its meaning and status (as with rccoding). Remaking does not just have to be limited to cngaging specific ideas or objects. It can also be characterized in a larger frame as creating a mode of our being-in-the-world toward-sustainment' - a way of being in an unsustainable world based on working to remake what is to hand as sustainable. The 'dialectic of sustainment' here becomes a lived condition of informed action of responsibility to one's own 'anthropocentric self.' In contrast to a sustainability profcssional' or a saving-the-planet-environmentalist' the intluence of such a person is not based on the limited material attainments of a single individual turned in on itself, but on what Confucius called an exemplary person'- a model to be emulated.

Although remaking cannot restore thc already destroycd, it is possible to destroy many forces of destruction and recover, recreate and reanimate numerous agents of material, immaterial and cultural sustainment. What is being evoked by these remarks is overwvhelmingly sobering, extrcmely confronting, replete with positive opportunities and absolutely vital to confront. Few people have glimpsed this vista, either as a transformation of daily routines or, more dramatically, as a mind-spinning challenge to onc's imagination and skills. Certainly, it adds a great deal to the potential of redirective practice and design.

The Sustainment names the only possible way to maintain the most critical frecdoms of 'being-in-the-world'. This implies the imposition of control over the still unchecked expansion ofdefuturing unsustainability that reduces freedom to market choicc.7 We should recall that a fundamental principle of civil society is that freedom is dependent upon limit and control (freedom under the law'). This fundamental principle dcmands being rcapplied to the current unstable socio-political world, because societies wishingto be sustained have to impose new limits and controls in thc face of the unsustainable. Imposition of controls obviously incorporates a good deal of existing cnvironmental regulation, but more radically, asserts an extensive control of 'the free market'. Obviously, such action puts democracy firmly before a critical gaze, while throwing up some extrcmely confronting questions, like: can the imposition of limit and controls, essential for sustain-ability, arrive democratically'?