materials they are constructed from, how they function, what they look like, thc energy invested in them and the financial-material investment in their production technologics. They need cither to have an extremely long life or to be easy to remanufacture, fully cycle or be disposed of without environmental costs. Likewrise, there may be some products that need to be dematcrialized by service substitution (providing these services du actually reducc impacts). More fundamentally, many things nced re-conceptualizing as composite objects, likc multi-tech roofs designed to generatc power, harvest rainwater, provide hail impact protection and provide growing space for light vegetable crops. Extending this thinking invites us to contemplate the rclation bctween the creation of 'quality things' and 'things eliminated'.

## Transforming Being with Things

Rematerialization is a concept that brings quality to action and links it to thc self. One of the stratcgies of rematcrialization would involve displacing machines with existing or improved hand tools and recoding the cxperience of using thcm as a means of learning for disclosure (being in touch with circumstances and the quality of material things). One can, for instance, displace thc motor mower by the mechanical mower, the car by new kinds of servo-assisted pedal power tricycles, the petrol engine powered leaf-blower by a traditional garden broom, the electricfood mix er by a hand-powered device and so on. There is the possibility here of gaining a sensc of achievement through learning and exercising new skills. Seeding these 'developments' to become a trend means taking back control of one's immediate physical world to reduce invested energy and materials, as well as helping to sustain the self. In a world made unsustainable, in so many ways, 'labour saving' has become 'life threatening'.

Rematerialization is in fact inseparable from remaking. W'hat is to be remade is often modest and mundane but it provides a differcnt path to the world in which we' dwell physically, functionally, aesthetically and emotionally. ('We' here has to be understood inclusively - it is we of more than one social class, culture, gendcr, age group, politics, religion etc – any notion that sustain-ability is a middle-class and Wcstern concern has to be busted apart.)

## Creating Major Changes in Modes of Dwelling

Somehow, and sooner ratherthan latcr, how we dwell in our selves (our inncr dwelling) and how wc dwell in the world with all other beings has to changc radically. For this to happen, a culture vcry different from thc current cultures in dominance has to emerge. This culture would recognize: the impossibility of transcending anthropocentrism but the importance of learning how to understand and take responsibility for our being anthropocentric. At the same time, such a culture would accept that how human beings have acted in the past has rendered biophysical ecologies unstable but it would not put absolute faith in science and technology to rectify this situation especially so that today's energy and material-intensive lifestyles are able to continue on as normal'. Instead, it would seek, via changcd modes of dwelling, to adapt to the different conditions that. are beginning to unfold due to the coming of unsettlemcnt. The idea that there are solutions to the kinds of problems that humanity is starting to face is misplaced. Some problems may be solved, many will not and we will have to learn to live with them adaptively.

Fundamentally, while science (and technology) should he appropriately mobilized to deal with some of the symptoms of our unsustainability, the causes, in the most general sense, require that we change how we dwell Such change can only be creatcd by cultural means that modify how one sees and acts in (and on) 'the world' in which one fnds oneself. These changes are essential and become part of the crucial political, ethical and economic transformations that can feed the rise of a culture of sustainment.

## A Last Remark

It behoves al} conccrned, responsible and critical thinkers and actual, or potentialredirective practitioners to claborate, refine, rcview and extend debate on the quality economy' concept. The investment in quality and the cost and return from those 'things that could be' beg to be grasped as ways of creating and distributing considcrable wealth from a dramatically smaller material footprint. The promotion and development of the idea of a quality economy' could equally counter the un-freedom carried by the unsustainability of the status quo. The quality cconomy, as it has been claboratcd here, also exposes the inability of current political and cconomic structures to imposc the limits that sustainment will demand (to secure the freedom that is being). Hcre thcn is the nexus of design, the political and new economic thought. What has been presented here does not pretend to be an adequately developed theory of a quality economy. It is merely indicative of an idea that begs a major project of plural contributions in its own right.