toward a peak of 9 billion to 1ì billion - are daunting. Design, as framed by redircctive practice, is poised before all of this, facing creative challcnges like humanity has never known before.

Even with a critical mass of redirective designers, the challenges are mindbogglingly huge. In a vast numbers of cases it is not a matter of tryingto deliver solutions - while some problems can be solved in the short or long time, many cannot. For instance, an ice-shelf cannot be refrozen, a recently extinct animal cannot be brought back to life, a logged and soil-eroded mountainside cannot be replanted, tle victims of war cannot be raised from the dead and cultures ethnocidally devastated cannot be restored. In many cases, the challenges to be faced are a matter of finding ways to adapt to changed circumstances. There is an interesting example of this currently in Australia where there is a slow move away from the idea that the severe drought that has held the nation in its grip for many years is not going to cnd; rather it is normality' - it's the ncw climate. As previously indicated, fornis of 'design for sustainability' can, and in many cases try, to give the inpression that once thcy dominate the mainstream it can be 'business as usual.' This is not the casc. There are clearly progressive innovations that can lighten our collective planetary footprint and make a contribution to futuring but there are also others that are counterproductive and simply sustain the unsustainable.

## Assessing the Efficacy of Change Agents

Having considered the nature of a new practice, given some thought to how it can be strategically mobilized and examined some of the contexts in which design remade is able to function, wc now need to consider how the affirmative idea of futuring and the moment and culture of sustainment can be communicated. ls it merely a question of finding an existing medium to hitch a ride on or is it a matter of creating new change agents? T answer this question let's start by a rapid assessmcnt of the currently available, or claimed global change agents.

Notwithstanding growing concern by many governments, citizens and corporations, the scale of the problem of escalating unsustainability is in no way matched by the global response. As seen with climate change, the dominant view (by degree) is that action should not be at the cxpense' of the cconomic status quo. The assessment that follows is based upon personal expcrience and a particular political perspective, which means that it speaks from a position of bias rather than claiming objectivity.

There is a cavcat to make: the overview presented can only give a very general impression, which means that exceptions exist both in terms of the actions of particular individuals, groups and programmes within particular change agents as well as how some actors manage to appropriate and redirect the change agent's intent. And thcre is onc unambiguous ground rule: a problem cannot be responded to unless it is faced. This must not be confused with either doomsaying or pessimism. No matter how bad the problem, there can be no grounds for optimism unless it is directly confronted. All othcr positions are idealistically deceptive and, notwithstanding good intent, must be viewed accordingly. We will usc this position as a means of briefly assessing the options.

Table I Evaluation of Change Agents/lnstruments
<table><tr><td>Change Agents / hnstruments</td><td>Discussion and Evaluation</td><td>Rated Efect</td></tr><tr><td>Govermment (policy and institutions)</td><td>At their best, these instruments do contri'bute to the protection of the natural environment, not least by</td><td>Moderate to low</td></tr><tr><td>- Environmental Protection</td><td>regulating polluters and forrs of pollution, but they equally partition 'the environnent' from other policy areas, especially the economic. Thus they function</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Authori'tics, environmcntal</td><td>with restrict've understandings of both environment</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>legislation, Land and Environment Courts</td><td>and 'sustainability'. Such instruments are part of the status quo rather than agents of its transformation.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Ghange Agents/ Instruments</td><td>Discussion and Evaluation</td><td>Rated Effect"</td></tr><tr><td>International conventions</td><td>The Kyoto Protocol is undoubtedly the best known of these – it has been outstandingly ineffectual in reducing global greenlouse gas emissions, or even making clear that its targets were moderate starting points towards tlhe major reductions (80%+) that are actually needed. ther conventions ainied at protecting, e.g whales, ocean fish stock and rainforests have been no more effective. Likewise, action against arms reduction has been weak and the containment of nuclear arms proliferation is on the verge of collapse.</td><td>Low</td></tr><tr><td>Environmental globalism – UNEP The Earth Charter, UN Millennium goals</td><td>Getting the world to march in step to reduce the ongoing impacts of unsustainability, with currently available instruments of clange is proving to be exceptionally hard. Problem defnition is poor, focusing on symptoms rather causes. Likewise, levels of international solidarity are low, with national economic and ideological interests overriding the common good. Available instruments mostly span the aims of sustanable development and humanitarianism. United Nations Environmental Progranuues are diverse and have a strong technocentric bias. While programmes that bring infrastructure, like potable water and renewable energy to cmmunities of need, do improve the quality of people's lives they also suffers from the general gesturalism, lack of vision and bureaucratic stasis that marls the work of so many UN agencies. The Earth Charter is the motherhood of all motherhood statements, and while there is</td><td>Moderate to low</td></tr><tr><td>Change Agents / Instruments</td><td>Discussionand Evaluation</td><td>Rated Effect*</td></tr><tr><td>Environmental economics, carbon trading and ethical investment</td><td>All these in struments go to the greening of capitalisn. At best, they can have positive impact reduction results. At worst, they sinply become a neans of money-makers fnding a way to maintain 'business as usual'. Environmental economics does not delivcr a fundamental paradigmatic break, and carbon trading is stlll a fragmented activity of moderate to bad programmes. Its ability to bccome global and effective is questionable and seemingly many years away. Ethical investment is a good idca that lacks a material ground - ethical corporations to invest in (as a rcsult, its investment base is low and in many corporate</td><td>Low to moderate 一</td></tr><tr><td>Natural capltalism and corporate sustainability</td><td>cases, questionable). 'Natural Capitalism' is a bioccntric path t• perpetual growth with a mix of good and weak ideas. Corporate sustainability when taken seriously can reduce the negative impacts of a conpany's activıties, but so casily can simply begreen-washing'.</td><td>Moderate</td></tr><tr><td>Environmental ethics</td><td>As a backwater of philosophy, this sub-discipline is weak and biooentric and has almost no agency or influenoe. Emerging out ol' concerns of the early environmental movement, it nceds a radical conceptual makeover to break out of its condition of limitation.</td><td>Low</td></tr><tr><td>Environmental edutcation</td><td>This is a very broad area of educational activity from primary' school to postgraduate. 1t is an amazingly mixed bag, spanning the worst of fuzzy thinking about 'naturc' to the best and most insightful methods of engaging how humanity currently dwells in the world and neods to do so in other ways. It is extremely important for it to trauscend its original naturalistic terms of reference to embrace the naturalized artificial.</td><td>Moderate but potentially high</td></tr><tr><td>Change Agents / Instruments</td><td>Discussion and Evaluation</td><td>Rated Effect</td></tr><tr><td>The environmental movement</td><td>The environment movement, spanning single issue activı'st groups through to broader ranging non- government organizations and 'green' political parties, contains many dedicated people often taking valued practical action. At the samc tinie, as environmental gesturalisnı has become part o the mainstream, it has in large part, to coin the phrase President Eisenhower directed at Britain after the Second World War lost an empire without fnding a role. Thus it either changes, not least by gaining an informed cultural and design agenda, or dies.</td><td>Low</td></tr><tr><td>Consumeraction</td><td>Household recycling, cnvironmentally friendly products', envirormuental labelling, etc. Such action makes a con tribution but this is minor in relation to: (1) the overall impacts of households and (2) the nature, volume, global growth and dependence of existing economies upon 'consumption'.</td><td>Low</td></tr><tr><td>'Sustainable Design'</td><td>Substantial comment on the strengths and weaknesses Moderate of the shades of 'green aud sustainable design' has been madein this text. This indicated it tobe a mixed bag of positives and negatives, the main weakness being that it puts nearly all eggs in the green teclnologies'basket.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>The spark of a moment of crisis</td><td>While not an agency in any institutional sense, there is widespread belief that the radical changes that sustainability demands are not going to arrive until a really dramatic environmcntal crisis occurs. This position is dangerous and limited. It falls in behind positions that defer action that needs t take place now. It is limnited by the fact that the crisis is already,</td><td>N/A</td></tr><tr><td>Change Agents/ Instruments</td><td>Discussion and Evahation</td><td>Rated Effect</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">The great conference in the sky</td><td>here but time measured from the perspective of a human lifetime fails to see th'is. Moreover, the tendency is for people who are not directly affected by a crisis to go on living normally.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Conferences can ●bviously be useful ways to share ideas and make contacts. Certainly theygive scholars an important forum in which to be tested. At the same time, there are many large talkfests' that are high in rhetoric and political posturing and low in actually leading t practical action or the advancement of thought and understanding. The most negative aspect ofsuch five-star-hotel-flown-in-from-four- corners-of-the-globe eveuts is they are treated as substitutes for doing anything about the issues they are meant to engage: climate change; HIV AIDS, urban development, whaling, being afew examples.</td><td>L●w</td></tr><tr><td>Fun, fun, fun</td><td>Here we are dealing with a strategy rather than an agency, but as it (in various forms) is common, it invites comment. The notion is that whatever the form of communication - a conference, book, TV documentary, course, and so on -it has to be entertaining to attract and hold an audience. While this may work for some, the reality is that once the going gets tough the fun seekers get going – out th e door! Unfashionable, it may be, butit is crucial to be serious about serious problems,</td><td>Low</td></tr></table>

What follows in Table 2 are some of the forms of action that earlier chapters have put forward. Some have a proven track record, other not, because they are still nascent and have yet to develop institutions and modes of organization. Here rating effectiveness is left for the reader.

Table 2 Evaluation of Projected Change Agents/Instruments\*
<table><tr><td>Change Agents/ Instruments</td><td>Discussion and Evaluation</td></tr><tr><td>Leadership in practice</td><td>The frame of redirective practice as a common idea having the possibility of permeatng different practices, allowing uncoordinated activity to travel in different ways to the same goal.</td></tr><tr><td>Design redesigned with rigour and risk</td><td>This is what is iinplied in all the ways design has been talked about. It means inside and outside senice relations, architects and designers become more active and effective change agents for sustainment.</td></tr><tr><td>A new sovereignty</td><td>ur current freedoms exist by dint of freedom under the law&#x27;, our future freedom will, it has been argued, only exist by dint of &#x27;freedom under the rule of sustainment.&#x27;</td></tr><tr><td>Designing in other ways</td><td>No matter if it is designing with the already designed, designing for elimination, design for a changing cliniate, designing in time – design has to change.</td></tr></table>

«Unrated.

From this brief review it is fair to say that most of the available 'change agents' rerain institutionally hide-bound, functioning with perceptions and practices grounded in the past rather than being orientated toward the future. Given this situation, this book has argued that there is an enormous task to develop and communicate the critical importance of a redefined and clearly elaborated role for design within tle frame of redirective practice. It is thus critical that the potential of redirective practice be grasped as a futuring form of action that can be very mobile, and that can move between and link formalized and informal spaces.