## On the Hinge: Turning towards Change

Knowing is never enough. In so many ways, in so many contexts, we, as the members of the more privileged classes of our planet (the assumption here is that to be in a position to read this book is to be privileged) already know what to do, but we fail to do it. Certainly, there arc political, econonnic and institutional obstacles in our path, but equally there arc intellectual and emotional obstructions. We tend to focus on the superstructural features of our life (our careers, homes, social relations, education, interests and pleasures) and neglect the foundations upon which all these things stand. We neither feel nor really understand our connectedncss to all that allows us to be, our being 'flesh of the world'. We do not feel our umsustainability beyond occasional touches of guilt as we fill-up our car's fuel tank, look at the contents of our supermarket trolley or check-in at the airport for a flight that we really can't justify. Certainly, few of us feel the tyranny of our human centredness. But we have to – being unsustainable has to hurt. This pain has very little to do with feeling guilty because we are 'consumers'. Rather it is about facing the fact that we are part of an age that's killing the future. It's the pain of knowing this, thinking we are helpless and making the best of our livcs in these circumstaices. To move forward we have to come to terms with the discovery of what we have become in our homelessness and isolation - in making a world we have almost lost the world, in becoming individuals we have lost common unity. Everything that has been said in the foregoing chapters is a rejection of helplessness. The claim is not that design redirected will provide the means to get us from where we collectively are to where we need to be, but rather, that is what we need to make it d•. We are at a moment unique in our being, we stand on the hinge. In one direction it folds toward struggle, but a future nevertheless; the other direction folds towards our suffering the fate of our own defuturing. To choose requires we know what choice we arc making.

## Example: A History of'The Impossible

The aim here is to expose the nature of the relation between language and perception. This task is akin to demonstrating Ludwig Wittgenstein's famous dictum – 'the limits of my language mean the limits of my world'.¹ For all of us who attempt to grasp the scale, complexity and seriousncss of the problems the human race currently faces, it can seem that overcoming them is actualy impossiblc. Yet we need to ask if we actually can, in fact, distinguish between what, at any given moment, is empirically impossible from what our limited perceptual reach tells us is impossible. For instance, for almost thc cntirety of human history, saying that a human being will walk on the moon would have been regarded as stating the impossiblc, yet we know it has happcned.

We can all think of examples of people, individually or collectively, who havc attained the impossible. In many respects, the history of the impossible is thc history of humanity. As purvcyors of the 'dialectic of sustainment', we, in all our difference, have created worlds and things and have gained destructive capabilities beyond the imagination of people even a hundred years ago. Clearly, the complexity, scope and ambition of the project of thc Sustainment that has been put forward by this book, is both essential and utterly reasonablc, but at the same time many people will regard it as absolutely impossible.Notwithstandinga bleak analysis and the total inadequacy of current action against the forces of defuturing unleashed by human action as they travel towards us from the past, loom in the present and threaten us from the future, it has to be affrmed that the history of humanity is a history of the realization of the impossible. The vast majority view large challenges in a condition of perceptual limitation – this was true in the past, and is so in the prcsent.

For humanity to have a significant and active possibility of making a future thcre are essentially thrce challenges that require to be met: (1) resolving as many as possible of those environmental problems that we, in whole or part, have bcen responsible for causing; (2) adapting to those environmental conditions and problems that we are helpless to resolve, at least in thc forcseeable future; and (3) hardest of all, transforming how we act if not what we are so we can cease generating the level of destruction, conflict and inequity that threatens our continuity.

Such a transformation means transforming all that brings us into being beyond our biological determninants. lt means creating a culture centred on Sustainment, countering our being designed into 'the inhuman' by the technologies of our invention and remaking our worldly conduct by remaling our own world and our mode of dwelling as a condition of care. Wc are unable to will ourselves to be other than we are en masse. In this situation, there are only two alternatives: highly socio-culturally directive political regimes (which history tełls us are neither attractive nor effective); or, to bring another world into being by design.

Underpinning so much of what has been said is the proposition that for design to usher in less destructive modes of worldly habitation, it has to be far more overtly ontologically directive/redirective. Notwithstanding earlier qualifications made on determinism, any objection that this is unacceptably deterministic would be ill-founded. To be human is to be detcrmined; and to be a late-modern globalized human being is to be a victim of instrumental and cconomic determinism. The issue then is: 'what is to bc determined by the designing of the designed so that we ct more responsibly in and on the world in which we fnd our self? This question acknowledges that we are, and need to be, plural in the formation of the differences that constitute a culture of sustainment.

## The Final Word

For humanity to continue to have a future as a species, the impossible has to be attained. To do this, an as yet unquantified critical mass of us has to overcomc the existing limits of mind, imagination and action. The question here is not where to start, because the start has been made but how to increase our ability, numbers and efficacy. What appears here, in this book, has aspired to make a contribution to opening and advancing this omnicritical project. The measure of its success rests with its readers. At this final point in striving to help bring the enormous redirective power of design into being and then out of the shadows' there are a series of comments made in the book's preface that beg replaying, be it with a little tinkering:

1. All human beings are designers (the ability to prefigure being de facto one of the characteristics that defines the nature of being human)

2. Some human beings develop their ability to design, make it clemental to their identity and in many cases earn their living so doing.

3. The objective of the entire book has been to expand how design is understood, practised and what it is mobilizcd for and against

4. The appeals made to the reader as a designer, which has been the dominant characterization of the reader, have bcen based on the notion of the reader as equally

\- the desigter (the I' that calls itself a designer) and

– anyone for whom design is an intrinsic part of their practice, conceptually or practically.