# A Note on Design Teams

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Design futuring ： sustainability, ethics, and new practice -- Tony Fry -- 1, Lon\Design futuring ： sustainability, ethics, and new practice -- Tony Fry -- 1, Lon\Design futuring ： sustainability, ethics, and new practice -- Tony Fry -- 1, Lon\auto\Design futuring ： sustainability, ethics, and new practice -- Tony Fry -- 1, Lon.md

## A Note on Design Teams

Design tcams are now a prerequisite for almost all large and complex design projects. Frequently, team members stay very much within their disciplinary comfort zones. Various team-building and bonding methods havc been employed to improve team performance – approaches vary. Assembling teams that mix members with broad areas of knowledge and problem-solving capabilities together with others with highly specific 'deep' knowledge and problem-solving skills is one favoured approach. Another is to surround the tean's object of engagement with a range of specialists all focussing on the sane problem from their diffcrcnt perspectives. Can redirective practice providc an alternative way of creating and operating a team? The quickest and most immediate answer is ycs. Redirective practice can provide team members with a shared meta-foundation of knowledge and a common political objective. Team developmcnt commences assuming solidarity and a shared theoretical framework (relationality) that itself facilitates the positioning and exchange of knowledge. Most crucially, these characteristics mean that the basis of the team is not mcrcly instrumental.

ln contrast to havingjust a pragmatic investment in tcam project success, redirectivc action towards sustain-ability can provide a far more grounded and motivational cause for effcctive collaboration. Rather that constituting a team, what is actually formed is a change community that shares the belief that thc Sustainment has to be treated as sovereign (a rule to be obeyed). Such a belief is compatible with enabling people to act with 'commonality in difference'- it is not compromised by any particular theological attachment. A tcam whose members believe in 'the rule the Sustainment', acting as a change community, act with a foundation that subordinates both the project and their contribution to it - while there are issues of practical negotiation, collaboration is necessitated rather than just desired. The key issue for the members of such teams is commitment.

Commitment to sustainment is not a rhetorically expressed intellectual position, but a matter of ontology. Those existing values, ambitions, dreams and desires vested in the defuturing status quo and held for a lifetime, cannot simply be rationalized away. Commitment to sustainment is thus a work- it is something to be done. This means that changes one malkes in one's life – what one buys; the amount of non-renewable energy one uses; the kind of work one chooses to do; how one cares for oneself, one's immediate human and nonhuman others, one's environment – all become significant means in one's self redirection and re-designing. To understand the self as 'the work' folds back to the comment made in an earlier chapter that the first act of sustainment is sustainment of the self. It also undercuts the common misconception that individual actions count for little when measured against the state of the world' - the point of such action is fundamentally not about 'saving theplanet but rather, initiating those ontological changes that establish the self as a change agent committed to sustainment.

The function of a team committed to sustainment is twofold: to provide a working environmcnt that supports the ontological transformation of its members, and thereby their commitment to sustainment; and, to advance sustainment via the work it undertakes.

Working on activities that develop the idea, practices and processes of sustain-ability creatcs a conceptuaì language of engagement that can be shared by all team members – this facilitates designers and non-designers working together. The team and its ethos reframe all activity within the regime of time that is defined by futuring– thc notion of time as anthropocentrically fnite. Understanding time as 'being that is defutured by unsustainability', viewing sustain-ability as time-making and as what the Sustainment maintains – all of this becomes foundational team knowledge.

This understanding of time is clearly vcry differcnt from time as measured by the clock or time as relative to the speed and distance of heavenly bodies'.

As we shall see in the ncxt chapter, the actual relation between design and time is central to sustain-ability (now graspable as an act of time-making in the service of futuring).

Everything said here on teams is not opposed to improving the operational pcrformance of teams – although it does qualify the forms of knowledge employed, whcther broad or specializcd. In fact some forms of knowledge' would actually be disabled or even eliminated. Certainly, a teanı working redirectively would have the potential to take personal and professional development to another level than those motivated by corporate and commercial goals.

