# INTRODUCING CRITICAL DESIGN

Industrial design is typically perceived as the process of design applied to the development and manufacture of products for mass production and consumption. It is synonymous with companies, such as Apple, for their technological innovations wrapped in aluminium and glass casings, which millions consume, and millions more aspire to own and use. It is synonymous with furniture design conceived by the likes of Charles and Ray Eames, Arne Jacobsen, and George Nelson, designs that are now produced and distributed by companies such as Vitra and Herman Miller and adorn ‘stylish’ living rooms and offices in many cities around the world. It is synonymous with the innovative production and material processes developed by Kartell in their plastic products, Dyson in their vacuum cleaners, Artemide in their lighting, and Unilever in their packaging. It is synonymous with the stripped back modernist aesthetic of Dieter Rams for Braun, or Naoto Fukasawa for Muji. It is synonymous with such superstar designers as Marc Newson with a flash of orange as motif in his product design, Ross Lovegrove with his biomorphic obsessions, Philippe Starck with his love of compound curves, and Karim Rashid’s pink blobjects. These examples of industrial design are conceived within a market-led paradigm. In this paradigm, the products of design are ultimately commercially orientated, designed, and produced for sale and use.

While industrial design practice might exist to drive production and consumption in a commercial paradigm, this is not its only application. Alternative models of industrial design exist to these mainstream practices. These models of practice are critical of orthodox applications within design practice; they are conceptual in their focus and challenging in their effect. This book is about such critical design practice.

In critical design practice, designers reject a role for industrial design that is limited to the production of objects conceived solely for fiscal gain and technological development. It seeks to avoid conventional production and consumption, offering an alternative use of industrial design. Instead, they propose that product and industrial design<sup>1</sup> can be used to mobilize debate and inquire into matters of concern through the creative processes involved when designing objects. They propose that the forms of interaction that occur within the design process, and through a user’s engagement with design work, can bring into relief issues by the materialization of these issues in objects and the experiences afforded. Guided by this rationale, critical design practice aims to challenge the current state of industrial design. In critical design practice, the principles, methods, and tactics of design are extended towards an application for design that offers more than a service-based relationship between a client and a designer. In doing this, it applies strategies that challenge the limits of design. These designs act as a form of critique and argument that is established through the design of objects and through the communication of an object’s narrative of use. This is achieved through processes of making and production, scenario building, and storytelling.

An increasing number of designers aim to present and define this approach. The practice has grown in popularity within the industrial design discipline over the past decade – particularly in an academic context of design research and postgraduate education. However, while there is much attention focused on critical design in practice, and where many examples of work populate exhibitions and design blogs, this book is amongst the first to theorize the field of critical design practice by presenting an overview. It considers the relationships between types of critical design practice, examples of design work, and the methods and tactics employed in practice. This is not to say it is the first book on critical design; there are a number of influential works written by practitioners who have worked to popularize and advance the field. There are increasing examples of researchers, design theorists, and critics working to understand and challenge the practice through academic articles, design writing, exhibition text, and the blogosphere. Notable exhibitions focusing on the practice include Strangely Familiar: Design and Everyday Life held at the Walker Arts Center, Minneapolis, USA, in 2003. This presented numerous examples of critical practice that blur the boundaries between form and function, questioned the habitual, and challenge hegemony within quotidian conditions. AC DC – Art Contemporain Design Contemporain – held in Geneva in 2007 brought designers, curators, critics, and academics together to question the influence of arts practice on emerging critical and conceptual forms of design. Designing Critical Design held at Z33, Hasselt, Belgium, in 2007 was the first exhibition to title an exposition of work as critical design. It brought together some of the main protagonists in the field including Dunne and Raby, Jurgen Bey, and Martí Guixé – examples of their work will be explored in later chapters. The following year in 2008 similar themes and examples were showcased at Somerset House in London in Wouldn’t It Be Nice … Wishful Thinking in Art and Design. This provided a platform for Ryan Gander, Bless, Dexter Sinister, Alicia Framis, Martino Gamper, Tobias Rehberger, Superflux, and Chosil Kil and brought these designers into the discourse surrounding the practice. The same year the exhibition Design and the Elastic Mind at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, curated by Paola Antonelli, provided perhaps the broadest and most inclusive showcase of examples. The exhibition included work familiar to the emerging canon, but went to include challenging and provocative examples of work from research labs, innovation centres, and student work. In working to popularize critical design and its relationship to mainstream design practices and contemporary art, these events were all celebratory in tone. Through the popularization of the practice, the gallery also became the place in which to design for and disseminate design work through.

Recently, a more focused critical discourse has emerged in the presentation and exhibition of work. For example, over summer 2014 as part of MoMA’s Design and Violence, a project that invited curators to propose examples of work for an open online debate, the design writer John Thackara introduced The Republic of Salivation (2010) by Michael Burton and Michiko Nitta. The project depicts a dystopian future scenario and the consequences of global food shortage. A discussion emerged in response that challenged the insular discourse on critical and speculative design. It challenged the grounding of many examples of critical design asking if the propositions pay enough attention to the causes of threats that the work addresses or the hegemonies that they challenge. This line of thought argues that critical design practice often appears radical, but simply maybe masquerading as radical because of the violence and shock in the proposition that the designers make and the expectations of use that they fabricate. The debate echoed design scholars who have targeted critique at critical design’s lack of engagement with discourse beyond art and design and how in within the practice designers are for the most part talking to themselves and peers and often fail to engage the root of problems and rather elaborately project fictional consequence. Tonkinwise’s (2015) Design Philosophy Papers review of Dunne and Raby’s (2014) Speculative Everything: Design Fiction and Social Dreaming presents and discusses the designers’ work and methods, which appears at first to be acutely critical of critical design practice, its designers, and value of this design practice. Arguably, however, such a critique is delivered from a position of confidence in the value of critical and speculative design practice since it offers a call for the practice to stand up to the scrutiny in the critique laid out. In such events, we are starting to see serious and challenging questions being asked of the practice but equally the designers are responding to such critique and in such the practice advances and matures. This is healthy, since ultimately for critical design practice to be truly critical and offer value in extending the agency of design, to