challenge disciplinary thinking, and to possibly even effect change, it must not be above critique itself.

## Challenging orthodoxy

Critical design practice is one among a growing number of approaches that aim to present and define interrogative, discursive, and experimental approaches in design practice and research. Such approaches include research through design (Frayling 1993; Zimmerman, Stolterman, and Forlizzi 2010). This approach is commonly associated with design research and often carried out in academic contexts, presenting a critical epistemological pursuit through design practice. Strategies of ludic design (Gaver et al. 2004), reflective design (Sengers 2005), slow design (Hällnas and Redström 2001), and counter-functional design (Moline 2008; Pierce and Paulos 2014) each aim to slow the interaction with objects and afford meaningful and questioning engagement with the objects and services proposed by challenging ubiquitous interaction with product and services. Adversarial design (DiSalvo 2012) explores activist and politically engaged opportunities afforded when publics are brought together around an issue that is brought to attention through the introduction of boundary objects.<sup>2</sup> These design interventions are interpreted and made sense of through the active critical participation of users and stakeholder groups. Each of these approaches in their own right challenges governing mentalities and orthodoxy within design practice. The purposive function of the work has a social and political orientation, rather than a commercial focus, by empowering publics, questioning technology, and challenging expectation of use. In this respect, critical design practice shares its critical agenda but is less easily defined as a form of practice because of its popular understanding.

## Challenging colloquialism: The problem with critical design

Before entering the discussion into history, theory, and practice, it is important to address the colloquial and popular understanding of critical design. The colloquial understanding within design culture goes something like this: The term ‘critical design’ was coined by Anthony Dunne (1997), and it describes a form of practice that he and Fiona Raby developed as research fellows with colleagues at the Royal College of Art (RCA), London, in the early 1990s. Critical design is located outside terms set by capital or production and counters conventions of utility, technology, and fiscal gain. Produced for exhibit rather than sale, these designs are less about problem solving and more about problem finding within disciplinary and societal discourse.

A popular view exists that considers what Dunne introduces as critical design in Hertzian Tales (1997) – a key text in design literature – as being representative of the field. The term ‘critical design’ has since been adopted as an umbrella term for any type of practice that suggests product design offers possibilities beyond the solving of design problems. However, Dunne and Raby themselves express caution when using ‘critical design’ as a label:

For us critical design now is a useful term to describe a practice that uses design as critique. But at the same time, we’re very wary of it becoming a label or a kind of a shorthand. I think the idea of design as a form of critique is really important and special. I’m worried that the label critical design is too narrow a form. Obviously, that particular phrase came from us and characterises the type of way that we work. It would be much more exciting to see other forms of design that critique. That maybe challenges what we do or offer something different. (Dunne and Raby Interviewed by Author, 2009)

Dunne and Raby’s ‘critical design’ has reconstituted the history of critical practice in product and industrial design. Other forms of conceptual design practice and other designers operating critically have ultimately come to be described as practising ‘critical design’. This generalization has led to critical design having values applied to it that do not correspond with the intentions of some designers engaging in critical practice, as Pullin writes:

I am never sure whether to use the term critical design to define my own work these days. The term is so associated with the Design Interactions course at the Royal College of Art, and its subversive, often dystopian, visions of technological futures. (2010, 324)

I see as many parallels with the work of Bill Gaver’s Interaction Research Studio at Goldsmiths – another group whose work is associated with critical design by observers, but not thought of as such by its practitioners. We haven’t managed to come up with as compelling an alternative definition yet though. (Pullin 2010, 324)

While addressing the emergence and development of critical design practice as a distinct form of product and industrial design, this book aims to take a broad view of critical design practice within this context. It discusses critical design’s emergence from a historic perspective. It explores the theoretical underpinning of the practice and the methods that critical designers employ within their work. It looks in detail at the mechanisms designers use to establish the critical move through design and engage audiences and users of their work in debate. Here, there is a particular focus on how designers marry product design practices with satiric narratives to create dark, humorous, and often ambiguous objects that encourage users to engage with themes critiqued by the designers.

The examples discussed will show how critical design practice is positioned as a form of socially and politically engaged activity and creative activism. The act of industrial design is used to incite reflection on issues pertinent to society today and designing is used as a medium for critique. Critical design practice challenges hegemonies and dominant ideologies in contexts of science and technology, social inequality, and unchallenged disciplinary norms.

The field is increasing in examples and exposure; however, as the number of examples increase, the theoretical analysis has until recently remained rather thin. For the practice to develop, more work is required that problematizes critical design and its methods. Throughout the book, the argument is made for the need to engage a broader readership in the discussion on critical design in order to engage a community of interest beyond the critical design practitioners that stoically advocate the practice. There is a need to develop the discourse on critical design practice beyond selfreferential accounts, glossy design magazines, exhibitions, and coffee table publications that currently present and disseminate this field of practice. Therefore, Critical Design in Context offers an analysis of the practice and the contribution that critical design makes to the industrial design discipline and beyond. A specific strategy used is to broaden the range of examples and case studies in the book to delineate the antecedents of popular examples of critical design and to draw together literature within the discourse of critical design practice. Critical design is often placed as a UK-centric movement; while the UK, and London in particular, does produce a lot of this design activity, the book will emphasize the international diversity of practitioners engaging in the practice. The book includes a range of examples from across Europe and Scandinavia as well as the USA and Southeast Asia.

Because of the non-commercial and professionally challenging agenda of critical design, there are barriers to the uptake of the practice by the broader industrial design profession. The book aims to challenge these barriers and locate critical design practice in a disciplinary and professional context.

The book goes further to address a lack of understanding about the function of critical design and a growing impatience of the practice. It argues that in a time of austerity, where globally we are faced with rising complex societal problems, ethical sociotechnical questions, and material scarcity, there is need for a broader and more questioning form of design practice that serves to question industrial design practice, challenging governing mentalities within orthodox industrial design and striving to advance the role and agency of the industrial designer. It discusses how this noncommercial practice is supported and facilitated within design culture and through institutional relationships in academic and educational contexts.