# LIST OF FIGURES 2.1 Achille and Pier Giacomo Castiglioni, Sella Stool with Bicycle Saddle, 1957, production Zanotta 1983. SELLSA seat, design Achille and Pier Giacomo Castiglioni in 1957, production Zanotta 1983. Courtesy of Achille Castiglioni Foundation 2.2 Alessandro Mendini, Destruction of Lassù chair, 1974 2.3 Tejo Remi, You Can’t Lay Down Your Memories: Chest of Drawers, 1991 2.4 Anthony Dunne, Pillow Talk documentary still, 1995. The Pillow (documentary still) video: Dan Sellars 2.5 Instant City Airships, The Airship in Lancashire: Model/collage, Peter Cook 2.6 Chromo 11: Airlife Seat Belts 2004 2.7 Superstudio (Frassinelli, Magris Alessandro e Roberto, Toraldo di Digitale (1)(A). Francia, Natalini): Supersurface, The Happy Island, project 1971. New York, Museum of Modern Art (MoMA). Ink, airbrush, graphite, and cut-and-pasted printed paper on paper 19¾ × 27⅝" (50.2 × 70.2 cm). Given anonymously Acc. n.: 1254.1974 2.8 Dunne and Raby, United Micro Kingdoms: Digiland, 2013. CGI: Tommaso Lanza 2.9 Martino Gamper, Olympia from the series 100 Chairs in 100 Days, 2005–2007 3.1 Sarah Gold, The Alternet, 2014. Alternet Community Network Kit/photo by Lynton Pepper/license: CC-BY 3.2 Dunne and Raby, Faraday Chair, 1997/photograph: Lubna Hammoud 3.3 Carole Collet, Strawberry Noir, part of the Biolace series 3.4 Auger-Loizeau, Happylife family display 2009 3.5 Sascha Pohflepp, Golden Institute, 2009 3.6 Studio Makkink and Bey. Foam Matters: The Model World Maquette, 2007 3.7 Dunne and Raby, Foragers Part of the Project between Reality and the Impossible, 2010. Photographer: Jason Evans. 3.8 Björn Franke, Traces of an Imaginary Affair, 2006 4.1 A and B. Interaction Research Studio: Energy and Co-Designing Communities, Practitioners and researchers imagining energy communities. Production version of Energy Babble, 2014. Bill Gaver, Mike Michael, Tobie Kerridge, Liliana Ovale, Matthew Plummer-Fernandez, and Alex Wilkie 2014 4.2 Dunne and Raby, Human Poo Energy Future: Lunch Box, 2004. Photograph: Dunne and Raby 4.3 Operating context, focus of critique, commentary, or inquiry: critical design practice operates in a peripheral zone at the boundary of product design practice 5.1 Statement chairs, experimental work of Marti Guixé. Lima Skip Furniture, 2004, Milan 5.2 Paulo Goldstein. Repaired Director Chair. Repair Is Beautiful, 2012 5.3 Ralph Ball and Maxine Naylor, 24 Star, Archaeology of the Invisible, 2005 5.4 Thomas Thwaites. The Toaster Project, 2010. Photographer: Daniel Alexander. 5.5 Chicken Factory 5.6 A and B. Tobie Kerridge, Nikki Scott, and Ian Thompson, 2003, Biojewellery. Wisdom tooth extraction and models of Trish and Lynsey’s rings, 2005–06. Photographer: Michael Venning 5.7 Souvenirs of a Future: Connected Festivals 5.8 Matt Malpass, First Aid for Users Suffering a Loss of Connection, 2006 5.9 Desire Management 5.10 Adam Thorpe and Joe Hunter Vexed Generation, Vexed Parka, 1995 5.11 Taxonomy of critical practice: The model can be used to map examples according to the methods, tactics, contexts of operation, and type of critical practice