## What’s so critical about critical design practice

Even though design and interaction with objects has a massive effect on our everyday life, a somewhat limited discourse has focused specifically on the effects of design from within the design profession, a claim supported by Miller’s dismay of product design:

It ought to be unimaginable that a profession would spend its entire time concerned with designing the particular form of goods without seeing it as essential to attempt to show what the consequences of that particular design would be. (2001, 1)

Critical design practice offers a means to use product design as a medium to focus on concerns both central to the discipline and beyond normal disciplinary bounds. The critical move is established by the voluntary insubordination of design methods. However, just as critical design practitioners challenge disciplinary orthodoxy and boundaries, in their insubordination they aim to develop a critical tradition that contributes to product design’s disciplinary foundation, addressing Thackara’s concerns that:

Because product design is thoroughly integrated into capitalist production, it is bereft of an independent critical tradition on which to base an alternative. (1988, 22)

Within the field, a number of practitioners and academics have recognized problems with uncritical design practice and have mobilized product design as a specifically critical act challenging how mainstream design unthinkingly propagates the values, assumptions, and ideologies inherent in the designer who passively embodies these values in products. This practice is motivated by an impulse to reframe the circumstances surrounding contemporary product design by using modes of investigation that probe the boundaries of the discipline and challenge the prevailing perception of what product design is, how it operates, and what the designer is capable of using product design for.

Unfortunately, formal analysis of this reframing has not kept pace. Often critical design activity is not considered product design. Raby (2008, 96) writes that in the majority of instances it is described as art. This claim is further supported in my own experience, observations, and research into the field. For example, when attending design research colloquiums and symposiums that focus on critical design practice, the discussion with the audience will inevitably result in the question being asked ‘isn’t it just art?’. A function of this book begins to address this analysis. The intention here is to advance the debate in critical design practice beyond the question ‘isn’t it just art?’. In attempting to do this, a range of concepts, perspectives, and methods that facilitate the operation of critical design practice are exposed and discussed.

## Why study critical design?

Throughout the book ‘mainstream’, ‘traditional’, ‘orthodox’, ‘conventional’, and ‘affirmative’ design are used to describe design activity that represents a governing mentality in product and industrial design. This mentality constitutes widely shared values, norms, and expectations of how product design operates. In mainstream design, the market provides strong incentives for designers to participate in economic systems that are arguably beyond individual’s ability to confront.

There are numerous forms of design practice set outside what might be considered mainstream design. These include participatory design, co-design, design activism, feminist design, and, more recently, socially responsive and transition design. Consideration of these practices is important because it brings into light the interconnected constraints to agency for designers who seek to challenge the status quo and mainstream applications of product design. However, in contrast to the research that focuses on these practices, formal analysis of critical design practice has not kept pace. This is concerning as Dunne and Raby argue that:

The design profession needs to mature and find ways of operating outside the tight constraints of servicing industry. At its worst product design simply reinforces global capitalist values. Design needs to see this for what it is, just one possibility and to develop alternative roles for itself. It needs to establish an intellectual stance of its own, or the design profession is destined to lose all intellectual credibility and viewed simply as an agent of capitalism. (Dunne and Raby 2001, 59)

Although Dunne and Raby’s prescription for design was presented in the late 1990s, it continues to have resonance. Indeed, with the aid of hindsight, now more than ever critical practices in design need to establish an intellectual stance of their own or else they are destined to lose their intellectual credibility. More and more the danger is that critical practice becomes overly self-reflexive and introverted, sustained, practiced, and exchanged in a closed community. By operating in this way, its usefulness as part of a larger disciplinary project is undermined. Mazé identifies the problem with critical design practice if it is not taken up as a disciplinary project and highlights the danger that if there is no extension beyond commentary or critique, critical design ‘might tend towards an overly self-reflexive and hermetic autonomy’ (Mazé and Redström 2007, 8). So there are already utterances of critical practice being little more than ‘design for design’s sake’, ‘design for designers’, or perhaps more appropriately ‘design for critical designers’.<sup>3</sup>

In design research, where ideological bases rule and theoretical grounding are essential as reference points, critical practice has not been viewed as a serious form of design. It is sustained in a somewhat closed discourse limited to design magazines, niche publications, and gallery showcases. Its theorization and documentation is left to design journalists, bloggers, and curators whose primary agendas are arguably to sell magazines, accumulate hits, or to get the viewing public through gallery doors. Thus, there is a need for the constructive input of a broader community to develop the practice alongside critical designers as the vital form of product design in both disciplinary and professional contexts. Increasingly, this development must come about thorough critique and problematization of the practice itself. At the time of writing, the design studies’ focus on critical practice is limited compared to that which focuses on other fields of ideation and making. This is evident in the lack of exogenous research that specifically addresses critical practice, notable when compared to the amount of scholarly writing that focuses on other marginalized practices.

Fields such as participatory design, socially responsible design, and co-design have emerged in parallel to critical design practice. These modes reflect upon the relationship between design and the communities that are being designed for, and, or with. They operate beyond conditions set by fiscal gain or technological development. They are established as intellectual and politically motivated practices, informing policy and used to address complex societal concerns. In their deviation from focusing on the production of objects, they reflect instead a move towards the designer acting as the facilitator for large groups of people; they imply a critique of mainstream design, or at least challenge common perceptions of the designer’s role. They are assumed progressive within disciplinary discourse. They have been absorbed into the disciplinary orthodoxy through the shared efforts of theorists, commentators, and practitioners.<sup>4</sup>

Over the past several years, critical design practice has received increasing attention in design research, education, and practice but only recently in design research has critical design been viewed as a form of design where ideological basis and theoretical grounding are a requirement. Within design research, critical design practice ignited discussions of design as a method of cultural provocation where some designers and commentators take critical design as a starting point for discussing how social issues and political themes might enter design practice. But there have also been calls for a postcritical design that addresses limits of critical design, including its potential to reinforce rather than question and confront the status quo and how it applies piecemeal critical theory and is framed flippantly as being politically engaged. Essentially, these calls challenge how critical design is sustained and why it is of value. There is a continuing need for the constructive input of a broad community to question the practice as a useful form of product design in disciplinary and professional contexts. By presenting an overview of the field, this book begins to address this need. It is not