## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS There are many people to thank for their support while writing this book and I am grateful for the contribution that many have made towards developing the account of critical design practice presented in the following chapters. To others, I am grateful for the support and advice offered during the process of research and writing. There are a few people that I must thank by name: First, Tracy Cordingley and Jamie Billing for introducing me to the field and setting me off on a form of inquiry with a direction and energy that sustain my interest in critical design practice today; Steve Rutherford, Hugh Miller, Tom Fisher, and Guy Julier for their insight and critical input in the formative stages of this project; and Lorraine Gamman, Adam Thorpe, Janet McDonnell, Nick Rhodes, Rebecca Ross, and the Design Against Crime team at Central Saint Martins for their support, for all the opportunities, and for affording the necessary culture in which to develop this work. I am grateful to Nottingham Trent University, and the University of the Arts London but especially to the staff and students of MA Industrial Design at Central Saint Martins who provided a day-to-day context for experimentation, a forum for debate, and a space to continually test ideas and thinking. For generously sharing their perspectives on the field over the past few years, my sincerest thanks go to Ralph Ball, Maxine Naylor, Anthony Dunne, Fiona Raby, Noam Toran, James Auger, Tobie Kerridge, Ramia Mazé, Kieren Jones, Nelly Ben Hayoun, Stephen Heyward, Bruce and Stephanie Tharp, and Jana Scholtz. My gratitude goes to all the designers who have generously contributed images of their work to exemplify the practice and illustrate the discussion. Thanks to Rebecca Barden for commissioning the work and the editorial team at Bloomsbury for their support throughout, to Heather Griffith for her input on early drafts, and to the reviewers for their critique and input in developing the manuscript. Finally, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my family, Dianne, Paul, and Jonathon Malpass, Debbie and Andrew Moss, and Rita Lee for their enduring support and to Chloe Griffith for her support, critical acumen, advice, patience, and enthusiasm throughout. Thank you!