overtly critical of critical design practice; it advocates the importance of critical design practice throughout. It aims to offer an introduction to the practice in order to broaden the readership and understanding of the practice. The book works to unpack the methodological approaches applied in practice and to provide analytical tools that can be used to question critical design practice.

## Researching critical design practice

Product and industrial design now occupies a position where it is confident enough as a discipline to be a vehicle for fulfilling social needs and for expressing independent thought. Through a more design-focused criticism of critical design practice, the value of critical design practice and its contribution to the product design discipline might be revealed. Moline (2008) and Mazé (2007) state that without formal analysis and serious intervention from the design research community, critical design practice might be consumed as a purely superficial form of product design. They recognize the need for design to reflect on its own products and practice, and the impact of its products and practices as tools of inquiry and commentary, and address Bonsiepe concerns:

We can hardly get to the root of design using art theoretical concepts. Design is an independent category. Located at the interface of industry, the market, technology and culture (living practice), design is eminently suited for engaging in culturally critical exercises that focus on the symbolic function of products. (Bonsiepe 2007, 30–31)

Activity focused in this way would address Raby’s claims that there is a need for analysis of the practice to avoid it been seen as a form of design entertainment.

## ‘Critical’ in critical design practice

What distinguishes critical design from other forms of design is its criticality. But what model of criticality? There is a relationship between critical design practice and critical theory; however, in critical design practice, critical theory is arguably applied strategically and sporadically, using concepts for inspiration and explanation rather than attempting to construct a complete and internally consistent argument. Reference to a range of post-structuralist thinkers or philosophers in Science and Technology Studies places a considerable burden on the audience to infer how all of this theory adds up to ground a critical design practice. As a design practice, critical design is perhaps better understood in relation to recent design approaches that expand design methods, tactics, and strategies beyond generating consumer products. It is informed by a long history of creative practice, including Dada and Situationism. Such approaches first developed in Art where artists integrated playful forms of critique through the appropriation of everyday objects and the celebration and subversion of quotidian conditions. Informed by these traditions, critical design practice has drawn on tactics associated with art to orient a subversion of design norms. Informed by conceptual art, critical design practice might be described as shifting focus from designer and the object to the concept. The design process has moved to set up the design concept (through material thing, or improvised intervention, instillations, performance, user participation, or other means) to challenge idea, institutions, and audience. As conceptual art mounted a critique of art by challenging institutional frames, for example, transgressing the gallery through readymades and intervention art, critical design practice subverts the ingrained expectations of design, use, and technological progression. Critical designers draw on artistic methods to critique design, science, and social concerns. In many examples, they take over spaces traditionally reserved for art, placing design in the gallery to draw attention to these concerns. In this respect, critical design practice relates to the conceptual domain of art. Fundamentally, however, objects of critical design practice relate everyday rituals and conventions of use. Chapter 4 will explore how attempts to make distinctions between art and critical design are misguided. Critical design and art may or may not overlap, but that critical design, tactically speaking, should not be absorbed into the social practices of the artworld, with their institutional structures of exhibitions, museums, and funding. Rather, critical design works best when it is operating within a context of use.

Critical design practice also bares a relationship to activist approaches to design and making that question and reframe the social role of institutional practices of design e.g. socially responsive design (Thorpe and Gamman 2011), critical making (Ratto and Boler 2014), and transition design (Tonkinwise et al. 2015). So there is a ‘critical’ tradition in design and the arts that is largely independent of critical theory and philosophies of difference. If we frame being critical as necessary and exclusively understood through these textual traditions, we make it more difficult to understand where critical design practice is coming from. It is therefore important to question what criticality can and should do in design practice beyond the forms and traditions of criticism from the humanities and cultural studies. In attempting to do this, a range of tactics are explored throughout the book that inform the critical design practice either explicitly or intuitively in practice. Focusing on the form and operation of critical practice, the book provides a framework by which to analyse, differentiate, organize, and discuss the characteristics of work. Above all, it allows us to study the field’s nuances and work towards a taxonomy of critical practice in design. It does this by providing contextual tools and theoretical apparatus that act as a point of access into the discussion of critical practice and its reflection in a variety of design projects. In doing this, I hope to argue for the value and necessity of this field of product and industrial design.

## Industrial design as a discipline

It is important to acknowledge the transdisciplinary character of many of the approaches that will be discussed in the following chapters. Transdisciplinarity is an unavoidable characteristic of a practice that looks to engage other fields and expertise, and extend a disciplinary purview. Human Computer Interaction, Interaction Design, Graphic and Communication Design, and Media-Art are among the practices that have informed critical designs development in an industrial design context. Each of these fields has its own account of critical practice. However, to be transdisciplinary, interdisciplinary, or cross-disciplinary, one must be disciplinary first and formed in a discipline to then cross over into other disciplines. My position in relation to critical design and the approach taken in writing this book is informed by my experience as an industrial designer, first operating in a commercial context before moving to research and practice in a critical design context. Throughout the book, critical design practice is positioned and discussed as a field of practice within the discipline of product and industrial design. It focuses on critical design practice specifically as it is understood as a form of product and industrial design and how it emerged from practices of industrial design.

As a designer, academic, and educator, I consider product and industrial design as a discipline before I consider it a profession. Like Cross (2006) and Nelson and Stolterman (2012), I frame industrial design as a specific branch of knowledge, learning, and practice, and a discipline that incorporates expertise, people, projects, communities, challenges, studies, inquiry, and research areas that are strongly associated with industrial design. Disciplines develop through dialogue, inquiry, claims, and rebuttal. For a discipline to emerge, it requires challenge and a critique of hegemony, multiple interpretations, voices, and perspectives. It needs protagonists on the edge looking outward and protagonists within reflecting on the value of the core disciplinary practice. It needs its advocates and adversaries. I pose that critical design practice affords this to product and industrial design. Through this book, we will see how critical design operates, explore its tradition and lineage, and argue why it is important in a product and industrial design context.

Critical Design in Context serves to offer an introduction into critical design practice and its concerns. It brings examples of practice and literature on the practice together in order to provide an account and contextualization of critical design practice that should be of use to any student of product and industrial design and its related fields. It should also be of use to design scholars interested in problematizing critical design practice, be it either as a piece to critique or to employ as an analytical tool in observing the practice.