# INTRODUCING CRITICAL DESIGN Industrial design is typically perceived as the process of design applied to the development and manufacture of products for mass production and consumption. It is synonymous with companies, such as Apple, for their technological innovations wrapped in aluminium and glass casings, which millions consume, and millions more aspire to own and use. It is synonymous with furniture design conceived by the likes of Charles and Ray Eames, Arne Jacobsen, and George Nelson, designs that are now produced and distributed by companies such as Vitra and Herman Miller and adorn ‘stylish’ living rooms and offices in many cities around the world. It is synonymous with the innovative production and material processes developed by Kartell in their plastic products, Dyson in their vacuum cleaners, Artemide in their lighting, and Unilever in their packaging. It is synonymous with the stripped back modernist aesthetic of Dieter Rams for Braun, or Naoto Fukasawa for Muji. It is synonymous with such superstar designers as Marc Newson with a flash of orange as motif in his product design, Ross Lovegrove with his biomorphic obsessions, Philippe Starck with his love of compound curves, and Karim Rashid’s pink blobjects. These examples of industrial design are conceived within a market-led paradigm. In this paradigm, the products of design are ultimately commercially orientated, designed, and produced for sale and use. While industrial design practice might exist to drive production and consumption in a commercial paradigm, this is not its only application. Alternative models of industrial design exist to these mainstream practices. These models of practice are critical of orthodox applications within design practice; they are conceptual in their focus and challenging in their effect. This book is about such critical design practice. In critical design practice, designers reject a role for industrial design that is limited to the production of objects conceived solely for fiscal gain and technological development. It seeks to avoid conventional production and consumption, offering an alternative use of industrial design. Instead, they propose that product and industrial design<sup>1</sup> can be used to mobilize debate and inquire into matters of concern through the creative processes involved when designing objects. They propose that the forms of interaction that occur within the design process, and through a user’s engagement with design work, can bring into relief issues by the materialization of these issues in objects and the experiences afforded. Guided by this rationale, critical design practice aims to challenge the current state of industrial design. In critical design practice, the principles, methods, and tactics of design are extended towards an application for design that offers more than a service-based relationship between a client and a designer. In doing this, it applies strategies that challenge the limits of design. These designs act as a form of critique and argument that is established through the design of objects and through the communication of an object’s narrative of use. This is achieved through processes of making and production, scenario building, and storytelling. An increasing number of designers aim to present and define this approach. The practice has grown in popularity within the industrial design discipline over the past decade – particularly in an academic context of design research and postgraduate education. However, while there is much attention focused on critical design in practice, and where many examples of work populate exhibitions and design blogs, this book is amongst the first to theorize the field of critical design practice by presenting an overview. It considers the relationships between types of critical design practice, examples of design work, and the methods and tactics employed in practice. This is not to say it is the first book on critical design; there are a number of influential works written by practitioners who have worked to popularize and advance the field. There are increasing examples of researchers, design theorists, and critics working to understand and challenge the practice through academic articles, design writing, exhibition text, and the blogosphere. Notable exhibitions focusing on the practice include Strangely Familiar: Design and Everyday Life held at the Walker Arts Center, Minneapolis, USA, in 2003. This presented numerous examples of critical practice that blur the boundaries between form and function, questioned the habitual, and challenge hegemony within quotidian conditions. AC DC – Art Contemporain Design Contemporain – held in Geneva in 2007 brought designers, curators, critics, and academics together to question the influence of arts practice on emerging critical and conceptual forms of design. Designing Critical Design held at Z33, Hasselt, Belgium, in 2007 was the first exhibition to title an exposition of work as critical design. It brought together some of the main protagonists in the field including Dunne and Raby, Jurgen Bey, and Martí Guixé – examples of their work will be explored in later chapters. The following year in 2008 similar themes and examples were showcased at Somerset House in London in Wouldn’t It Be Nice … Wishful Thinking in Art and Design. This provided a platform for Ryan Gander, Bless, Dexter Sinister, Alicia Framis, Martino Gamper, Tobias Rehberger, Superflux, and Chosil Kil and brought these designers into the discourse surrounding the practice. The same year the exhibition Design and the Elastic Mind at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, curated by Paola Antonelli, provided perhaps the broadest and most inclusive showcase of examples. The exhibition included work familiar to the emerging canon, but went to include challenging and provocative examples of work from research labs, innovation centres, and student work. In working to popularize critical design and its relationship to mainstream design practices and contemporary art, these events were all celebratory in tone. Through the popularization of the practice, the gallery also became the place in which to design for and disseminate design work through. Recently, a more focused critical discourse has emerged in the presentation and exhibition of work. For example, over summer 2014 as part of MoMA’s Design and Violence, a project that invited curators to propose examples of work for an open online debate, the design writer John Thackara introduced The Republic of Salivation (2010) by Michael Burton and Michiko Nitta. The project depicts a dystopian future scenario and the consequences of global food shortage. A discussion emerged in response that challenged the insular discourse on critical and speculative design. It challenged the grounding of many examples of critical design asking if the propositions pay enough attention to the causes of threats that the work addresses or the hegemonies that they challenge. This line of thought argues that critical design practice often appears radical, but simply maybe masquerading as radical because of the violence and shock in the proposition that the designers make and the expectations of use that they fabricate. The debate echoed design scholars who have targeted critique at critical design’s lack of engagement with discourse beyond art and design and how in within the practice designers are for the most part talking to themselves and peers and often fail to engage the root of problems and rather elaborately project fictional consequence. Tonkinwise’s (2015) Design Philosophy Papers review of Dunne and Raby’s (2014) Speculative Everything: Design Fiction and Social Dreaming presents and discusses the designers’ work and methods, which appears at first to be acutely critical of critical design practice, its designers, and value of this design practice. Arguably, however, such a critique is delivered from a position of confidence in the value of critical and speculative design practice since it offers a call for the practice to stand up to the scrutiny in the critique laid out. In such events, we are starting to see serious and challenging questions being asked of the practice but equally the designers are responding to such critique and in such the practice advances and matures. This is healthy, since ultimately for critical design practice to be truly critical and offer value in extending the agency of design, to challenge disciplinary thinking, and to possibly even effect change, it must not be above critique itself. ## Challenging orthodoxy Critical design practice is one among a growing number of approaches that aim to present and define interrogative, discursive, and experimental approaches in design practice and research. Such approaches include research through design (Frayling 1993; Zimmerman, Stolterman, and Forlizzi 2010). This approach is commonly associated with design research and often carried out in academic contexts, presenting a critical epistemological pursuit through design practice. Strategies of ludic design (Gaver et al. 2004), reflective design (Sengers 2005), slow design (Hällnas and Redström 2001), and counter-functional design (Moline 2008; Pierce and Paulos 2014) each aim to slow the interaction with objects and afford meaningful and questioning engagement with the objects and services proposed by challenging ubiquitous interaction with product and services. Adversarial design (DiSalvo 2012) explores activist and politically engaged opportunities afforded when publics are brought together around an issue that is brought to attention through the introduction of boundary objects.<sup>2</sup> These design interventions are interpreted and made sense of through the active critical participation of users and stakeholder groups. Each of these approaches in their own right challenges governing mentalities and orthodoxy within design practice. The purposive function of the work has a social and political orientation, rather than a commercial focus, by empowering publics, questioning technology, and challenging expectation of use. In this respect, critical design practice shares its critical agenda but is less easily defined as a form of practice because of its popular understanding. ## Challenging colloquialism: The problem with critical design Before entering the discussion into history, theory, and practice, it is important to address the colloquial and popular understanding of critical design. The colloquial understanding within design culture goes something like this: The term ‘critical design’ was coined by Anthony Dunne (1997), and it describes a form of practice that he and Fiona Raby developed as research fellows with colleagues at the Royal College of Art (RCA), London, in the early 1990s. Critical design is located outside terms set by capital or production and counters conventions of utility, technology, and fiscal gain. Produced for exhibit rather than sale, these designs are less about problem solving and more about problem finding within disciplinary and societal discourse. A popular view exists that considers what Dunne introduces as critical design in Hertzian Tales (1997) – a key text in design literature – as being representative of the field. The term ‘critical design’ has since been adopted as an umbrella term for any type of practice that suggests product design offers possibilities beyond the solving of design problems. However, Dunne and Raby themselves express caution when using ‘critical design’ as a label: For us critical design now is a useful term to describe a practice that uses design as critique. But at the same time, we’re very wary of it becoming a label or a kind of a shorthand. I think the idea of design as a form of critique is really important and special. I’m worried that the label critical design is too narrow a form. Obviously, that particular phrase came from us and characterises the type of way that we work. It would be much more exciting to see other forms of design that critique. That maybe challenges what we do or offer something different. (Dunne and Raby Interviewed by Author, 2009) Dunne and Raby’s ‘critical design’ has reconstituted the history of critical practice in product and industrial design. Other forms of conceptual design practice and other designers operating critically have ultimately come to be described as practising ‘critical design’. This generalization has led to critical design having values applied to it that do not correspond with the intentions of some designers engaging in critical practice, as Pullin writes: I am never sure whether to use the term critical design to define my own work these days. The term is so associated with the Design Interactions course at the Royal College of Art, and its subversive, often dystopian, visions of technological futures. (2010, 324) I see as many parallels with the work of Bill Gaver’s Interaction Research Studio at Goldsmiths – another group whose work is associated with critical design by observers, but not thought of as such by its practitioners. We haven’t managed to come up with as compelling an alternative definition yet though. (Pullin 2010, 324) While addressing the emergence and development of critical design practice as a distinct form of product and industrial design, this book aims to take a broad view of critical design practice within this context. It discusses critical design’s emergence from a historic perspective. It explores the theoretical underpinning of the practice and the methods that critical designers employ within their work. It looks in detail at the mechanisms designers use to establish the critical move through design and engage audiences and users of their work in debate. Here, there is a particular focus on how designers marry product design practices with satiric narratives to create dark, humorous, and often ambiguous objects that encourage users to engage with themes critiqued by the designers. The examples discussed will show how critical design practice is positioned as a form of socially and politically engaged activity and creative activism. The act of industrial design is used to incite reflection on issues pertinent to society today and designing is used as a medium for critique. Critical design practice challenges hegemonies and dominant ideologies in contexts of science and technology, social inequality, and unchallenged disciplinary norms. The field is increasing in examples and exposure; however, as the number of examples increase, the theoretical analysis has until recently remained rather thin. For the practice to develop, more work is required that problematizes critical design and its methods. Throughout the book, the argument is made for the need to engage a broader readership in the discussion on critical design in order to engage a community of interest beyond the critical design practitioners that stoically advocate the practice. There is a need to develop the discourse on critical design practice beyond selfreferential accounts, glossy design magazines, exhibitions, and coffee table publications that currently present and disseminate this field of practice. Therefore, Critical Design in Context offers an analysis of the practice and the contribution that critical design makes to the industrial design discipline and beyond. A specific strategy used is to broaden the range of examples and case studies in the book to delineate the antecedents of popular examples of critical design and to draw together literature within the discourse of critical design practice. Critical design is often placed as a UK-centric movement; while the UK, and London in particular, does produce a lot of this design activity, the book will emphasize the international diversity of practitioners engaging in the practice. The book includes a range of examples from across Europe and Scandinavia as well as the USA and Southeast Asia. Because of the non-commercial and professionally challenging agenda of critical design, there are barriers to the uptake of the practice by the broader industrial design profession. The book aims to challenge these barriers and locate critical design practice in a disciplinary and professional context. The book goes further to address a lack of understanding about the function of critical design and a growing impatience of the practice. It argues that in a time of austerity, where globally we are faced with rising complex societal problems, ethical sociotechnical questions, and material scarcity, there is need for a broader and more questioning form of design practice that serves to question industrial design practice, challenging governing mentalities within orthodox industrial design and striving to advance the role and agency of the industrial designer. It discusses how this noncommercial practice is supported and facilitated within design culture and through institutional relationships in academic and educational contexts. ## What’s so critical about critical design practice Even though design and interaction with objects has a massive effect on our everyday life, a somewhat limited discourse has focused specifically on the effects of design from within the design profession, a claim supported by Miller’s dismay of product design: It ought to be unimaginable that a profession would spend its entire time concerned with designing the particular form of goods without seeing it as essential to attempt to show what the consequences of that particular design would be. (2001, 1) Critical design practice offers a means to use product design as a medium to focus on concerns both central to the discipline and beyond normal disciplinary bounds. The critical move is established by the voluntary insubordination of design methods. However, just as critical design practitioners challenge disciplinary orthodoxy and boundaries, in their insubordination they aim to develop a critical tradition that contributes to product design’s disciplinary foundation, addressing Thackara’s concerns that: Because product design is thoroughly integrated into capitalist production, it is bereft of an independent critical tradition on which to base an alternative. (1988, 22) Within the field, a number of practitioners and academics have recognized problems with uncritical design practice and have mobilized product design as a specifically critical act challenging how mainstream design unthinkingly propagates the values, assumptions, and ideologies inherent in the designer who passively embodies these values in products. This practice is motivated by an impulse to reframe the circumstances surrounding contemporary product design by using modes of investigation that probe the boundaries of the discipline and challenge the prevailing perception of what product design is, how it operates, and what the designer is capable of using product design for. Unfortunately, formal analysis of this reframing has not kept pace. Often critical design activity is not considered product design. Raby (2008, 96) writes that in the majority of instances it is described as art. This claim is further supported in my own experience, observations, and research into the field. For example, when attending design research colloquiums and symposiums that focus on critical design practice, the discussion with the audience will inevitably result in the question being asked ‘isn’t it just art?’. A function of this book begins to address this analysis. The intention here is to advance the debate in critical design practice beyond the question ‘isn’t it just art?’. In attempting to do this, a range of concepts, perspectives, and methods that facilitate the operation of critical design practice are exposed and discussed. ## Why study critical design? Throughout the book ‘mainstream’, ‘traditional’, ‘orthodox’, ‘conventional’, and ‘affirmative’ design are used to describe design activity that represents a governing mentality in product and industrial design. This mentality constitutes widely shared values, norms, and expectations of how product design operates. In mainstream design, the market provides strong incentives for designers to participate in economic systems that are arguably beyond individual’s ability to confront. There are numerous forms of design practice set outside what might be considered mainstream design. These include participatory design, co-design, design activism, feminist design, and, more recently, socially responsive and transition design. Consideration of these practices is important because it brings into light the interconnected constraints to agency for designers who seek to challenge the status quo and mainstream applications of product design. However, in contrast to the research that focuses on these practices, formal analysis of critical design practice has not kept pace. This is concerning as Dunne and Raby argue that: The design profession needs to mature and find ways of operating outside the tight constraints of servicing industry. At its worst product design simply reinforces global capitalist values. Design needs to see this for what it is, just one possibility and to develop alternative roles for itself. It needs to establish an intellectual stance of its own, or the design profession is destined to lose all intellectual credibility and viewed simply as an agent of capitalism. (Dunne and Raby 2001, 59) Although Dunne and Raby’s prescription for design was presented in the late 1990s, it continues to have resonance. Indeed, with the aid of hindsight, now more than ever critical practices in design need to establish an intellectual stance of their own or else they are destined to lose their intellectual credibility. More and more the danger is that critical practice becomes overly self-reflexive and introverted, sustained, practiced, and exchanged in a closed community. By operating in this way, its usefulness as part of a larger disciplinary project is undermined. Mazé identifies the problem with critical design practice if it is not taken up as a disciplinary project and highlights the danger that if there is no extension beyond commentary or critique, critical design ‘might tend towards an overly self-reflexive and hermetic autonomy’ (Mazé and Redström 2007, 8). So there are already utterances of critical practice being little more than ‘design for design’s sake’, ‘design for designers’, or perhaps more appropriately ‘design for critical designers’.<sup>3</sup> In design research, where ideological bases rule and theoretical grounding are essential as reference points, critical practice has not been viewed as a serious form of design. It is sustained in a somewhat closed discourse limited to design magazines, niche publications, and gallery showcases. Its theorization and documentation is left to design journalists, bloggers, and curators whose primary agendas are arguably to sell magazines, accumulate hits, or to get the viewing public through gallery doors. Thus, there is a need for the constructive input of a broader community to develop the practice alongside critical designers as the vital form of product design in both disciplinary and professional contexts. Increasingly, this development must come about thorough critique and problematization of the practice itself. At the time of writing, the design studies’ focus on critical practice is limited compared to that which focuses on other fields of ideation and making. This is evident in the lack of exogenous research that specifically addresses critical practice, notable when compared to the amount of scholarly writing that focuses on other marginalized practices. Fields such as participatory design, socially responsible design, and co-design have emerged in parallel to critical design practice. These modes reflect upon the relationship between design and the communities that are being designed for, and, or with. They operate beyond conditions set by fiscal gain or technological development. They are established as intellectual and politically motivated practices, informing policy and used to address complex societal concerns. In their deviation from focusing on the production of objects, they reflect instead a move towards the designer acting as the facilitator for large groups of people; they imply a critique of mainstream design, or at least challenge common perceptions of the designer’s role. They are assumed progressive within disciplinary discourse. They have been absorbed into the disciplinary orthodoxy through the shared efforts of theorists, commentators, and practitioners.<sup>4</sup> Over the past several years, critical design practice has received increasing attention in design research, education, and practice but only recently in design research has critical design been viewed as a form of design where ideological basis and theoretical grounding are a requirement. Within design research, critical design practice ignited discussions of design as a method of cultural provocation where some designers and commentators take critical design as a starting point for discussing how social issues and political themes might enter design practice. But there have also been calls for a postcritical design that addresses limits of critical design, including its potential to reinforce rather than question and confront the status quo and how it applies piecemeal critical theory and is framed flippantly as being politically engaged. Essentially, these calls challenge how critical design is sustained and why it is of value. There is a continuing need for the constructive input of a broad community to question the practice as a useful form of product design in disciplinary and professional contexts. By presenting an overview of the field, this book begins to address this need. It is not overtly critical of critical design practice; it advocates the importance of critical design practice throughout. It aims to offer an introduction to the practice in order to broaden the readership and understanding of the practice. The book works to unpack the methodological approaches applied in practice and to provide analytical tools that can be used to question critical design practice. ## Researching critical design practice Product and industrial design now occupies a position where it is confident enough as a discipline to be a vehicle for fulfilling social needs and for expressing independent thought. Through a more design-focused criticism of critical design practice, the value of critical design practice and its contribution to the product design discipline might be revealed. Moline (2008) and Mazé (2007) state that without formal analysis and serious intervention from the design research community, critical design practice might be consumed as a purely superficial form of product design. They recognize the need for design to reflect on its own products and practice, and the impact of its products and practices as tools of inquiry and commentary, and address Bonsiepe concerns: We can hardly get to the root of design using art theoretical concepts. Design is an independent category. Located at the interface of industry, the market, technology and culture (living practice), design is eminently suited for engaging in culturally critical exercises that focus on the symbolic function of products. (Bonsiepe 2007, 30–31) Activity focused in this way would address Raby’s claims that there is a need for analysis of the practice to avoid it been seen as a form of design entertainment. ## ‘Critical’ in critical design practice What distinguishes critical design from other forms of design is its criticality. But what model of criticality? There is a relationship between critical design practice and critical theory; however, in critical design practice, critical theory is arguably applied strategically and sporadically, using concepts for inspiration and explanation rather than attempting to construct a complete and internally consistent argument. Reference to a range of post-structuralist thinkers or philosophers in Science and Technology Studies places a considerable burden on the audience to infer how all of this theory adds up to ground a critical design practice. As a design practice, critical design is perhaps better understood in relation to recent design approaches that expand design methods, tactics, and strategies beyond generating consumer products. It is informed by a long history of creative practice, including Dada and Situationism. Such approaches first developed in Art where artists integrated playful forms of critique through the appropriation of everyday objects and the celebration and subversion of quotidian conditions. Informed by these traditions, critical design practice has drawn on tactics associated with art to orient a subversion of design norms. Informed by conceptual art, critical design practice might be described as shifting focus from designer and the object to the concept. The design process has moved to set up the design concept (through material thing, or improvised intervention, instillations, performance, user participation, or other means) to challenge idea, institutions, and audience. As conceptual art mounted a critique of art by challenging institutional frames, for example, transgressing the gallery through readymades and intervention art, critical design practice subverts the ingrained expectations of design, use, and technological progression. Critical designers draw on artistic methods to critique design, science, and social concerns. In many examples, they take over spaces traditionally reserved for art, placing design in the gallery to draw attention to these concerns. In this respect, critical design practice relates to the conceptual domain of art. Fundamentally, however, objects of critical design practice relate everyday rituals and conventions of use. Chapter 4 will explore how attempts to make distinctions between art and critical design are misguided. Critical design and art may or may not overlap, but that critical design, tactically speaking, should not be absorbed into the social practices of the artworld, with their institutional structures of exhibitions, museums, and funding. Rather, critical design works best when it is operating within a context of use. Critical design practice also bares a relationship to activist approaches to design and making that question and reframe the social role of institutional practices of design e.g. socially responsive design (Thorpe and Gamman 2011), critical making (Ratto and Boler 2014), and transition design (Tonkinwise et al. 2015). So there is a ‘critical’ tradition in design and the arts that is largely independent of critical theory and philosophies of difference. If we frame being critical as necessary and exclusively understood through these textual traditions, we make it more difficult to understand where critical design practice is coming from. It is therefore important to question what criticality can and should do in design practice beyond the forms and traditions of criticism from the humanities and cultural studies. In attempting to do this, a range of tactics are explored throughout the book that inform the critical design practice either explicitly or intuitively in practice. Focusing on the form and operation of critical practice, the book provides a framework by which to analyse, differentiate, organize, and discuss the characteristics of work. Above all, it allows us to study the field’s nuances and work towards a taxonomy of critical practice in design. It does this by providing contextual tools and theoretical apparatus that act as a point of access into the discussion of critical practice and its reflection in a variety of design projects. In doing this, I hope to argue for the value and necessity of this field of product and industrial design. ## Industrial design as a discipline It is important to acknowledge the transdisciplinary character of many of the approaches that will be discussed in the following chapters. Transdisciplinarity is an unavoidable characteristic of a practice that looks to engage other fields and expertise, and extend a disciplinary purview. Human Computer Interaction, Interaction Design, Graphic and Communication Design, and Media-Art are among the practices that have informed critical designs development in an industrial design context. Each of these fields has its own account of critical practice. However, to be transdisciplinary, interdisciplinary, or cross-disciplinary, one must be disciplinary first and formed in a discipline to then cross over into other disciplines. My position in relation to critical design and the approach taken in writing this book is informed by my experience as an industrial designer, first operating in a commercial context before moving to research and practice in a critical design context. Throughout the book, critical design practice is positioned and discussed as a field of practice within the discipline of product and industrial design. It focuses on critical design practice specifically as it is understood as a form of product and industrial design and how it emerged from practices of industrial design. As a designer, academic, and educator, I consider product and industrial design as a discipline before I consider it a profession. Like Cross (2006) and Nelson and Stolterman (2012), I frame industrial design as a specific branch of knowledge, learning, and practice, and a discipline that incorporates expertise, people, projects, communities, challenges, studies, inquiry, and research areas that are strongly associated with industrial design. Disciplines develop through dialogue, inquiry, claims, and rebuttal. For a discipline to emerge, it requires challenge and a critique of hegemony, multiple interpretations, voices, and perspectives. It needs protagonists on the edge looking outward and protagonists within reflecting on the value of the core disciplinary practice. It needs its advocates and adversaries. I pose that critical design practice affords this to product and industrial design. Through this book, we will see how critical design operates, explore its tradition and lineage, and argue why it is important in a product and industrial design context. Critical Design in Context serves to offer an introduction into critical design practice and its concerns. It brings examples of practice and literature on the practice together in order to provide an account and contextualization of critical design practice that should be of use to any student of product and industrial design and its related fields. It should also be of use to design scholars interested in problematizing critical design practice, be it either as a piece to critique or to employ as an analytical tool in observing the practice. Above all, I hope that the history, the theory, the methods, and examples of practice, presented in the following chapters, shed light on the operation of critical design practice and its contribution to product and industrial design in a disciplinary context. ## The structure and approach to writing The book is broken down into three thematic parts: history, theory, and practice. Chapter 2 presents a history of critical design practice, placing critical design today in a historic context. It discusses how the term ‘critical design’ appeared some twenty years ago in the design research community as a particular approach in interaction design as a field of industrial design. Referring to a longer tradition of critical approaches in industrial design and architecture, it was meant to re-establish alternative views on product and interface design, telling stories about human values and behaviour that were neglected in commercial industrial design practices. Thus, the chapter charts a history of critical design from its roots in Italian Radical Design, Anti Design, and New Design, in the German and Dutch traditions of Conceptual Design as well as in the critical practice of Human Computer Interaction and Interaction Design. The chapter goes on to show how critical design projects carried out today are heavily influenced by the methods and approaches developed in these preceding practices as well as the anti-capitalist, anti-commercial, ethically led, and activist ideologies that informed these earlier modes of critical practice. Additionally, comparisons of historic and contemporary examples of critical design practice will show how the design language and themes in some critical design practice today mirror, or are at least informed by, work produced over forty years ago. The discussion in this chapter reveals that contrary to the popular understanding of critical design practice, critical design is not such a new or emerging field or movement, but is part of a long and diverse trajectory of critical practice in industrial design and its forerunners have influenced mainstream industrial design practice and theory today. Chapter 3 begins to tackle the theory informing, and developed through, critical design practice. This chapter aims to illustrate design activity, theoretical perspectives, and methods used in critical design practice. The chapter begins by introducing the theoretical perspectives that inform critical design through a discussion on ‘Para-functionality’, ‘Post-optimal design’, and the ‘Aesthetics of use’ as concepts that have been developed over the past fifteen years to explain how critical design practice works. The chapter outlines how critical design is perceived as a form of design research. However, it shows how critical design as a research method is not objective or explanatory, and how it is criticized for not being scientifically rigorous because of the inherent uncertainty to be found in the design process and the objects it produces. Critical design embraces subjectivity, ambiguity, and the object as an evocative agent. In short, critical design as a research method sets out to ask more questions than it aims to answer. With this in mind, the discussion on design activity, theoretical perspectives, and the methods used shows how in a changing territory of design research, critical design practice operates though its provocative objects with ambiguous characteristics. This use of purposeful ambiguity allows the user to see and experience phenomena that would otherwise go unnoticed, as it provokes new ways of thinking about the world through objects. The discussion will illustrate how the open-ended and relational characteristic of critical design is being embraced by disciplines external to industrial design e.g. how critical designers are working with scientists to probe and question difficult ethical sociotechnical questions through the production of objects and scenarios. The chapter contextualizes critical design practice’s use in relation to the sciences and the social sciences through a discussion on design examples and methods. Continuing this inquiry into the theory associated with critical design practice, Chapter 4 considers criticism and function in critical design. This chapter focuses on critical design as a specific field of industrial design practice. It considers barriers to critical design practice being seen as part of a disciplinary project. The chapter begins by arguing that analysis of critical design practice often comes from perspectives developed in art and visual culture. The chapter aims to identify the limitations of analysing the practice from these perspectives. It argues the need for a more design-centric focus. The chapter goes on to discuss how ‘function’ is used as a concept to ground criticism of critical design practice and to categorize critical design as a form of conceptual art. The discussion shows that ‘function’ offers insufficient grounds for criticism and categorization. It renders claims that critical design is not design because the objects do not function in a utilitarian sense redundant. Function as a concept is explored to show that an object’s function not only has the potential to extend beyond utility, efficiency, and optimization, but even in the strictest modernist sense of the concept, function has always comprised characteristics that move into post-optimal realms, beyond efficient use, utility, and practical specifications. The chapter argues for a relational, dynamic characteristic of function that supports seeing and discusses critical design practice as other examples of orthodox industrial design and not conceptual art. The chapter ultimately locates critical design in its disciplinary context. Building on this, the chapter distinguishes what differentiates critical design from other forms of critical creative practices. It states what is distinct about critical design that primarily relates to how critical design uses the ubiquitous language of product design and narratives of everyday use to engage broad audiences in debate and critique. Through the presentation and discussion of design examples, Chapter 5 explores what critical design practice is critical of. This chapter presents three distinct approaches to critical practice; these three types of practice characterize contemporary critical design and are defined as associative design, speculative design, and critical design. Drawing from the discussion outlined throughout the book, Chapter 5 describes how associative design emerged from political forms of radical and anti-design, drawing on mechanisms of subversion and experimentation in conceptual art. The critique focuses on disciplinary concerns. Speculative design advances product design to comment on emerging science and technology, drawing on socioscientific research and theories. The critique focuses on scientific and technological concerns. Finally, critical design functions as a form of critical language and offers a sociocultural critique. The chapter establishes how these three approaches in critical practice function as a form of satiric design, in each case the designers use satire in their design work to establish critique and engage user audiences in debate on and around the work through the use of humour. The discussion shows that the characteristics of satire and the range of techniques used to offer a satiric response are appropriate mechanisms to differentiate these types of critical practice. The examples and approaches discussed throughout the chapter identify precise points inherent to the critical attitude in industrial design. Ultimately, the chapter shows that contemporary critical design is a rich and diverse activity engaging with a range of themes, or what are termed throughout the book as matters of concern, where the products and practices of industrial design are mobilized to engage diverse communities and publics in debate about issues pertinent to the design discipline, scientific and technical developments, and sociocultural concerns. Chapter 5 concludes by presenting a taxonomy of critical design practice. The taxonomy incorporates theory, methods, and tactics identified and discussed throughout the book and provides contextual tools and theoretical apparatus to engage with critical design practice. The taxonomy serves as a tool to analyse examples of critical practice and its application is illustrated. The taxonomy also serves as a tool to inform the operation of critical practice and identifies methodological and critical approaches that are of interest to design practitioners and students of design. In Chapter 6, the book concludes by describing the disciplinary contribution that critical design makes. It discusses the constructive relationship between critical design practice and mainstream design practice. It argues how critical design practice extends the scope and agency of today’s industrial designer into new contexts of operation and engagement and how this creates new opportunities for today’s product and industrial designers. The book places critical design practice in a context of product and industrial design practice. It places critical design practice in historic context and discusses the theoretical contexts that designers draw from and position the work in. It discusses the contexts engendered in the design work, the focus of critique, and subjects of investigation undertaken through critical design practice. It discusses where and in what contexts critical design operates, discussing how and by what methods and tactics critical designers operate. With these things considered, the following chapters ultimately serve to contextualize critical design practice and its contribution as a form of practice.