Above all, I hope that the history, the theory, the methods, and examples of practice, presented in the following chapters, shed light on the operation of critical design practice and its contribution to product and industrial design in a disciplinary context.

## The structure and approach to writing

The book is broken down into three thematic parts: history, theory, and practice. Chapter 2 presents a history of critical design practice, placing critical design today in a historic context. It discusses how the term ‘critical design’ appeared some twenty years ago in the design research community as a particular approach in interaction design as a field of industrial design. Referring to a longer tradition of critical approaches in industrial design and architecture, it was meant to re-establish alternative views on product and interface design, telling stories about human values and behaviour that were neglected in commercial industrial design practices. Thus, the chapter charts a history of critical design from its roots in Italian Radical Design, Anti Design, and New Design, in the German and Dutch traditions of Conceptual Design as well as in the critical practice of Human Computer Interaction and Interaction Design. The chapter goes on to show how critical design projects carried out today are heavily influenced by the methods and approaches developed in these preceding practices as well as the anti-capitalist, anti-commercial, ethically led, and activist ideologies that informed these earlier modes of critical practice. Additionally, comparisons of historic and contemporary examples of critical design practice will show how the design language and themes in some critical design practice today mirror, or are at least informed by, work produced over forty years ago. The discussion in this chapter reveals that contrary to the popular understanding of critical design practice, critical design is not such a new or emerging field or movement, but is part of a long and diverse trajectory of critical practice in industrial design and its forerunners have influenced mainstream industrial design practice and theory today.

Chapter 3 begins to tackle the theory informing, and developed through, critical design practice. This chapter aims to illustrate design activity, theoretical perspectives, and methods used in critical design practice. The chapter begins by introducing the theoretical perspectives that inform critical design through a discussion on ‘Para-functionality’, ‘Post-optimal design’, and the ‘Aesthetics of use’ as concepts that have been developed over the past fifteen years to explain how critical design practice works.

The chapter outlines how critical design is perceived as a form of design research. However, it shows how critical design as a research method is not objective or explanatory, and how it is criticized for not being scientifically rigorous because of the inherent uncertainty to be found in the design process and the objects it produces. Critical design embraces subjectivity, ambiguity, and the object as an evocative agent. In short, critical design as a research method sets out to ask more questions than it aims to answer.

With this in mind, the discussion on design activity, theoretical perspectives, and the methods used shows how in a changing territory of design research, critical design practice operates though its provocative objects with ambiguous characteristics. This use of purposeful ambiguity allows the user to see and experience phenomena that would otherwise go unnoticed, as it provokes new ways of thinking about the world through objects. The discussion will illustrate how the open-ended and relational characteristic of critical design is being embraced by disciplines external to industrial design e.g. how critical designers are working with scientists to probe and question difficult ethical sociotechnical questions through the production of objects and scenarios. The chapter contextualizes critical design practice’s use in relation to the sciences and the social sciences through a discussion on design examples and methods.

Continuing this inquiry into the theory associated with critical design practice, Chapter 4 considers criticism and function in critical design. This chapter focuses on critical design as a specific field of industrial design practice. It considers barriers to critical design practice being seen as part of a disciplinary project. The chapter begins by arguing that analysis of critical design practice often comes from perspectives developed in art and visual culture. The chapter aims to identify the limitations of analysing the practice from these perspectives. It argues the need for a more design-centric focus. The chapter goes on to discuss how ‘function’ is used as a concept to ground criticism of critical design practice and to categorize critical design as a form of conceptual art. The discussion shows that ‘function’ offers insufficient grounds for criticism and categorization. It renders claims that critical design is not design because the objects do not function in a utilitarian sense redundant. Function as a concept is explored to show that an object’s function not only has the potential to extend beyond utility, efficiency, and optimization, but even in the strictest modernist sense of the concept, function has always comprised characteristics that move into post-optimal realms, beyond efficient use, utility, and practical specifications. The chapter argues for a relational, dynamic characteristic of function that supports seeing and discusses critical design practice as other examples of orthodox industrial design and not conceptual art. The chapter ultimately locates critical design in its disciplinary context. Building on this, the chapter distinguishes what differentiates critical design from other forms of critical creative practices. It states what is distinct about critical design that primarily relates to how critical design uses the ubiquitous language of product design and narratives of everyday use to engage broad audiences in debate and critique.

Through the presentation and discussion of design examples, Chapter 5 explores what critical design practice is critical of. This chapter presents three distinct approaches to critical practice; these three types of practice characterize contemporary critical design and are defined as associative design, speculative design, and critical design. Drawing from the discussion outlined throughout the book, Chapter 5 describes how associative design emerged from political forms of radical and anti-design, drawing on mechanisms of subversion and experimentation in conceptual art. The critique focuses on disciplinary concerns. Speculative design advances product design to comment on emerging science and technology, drawing on socioscientific research and theories. The critique focuses on scientific and technological concerns. Finally, critical design functions as a form of critical language and offers a sociocultural critique. The chapter establishes how these three approaches in critical practice function as a form of satiric design, in each case the designers use satire in their design work to establish critique and engage user audiences in debate on and around the work through the use of humour. The discussion shows that the characteristics of satire and the range of techniques used to offer a satiric response are appropriate mechanisms to differentiate these types of critical practice. The examples and approaches discussed throughout the chapter identify precise points inherent to the critical attitude in industrial design. Ultimately, the chapter shows that contemporary critical design is a rich and diverse activity engaging with a range of themes, or what are termed throughout the book as matters of concern, where the products and practices of industrial design are mobilized to engage diverse communities and publics in debate about issues pertinent to the design discipline, scientific and technical developments, and sociocultural concerns. Chapter 5 concludes by presenting a taxonomy of critical design practice. The taxonomy incorporates theory, methods, and tactics identified and discussed throughout the book and provides contextual tools and theoretical apparatus to engage with critical design practice. The taxonomy serves as a tool to analyse examples of critical practice and its application is illustrated. The taxonomy also serves as a tool to inform the operation of critical practice and identifies methodological and critical approaches that are of interest to design practitioners and students of design.

In Chapter 6, the book concludes by describing the disciplinary contribution that critical design makes. It discusses the constructive relationship between critical design practice and mainstream design practice. It argues how critical design practice extends the scope and agency of today’s industrial designer into new contexts of operation and engagement and how this creates new opportunities for today’s product and industrial designers.

The book places critical design practice in a context of product and industrial design practice. It places critical design practice in historic context and discusses the theoretical contexts that designers draw from and position the work in. It discusses the contexts engendered in the design work, the focus of critique, and subjects of investigation undertaken through critical design practice. It discusses where and in what contexts critical design operates, discussing how and by what methods and tactics critical designers operate. With these things considered, the following chapters ultimately serve to contextualize critical design practice and its contribution as a form of practice.