# CRITICAL DESIGN PRACTICE AND ITS DISCIPLINARY CONTRIBUTION In this book, I have introduced examples of critical design practice and discussed the tactics used to establish a critical move through product and industrial design. I have outlined a brief history of the practice, theoretical approaches that inform critical practice and explored, through the categorization of associative, speculative, and critical design, where critical practice engages and critiques matters of concern familiar to the product design discipline, and those matters of concern that are not so familiar. By means of a conclusion, this chapter sets out an argument for the disciplinary contribution that critical design practice makes. ## Summary The discussion in Chapter 2 described how the term ‘critical design’ appeared some twenty years ago in the design research community as a particular approach to human-computer interaction. Referring to a longer tradition of critical approaches in product design and architecture, it was meant to re-establish alternative views on product and interface design, telling stories about human values and behaviour that were neglected in commercial product design. The discussion charted a history from Radical Design in the Italian tradition; Anti-Design, New Design, and Conceptual Design in the German and Dutch traditions; and critical practice in HCI, Interaction Design, and Critical Technical Practice. Associative, speculative, and critical design projects carried out today are heavily influenced by the methods and approaches developed in these preceding practices and are influenced by the anti-capitalist, anti-commercial, ethically led, and activist ideologies that informed these earlier modes of critical practice. The discussion showed how contemporary examples of critical design practice are informed by aesthetic principles established in the 1960s and 1970s and how these approaches have been practiced throughout the lineage of critical practice. To illustrate this, Peter Cook’s Archigram Instant City Airships was compared to Brendan Walker’s Chromo 11 Air Life Seat Belts and Superstudio’s Monumento Continuo alongside Dunne and Raby’s United Micro Kingdoms Digitarians. These examples show how the design language in critical design practice today is informed by work produced over forty years ago. The benefit of looking at the history of critical design practice came from identifying design methods used to establish the critical move through design. The review of precedents identified ‘cutup’, ‘context transfer’, ‘hybridity’, and ‘technocratic visualization’ as methods used to build ambiguity into objects. These methods are used in contemporary examples of practice and from a theoretical perspective, they offer a means to differentiate between the examples of associative, speculative, and critical design and are used to inform the structure of the taxonomy presented in Chapter 5. Chapter 3 focused on the discourse surrounding critical design since the development and popularization of the term ‘c.1993’. It described the use of product design to address various social, technical, scientific, and disciplinary concerns. The discussion outlined the theoretical perspectives that ground critical design practice outlining the perspectives of Dunne (1997), Redström and Hällnass (2002a, 2002b), and Ball and Naylor (2006). It focused on the ‘aesthetics of use’, ‘correspondence and context’, ‘parafunctionality’, and the ‘post-optimal object’. It described the instrumental use of ‘ambiguity as a resource for design’ and established that designing ambiguity into the object – in its appearance and its use – is instrumental in establishing the critical move through product design. The type of ambiguity designed into critical design work was identified as another means to differentiate between examples of critical design practice. With reference to Gaver, Beaver, and Benford (2003), three types of ambiguity were identified. Associative design works through ‘ambiguity of context’, speculative design works through ‘ambiguity of information’, and critical design through ‘relational ambiguity’. In practical terms, the discussion set out in Chapter 3 illustrated the sensitivity required when designing ambiguity into objects as a means to spark debate, engagement, or to establish the critical move. For associative, critical, or speculative design to work, the objects designed must be seen as design objects. Put simply, too odd and they will not work, too strange and the designs will not engage the user. The work produced – be it a lone object or an object contextualized by an extrinsic narrative established through a film or some other medium – should always relate back to quotidian conditions. Good examples of critical design practice tap into users’ familiar understanding of objects of use. They subvert the understanding between users and object, essentially exploiting the evocative characteristics of designed objects. This creates a dilemma of interpretation afforded by the contradiction, tension, and juxtaposition of an object of use and the subversion of users’ conventional understanding of how that object might be used. It is in this tension, in this dilemma of interpretation, that questions are asked and channels of discourse are opened. This function of critical design practice is useful when trying to develop an understanding of how the designers establish inquiry through design and frame the practice as research. Where this dilemma of interpretation is established using ‘ambiguity’, ‘design fictions’, and ‘strangely familiar’ objects, through methods commonly associated with art practice, it is all too easy to see the work as something other than product design. Because of these characteristics, critical design practice is often subject to art discourse, critique, and gallery circulation. The assertion made by the designers, that the work is design, is important since the power of critical design practice lies in its objects being seen as product design. As a method, strategy, or theoretical perspective, critical design has been widely interpreted. It has shown how it has been appropriated in an increasing number of student projects and adopted by many trying to find a label for what they do. With this has come a sporadic analysis of the field that often discusses the work with reference to its proximity to art practice. The book has questioned some analysis of the practice that comes from exhibition and curation perspectives. In this context, appraisal can be accused of being unrepresentative and affirmative. This was exemplified in Antonelli’s account of Catts and Zurr’s work during the Design and the Elastic Mind exhibition that was astutely challenged by Cogdell (2009) in her Design Issues review of it. The discussion revealed how dominant criticism and analysis of critical design is often grounded in perspectives rooted in art and visual culture discourses. The discussion identified the criticism of critical design practice and the barriers that exist to seeing critical design practice as product design. The focus here set up one of the main arguments and concerns in this book: the danger of critical design practice being seen as a form or quasi art or as a form of design entertainment enjoyed for its humour or novelty rather than for its insight. Critical design practice needs to avoid this by inviting commentary and critique of the practice. The first thing to address in aiming to establish this designcentric analysis is the barriers that exist to seeing critical design as a form of product design. Most clearly, this is the question of critical design practice’s proximity to art. Even the most open-minded design professionals and researchers question if critical design operates as product design because it does not serve to solve problems through highly resolved objects or innovative systems design. Considering the ‘isn’t it just art?’ question, a concept of function based on optimization and efficiency was identified as the measure used by many to differentiate between objects of art and design. In an attempt to move the discussion away from the ‘art question’, the common perception of function, or more accurately ‘practical functionality’, was challenged and a concept of function conceived beyond efficiency and optimization was presented. The discussion here drew on literature from design theory, but also from other disciplines that engage with objects, form, and materiality. Archaeologists have an interesting and useful take when attempting to re-conceptualize function. Ligo (1984) and Schiffer (1992) extend function beyond efficiency into more social and even existential contexts. Material culture perspectives also contribute and should be considered in any attempt to reframe function. Miller (1987) was again useful in his call to think about a more open interpretation and the sociological perspective (Shove, Watson, and Ingram 2007) and brought current thinking on practice-orientated design into play. Just as these perspectives support the rationality of function, the discussion identified designers and scholars who advocate a socially constructed and dynamic function of, and for, objects. The discussion showed how Brandes, Stich, and Wender (2009), Kroes (2010), and Fisher and Shipton (2010) suggest forms of use that, despite the designer’s intent, function will always emerge in use. This perspective is shared by Mazé (2007) in her thesis exploring the ‘temporal form of interaction’, Wilkie (2010) in his ‘user assemblages’, and Niedderer (2004, 2006) in her category of the ‘performative object’. The discussion located how function can be considered in a context of critical design practice. It showed that an object’s function is open to the interpretation by the user and the intention of the designer. In short, function is an ill-defined and open concept; it extends beyond optimization and efficiency into social existential and cultural contexts, and therefore it provides insufficient grounds to frame critical design practice in art discourse. The reality is that things are more complex than a simple design/art dichotomy. In a context of critical design practice, if both user and designer are willing to see the object as a functioning design object, then the object does function as an object of design and should be discussed as such. This discussion of function was useful because it established that critical design practice operates through a system of ‘rhetorical use’. Rhetorical use was introduced as a form of symbolic and intellectual use. This use is afforded through the designer’s projection of the object in material form, and imagination on the part of the user. Rhetorical use is just as legitimate as practical use. Accepting rhetorical use as a legitimate form of use counters arguments based on the claim that critical design is not useful and does not function. There is more to the function of designed objects than just practical considerations. Through this proposition, I challenge the reader to overcome the modernist doctrine inherent in ‘form follows function’ and by doing this, overcome one of the biggest barriers to seeing and talking about critical design as product design. An open concept of function and use, as advocated by those cited above, shifts focus beyond aesthetic questions to open critical design practice up to a more design-centric analysis. An analysis where questions can be asked of the object, which orient around contexts and systems of use, the practices that might situate the object or the behaviours that might emerge as a result of engaging with, and using the critical design object. The discussion in Chapter 4 outlined the need for apparatus to facilitate discussion into critical design practice. The premise here is that models make sense of things. A model of the practice that illustrates its position in relation to other forms of design practice and places it in a disciplinary context, developed from a product design perspective, might engage a broader discussion of the practice and by extension advance the theoretical foundation of the practice. The discussion detailed work carried out in this vain. Sanders’s (2006) ‘evolving map of design research and practice’ places critical design in a design research context; Walker’s (2010) positioning of critical design as ‘fundamental research’ showed how critical design functions as research in a design process and as a means of ideation. A rhizomic model of the field and its reach was identified in Design Act (2009). Mazé positioned critical design practice amongst examples of socially responsible design practice, participatory design, and co-design practices that are political by nature and orientate around active critical participation. Considering how others have explored and conceptualized critical design practice, the chapter introduced a characteristic of critical design practice that differentiates it from other forms of socially and politically engaged practices. There is a trend to discuss critical design alongside other forms of socially engaged participatory and co-design practices (Bülmann 2008; Sanders and Stappers 2008; Design Act 2009). Arguably, critical design practice as it has been described in this book, differs from these practices in that it functions as an authoritative form of product design. The ‘critical’ designer performs as author and critic, and although this has changed slightly in speculative design practice where designers frequently collaborate with experts in scientific contexts, there remains an authorship over the work and often a polemic thread is engendered in the design and narratives of use. In short, the designer takes a critical position through the medium of product and industrial design. Such a view of the field differentiates it from other forms of socially responsible or responsive forms of design practice, participatory, or co-design which are characterized by the redistribution of power in making design decisions from the designer to the stakeholder users. However, I recognize that these practices are also critical of prevailing orthodoxy and are having deterritorializing effects on the role of the designer and what constitutes product design practice today. The taxonomy presented in Chapter 5 works to illustrate the diversity in critical design practice. It shows how critical design practice broadly constitutes three types of practice: associative, critical, and speculative design. This conceptualization positions the colloquial and popularly understood view of critical design in a broader context of critical design practice. Critical design has a history in associative design and a future in speculative design. All three forms of practice exist today in contemporary product design practice. The taxonomy contextualizes critical design practice in three ways. First, it is used to show the contexts engendered in the practice, the disciplinary, science, and technology, or sociocultural project focus. Second, it shows where a project is carried out (the operating context). Academic design research, the gallery system, and various studio practices were identified as contexts that facilitate the practice. The range of examples discussed show how the practice is closely linked to design schools and the academy. These spaces provide the freedom from the restraints imposed by industry and produce another form of capital, epistemic, and human capital. This illustrated the importance of the institution to the practice. Third, it shows how the practice operates through satire and methods used to establish a critical narrative through design. Satiric design was identified as salient and is useful because, as a concept, it addresses questions about how critical design is done. Notably, critical design practice functions through the marriage of design principles and satire. Inseparable from any definition of satire is critique and corrective purpose, expressed through a critical mode that ridicules or otherwise challenges conditions needing reformation in the opinion of the critical designer as satirist. The taxonomy, by discussing key theoretical concepts that inform critical design and defining categories of practice, design methods, and contexts of operation, and structuring them into a taxonomic space, offers theoretical apparatus to engage with the field. It provides designers a territory to operate from and observers of the practice a territory to analyse and critique. Throughout these chapters, I have hoped to illustrate that critical design is a rich and important form of design practice, capable of inquiry, commentary, debate, and provocation in social, scientific, and disciplinary matters of concern. I have hoped to articulate that this field warrants analysis in order for it to continue in its development and make a valuable contribution to product design. I have hoped to provide a theoretical apparatus by which to engage an audience in the discourse of critical design practice and offer a point of entry by developing the terminology and laying down definitions around which the practice can be discussed. The premise here is that to develop the practice more people from outside critical design need to engage and challenge it. ## Challenging disciplinary orthodoxy Through a discussion of the history, theory, and practice of critical design, we have seen how it offers an alternative application for the product and industrial design skillset, and its design process and methods, to that of the commercially orientated mainstream product design practice. However, common to both critical and mainstream practice is the execution of design judgment honed and exercised through the designer’s practice, where tool-based creativity and making – in some form or another – is at the core of the practice. Because critical practice – in the guises of associative, speculative, and critical design – utilizes skills that are core to mainstream industrial design, it contributes to product and industrial design as a discipline by demonstrating the application of designerly skill, judgment, and process in broad contexts. It works to extend the purview of what product design is, and what can be considered within product and industrial design’s disciplinary remit. We have seen throughout that even though critical design projects are carried out in conceptual frames where the objects remain at the scale of one off provocations, critical designers attribute importance to the processes, methods, and principles of industrial design. This is illustrated by how the design work produced relates back to a quotidian understanding of objects afforded through the user’s familiarity with form and forms of interaction. The designers leverage the user’s familiarity to engage audiences in thought and discussion around the themes engendered in the design work. In many of the examples, we see a high finish in the designed object, carefully considered production, and assembly and the utilization of models and prototypes that are situated in detailed visual scenarios that depict how these objects are used. In critical design practice, the designers value the same rules and expectations in the production of work, as they would if working on a commercial project. There is attention to form and contexts of use. The tools and design methods applied are equally relevant and applicable in both forms of practice. Both forms map the problem context, survey the horizon, and are concerned with the future. Both critical and mainstream designers imagine objects and the scenarios that these objects will live in; they are concerned with affecting change and intervening in the future – at some scale. So, as with a commercial brief where an understanding of context and circumstances of use are absolutely everything, where the project’s success hinges on the appropriate identification and management of the design problem in context through the identification and analysis of insight, and the translation of this insight into an appropriate and relevant design response, critical design practice honours the same design traditions and the same reasoning in the design work that is expected from orthodox design practice. Critical design practice does not function in a market context, this does not however, provide a caveat for shortcuts in the design process. It does not provide caveat for the absence of the design reasoning and iterative engagement expected of any good design work. The analysis, reasoning, judgment, iteration, testing, and creative output expected of any design process is paramount and should be present in the critical design process. When this is the case, projects are successful. There are many examples of designers claiming work as critical design, using critical and speculative design as a handy label to hide behind when the work does not come from a critical position inherent in the designer and is not the product of a rigorous process. In a critical design project, design methods and the production of design work are positioned as a system of critical thought. Rather than using other mediums, critical designers value the reflective and iterative processes that are fundamental to industrial design practice. They emphasize the processes of designing in order to articulate a position and develop understanding through making, tool-based creativity, and the dissemination of process and products of design. Amidst attitudes of dissatisfaction and frustration with the status quo – in disciplinary, technological, and societal contexts – there is a collective refusal by the critical designers discussed throughout this book to abandon product design practice. It would be all too easy to frame the projects as other forms of creative practice, but the refusal to do so affords critical design agency to offer a criticism from within design practice. Within the examples discussed, there is a belief that the function of product and industrial design can be extended into provocative realms and that design has the potential to open up new avenues of discourse and reflect on the principles and values inherent in product design. While dissident in character, the refusal to abandon the product design discipline through the application of design language, methods, and principles, offers a valuable contribution to the discipline. The critique of the discipline, through the subversion of disciplinary traditions, adds a new practice of values. This fits with a concept of critique where critique is a practice that not only suspends judgment but also offers a new practice of values based on that very suspension (2002xx). In establishing this critique, the designers aim to extend the purview of the discipline and what product design is capable of addressing beyond fiscal and technological drivers. This suspension of conventional market, user, and technologically driven values paradoxically adds value to product and industrial design. Critical design practice therefore has an agonistic relationship to orthodox product design, a relationship based on a plurality and advocacy. When critical and mainstream design are seen as complementary fields operating constructively in an agonistic relationship, critical design practice advances the product discipline. It offers the means to look inward at the processes and principles of design rather than passively accept normative practice and hegemony. It serves to challenge a ‘business as usual’ model within the discipline and profession. The role here is not to undermine or subvert the profession, but to challenge it and drive it forward as a thoughtful and reflective agent. Moreover, engaging fields, practices, and issues beyond perceived disciplinary silos and boundaries take the industrial designer into new territories of operation. This creates opportunities for knowledge generation, collaboration, and importantly, the possibility of new professional roles for product and industrial designers i.e. working in contexts such as medical ethics, synthetic biology, politics, and the plethora of other contexts that critical and speculative design are engaging with. Looking at this pragmatically might mean more jobs for designers as it offers a potential to do design work in contexts that sit outside a saturated job market – it moves the designer beyond the design consultancy and the in-house studio towards a role for the designer in think tanks, policy-making, technological research centres, thirdsector organizations, and academic research centres – to name just a few facilitating contexts derived from the examples discussed throughout this book. ## An extended role for industrial design: Discipline, science, and society Critical designers exercise disciplinary confidence. They trust and value the application of industrial design and how it contributes to problem contexts considered outside mainstream design. This activity extends the scope and agency of today’s industrial designer into new contexts of operation and engagement. The designers share the belief that product design is more than a profession, more than an agent of capital, and is a powerful medium, language, and process through which to make comment and engage inquiry. The affective and relational character of the work opens channels of discourse on and around the object. Design used in this way works as part of a research process. Research in this sense sits in opposition to positivist research methods that aim to present facts, which as often as they contribute to knowledge, close down avenues of inquiry. The ability to provoke discussion on an object and to engage a public has an instrumental application in the research context. In this context, the designs function as probes offering means to make sense of emerging science, comment on societal concerns, and construct publics around these matters of concern. Galloway poignantly describes this: Since facts seem to end debates, and design seems to open them up, our greatest chance for critical intervention arise in our engagement of shared concerns – even if that means we cannot solve a problem. (Galloway 2007) Opening up the discourse through critical design practice and a combination of highly situated ethics and aesthetics allows for greater critical manoeuvrability and means of progression into the future. The discussion in Chapter 3 showed how this affective function of critical design practice is being embraced in contexts of science and technology research where designers are collaborating with scientists, bioethicists, and even in environmental policy. In a time when we are faced with rising complex societal problems, ethical sociotechnical questions, and material scarcity, there is need for a broad and more questioning form of design practice that serves to question and advance orthodox industrial design practice. We are now also at a point where we should question the impact of such practice. This is maybe where critical, speculative, and associative design falls short of its reach and impact to date. It is now established as a practice, and we should be confident in its disciplinary role, but we should now question and report on how critical design interfaces and impacts on the problem contexts it is used to engage with – how the debate, the engagement, the construction of publics, and the assembly of audience through the design device have meaningful effect. For example, how does it impact on the medical ethics it engages, the synthetic biologists who collaborate or reframe disciplinary attitudes towards production and consumption? How does it interface fully with the discourses it engages and how does it open itself effectively to challenge and critique in a context beyond critical design practice? When we can evidence the impact and effect of critical design practice within the contexts that it is engaging, we can say that the purview and disciplinary remit of product and industrial design have been extended. We can say that critical and speculative design had an effect in how it has agitated and expanded the discipline. But here we are met with a dilemma; when a critical design practice serves a utilitarian function and when it is incorporated into the disciplinary core and becomes part of the governing mentality, is it still critical? Perhaps not, but rest assured that other forms of critical practice will emerge that question the core and its governing mentalities just as associative, speculative, and critical design have done. The examples presented and the discussion in this book reflect on particular moments and approaches to critical practice. The taxonomy presents an interpretation and conceptual anchor to contextualize critical design practice, but critical practice is and always should be in flux and development for as long as the discipline and its governing mentalities are in flux and development.