Figure 2.9 Martino Gamper, Olympia from the series 100 Chairs in 100 Days, 2005–2007.

These comparisons serve to illustrate that critical design has a rich history in practice and that tactics, themes, and approaches have developed over time.

## Conclusion

The primary aim of this chapter is to contextualize critical design as part of an older tradition of criticality in product and industrial design. In charting this brief history, the discussion shows how the term ‘critical design’ appeared some twenty years ago in the design research community as a particular approach to human computer interaction. However, as part of a longer tradition of critical approaches in product design, it was meant to re-establish alternative views on product design, telling stories about human values and behaviour that were neglected in commercial product design.

The chapter identified social and technological conditions that led to the emergence of critical practices. A salient observation is how examples of critical practice emerge out of turbulent political, economic, and technological shifts. Whether it was the disillusionment with functionalism, the political turmoil of the 1960s, or the technological shift from the mechanical to the digital paradigm, designers active at these times find their voice through design practice.

In many of the examples discussed, we see how critical design practice is rooted within an established community of practice supported by institutional contexts. The Art School has historically supported the practice and the role of the educational institution is significantly important. The educational institution facilitated the ‘Bristol Experiment’, the University of Florence facilitated Italian antidesign, the Cranbrook Academy experimented in product semantics, and Eindhoven supported Droog. Furthermore, The RCA and the Computer Related Design Studio provided environments for experimentation with new technology and approaches to designing that would not be carried out in an applied industrial context.

Although this is historically significant, it pertains to contemporary practice. As we will see in later chapters, the majority of critical design practice carried out today is associated with academic institutions and is often framed as research carried out within this context.

Paradoxically, the structures and media that contribute to and support commercial and professional design culture; publications and exhibitions, for example, also support critical design practice, since work is disseminated through galleries and the popular design press. Here we see a problem in critical design practice in that it is dependent on its links with the design culture within which it operates and simultaneously critiques.

Critical design projects carried out today are influenced by the methods and approaches developed in earlier examples of practice. They are influenced by the anti-capitalist, anti-commercial, ethically led, and activist ideologies that informed earlier modes of critical practice. The discussion shows how contemporary examples of critical design practice are informed by aesthetic principles found in older examples. The benefit of looking at the history of critical design practice comes from identifying design methods used to establish the critical move through design. This short review of precedents identified ‘cut up’, ‘context transfer’, ‘hybridity’, and ‘technocratic visualization’ as methods used to build ambiguity into objects to achieve defamiliarizing effect that provokes the user to engage in meaning making and provokes thought through the object’s design. These methods are used today in contemporary examples of practice to establish the critical move and position design as a field of concern. Positioning design as a field of concern, response, and as a mode of inquiry is a fundamental principle that grounds contemporary critical design practice. Here design practice and its objects facilitate a way of knowing, exploring, projecting, and activating the relationship between users, objects, and the systems that they exist in. The following chapter explores in detail the theoretical and methodological approaches in practice that afford such a function in critical design practice.

# 3 THEORIES, METHODS, AND TACTICS

This chapter aims to illustrate design activity, theoretical perspectives, methods, and tactics used in critical design practice. It introduces these perspectives initially through a discussion on parafunctionality, post-optimal design, and the aesthetics of use. These concepts are used to explain how critical design practice operates as a medium for inquiry. It discusses how critical design functions as a form of design research, arguing that the practice is not objective or explanatory, but instead focuses on intersubjectivity and proposition, posited through the act of product design. In this context, the purposive function of the design work is discursive where the designer aims to generate debate about the themes engaged in the design work. The chapter shows how the open-ended and relational characteristic of work produced by critical designers is embraced by disciplines external to product design. The chapter contextualizes critical design practice’s use in relation to the sciences and the social sciences, before starting to discuss the contribution that critical design practice makes to the product and industrial design discipline. The chapter ultimately places critical design in a theoretical and disciplinary context.

## Design as a medium for inquiry

Critical design practice is used as a medium to engage user audiences and provoke debate. It does this by encouraging its audiences to think critically about themes engendered in the design work. Operating in this way, critical design can be described as an affective, rather than an explanatory, practice in so much as it opens lines of inquiry as opposed to providing answers or solutions to questions or design problems. Mazé and Redström (2007) describe this function by explaining that the practice is not aimed at simplification, but diversification of the ways in which we might understand design problems and ideas. The focus here is on the epistemic qualities of the designed object i.e. how objects encourage us to think in tangible ways when we consider how they feature in everyday life. Applied in this way, the design of objects – and the scenarios that they exist in – can be employed to create a descriptive comprehension of complex issues.

Sarah Gold’s Alternet (2014) offers a good example of this. The Alternet explores the complex and pressing issue of data privacy through the proposition of an ‘Alternative Internet’ infrastructure that is community-owned, and where the retention of ownership of personal data is paramount. It counters hegemonies that surround Internet and data usage in an age dominated by optimism surrounding the Internet of Things, and the benefits of cloud computing and big data driven by the big four: Microsoft, Apple, Facebook, and Amazon. People are now aware of the manipulation and profiling made possible by the huge amount of data we all produce when using information technologies. The services that constitute the Internet depend on our data sustaining their businesses. In this scenario, recovering control of our privacy means regaining control of our data. The Alternet is a fair trade, radically reinterpreted Internet structure that provides data ownership through straightforward data licences and open-source hardware and software that are used to establish an autonomous mesh network reliant on a sense of civic duty. It allows individuals to choose whether to share their data and how their data is used. Users become participants as the Alternet is established and stewarded by the Alternet Co-operative, its users. In this way, the Alternet differentiates itself from the Internet and darknets because it is a digital commons – a civic alternative. Gold’s work presents an alternative for communications by proposing the products, infrastructure, and the service system required for the Alternet to function. It interrogates questions around transparency of data ownership. In doing this, it makes visible complex concerns in relation to how personal data is used and private information commoditized. The design of the hardware, software, and contextualizing material that Gold presents draws attention to this issue through familiar form and expectations of use. As a longdistance mesh network, the Alternet grows organically with each new router that is added. The router cases are made on a standard desktop 3D printer. The cases are designed to prevent malicious nodes from being added to the network. Each router is printed with a fingerprint that is unique and verifiable against a public database of router IDs, so any compromised router is automatically removed from the network until the community are able to assess it. In addition, the routers are made with special catches that mean to adapt the router requires the printed box to be physically broken, acting as a visual warning that the router has been compromised. These security solutions are designed to make it ‘just hard enough to deter people from maliciously adopting the network. A data barometer accessed through a smartphone application makes an invisible material visible and actionable. Each time an individual opens their Alternet operating system, they see their barometer that displays a colour diagnostic that changes colour depending on the last service to request the individual’s data.

The approach resonates with storytelling, but this is a form of storytelling through object, service, and systems design. This makes the narrative accessible and compelling. The design makes the issue tangible and engaging.

Used as a medium of inquiry, product and industrial design increases the understanding of an issue through the user engagement and discussion that takes place around the design object. This engagement provides opportunities for critical design as a form of inquiry because it opens discussion and ultimately new