importance of narrative and storytelling in the development of critical design work. However, these interactions are not afforded through the actual use of the design object, but through strategies of rhetorical use.

## Rhetorical use

Rhetorical use in critical practice is established by constructing narratives of use. This means designing the object’s context and the presentation of scenarios that give meaning to the object. This is often achieved with media that is external to and situates the design object. Typically, this takes the form of film, images, photomontage, and vignette. In establishing narratives of use, the designer takes on the role of a storyteller and author where fictional scenarios are developed to position the object, but also where the imagined or rhetorical interaction with the object itself works to make the fictional scenarios believable. As we saw in the example of The Pillow in Chapter 2, the ambiguous objects that characterize critical design practice are made sense of through material that situates the work in an everyday and familiar context. The object and contextualizing material taken together can be defined as a design device.

Through rhetorical use, critical design practice aims to explore what might be and to establish alternatives that offer an experience similar to the quality of poetic language. This encourages the user to imagine the object in their lives, while simultaneously creating a dilemma of interpretation within the user. This dilemma of interpretation encourages the user to question the qualities of the object and the narrative of use that contextualize it. It is within this dilemma of interpretation, and in the suspension of disbelief, that questions can be asked of the product design and of the designer’s critical position.

## Discursive design

Post-optimal design, para-functional objects, and rhetorical use are used to establish the designed object as a form of discourse. In practice, discourses allow for a certain way of seeing, understanding, and commenting. Here the use of discourse is not limited to disciplinary or linguistic discourse but entire ways of understanding things, where one knows through discourse, as discourse allows for the production of certain and individual truths. In critical design, the act of designing – including the subjective interpretations and processes that inform the work – is established as a mode of discourse<sup>2</sup> and so critical design is close to what Krippendorff describes as ‘designing the design discourse’ (Krippendorff 2006, 32). In designing the discourse, critical design practice can be described as a form of critical thought amongst other forms of critical thinking. Bruce and Stephanie Tharp describe this intention and role in practice:

The primary intent of the discursive designer is to encourage users’ reflections upon, or engagements with, a particular discourse; the goal is to affect the intellect. As distinct from objects of art, architecture, and graphics, which can all be agents of discourse, products have particular qualities that offer unique communicative advantages. (Tharp and Tharp, 2009)

Examples of discursive design include Diller + Scofindio’s The Vice/Virtue glass series (1997) produced for the exhibition Glassmanifest, in Leerdam, the Netherlands. In the design of drinking glasses, each glass in the series – Dispensary (blown glass with a compartment for Prozac), Exhaust (blown glass with a cigarette), and Fountain (blown glass with integrated hypodermic needle) – serves one addiction. Though the work, the designers explore contradictory cultural attitudes towards addiction and health, where the hacked glasses accommodate the dual pursuits of health and hedonism.

The Near Future Laboratory designers’, Julian Bleecker and Nicolas Nova, Slow Messenger (2009) offers another example of discursive commentary through design intervention and playful experiment. Through the design of the world’s slowest instant messenger, the designers explore how in a digitally networked era contact is perpetual and ubiquitous. The device delivers a message through a deliberately primitive text display that turns the torrent into a trickle and the user has to wait for the message to reveal. Implemented as hardware, it uses a 96×64 pixel display; the design questions how our connectivity often results in meaningless communiqués and dispatches.

Another example of discursive design is Superflux’s Open Informant (2013). Open Informant takes the form of a networked object including a phone app and e-ink badge. The app searches your communications for National Security Agency trigger words and then sends text fragments containing these words to the badge worn by the user for public display. Using the body as an instrument for protest, the badge becomes a means of rendering our own voice visible in an otherwise faceless technological panopticon. By openly displaying what is currently taken by forceful stealth, Superflux questions the intrusive forms of surveillance adopted by democratic nations on their own citizenry. Through the design, they aim to shift the discussion around wearables from being about you and your body as machine to the culture of machine intelligence and algorithmic monitoring.

## The aesthetics of use and meaningful presence

Lars Hällnas and Johan Redström have developed an approach in interaction design that is interested in engagement rather than errorfree optimized performance. They argue that to optimize practical functionality with respect to utilitarian perspectives is not enough in the design of objects and interactions (2001, 2002a, 2002b). Aesthetics with its rich framework for critique may be used to extend the scope of product design by critically examining it from within practice (Redström 2008). They extend the concept of the postoptimal object and the aesthetic experiences it aims to afford, through the concepts of ‘aesthetics of use’ and ‘meaningful presence’. They argue that aesthetics is the proper foundation for technology design as it turns from its focus on efficient use towards concerns for what they call ‘meaningful presence’ (Hällnas and

Redström 2002a, 108). Meaningful presence challenges the design and evaluation of an object in relation to a definition of what the object is, towards a focus on what the object may mean.

In human-computer interaction, we usually think of the computer as a tool for achieving certain ends, such as creating a document or searching for information. We thus evaluate the usability of computational artifacts in relation to criteria such as efficiency, simplicity of use, and ease of learning, based on relatively precise descriptions of what they are used for. We may call descriptions of things along these lines functional descriptions based on a general notion of use. This is what we do when we ask what a house, or a hammer, is and answer with a description telling what houses and hammers in general are used for. (Hällnas and Redström 2002b, 107)

These functional descriptions of objects focus on objectives of use without reference to the person using them. However, definitions of use can be described in other ways that relate to a particular meaning given to an object. This is described as the presence of an object. Presence is defined in terms of how the object expresses itself when the user encounters it:

When we ask a friend about a certain piece of furniture in her home and she answers that it is the table she got from her late grandfather. Clearly, it would be inappropriate to answer such a question with ‘it is a piece of furniture on which you can put this or that kind of object provided it does not weigh more than X kg’. When we ask questions about this particular table, we do not ask for its general use, but about its existence in our friend’s life, its role or place. When we learn what it is, we get an existential description of what this particular table is to our friend, a description based on the table’s presence in her life. (Hällnas and Redström 2002b, 107–108)

Such a perspective considers objects as bearers of expressions rather than functions. This constructivist perspective aligns with Krippendorff’s (2006) thesis on designing that states that users construct situated meaning when they encounter objects – a perspective grounded on ecological cognitive theory, radical biological constructivism and Wittgenstein’s notion of ‘language games’. For Krippendorff, designers should employ second-order understanding in designing if the artefacts are to be useful, usable, and understandable by users. In other words, when designers can anticipate the meanings users will assign to an artefact during use, then they might successfully represent the user perspective in the design process (Krippendorff 2006).

However, where Krippendorff suggests that the user might be understood, Hällnas and Redström, like Dunne and more recently Wilkie (2010), outline the complexity in trying to understand the user through empirical observations based on need and efficient use.<sup>3</sup> They argue that designers cannot anticipate the meaning users will assign to an artefact during use, and therefore, to represent a generalized user in the design process is at best a tentative aim (Dunne 1998; Dunne and Raby 2001; Hällnas and Redström 2002a).

As Redström (2006) points out, the subject has become more important than the object in much of design and design research. The ‘subject’ who emerges from user-centred design, however, is not a ‘humanist’ subject; he or she is an ‘engineered’ subject, who responds correctly to stimuli and thus can be shaped into a reliable member of mass society, whether conceived on consumerist or social-progressive grounds. Dunne and Raby challenge this conception of the user:

This enslavement is not, strictly speaking, to machines, or to the people who build and own them, but to the conceptual models, values, and systems of thought the machines embody. Userfriendliness helps to naturalize electronic objects and the values they embody. (Dunne and Raby 2001, 30)

Users are messy, complex, and unpredictable. By embracing the unpredictability in how a user may interact with an object, there is a need to observe a richer relation to our things, for example, through the exploration of engagement rather than efficiency in use and