development of a product or service. Criticizing something that, like some art, defines its purpose as raising debate and communicating ideas is difficult. In effect, any criticism of the work can be perceived as debate and therefore can be seen as confirming its success. However, for critical design practice to work and contribute to a disciplinary foundation of product and industrial design, it must never be beyond criticism itself.

## Function in critical design practice

Moline and Mazé argue that an overly reflexive practice, discussed in the same way that art practice is discussed, is counterproductive in developing a critical design practice that contributes to and expands the purview of industrial design as a discipline<sup>4</sup> (Moline 2006; Mazé 2007). Moline calls for a more design-centric analysis of critical design practice. She argues that certain perspectives – for example, relational aesthetics – polarize the designer because the designer as author is antithetical to the designer as service provider.

Similarly, Pullin suggests that ‘… there are other design approaches between these two extremes’ and that ‘a richer shared vocabulary of the different roles of design in this area would be valuable’ (2010, 731). This position is shared by Moline, who questions the givens of functionalist debates in design and argues for an extended vocabulary for critical, conceptual, and experimental practice:

Despite the growing research in design history and contemporary practice, design criticism lacks density. Much design criticism is generally limited to reductive pragmatic and simplistic understandings of functionalism that emphasize market popularity and technical innovation to the neglect of the wider ramifications of design decisions. (Moline 2008)

Moline’s argument has two important implications. First, she issues a call for designers, commentators, design critics, and theorists to develop the vocabulary they use to discuss critical design practice in terms not solely dependent on arguments and knowledge from other fields of expertise. Second, Moline identifies how the criticism of critical design practice from the arts and visual culture is often grounded in a somewhat narrow conception of function. This narrow conception, limited to practical functionality based on optimization and efficiency, is arguably the most prominent barrier to seeing critical design practice as industrial design. Therefore, to develop critical design practice as part of a disciplinary project, an understanding of function limited to practicality, optimization, and efficiency needs to be readdressed.

Because of historic connotations, function associated with practicality in use appears to be an easy concept to use to dismiss the critical design practice as something other than product design. However, function is far from being a clearly defined term and is widely discussed in literature on design.<sup>5</sup> The popular understanding comes from Louis Sullivan’s observation in 1896 that ‘form ever follows function’, which was subsequently popularized in the modernist dictum, ‘form follows function’.

In common understanding, function relates to optimization and efficient performance. Lemoine (1988) describes design as being grounded in modernity, which is why from its beginnings the design of things and their function have been geared towards the principle of optimization (i.e. the idea of a positivistic interpreted controllability of the world). This interpretation of function commonly designates the object’s practicality in use. This perspective is exemplified in user-centred design, which employs some measure of user participation to optimize design with regard to practical and efficient use. Historically, this focus for designers and the strong faith in modernist ideology has provoked criticism. For example, Lemoine writes:

This particular debate, in which modernism and functionalism are conflated, has tended to divert attention from the aesthetic to the tactical; there is nothing inherently ‘modern’ about ‘function’ – design has always had a functional element. (Lemoine 1988, 23)

Dormer also questions the optimization of products with regard to their function:

This is what differentiates the 1980s from 1890, 1909, and even 1949 – the ability of industrial design and manufacturers to deliver goods that cannot be bettered, however much money you possess …. Beyond a certain, relatively low price, the rich cannot buy a better camera, home computer, tea kettle, television, or video recorder than you and I. (Dormer 1990, 124)

Criticism of modernist functionalism can be traced back to an overemphasis on the physical and essentialist characteristics. However, what function is and considers, even in the modernist sense of the term, is questionable.

Ligo challenges the foundations of modernist functionalism in an analysis of how function was discussed by modernist architectural critics (Ligo 1984). He shows that function is not limited to practicality in use and classifies five very different types of function:

Structural articulation, which refers to the object’s material structure;

•  Physical function, which refers to the utilitarian task of the object;

•  Psychological function, which pertains to the user’s emotional response to the object;

•  Social function, which refers to the nature of the activity that the object provides with regard to the social dimension; and

•  Cultural-existential function, which has more profound cultural and symbolic characteristics that include the existential being of the individual using the object.

In similar terms, archaeologist Michael Schiffer writes that an object can have three different sorts of function. The most commonly understood is ‘techno-function’, which is where the object is up to the job at hand (Schiffer 1992). This understanding is similar to Ligo’s ‘structural articulation’ and ‘physical function’. Less frequent are his ‘ideo-functions’ that draw from sets of abstract ideas that we share, like Ligo’s ‘psychological’ and ‘cultural-existential’ function. The third function Schiffer identifies is ‘socio-function’ that has parallels to Ligo’s ‘social function’ as it signals to others the sort of attitude that we hold. In addition, Schiffer notes that, just as often, the function depends on where the object is, who is using it, and when; thus, function comes about because of the system in which an object exists so that the object’s function is defined by the context of use. Schiffer calls this the ‘system function’. By definition, system functions cannot be designed into objects. The system function comes about only in the process of users’ interaction with the object as they create the systems in which the object functions (Fisher and Shipton 2010).

Much work has been done in this area in material culture studies. For example, Daniel Miller argues that function is a dynamic concept and open to interpretation in different social contexts; he writes that ‘even the physicality of a material object in one social context might be read differently in another social context and the systems of use that pertain’ (Miller 1987, 109). Miller extends his argument to suggest how the labelling and classification of an object are used to indicate both its function and the relationship between the object and how it is used. He also describes how objects often function beyond these prescriptions, in different systems of use:

In no domain is it as difficult as it is in the matter of function and utility to distinguish the actual place of artefacts in human practices. In many societies the classification and labeling of objects appear to indicate a close relationship between artefact and particular function. What is problematic about this is the common assumption that is caused by and in turn indicates some relationship of efficiency between the object and its use. (Miller 1987, 116)

In keeping with this convention, Kristina Niedderer in her thesis, introducing the category of performative object, is critical of reading function from an object’s form. She writes:

Although the material form is one mode through which function becomes apparent, function is not equal to the form nor is it fully visible in the form. An object’s function becomes fully visible in its second mode, in use, which is pinpointed in the definition of function as ‘the special kind of activity proper to anything’ (OED 2009). The definition emphasizes function as an immaterial quality that is bound to the dynamic use of the object. (Niedderer 2004, 64)

Describing how functions emerge in use, Kroes (2010, 85) argues that technical functions are related to physical features, but just as often, they are subject to human intentions. This thinking is expressed in practice-oriented design that assumes the relationality of meaning and states that values and meaning emerge in practice and in relations between objects, skills, and temporalities that, in turn, define an object’s use:

When technologies appear stable, when their design is fixed, their social significance and their relational role in practice [are] always on the move (Bijker, 1992). This suggests that moments of sociotechnical closure [are] illusionary in that objects continue to evolve as they are integrated into always fluid environments of consumption, practice, and meaning. (Shove, Watson, and Ingram 2007, 8)

In such conceptions, function is relative and situational; it is a dynamic property – a matter of concern, rather than something factual and fixed. Latour illustrates how an object might function in this way:

It was as if there were really two very different ways of grasping an object: one through its intrinsic materiality, the other through its more aesthetic or ‘symbolic’ aspects. The functionalist technical perspective sees the objects as a matter of fact; an alternative is to see the object as a thing, a matter of concern that is encompassing of object and system. (Latour 2009, 2)

These arguments suggest that an object’s function cannot simply be read from its form, from the way that it is labelled or classified, or even from its physical properties. Function is a dynamic, immaterial, and social property. An object’s function depends on the practices that situate it in a system of use. Function is subject to the designer’s intention; however, it is also always open to interpretation by the user.

The argument that function can be interpreted has important implications for any criticism of critical design practice based on function. Function might be understood as the plan of action that the object represents, where designer and user share their understanding about the intended purpose of the object. The function of an object can therefore be as a symbolic communicating concept, and a matter of understanding between the designer and user. Function might be understood as the perception of use, which emphasizes the appropriation of the object through the user according to their particular needs, involving what Mazé describes as ‘… processes of interpretation, incorporation, and appropriation into the user’s lifeworld’ (Mazé 2007, 2). Therefore, like Schiffer and Niedderer, Mazé indicates that function has its counterpart in use, which means that although function and use are normally assumed to converge in the contextual understanding of efficient functionality, they do not have to do so. Function itself is open to wilful appropriation within use, and subject to the intentions of the user. Thus, an object’s function is physically constructed but at the same time is a social construction so that objects of use have a dual ontological nature, as Kroes details:

An essential aspect of any technical object is its function; take away from a technical object its function and what is left is just some kind of physical object. It is by virtue of its practical function that an object is a technical object. The function of technical objects, however, cannot be isolated from the context of intentional action (use). The function of an object, in the sense of being a means to an end, is grounded within that context. When we associate intentional action with the social world (in opposition to causal action with the physical world), the function can be said to be a social construction. So a technical artifact is at the same time a physical construction as well as a social construction: It has a dual ontological nature. (Kroes 2010)

In critical design practice, function moves beyond physical and technical function, optimization, efficiency, and utility to operate in social, psychological, and cultural-existential ways. This function is advocated in the tactics detailed in Chapter 3, for example, in Hällnas and Redström’s meaningful presence and aesthetics of use, in Dunne’s, para-functionality and post-optimal design, and in Ball and Naylor’s correspondences and context.<sup>6</sup>

Objects that are conceived through these constructs might not serve a practical function, or the object’s form might not illustrate its function, but it has a function through the assertion of the designer, through the contexts engendered in the work, and more importantly, through the user’s willingness to read the object as product design. Through these factors, the context of use in which a critical design object functions is established.

Chapter 3 showed that in the most abstract examples of critical design practice, the intentions of the designer and the object’s use are contextualized by writing, photography, or film. These mechanisms are used to establish scenarios of use and the competencies required to understand the work as design. The design works through a form of rhetorical function and use. Such a proposition is not so far removed from some established and widely accepted perspectives. For example, Richard Buchanan compares design to rhetoric, suggesting that:

The designer, instead of simply making an object or a thing, is actually creating a persuasive argument that comes to life whenever a user considers or uses a product as a means to some end. (Buchanan 1989, 95)

Rhetorical use is a type of imagined and fictional use. If function is considered as a socially constructed concept, or as a matter of concern rather than a fact, then rhetorical use and para-functionality are as legitimate as practical function and actual efficient use. Through rhetorical use, critical design practice leverages practical functionality to achieve the primary goal of delivering a deliberate message that is potent enough to spark contemplation, discussion, and debate by allowing users to imagine using the object in their everyday life.

In this context, Vilém Flusser notes that objects are not objective but are inter-subjective and rife with the values and intentions of the person who designed them. In using objects, we interact with things projected by other people. Such a proposition does not just reside in the philosophical perspectives of Flusser. Writing from a more technical perspective, Van de Poel and Kroes share this understanding:

Those who argue in favor of some kind of moral agency consider technical artefacts to be inherently normative: technological artifacts are not taken to be simply inert, passive means to be used for realizing practical ends. In other words, technological artefacts are considered to be somehow ‘value-laden’ (or ‘normladen’). These moral values and norms may be explicitly designed into these artefacts, or they may be acquired in (social) user practices. (Van de Poel and Kroes 2006)

Objects of use are therefore mediations between one person and another and are not just objects. Flusser asks whether designing objects can be formulated in this way:

Can I give form to my projected designs in such a way that the communicative, the inter-subjective, the dialogic are more strongly emphasised than the objective, the substantial, and the problematic? (Flusser 1999, 59)

Essentially, critical designers answer affirmatively and proceed accordingly. Through rhetoric and the acknowledgement of the dual ontological character of objects, and through the social construction of function and use, systems of use are established. Within this system of use, where the user is willing to see objects of critical design practice as product design, critical design practice is product design. However, here the ‘critical’ designer faces the full challenge: affording rhetorical and imagined use and establishing the competencies required so that the user understands the work as design.