In today’s design culture, a barrier is built on the doctrine of technical function grounded in efficiency and optimization. The challenge for the critical designer is to overcome these barriers. Meanwhile, the challenges for the theorist and critic are to acknowledge a broader concept of function and to see and discuss critical design in a more design-centric discourse in order to coherently place critical design practice in its disciplinary and professional context.

## The paradox of critical design in commercial use

The critical social theorist Craig Calhoun suggests that critical reflection on the way things are, with their underlying, often hidden factors, enables exploration of other possibilities, and can allow an improvement in the way things are (Calhoun 1995). How these critical practices improve the way things are is not an easy subject. On the one hand, enabling, affording, and evoking critical reflection, discussion, debate, and speculation is typically considered an improvement in itself. On the other hand, to make critique meaningful, it must be directed at those who contribute to the culture that is being critiqued (Koskinen et al. 2011). This would necessitate a movement out of the gallery, and the perception of critical design as intellectual debates ‘by designers for designers’. It would also shift the role of debate from an end to a means. I have discussed the instrumental use of critical design in design research and as an effective tool in contexts of science and technology, but there are a limited number of examples where critical design has been used instrumentally in a product design industry context.

It could be argued that the technology company Philips carries out activity in this area. Gardien’s (2006) design-led horizon innovation model proposes a framework that Philips designers use to think about short-, medium-, and long-term futures. Horizon 1, horizon 2, and horizon 3 reflect short-, medium-, and long-term futures. Each horizon explores a different time space and therefore needs a different foresight in design approach and input. Horizon 3 is about radical innovation and transformation and creates a space where critical design might have commercial application in its ability to provoke debate and test societal expectations. Deliverables range from scenarios and narratives to the creation of experience prototypes. An example of this is Auger’s Smell+ project (discussed in Chapter 5). Intel and Microsoft have also initiated briefs with research centres and universities to carry out work that might not align with core business but are conceived with an interest to probe future social, political, and economic expectations and possibilities. In such activity, the commercial sector recognizes design’s ability to visualize and make issues tangible through scenarios of use and object form. Walker (2010) describes how design carried out from within an academic context can contribute in commercial, mainstream contexts as it confronts contemporary issues and complex problems:

We must find ways to renew the profession by developing agendas and propositions that envision what is desirable, meaningful, and sustainable; the responsibility to do so lies partly with those in the profession itself and partly with the academic institutions that educate and train its future participants. (2010, 97)

He argues that design in academia has the opportunity to focus on fundamental, conceptual design in ways that are often more difficult to justify in corporate culture:

Design at universities has the capacity and freedom to critique current approaches, examine their insufficiencies, and explore new possibilities in ways that are removed from the day-to-day priorities of design consultancy and, in view of the urgent requirement for alternative, more benign ways forward, it has an obligation to do so. (2010, 98)

In this process, the reflective activity from fundamental research has the potential to feed into commercial design and applied research. Walker identifies how it is important to recognize:

that the contribution of Speculative Design work within academia is not to develop potentially viable ‘solutions’ that can be tested or measured against some predetermined, pragmatic criteria. Rather, its purpose is to probe and challenge our assumptions and to explore other, imaginative avenues that appear to be worthwhile. (98)

The objective of this kind of work is to raise questions. An important point recognized by Walker is that critical design practice can be situated as a form of fundamental creativity-based research driven by envisioning new possibilities, and this differs in emphasis and purpose than reactive problem solving governing product and industrial design.

## Modelling the field

Critical and speculative design might be said to operate as an intersecting field of research and practice – discipline and profession. Fallman (2008) visualizes this space in a model that not only refers to academic research, but also includes knowledge gained through practice-based and explorative avenues. Fallman’s Triangle of Interaction Design Research can be used to plot the position of activity in between three extremes: design practice, design exploration, and design studies. The differences between these three types of practice are primarily in tradition and perspective, rather than the methods and tools being used. In Fallman’s model, ‘design practice’ denotes activities that are similar to commercial design work, carried out in commercial consultancy but with a difference in that the researcher becomes engaged in a particular design practice with an appropriate research question in mind. The research question is developed and explored through a reflective first-hand experience, either of the tools or processes, or proactive manner, through an already established research agenda that seeks to change how a specific technique is used. ‘Design studies’ most closely resembles traditional academic research where the aim is to contribute to the intellectual tradition and body of knowledge. ‘Design exploration’ is similar to design practice but differs in one key point in that it aims to explore ‘what if’ questions through the process of designing, rather than by answering a particular research problem. Design exploration is a way to comment on a phenomenon by developing an artefact that embodies the statement or question that the researcher is attempting to critique. Fallman’s ‘design exploration’ is synonymous with critical design practice:

The typical client is the researcher’s own research agenda. These projects are often self-initiated. Design in this area neither is typically driven by how well the product fits into an existing or expected future market, nor based on the observed needs of a group of users. Rather, design becomes a statement of what is possible, what would be desirable or ideal, or just to show alternatives and examples: design exploration is a way to comment on a phenomenon by bringing forth an artefact that often in itself, without overhead explanations, becomes a statement or a contribution to an ongoing societal discussion. (Fallman 2008, 7)

In another mapping exercise, Design Act (2009) highlights and discusses contemporary design and design research practices that engage with political and societal issues. It traces current and historic tendencies towards critical practice that engages ideologically and practically and provides a forum to discuss these with practitioners, educators, curators, critics, and others in the fields of design. Rather than posing a critique from the outside, Design Act explores design methods, aesthetics, and techniques that mount what Mazé notably describes as ‘criticism from within’ – that is, designers who engage with social and political ideas in and through action within their own practice. Design Act expands conceptions about what design is and catalogues examples that might look like pedagogy, policy, or art rather than conforming to the familiar objects and objectives of product design (Ericson and Mazé 2011).

Design Act documents projects that inquire into the social agency of design. Alongside examples of critical design practice, it includes examples of work that are described as Socially Responsible Design. Socially Responsible Design can be described as being