activism. Their Vexed Parka moved from a critical object reflecting the state of policing in London to become bought and ultimately used as functioning urban armour and as a symbol of protest and dissent in the face of heavy-handed policing.

## Design practice as satire

The examples discussed throughout this chapter establish their critique through a form of satiric design. Satire has long been used as a device to offer critique, but it also provides a provocative lens by which to examine design’s forms of critical practice. To reiterate what was introduced in chapter 3, satire, with its established theoretical foundation, diminishes a subject by making it ridiculous and evoking attitudes of amusement, contempt, scorn, or indignation towards it. In design’s various critical practices, satire functions as constructive social criticism. In achieving this, the designers use wit as an instrument to afford critical reflection and engage a user audience through humour. In this way, critical design practice highlights the vices, abuses, and shortcomings found in orthodox product design, while holding scientific developments or sociocultural conditions up to ridicule. At its most strident, this is done with the intent of shaming individuals, the discipline, or even society itself to reflect and ultimately work towards the improvement of a situation.

In classical terms, two major forms of satire are employed in critical design practice: juvenalian and horatian. Juvenalian satire is often political, savage, and pointed; it works through narrative techniques of antithesis, obscenity, and violence. Horatian satire is less savage as it identifies folly and works through paradoxical techniques of burlesque, colloquialism, exaggeration, and anticlimax.<sup>2</sup>

Associative design works through horatian satire. In the horatian approach, the designer takes either an existing work that was created with a serious purpose, or an object with reputable characteristics, and then makes the work look ridiculous by infusing it with incongruous ideas. This is achieved by presenting it in inappropriate forms, remaking it by using inappropriate materials or by subverting the context in which it might be used. The work parodies design to construct criticism. Parody is a composition that imitates the serious manner and characteristic features of a particular work, or the distinctive style of its maker. It then applies the imitation to a lowly or comically inappropriate subject. It is a variety of burlesque, a form of satire characterized by ridiculous exaggeration. A serious subject may be treated frivolously or a frivolous subject seriously.

Speculative and critical design work through juvenalian satire. By working through narrative forms of allegory, exaggeration, antithesis, obscenity, and violence, juvenalian satire is ‘darker’ than horatian satire. In this respect, the juvenalian designer approaches their work by attacking perceived errors in logic or thinking, and as such tries to evoke contempt, shock, and righteous indignation in the mind of the user audience.

Accordingly, speculative design works through mechanisms of exaggeration, distortion, and allegory. In this use of satire, however, recognition must precede correction. Recognition on the users’ part is afforded through the designer’s understanding of allegory; the latter constructs narratives of use around technological products and the application of new science. This satire is achieved by changing the perspective on a condition or situation. By separating something from its ordinary context, speculative design emphasizes some aspects of the problem and plays down others through methods of exaggeration or understatement.

Finally, critical design works in a somewhat different manner, relying on antithesis, counterproposition, and allegory. The narratives developed here depict scenarios as a means to visualizing alternatives. Critical designers evoke dark humour, while using polemic narratives employing forms of obscenity and violence.

Certain techniques lend themselves easily to satire because they can contain a measure of both wit and humour, and the necessary satiric association. Among them are exaggeration, distortion, understatement, innuendo, and allegory. A brief example of each of these will help illustrate the versatility of the satiric method and the ways the satirist designers presents their criticism.

Exaggeration is one of the most commonly used techniques, since the depiction of an extreme or blatantly vicious case is one of the best ways to get the target user to recognize, or admit, that an issue or problem exists at all – recognition must precede correction. The designer satirist brings his description of what is wrong with a situation to its logical extreme, exaggerating by overemphasis in order to make the unseeing see and the seeing-but-complacent oppose. This approach is evident in the work of Ball and Naylor, Gamper, and Bey discussed previously in the chapter.

Understatement is the converse of exaggeration and is useful in cases where the problem faced is already so great that it can hardly be exaggerated. The mention of the problem by understatement serves to call attention to the true degree of the problem. This approach is evident in the work of Jones’s Chicken Factory and Sea Chair discussed previously. The projects address severe environmental concerns and practices through a commentary delivered through humble understated quotidian objects.

Distortion is commonly used in critical practice. Distortion effectively changes the perspective of a condition or event by isolation, that is, the separation from its ordinary surroundings, or by stressing some aspects and deemphasizing others. This is most prominent in speculative design and the projects discussed above, where science is taken out of the laboratory and materialized through object and scenarios of use applied in everyday settings and domestic environments.

Innuendo and insinuation is a valuable tool for the satirist designer because it allows them to implicate a target by a completely indirect attack as exemplified in the work of Onkar Kular Harry and Parker.

Allegory is the final element I will include here. Designers typically use allegories as rhetorical devices that convey their position through symbolic figures, actions, imagery, and events that together create the moral, ethical, or political meaning that they wish to convey. The critique is more likely to be remembered in the allegory because of the vehicle of the story and its use of physical realities such as the use of behaviours, objects, interactions, and the people used to represent the concepts presented. This is most prominent in speculative design and the development, visualization, and communication of the extrinsic narratives that typify examples of the practice.

## The uses of narrative

In this satiric critical design practice, a quality of narrative is always essential. Fundamentally, it describes the use of storytelling techniques to pass comment or inquire through the actions of designing. Narratives of use situate the product in a context that allows the user to understand and engage with the design and further its satiric forms.

Relying on a subtle form of satire, associative design uses a form of embedded narrative. The object offers a laconic criticism. In this context, objects stand alone and are rarely contextualized by external medium e.g. writing, supporting images, and film. The commentary is embedded in the object through the materials used and the form the object takes. An embedded narrative is possible because of the subversion of familiar typology and collective understanding as in the example of Ralph Ball and Maxine Naylor, 24 Star Generic Office Chair.

Because of their provisional and unfamiliar characteristics, many objects of speculative design require a detailed supporting narrative to establish their use. This is established through scenario building where objects and technologies are situated in contexts of use. Through technocratic visualization, for example in Dunne and Raby’s Foragers project narrative, meanings are constructed through specially made devices. But the unfamiliar can also shape narrative by assigning unusual objects with descriptive names, for example, as in Alexandra Daisy Ginsburg’s Growth Assembly, Carole Collet’s Biolace, and Tobie Kerridge’s Biojewellery. Sometimes, too, the use of external media such as film, photography, and performance supplement and contextualize these objects. In this respect, the critique is established through a synthesis of objects and contextualizing material.

Critical design operates in a similar way by also making use of film, photography, and narrative naming, thus establishing an extrinsic narrative to establish contexts of use. Here, however, a topic is criticized because it falls short of some standard that the designer desires that it should reach. This is expressed through a critical narrative that ridicules or otherwise attacks conditions