Figure 5.11. By considering if a design project can be categorized as associative, speculative, or critical design and in identifying the context in which it was carried out, this model can be used in a number of ways to map critical practices, allowing us to view relationships between examples of practice and chart their trajectories.

## The taxonomy as an analytical tool

The taxonomy therefore presents a theoretical apparatus to engage with the field of critical practice. I’ll begin by introducing the components of the taxonomy.

The top half of the model shows the categories of practice. The three practices are structured alongside each other, from right to left: associative design through speculative design to critical design. The type of ambiguity that each of the practices operates by is shown, for example ambiguity of context, ambiguity of information, or relational ambiguity. The design methods that are used to build ambiguity into the design work and establish the system of use are also illustrated, for example, ‘cutup’ and ‘extrinsic narrative’.

Moving from associative design through speculative design to critical design, the characteristics of the objects become less rational and the objects are typically less familiar. Because of this, more of an external narrative is required in speculative design to situate the object in its system of use, and even more so in critical design. Moving from associative design to critical design there is also a scale of satire ranging from horatian in associative design through to juvenalian in critical design.

The three categories of practice in the top half of the taxonomic model are reflected in the bottom half. This half of the model is sectioned according to the context that a project is carried out from. These contexts are studio projects, education, academic design research, and para-academic contexts. This allows examples of associative, speculative, and critical design to be plotted against the context in which they were carried out.

The visual taxonomy facilitates the placement of associative, speculative, and critical design projects in such a way that projects can be mapped, contrasted, and trajectories of practice drawn. The taxonomy in its visual dimension presents an illustrative summary of the relationship between the three categories of practice introduced in this chapter structured by the methods and tactics employed in practice.

## Applications of the taxonomy

The model can be used as a model to map numerous examples of practice from numerous designers. In Mapping the Terrain, projects can be plotted according to the type of practice and where they are carried out. The model can be used to plot individual designers’ projects. It can illustrate what projects a designer is involved in at any one time and if there is a clear correlation of activity in any of the three types of practice. Extending this, the taxonomy can be used as a background to discuss trajectories of practice by plotting projects by the date when they were carried out. This might be used to plot a single designer or studio’s practice or may include examples from a number of practitioners. The model can be used to identify clusters of activity and trends in projects at a specific time. Clustering a designer’s body of work or a larger community’s work allows questions to be asked of why that activity was so prominent at a specific time. This might be cross-referenced with other factors, for example funding themes, theoretical trends, or sociotechnical and political considerations. The model can be used to compare design and draw comparisons between practitioners and projects. For example, it can be used to analyse the content of an exhibition or works documented on a designer’s website. The taxonomy offers theoretical apparatus to understand, analyse, and discuss examples of critical design practice and how and where they operate.

## Conclusions

This chapter has defined three specific types of critical design practice. The discussion outlined methods by which these practices operate. Common to the field is the use of satire, rationality, and narrative to engage and offer critique. The purpose of critical design concurrent with the function of satire is constructive criticism, using wit as an instrument to affect critical reflection. There is no satire without critique and humour is a powerful tool of engagement. But this critique is contingent on reading the objects of critical practice as objects of design. These are, therefore, always contextualized and rationalized with a narrative of use.

Critical practices in design today are in flux. Moreover, if design must establish an intellectual stance of its own, we must explore its critical turn more fully. Above all, we must perceive how design responds to disciplinary, scientific, or social concerns. This chapter has examined how satire in design can relate to the type of ambiguity used in each of the three types of critical practice. By extension, it also helps us understand how rational an object is, and how it contains a narrative.

Satire, ambiguity, and rationality relate to each other and all help to characterize and differentiate between associative, critical, and speculative design practice. The relationships between the categories of critical design, the design methods used, and the methods of classification are summarized. These are structured into a taxonomic space that offers theoretical apparatus to engage with the field of critical design practice. Throughout the chapter, the taxonomy has been populated with examples of critical design projects to illustrate the model’s application as an analytical tool and apparatus for discussion. To conclude, the taxonomy provides a means to map the territory of critical design practice, offering observers of the practice a territory to analyse and critique. The implications of the taxonomy and its application are detailed in the following and concluding chapter.

# CRITICAL DESIGN PRACTICE AND ITS DISCIPLINARY CONTRIBUTION

In this book, I have introduced examples of critical design practice and discussed the tactics used to establish a critical move through product and industrial design. I have outlined a brief history of the practice, theoretical approaches that inform critical practice and explored, through the categorization of associative, speculative, and critical design, where critical practice engages and critiques matters of concern familiar to the product design discipline, and those matters of concern that are not so familiar. By means of a conclusion, this chapter sets out an argument for the disciplinary contribution that critical design practice makes.

## Summary

The discussion in Chapter 2 described how the term ‘critical design’ appeared some twenty years ago in the design research community as a particular approach to human-computer interaction. Referring to a longer tradition of critical approaches in product design and architecture, it was meant to re-establish alternative views on product and interface design, telling stories about human values and behaviour that were neglected in commercial product design. The discussion charted a history from Radical Design in the Italian tradition; Anti-Design, New Design, and Conceptual Design in the German and Dutch traditions; and critical practice in HCI, Interaction Design, and Critical Technical Practice. Associative, speculative, and critical design projects carried out today are heavily influenced by the methods and approaches developed in these preceding practices and are influenced by the anti-capitalist, anti-commercial, ethically led, and activist ideologies that informed these earlier modes of critical practice.

The discussion showed how contemporary examples of critical design practice are informed by aesthetic principles established in the 1960s and 1970s and how these approaches have been practiced throughout the lineage of critical practice. To illustrate this, Peter Cook’s Archigram Instant City Airships was compared to Brendan Walker’s Chromo 11 Air Life Seat Belts and Superstudio’s Monumento Continuo alongside Dunne and Raby’s United Micro Kingdoms Digitarians. These examples show how the design language in critical design practice today is informed by work produced over forty years ago. The benefit of looking at the history of critical design practice came from identifying design methods used to establish the critical move through design. The review of precedents identified ‘cutup’, ‘context transfer’, ‘hybridity’, and ‘technocratic visualization’ as methods used to build ambiguity into objects. These methods are used in contemporary examples of practice and from a theoretical perspective, they offer a means to differentiate between the examples of associative, speculative, and critical design and are used to inform the structure of the taxonomy presented in Chapter 5.

Chapter 3 focused on the discourse surrounding critical design since the development and popularization of the term ‘c.1993’. It described the use of product design to address various social, technical, scientific, and disciplinary concerns. The discussion outlined the theoretical perspectives that ground critical design practice outlining the perspectives of Dunne (1997), Redström and Hällnass (2002a, 2002b), and Ball and Naylor (2006). It focused on the ‘aesthetics of use’, ‘correspondence and context’, ‘parafunctionality’, and the ‘post-optimal object’. It described the instrumental use of ‘ambiguity as a resource for design’ and established that designing ambiguity into the object – in its appearance and its use – is instrumental in establishing the critical move through product design.

The type of ambiguity designed into critical design work was identified as another means to differentiate between examples of critical design practice. With reference to Gaver, Beaver, and Benford (2003), three types of ambiguity were identified. Associative design works through ‘ambiguity of context’, speculative design works through ‘ambiguity of information’, and critical design through ‘relational ambiguity’. In practical terms, the discussion set out in Chapter 3 illustrated the sensitivity required when designing ambiguity into objects as a means to spark debate, engagement, or to establish the critical move. For associative, critical, or speculative design to work, the objects designed must be seen as design objects. Put simply, too odd and they will not work, too strange and the designs will not engage the user. The work produced – be it a lone object or an object contextualized by an extrinsic narrative established through a film or some other medium – should always relate back to quotidian conditions. Good examples of critical design practice tap into users’ familiar understanding of objects of use. They subvert the understanding between users and object, essentially exploiting the evocative characteristics of designed objects. This creates a dilemma of interpretation afforded by the contradiction, tension, and juxtaposition of an object of use and the subversion of users’ conventional understanding of how that object might be used. It is in this tension, in this dilemma of interpretation, that questions are asked and channels of discourse are opened. This function of critical design practice is useful when trying to develop an understanding of how the designers establish inquiry through design and frame the practice as research.

Where this dilemma of interpretation is established using ‘ambiguity’, ‘design fictions’, and ‘strangely familiar’ objects, through methods commonly associated with art practice, it is all too easy to see the work as something other than product design. Because of these characteristics, critical design practice is often subject to art discourse, critique, and gallery circulation. The assertion made by the designers, that the work is design, is important since the power of critical design practice lies in its objects being seen as product design.

As a method, strategy, or theoretical perspective, critical design has been widely interpreted. It has shown how it has been appropriated in an increasing number of student projects and adopted by many trying to find a label for what they do. With this has come a sporadic analysis of the field that often discusses the work with reference to its proximity to art practice. The book has questioned some analysis of the practice that comes from exhibition and curation perspectives. In this context, appraisal can be accused of being unrepresentative and affirmative. This was exemplified in Antonelli’s account of Catts and Zurr’s work during the Design and the Elastic Mind exhibition that was astutely challenged by Cogdell (2009) in her Design Issues review of it. The discussion revealed how dominant criticism and analysis of critical design is often grounded in perspectives rooted in art and visual culture discourses. The discussion identified the criticism of critical design practice and the barriers that exist to seeing critical design practice as product design.

The focus here set up one of the main arguments and concerns in this book: the danger of critical design practice being seen as a form or quasi art or as a form of design entertainment enjoyed for its humour or novelty rather than for its insight. Critical design practice needs to avoid this by inviting commentary and critique of the practice. The first thing to address in aiming to establish this designcentric analysis is the barriers that exist to seeing critical design as a form of product design. Most clearly, this is the question of critical design practice’s proximity to art. Even the most open-minded design professionals and researchers question if critical design operates as product design because it does not serve to solve problems through highly resolved objects or innovative systems design. Considering the ‘isn’t it just art?’ question, a concept of function based on optimization and efficiency was identified as the measure used by many to differentiate between objects of art and design.

In an attempt to move the discussion away from the ‘art question’, the common perception of function, or more accurately ‘practical functionality’, was challenged and a concept of function conceived beyond efficiency and optimization was presented. The discussion here drew on literature from design theory, but also from other disciplines that engage with objects, form, and materiality. Archaeologists have an interesting and useful take when attempting to re-conceptualize function. Ligo (1984) and Schiffer (1992) extend function beyond efficiency into more social and even existential contexts. Material culture perspectives also contribute and should be considered in any attempt to reframe function. Miller (1987) was again useful in his call to think about a more open interpretation and the sociological perspective (Shove, Watson, and Ingram 2007) and brought current thinking on practice-orientated design into play.

Just as these perspectives support the rationality of function, the discussion identified designers and scholars who advocate a socially constructed and dynamic function of, and for, objects. The discussion showed how Brandes, Stich, and Wender (2009), Kroes (2010), and Fisher and Shipton (2010) suggest forms of use that, despite the designer’s intent, function will always emerge in use. This perspective is shared by Mazé (2007) in her thesis exploring the ‘temporal form of interaction’, Wilkie (2010) in his ‘user assemblages’, and Niedderer (2004, 2006) in her category of the ‘performative object’.

The discussion located how function can be considered in a context of critical design practice. It showed that an object’s function is open to the interpretation by the user and the intention of the designer. In short, function is an ill-defined and open concept; it extends beyond optimization and efficiency into social existential and cultural contexts, and therefore it provides insufficient grounds to frame critical design practice in art discourse. The reality is that things are more complex than a simple design/art dichotomy. In a context of critical design practice, if both user and designer are willing to see the object as a functioning design object, then the object does function as an object of design and should be discussed as such.

This discussion of function was useful because it established that critical design practice operates through a system of ‘rhetorical use’. Rhetorical use was introduced as a form of symbolic and intellectual use. This use is afforded through the designer’s projection of the object in material form, and imagination on the part of the user. Rhetorical use is just as legitimate as practical use.

Accepting rhetorical use as a legitimate form of use counters arguments based on the claim that critical design is not useful and does not function. There is more to the function of designed objects than just practical considerations. Through this proposition, I challenge the reader to overcome the modernist doctrine inherent in ‘form follows function’ and by doing this, overcome one of the biggest barriers to seeing and talking about critical design as product design. An open concept of function and use, as advocated by those cited above, shifts focus beyond aesthetic questions to open critical design practice up to a more design-centric analysis. An analysis where questions can be asked of the object, which orient around contexts and systems of use, the practices that might situate the object or the behaviours that might emerge as a result of engaging with, and using the critical design object.

The discussion in Chapter 4 outlined the need for apparatus to facilitate discussion into critical design practice. The premise here is that models make sense of things. A model of the practice that illustrates its position in relation to other forms of design practice and places it in a disciplinary context, developed from a product design perspective, might engage a broader discussion of the practice and by extension advance the theoretical foundation of the practice. The discussion detailed work carried out in this vain. Sanders’s (2006) ‘evolving map of design research and practice’ places critical design in a design research context; Walker’s (2010) positioning of critical design as ‘fundamental research’ showed how critical design functions as research in a design process and as a means of ideation. A rhizomic model of the field and its reach was identified in Design Act (2009). Mazé positioned critical design practice amongst examples of socially responsible design practice, participatory design, and co-design practices that are political by nature and orientate around active critical participation. Considering how others have explored and conceptualized critical design practice, the chapter introduced a characteristic of critical design practice that differentiates it from other forms of socially and politically engaged practices. There is a trend to discuss critical design alongside other forms of socially engaged participatory and co-design practices (Bülmann 2008; Sanders and Stappers 2008; Design Act 2009). Arguably, critical design practice as it has been described in this book, differs from these practices in that it functions as an authoritative form of product design. The ‘critical’ designer performs as author and critic, and although this has changed slightly in speculative design practice where designers frequently collaborate with experts in scientific contexts, there remains an authorship over the work and often a polemic thread is engendered in the design and narratives of use. In short, the designer takes a critical position through the medium of product and industrial design. Such a view of the field differentiates it from other forms of socially responsible or responsive forms of design practice, participatory, or co-design which are characterized by the redistribution of power in making design decisions from the designer to the stakeholder users. However, I recognize that these practices are also critical of prevailing orthodoxy and are having deterritorializing effects on the role of the designer and what constitutes product design practice today.

The taxonomy presented in Chapter 5 works to illustrate the diversity in critical design practice. It shows how critical design practice broadly constitutes three types of practice: associative, critical, and speculative design. This conceptualization positions the colloquial and popularly understood view of critical design in a broader context of critical design practice. Critical design has a history in associative design and a future in speculative design. All three forms of practice exist today in contemporary product design practice. The taxonomy contextualizes critical design practice in three ways. First, it is used to show the contexts engendered in the practice, the disciplinary, science, and technology, or sociocultural project focus. Second, it shows where a project is carried out (the operating context). Academic design research, the gallery system, and various studio practices were identified as contexts that facilitate