the practice. The range of examples discussed show how the practice is closely linked to design schools and the academy. These spaces provide the freedom from the restraints imposed by industry and produce another form of capital, epistemic, and human capital. This illustrated the importance of the institution to the practice. Third, it shows how the practice operates through satire and methods used to establish a critical narrative through design. Satiric design was identified as salient and is useful because, as a concept, it addresses questions about how critical design is done. Notably, critical design practice functions through the marriage of design principles and satire. Inseparable from any definition of satire is critique and corrective purpose, expressed through a critical mode that ridicules or otherwise challenges conditions needing reformation in the opinion of the critical designer as satirist.

The taxonomy, by discussing key theoretical concepts that inform critical design and defining categories of practice, design methods, and contexts of operation, and structuring them into a taxonomic space, offers theoretical apparatus to engage with the field. It provides designers a territory to operate from and observers of the practice a territory to analyse and critique.

Throughout these chapters, I have hoped to illustrate that critical design is a rich and important form of design practice, capable of inquiry, commentary, debate, and provocation in social, scientific, and disciplinary matters of concern. I have hoped to articulate that this field warrants analysis in order for it to continue in its development and make a valuable contribution to product design. I have hoped to provide a theoretical apparatus by which to engage an audience in the discourse of critical design practice and offer a point of entry by developing the terminology and laying down definitions around which the practice can be discussed. The premise here is that to develop the practice more people from outside critical design need to engage and challenge it.

## Challenging disciplinary orthodoxy

Through a discussion of the history, theory, and practice of critical design, we have seen how it offers an alternative application for the product and industrial design skillset, and its design process and methods, to that of the commercially orientated mainstream product design practice. However, common to both critical and mainstream practice is the execution of design judgment honed and exercised through the designer’s practice, where tool-based creativity and making – in some form or another – is at the core of the practice. Because critical practice – in the guises of associative, speculative, and critical design – utilizes skills that are core to mainstream industrial design, it contributes to product and industrial design as a discipline by demonstrating the application of designerly skill, judgment, and process in broad contexts. It works to extend the purview of what product design is, and what can be considered within product and industrial design’s disciplinary remit. We have seen throughout that even though critical design projects are carried out in conceptual frames where the objects remain at the scale of one off provocations, critical designers attribute importance to the processes, methods, and principles of industrial design. This is illustrated by how the design work produced relates back to a quotidian understanding of objects afforded through the user’s familiarity with form and forms of interaction. The designers leverage the user’s familiarity to engage audiences in thought and discussion around the themes engendered in the design work. In many of the examples, we see a high finish in the designed object, carefully considered production, and assembly and the utilization of models and prototypes that are situated in detailed visual scenarios that depict how these objects are used.

In critical design practice, the designers value the same rules and expectations in the production of work, as they would if working on a commercial project. There is attention to form and contexts of use. The tools and design methods applied are equally relevant and applicable in both forms of practice. Both forms map the problem context, survey the horizon, and are concerned with the future. Both critical and mainstream designers imagine objects and the scenarios that these objects will live in; they are concerned with affecting change and intervening in the future – at some scale.

So, as with a commercial brief where an understanding of context and circumstances of use are absolutely everything, where the project’s success hinges on the appropriate identification and management of the design problem in context through the identification and analysis of insight, and the translation of this insight into an appropriate and relevant design response, critical design practice honours the same design traditions and the same reasoning in the design work that is expected from orthodox design practice.

Critical design practice does not function in a market context, this does not however, provide a caveat for shortcuts in the design process. It does not provide caveat for the absence of the design reasoning and iterative engagement expected of any good design work. The analysis, reasoning, judgment, iteration, testing, and creative output expected of any design process is paramount and should be present in the critical design process. When this is the case, projects are successful. There are many examples of designers claiming work as critical design, using critical and speculative design as a handy label to hide behind when the work does not come from a critical position inherent in the designer and is not the product of a rigorous process.

In a critical design project, design methods and the production of design work are positioned as a system of critical thought. Rather than using other mediums, critical designers value the reflective and iterative processes that are fundamental to industrial design practice. They emphasize the processes of designing in order to articulate a position and develop understanding through making, tool-based creativity, and the dissemination of process and products of design. Amidst attitudes of dissatisfaction and frustration with the status quo – in disciplinary, technological, and societal contexts – there is a collective refusal by the critical designers discussed throughout this book to abandon product design practice. It would be all too easy to frame the projects as other forms of creative practice, but the refusal to do so affords critical design agency to offer a criticism from within design practice. Within the examples discussed, there is a belief that the function of product and industrial design can be extended into provocative realms and that design has the potential to open up new avenues of discourse and reflect on the principles and values inherent in product design.

While dissident in character, the refusal to abandon the product design discipline through the application of design language, methods, and principles, offers a valuable contribution to the discipline. The critique of the discipline, through the subversion of disciplinary traditions, adds a new practice of values. This fits with a concept of critique where critique is a practice that not only suspends judgment but also offers a new practice of values based on that very suspension (2002xx). In establishing this critique, the designers aim to extend the purview of the discipline and what product design is capable of addressing beyond fiscal and technological drivers. This suspension of conventional market, user, and technologically driven values paradoxically adds value to product and industrial design. Critical design practice therefore has an agonistic relationship to orthodox product design, a relationship based on a plurality and advocacy. When critical and mainstream design are seen as complementary fields operating constructively in an agonistic relationship, critical design practice advances the product discipline. It offers the means to look inward at the processes and principles of design rather than passively accept normative practice and hegemony. It serves to challenge a ‘business as usual’ model within the discipline and profession. The role here is not to undermine or subvert the profession, but to challenge it and drive it forward as a thoughtful and reflective agent. Moreover, engaging fields, practices, and issues beyond perceived disciplinary silos and boundaries take the industrial designer into new territories of operation. This creates opportunities for knowledge generation, collaboration, and importantly, the possibility of new professional roles for product and industrial designers i.e. working in contexts such as medical ethics, synthetic biology, politics, and the plethora of other contexts that critical and speculative design are engaging with.

Looking at this pragmatically might mean more jobs for designers as it offers a potential to do design work in contexts that sit outside a saturated job market – it moves the designer beyond the design consultancy and the in-house studio towards a role for the designer in think tanks, policy-making, technological research centres, thirdsector organizations, and academic research centres – to name just