Appendix A Design Principles ## Chapter 1 User interfaces should be based on user mental models rather than implementation models. Goal-directed interactions reflect user mental models. Interaction design is not guesswork. ## Chapter 3 Don’t make the user feel stupid. Focus the design for each interface on a single primary persona. ## Chapter 4 Define what the product will do before you design how the product will do it. In the early stages of design, pretend the interface is magic. ## Chapter 5 Never show a design approach you’re unhappy with; stakeholders just might like it. There is only one user experience: Form and behavior must be designed in concert. ## Chapter 8 The computer does the work, and the person does the thinking. Software should behave like a considerate human being. If it’s worth it to the user to do it, it’s worth it to the application to remember it. ## Chapter 9 Decisions about technical platform are best made in concert with interaction design efforts. Optimize sovereign applications for full-screen use. Sovereign interfaces should feature a conservative visual style. Sovereign applications should exploit rich input. Maximize document views within sovereign applications. Transient applications must be simple, clear, and to the point. Transient applications should be limited to a single window and view. A transient application should launch to its previous position and configuration. Kiosks should be optimized for first-time use. ## Chapter 10 Don’t weld on training wheels. Nobody wants to remain a beginner. Optimize for intermediates. Inflect the interface for typical navigation. Users make commensurate effort if the rewards justify it. Imagine users as very intelligent and very busy. ## Chapter 11 No matter how cool your interface is, less of it would be better. Don’t use dialogs to report normalcy. Ask forgiveness, not permission. ## Chapter 12 Eliminate excise wherever possible. Don’t stop the proceedings with idiocy. Don’t make users ask for permission. Allow input wherever you have output. Significant change must be significantly better. ## Chapter 13 Most people would rather be successful than knowledgeable. Never bend your interface to fit a metaphor. All idioms must be learned; good idioms need to be learned only once. Rich visual feedback is the key to successful direct manipulation. Visually communicate pliancy whenever possible. ## Chapter 14 An error may not be your application’s fault, but it is your application’s responsibility. Audit, don’t edit. Save documents and settings automatically. Put files where users can find them. ## Chapter 17 Visually distinguish elements that behave differently. Visually communicate function and behavior. Take things away until the design breaks, and then put that last thing back in. Visually show what; textually tell which. Obey standards unless there is a truly superior alternative. Consistency doesn’t imply rigidity. ## Chapter 18 The utility of any interaction idiom is context-dependent. A dialog box is another room; have a good reason to go there. Provide functions in the window where they are used. Use menus to provide a pedagogic vector. Disable menu items when they are not applicable. Use consistent visual symbols on related commands. Toolbars give experienced users fast access to frequently used functions. Use ToolTips with all toolbar and iconic controls. Support both mouse and keyboard use for navigation and selection tasks. Use cursor hinting to show the meanings of metakeys. Single-clicking selects data or an object or changes the control state. Double-clicking means single-clicking plus action. Mouse-down over an object or data should select the object or data. Mouse-down over controls means proposing an action; mouse-up means committing to an action. The selection state should be visually evident and unambiguous. Drop candidates must visually indicate their receptivity. The drag cursor must visually identify the source object. Any scrollable drag-and-drop target must auto-scroll. Debounce all drags. Any program that demands precise alignment must offer a vernier. ## Chapter 19 Most mobile apps have transient posture. Limit the number and direction of animated screen transitions. Use guided tours to orient first-time users. Use overlays to explain gestures. ## Chapter 20 Use persistent headers to maintain context. Breadcrumbs with lateral links help speed navigation. Auto-complete, auto-suggest, and faceted search help users find things faster. Make scrolling an engaging experience. Infinite scrolling and site footers are mutually exclusive idioms. If you have only one version of your site, make it responsive. Chapter 21