## Appendix B Bibliography 1. Adlin, Tamara and Pruitt, John. 2010. The Essential Persona Lifecycle . New York: Morgan Kaufmann. 2. Alexander, Christopher. 1964. Notes on the Synthesis of Form . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 3. Alexander, Christopher. 1979. The Timeless Way of Building . New York: Oxford University Press. 4. Alexander, Christopher, et al. 1977. A Pattern Language . New York: Oxford University Press. 5. Bertin, Jacques. 2010. Semiology of Graphics . Redlands, CA: Ersi Press. 6. Beyer, Hugh and Holtzblatt, Karen. 1998. Contextual Design . New York: Morgan Kaufmann. 7. Borchers, Jan. 2001. A Pattern Approach to Interaction Design . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 8. Borenstein, Nathaniel S. 1994. Programming as if People Mattered . Princeton: Princeton University Press. 9. Buxton, Bill. 1990. “The ‘Natural’ Language of Interaction: A Perspective on Non-Verbal Dialogues.” Laurel, Brenda, ed. The Art of Human-Computer Interface Design . Boston: Addison-Wesley. 10. Carroll, John M., ed. 1995. Scenario-Based Design . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 11. Carroll, John M. 2000. Making Use: Scenario-Based Design of Human-Computer Interactions . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 12. Constantine, Larry L. and Lockwood, Lucy A. D. 1999. Software for Use . Boston: Addison-Wesley. 13. Constantine, Larry L. and Lockwood, Lucy A. D. 2002. forUse Newsletter #26, October. 14. Cooper, Alan. 1999. The Inmates Are Running the Asylum . Indianapolis: Sams. 15. Crampton Smith, Gillian and Tabor, Philip. 1996. “The Role of the Artist-Designer.” Winograd, Terry, ed. Bringing Design to Software . Boston: Addison-Wesley. 16. Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. 1990. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience . New York: Harper & Row. 17. De Saint-Exupéry, Antoine. 2002. 18. DeMarco, Tom and Lister, Timothy. 2013. Peopleware , Third Edition. Boston: Addison-Wesley. 19. Dillon, Andrew. “Beyond Usability: Process, Outcome and Affect in Human Computer Interaction.” Paper presented at the Lazerow Lecture at the Faculty of Information Studies, University of Toronto, March 2001. Retrieved from www.ischool.utexas.edu/\~adillon/publications/beyond\_usability.html . 20. Dreyfuss, Henry. 2003. Designing for People . New York: Allworth Press. 21. Gamma, Erich, et al. 1995. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software . Boston: Addison-Wesley. 22. Garrett, Jesse James. 2011. The Elements of User Experience , Second Edition. San Francisco: New Riders. 23. Gellerman, Saul W. 1963. Motivation and Productivity . New York: Amacom Press. 24. Goodman, Elizabeth, Kuniavsky, Mike, and Moed, Andrea. 2012. Observing the User Experience . New York: Morgan Kaufmann. 25. Goodwin, Kim. 2001. “Perfecting Your Personas.” Cooper Newsletter , July/August. 26. Goodwin, Kim. 2002. “Getting from Research to Personas: Harnessing the Power of Data.” User Interface 7 West Conference. 27. Goodwin, Kim. 2002a. Cooper U Interaction Design Practicum Notes. Cooper. 28. Goodwin, Kim. 2009. Designing for the Digital Age . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 29. Grudin, J. and Pruitt, J. 2002. “Personas, Participatory Design and Product Development: An Infrastructure for Engagement.” PDC ’02: Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference . 30. Heckel, Paul. 1994. The Elements of Friendly Software Design . San Francisco: Sybex. 31. Hoober, Steven and Berkman, Eric. 2012. Designing Mobile Interfaces . Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly. 32. Horn, Robert E. 1998. Visual Language . Bainbridge Island, WA: Macro Vu Press. 33. Horton, William. 1994. The Icon Book: Visual Symbols for Computer Systems and Documentation . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 34. Johnson, Jeff. 2007. GUI Bloopers 2.0 . New York: Morgan Kaufmann. 35. Jones, Matt and Marsden, Gary. 2006. Mobile Interaction Design . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 36. Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 37. Kobara, Shiz. 1991. Visual Design with OSF/Motif . Boston: Addison-Wesley. 38. Korman, Jonathan. 2001. “Putting People Together to Create Good Products.” Cooper Newsletter , September. 39. Kramer, Kem-Laurin. 2012. User Experience in the Age of Sustainability . New York: Morgan Kaufmann. 40. Krug, Steve. 2014. Don’t Make Me Think, Revisited. San Francisco: New Riders. 41. Kuutti, Kari. 1995. “Work Processes: Scenarios as a Preliminary Vocabulary.” Carroll, John M., ed. Scenario-Based Design . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 42. Laurel, Brenda. 2013. Computers as Theatre , Second Edition. Boston: Addison-Wesley. 43. Lidwell, William, Holden, Kritina, and Butler, Jill. 2010. Universal Principles of Design , Revised and Updated Edition. Boston: Rockport Publishers. 44. Macdonald, Nico. 2003. What Is Web Design? Brighton, UK: RotoVision. 45. McCloud, Scott. 1994. Understanding Comics. Northampton, MA: Kitchen Sink Press. 46. Mikkelson, N. and Lee, W. O. 2000. “Incorporating user archetypes into scenario-based design.” Proceedings of UPA 2000 . 47. Miller, R. B. 1968. “Response time in man-computer conversational transactions.” Proceedings of the AFIPS Fall Joint Computer Conference, vol. 33, 267–277. 48. Mitchell, J. and Shneiderman, B. 1989. “Dynamic versus static menus: An exploratory comparison.” SIGCHI Bulletin , vol. 20, no. 4, 33–37. 49. Moggridge, Bill. 2007. Designing Interactions . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 50. Morville, Peter. 2005. Ambient Findability . Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly. 51. Morville, Peter and Rosenfeld, Louis. 2007. Information Architecture for the World Wide Web , Third Edition. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly. 52. Mulder, Steve and Yaar, Ziv. 2006. The User Is Always Right . San Francisco: New Riders. 53. Mullet, Kevin and Sano, Darrell. 1995. Designing Visual Interfaces . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 54. Neil, Theresa. 2014. Mobile Design Pattern Gallery , Second Edition. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly. 55. Nelson, Theodor Holm. 1990. “The Right Way to Think About Software Design.” Laurel, Brenda, ed. The Art of Human-Computer Interface Design . Boston: Addison-Wesley. 56. Newman, William M. and Lamming, Michael G. 1995. Interactive System Design . Boston: Addison-Wesley. 57. Nielsen, Jakob. 1993. Usability Engineering . Waltham, MA: Academic Press. 58. Nielsen, Jakob. 2000. Designing Web Usability . San Francisco: New Riders. 59. Nielsen, Jakob. 2002. UseIt.com . 60. Norman, Don. 2013. The Design of Everyday Things , Revised and Expanded Edition. New York: Basic Books. 61. Norman, Donald A. 1994. Things That Make Us Smart . New York: Basic Books. 62. Norman, Donald A. 1998. The Invisible Computer . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 63. Norman, Donald A. 2005. Emotional Design . New York: Basic Books. 64. Nudelman, Greg. 2013. Android Design Patterns . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 65. Papanek, Victor. 1984. Design for the Real World . Chicago: Academy Chicago Publishers. 66. Perfetti, Christine and Landesman, Lori. 2001. “The Truth About Download Times.” UIE.com . 67. Pinker, Stephen. 1999. How the Mind Works . New York: Norton. 68. Raskin, Jeff. 2000. The Humane Interface . Boston: Addison-Wesley. 69. Reimann, Robert. 2002. “Perspectives: Learning Curves.” edesign magazine, December. 70. Reimann, Robert. 2005. “Personas, Scenarios, and Emotional Design.” UXMatters.com . 71. Reimann, Robert M. 2001. “So You Want to Be an Interaction Designer.” Cooper Newsletter , June. 72. Reimann, Robert M. 2002. “Bridging the Gap from Research to Design.” Panel presentation, IBM Make IT Easy Conference. 73. Reimann, Robert M. and Forlizzi, Jodi. 2001. “Role: Interaction Designer.” Presentation to AIGA Experience Design 2001. 74. Rheinfrank, John and Evenson, Shelley. 1996. “Design Languages.” Winograd, Terry, ed. Bringing Design to Software . Boston: Addison-Wesley. 75. Rogers, Yvonne, Sharp, Helen, and Preece, Jenny. 2011. Interaction Design , Third Edition. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 76. Rombauer, Irma S. and Becker, Marion Rombauer. 1975. The Joy of Cooking . New York: Scribner. 77. Rudolf, Frank. 1998. “Model-Based User Interface Design: Successive Transformations of a Task/Object Model.” Wood, Larry E., ed. User Interface Design: Bridging the Gap from User Requirements to Design . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 78. Saffer, Dan. 2010. Designing for Interaction , Second Edition. San Francisco: New Riders. 79. Saffer, Dan. 2013. Microinteractions . Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly. 80. Sauro, Jeff and Lewis, James R. 2012. Quantifying the User Experience . New York: Morgan Kaufmann. 81. Schön, D. and Bennett, J. 1996. “Reflective Conversation with Materials.” Winograd, Terry, ed. Bringing Design to Software . Boston: Addison-Wesley. 82. Schumann, J., Strothotte, T., Raab, A., and Laser, S. 1996. Assessing the Effect of Non- Photorealistic Rendered Images in CAD , CHI 1996 Papers, 35–41. 83. Scott, Bill and Neil, Theresa. 2009. Designing Web Interfaces . Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly. 84. Shneiderman, Ben, et al. 2009. Designing the User Interface , Fifth Edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 85. Simon, Herbert A. 1996. The Sciences of the Artificial , Third Edition. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 86. Snyder, Carolyn. 2003. Paper Prototyping . New York: Morgan Kaufmann. 87. Sutton, Robert and Rao, Huggy. 2014. Scaling Up Excellence, BY: Random House. 88. Tidwell, Jennifer. 2011. Designing Interfaces . Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly. 89. Tufte, Edward. 1983. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information . Cheshire, CT: Graphic Press. 90. Van Duyne, Douglas K., Landay, James A., and Hong, Jason I. 2006. The Design of Sites , Second Edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 91. Veen, Jeffrey. 2000. The Art and Science of Web Design . San Francisco: New Riders. 92. Verplank, B., Fulton, J., Black, A., and Moggridge, B. 1993. “Observation and Invention: Use of Scenarios in Interaction Design.” Tutorial Notes, InterCHI ’93, Amsterdam. 93. Vora, Pawan. 2009. Web Application Design Patterns . New York: Morgan Kaufmann. 94. Weiss, Michael J. 2000. The Clustered World: How We Live, What We Buy, and What It All Means About Who We Are . New York: Little, Brown and Company. 95. Wigdor, Daniel and Wixon, Dennis. 2011. Brave NUI World . New York: Morgan Kaufmann. 96. Winograd, Terry, ed. 1996. Bringing Design to Software . Boston: Addison-Wesley. 97. Wirfs-Brock, Rebecca. 1993. “Designing Scenarios: Making the Case for a Use Case Framework.” Smalltalk Report , November/December. 98. Wixon, Dennis and Ramey, Judith, eds. 1996. Field Methods Casebook for Software Design . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 99. Wood, Larry E. 1996. “The Ethnographic Interview in User-Centered Task/Work Analysis.” 100. Young, Indi. 2008. Mental Models . Brooklyn, NY: Rosenfeld Media. 101. http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2011/03/07/lean-ux-getting-out-of-the-deliverablesbusiness/ 102. http://dontpaniconline.com/magazine/music/steve-albinis-letter-to-nirvana-before-heproduced-in-utero