## Acknowledgments The other authors and I are extremely proud of this fourth edition. We and many others worked hard to update, illustrate, and improve it, but without the efforts of Mary James at Wiley, it would not exist. Mary’s quiet, insistent support made the mountainous project seem imminently doable. Once we began, Mary continued to marshal necessary resources and encourage everyone to make this book a reality. Mary recruited some imposing talent at Wiley to wrangle the many moving pieces of a project such as this. Project editor Adaobi Obi Tulton has done a fabulous job making the gears mesh and the wheels turn smoothly. Marketing manager Ashley Zurcher’s early support for the project helped us get the paper, color, graphics, and promotion we aspired to. Her enthusiasm gave us confidence to do our best. Ever since Apple changed the landscape of consumer computing with its smartphones and tablet computers, Robert Reimann has been gently nudging me to update About Face . When I turned the tables on him, asking him to do the lion’s share of the writing, he unhesitatingly agreed. Most of the changes in this book are his, along with most of the credit. Chris Noessel generously agreed to act as technical editor, and his contributions can be felt throughout the manuscript. The capable writing of Dave Cronin and Doug LeMoine added much to the depth and completeness of this new edition. Visually, this edition is far advanced over its predecessors. Many individual members of the Cooper design staff contributed their talents. Supremely talented visual designer Jason Csizmadi led the effort, organizing and coordinating, not to mention drawing and Photoshopping late into the night. You can see the beautiful fruits of his labor on these pages, from (and including) cover to cover. Other designers whose work is featured herein include Cale Leroy, Christina Beard, Brendan Kneram, and Gritchelle Fallesgon, along with Martina Maleike, James Laslavic, Nick Myers, and Glen Davis. Other Cooperistas contributed their care and talent at many points during the yearlong writing effort. In particular, big props to Jayson McCauliff, Kendra Shimmell, and Susan Dybbs, who helped immensely in keeping the project on track as work and life brought their distractions. Similarly, Steve Calde and Karen Lemen were always ready to help as the project evolved. We would also like to thank the following colleagues and Cooper designers for their contributions to this and previous editions, to whom we are greatly indebted: Kim Goodwin, who contributed significantly to the development and expression of the concepts and methods described in Part I; Hugh Dubberly for his help in developing the principles described at the end of Chapter 7 and for his assistance in clarifying the Goal-Directed process with early versions of the diagrams found in Chapter 1; Gretchen Anderson and Elaine Montgomery for their contributions on user and market research in Chapter 2; Rick Bond for his many insights into usability testing featured in Chapter 5; Chris Weeldreyer for his insights into the design of embedded systems in Chapter 19; Wayne Greenwood for his contributions on control mapping in Chapter 12; and Nate Fortin and Nick Myers for their contributions on visual interface design and branding in Chapter 17. We would also like to thank Elizabeth Bacon, Steve Calde, John Dunning, David Fore, Nate Fortin, Kim Goodwin, Wayne Greenwood, Noah Guyot, Lane Halley, Ernest Kinsolving, Daniel Kuo, Berm Lee, Tim McCoy, Elaine Montgomery, Nick Myers, Ryan Olshavsky, Angela Quail, Suzy Thompson, and Chris Weeldreyer for their contributions to the Cooper designs and illustrations featured in this book. It should also be noted that the parts of Chapter 3 concerned with cognitive processing originally appeared in an article by Robert Reimann on UXMatters.com and are used with permission. We are grateful to clients David West at Shared Healthcare Systems, Mike Kay and Bill Chang at Fujitsu Softek, John Chaffins at CrossCountry, Chris Twogood at Teradata, and Chris Dollar at McKesson for granting us permission to use examples from the Cooper design projects featured in this book. We also want to thank the many other clients who had the vision and foresight to work with us and support us in their organizations. We would like to acknowledge the following authors and industry colleagues who have influenced or clarified our thinking over the years: Christopher Alexander, Edward Tufte, Kevin Mullet, Victor Papanek, Donald Norman, Larry Constantine, Challis Hodge, Shelley Evenson, Clifford Nass, Byron Reeves, Stephen Pinker, and Terry Swack. Thanks to my agent, Bill Gladstone, who again created a successful business framework for all this to happen. As always, the most long-suffering contributors to a work like this one are the authors’ families. We appreciate how much our partners and children have sacrificed so that we could create this book.