## Foreword I began working on the first edition of this book 20 years ago. Fittingly, I wrote a manifesto—a challenge to frustrated practitioners to step forward and begin creating software that users would love. In those days, few designers and precious little software didn’t make your head hurt to use. Strong measures were called for. Today, the technology landscape is much different; consequently, this fourth edition is also much different. In 1994 the state of the art of personal software was an address book or spreadsheet. Today, the digitization of all forms of media has put consumers neck-deep in technology. Powerful handheld apps are now in the hands of amateurs and nontechnical users—apps for music listening and production; for photography, video, news, and communications; for home security and environmental control; for health, fitness, and personal tracking; for games and education; and for shopping. Over a billion people have a full-fledged computer in their pocket and access to millions of applications and websites. The value of making these user-facing products easier to understand and use is clear. We interaction designers have earned our seat at the table and are well established as an integral part of teams that produce successful, widely used digital products. The primary challenge of the first two decades of interaction design practice was to invent the process, tools, roles, and methods needed to succeed. Now that we have demonstrated our success, our relationship to others in our organization is changing. Each of these best practices is now evolving as we integrate our skills more deeply into our teams. Specifically, we need to work more effectively with business people and developers. Twenty years ago, developers too had to fight for inclusion and relevance. Although firmly embedded in the corporate hierarchy, they lacked credibility and authority. As consumer digitization increased, developers grew dissatisfied as the agents of users’ misery. They knew they could do better. The agile movement and, more recently, the growth of lean practices are each efforts by software developers to have more influence on their own destiny. Developers were just as frustrated as designers at the sorry state of digital interaction, and they wanted improvements. They realized that the software construction process had been modeled after industrial archetypes that didn’t suit the new digital medium. A few brave developers began experimenting with unorthodox methods of creating software in smaller increments while maintaining closer contact with their clients. They wanted to avoid lengthy development efforts—“death marches”—that resulted in unhappy users. They also were motivated by a natural desire to find a process that more reliably resulted in better products that they could be proud of. Although each variant has its adherents and detractors, the course of software development has been forever altered by these new approaches. The notion that the old ways weren’t working well is now widely accepted, and the quest for new methods continues. This new self-awareness in the development community is a huge opportunity for interaction designers. Before, developers saw designers as competing for scarce resources. Now, developers see interaction designers as useful helpers, able to contribute skills, experience, and viewpoints that developers cannot. As developers and designers have begun to cooperate instead of competing, they have discovered that their powers are multiplied by working side by side. Every practitioner—developer as well as designer—wants to create a product they can be proud of. To improve outcomes, both groups have been rethinking the entire development process, demanding better tools, better guidance, and better access. Historically, though, developers and interaction designers have pursued their common goal separately, developing tools and processes that work in separate silos. The two practices are quite different in many ways, and neither will work in subservience to the other. The challenge, then, is to learn how they can work together, effectively, successfully, in mutual support. At the most forward-looking companies, you can already see this happening: Developers and designers sit next to each other, working cooperatively and collaboratively. When designers and developers—and the many other practitioners working with them—collaborate fully, the result is far better than any other method we’ve tried. The speed with which the work gets done is much greater and the quality of the end product much higher. And users are more delighted. On the business side, executives often misunderstand the role of interaction design. It sometimes seems that the only place where it is truly understood is in tiny start-ups. Although larger companies may have many interaction designers on staff, managers persistently fail to incorporate their design expertise into the process until it’s too late. All the design skill and process in the world won’t succeed unless the corporate culture supports interaction design and its objectives. Apple isn’t a paragon of user experience because of its employees’ design skills, but because Steve Jobs, its former (and legendarily autocratic) leader, was a tireless advocate of the power of design. Few companies have leaders as bold as Jobs. Those that do tend to be small start-ups. You will find it difficult to convince business people of the value of collaborative design work. But each year will see more success stories—more proof of the value of this new work paradigm. I remember when Apple and Microsoft, not to mention Google and Facebook, were tiny start-ups with many doubters. The two opportunities that face interaction designers today are finding, or creating, advocates on the business side, and learning how to collaborate with the newly sympathetic development community. What is indisputable is the awesome power of interaction design: giving technology users a memorable, effective, easy, and rewarding experience as they work, play, and communicate. —Alan Cooper # 读累了记得休息一会哦\~ 公众号：古德猫宁李 电子书搜索下载 书单分享 书友学习交流 网站：沉金书屋 https://www.chenjin5.com 电子书搜索下载 电子书打包资源分享 学习资源分享