structure and details. Interpretation —Much of the designer’s work is reading between the lines of facts gathered about users’ behaviors, their environment, and what they say. The designer must take these facts together as a whole and analyze them to uncover the design implications. Interviewers must be careful, however, to avoid assumptions based on their own interpretation of the facts without verifying these assumptions with users. Focus —Rather than coming to interviews with a set questionnaire or letting the interview wander aimlessly, the designer needs to subtly direct the interview so as to capture data relevant to design issues. ## Improving on contextual inquiry Contextual inquiry forms a solid theoretical foundation for qualitative research, but as a specific method it has some limitations and inefficiencies. The following process improvements, in our experience, result in a more highly leveraged research phase that better sets the stage for successful design: Shorten the interview process. Contextual inquiry assumes full-day interviews with users. The authors have found that interviews as short as one hour can be sufficient to gather the necessary user data, provided that a sufficient number of interviews (about six well-selected users for each hypothesized role or type) are scheduled. It is much easier and more effective to find a diverse set of users who will consent to an hour with a designer than it is to find users who will agree to spend an entire day. Use smaller design teams. Contextual inquiry assumes a large design team that conducts multiple interviews in parallel, followed by debriefing sessions in which the full team participates. We’ve found that it is more effective to conduct interviews sequentially with the same designers in each interview. This allows the design team to remain small (two or three designers). But even more importantly, it means that the entire team interacts with all the interviewed users directly, allowing the members to most effectively analyze and synthesize the user data. Identify goals first. Contextual inquiry feeds a design process that is fundamentally taskfocused. We propose that ethnographic interviews identify and prioritize user goals before determining the tasks that relate to these goals. Look beyond business contexts. The vocabulary of contextual inquiry assumes a business product and a corporate environment. Ethnographic interviews are also possible in consumer domains, although the focus of questioning is somewhat different, as discussed next. ## Preparing for ethnographic interviews Ethnography is a term borrowed from anthropology; it means the systematic and immersive study of human cultures. In anthropology, ethnographic researchers spend years living in the cultures they study and record. Ethnographic interviews take the spirit of this type of research and apply it on a micro level. Rather than trying to understand behaviors and social rituals of an entire culture, the goal is to understand the behaviors and rituals of people interacting with individual products. what users say and do. Interviewers must take care not to make these technologies too obtrusive; otherwise, the users will be distracted and behave differently than they would when not being recorded. In our practice, we’ve found that a notebook and a digital camera allow us to capture everything we need without compromising the honest exchange of information. Typically, we don’t bring out the camera until we feel that we’ve established a good rapport with the interview subject. Then we use it to capture elements and artifacts in the environment that are difficult to jot down in our notes. Video, when used with care, can sometimes be a powerful rhetorical tool for achieving stakeholder buy-in to contentious or surprising research results. Video may also prove useful in situations where note-taking is difficult, such as in a moving car. For consumer products, it can be hard to get a true picture of people’s behaviors, especially if they will be using the product outside or in public. For these kinds of projects, a man-on-thestreet approach to user observation can be effective. Using this approach, the design team casually observes product-related behaviors of people in public spaces. This type of technique is useful for understanding brick-and-mortar commerce-related behaviors that may translate into online behaviors, mobile-related behaviors of all sorts, or behaviors associated with specialized types of environments, such as theme parks and museums. ## Interviewing and Observing Users Drawing on years of design research in practice, we believe that a combination of observation and one-on-one interviews is the most effective and efficient tool in a designer’s arsenal for gathering qualitative data about users and their goals. The technique of ethnographic interviews is a combination of immersive observation and directed interview techniques. Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt pioneered an ethnographic interviewing technique they call contextual inquiry . Their method has, for good reason, rapidly gained traction in the industry and provides a sound basis for qualitative user research. It is described in detail in the first four chapters of their book, Contextual Design (Morgan Kaufmann, 1998). Contextual inquiry methods closely parallel the methods described here, but with some subtle and important differences. ## Contextual inquiry Contextual inquiry, according to Beyer and Holtzblatt, is based on a master-apprentice model of learning: observing and asking questions of the user as if she is the master craftsman, and the interviewer the new apprentice. Beyer and Holtzblatt also enumerate four basic principles of engaging in ethnographic interviews: Context —Rather than interviewing the user in a clean white room, it is important to interact with and observe the user in her normal work environment, or whatever physical context is appropriate for the product. Observing users as they perform activities and questioning them in their own environments, filled with the artifacts they use each day, can bring to light the all-important details of their behaviors. Partnership —The interview and observation should take the tone of a collaborative exploration with the user, alternating between observation of work and discussion of its