Printing 1770-1970: An Illustrated History of Its Development and Uses in England. By MIcHAEL TwYMAN. London: Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1970, Pp. viii+ 283. \$20.00. Distributed in the U.S. by R. R. Bowker Co.

This book deals with printed ephemera, or job printing, in England from the late eighteenth century to the present. The specific dates in the title derive from the fact that it was printed and published by Eyre and Spottiswoode on the occasion of their bicentenary in 1970. In many respects it is similar to John Lewis's Printed Ephemera: The Changing Uses of Type and Letterforms in English and American Printing (Ipswich: W. S. Cowell, 1962); but there are enough differences to consider the two books complementary rather than competitive. Both emphasize the significance of ephemeral printing in the study of social history and popular taste. As such they can also be profitably examined in connection with another recent book, The Story of Street Literature: Forerunner of the Popular Press, by Robert L. Collison (London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1973).

Printing 1770–1970 consists of 2 approximately equal parts. Part 1 (pp. 1–130) contains an Introduction and 7 chapters, with 343 illustrations associated with the text and referred to by number in the text. Part 2 (pp. 131–264) consists of further illustrations, numbered 344-880, and organized in 5sections: “Ceremony," "Rural Life," "Transport," "Wars," and "Exhibitions." Supplementing the 2 parts of the work are a very good select Bibliography, a detailed Index of Illustrations (with symbols to identify letterpress, lithographic, and other printers), and an accurate general Index. The illustrations, a good many in color, are of excellent quality.

The text, part 1, is a history of non-book printing from the Industrial Revolution to the present day. Throughout the several topical chapters, printing is related to social change during the past two centuries: population increase, expansion of trade, improvements in technology and communication, pressures for the dissemination of information, and the development of free education. Chapter 1, "The Information Explosion," sketches the proliferation of printing establishments and the phenomenal increase in printing production. Successive topical chapters cover new printing processes, color printing, mechanization of papermaking and printing, typography, pictorial printing, and design, In each chapter there are references to contemporaneous dcvelopments on the Continent and in the United States, but the author does not stray from his focus on English printing history. Unlike most general histories of printing, very recent developments—specifically the use of computers, reprography and in-house printing, photocomposition, and web-offset lithography--are not neglected. Highly technical points are clearly explained and skillfully illustrated by well-selected examples of printing.

Michael Twyman teaches typography and graphic design at the University of Reading. is a practicing designer, and is active in professional and scholarly societies in the fields of printing and design, He is author of John Soulby, Printer, Ulverston (1966), a detailed study of a provincial printer, and of Litkography 1800–1850: The Techniques of Drawing on Stone in England and France and Their Application to Works of Topography (1970). Librarians, bibliographers, collectors of ephemera, as well as anyone interested in typography and the graphic arts will find Twyman's Printing 1770- 1970 an enlightening exposition and a very useful reference work.

University of California, Los Angeles

ANDRew H. HoRN

Hugh Gaine: A Colonial Printer-Editor's Odyssey to Loyalism. By ALrREd LAwRENcE LorEnz, Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1972. Pp. xii+192. \$6.95.

This bookis a welcome addition to the growing body of recent works on printers