## Editor's Introduction "Cultural revolution" is a term most familiar from the upheaval in China in the 196os. But, whether or not the Chinese Communists were aware of it, their cultural revolution had a precedent in Soviet history. During the First Five-Year Plan, and particularly in the years 1928–31, the old Russian intelligentsia was buffseted by a militant movement in which Communist youth were particularly prominent. Students challenged their professors, forcing them to undergo "reelection" to their positions. In the professions, established authorities were overthrown by younger, more militant, Marxist groups, and scholars were urged to focus their research on topics that were of practical relevance to society and the economy. Along with a drive to link the whole educational process with the “real life" of industry, kolkhoz agriculture, and the political campaigns of the day, Communist and working-class students were recruited to higher education in unprecedented numbers. Cultural revolutionaries attacked "bureaucratic" administrative forms, proposing instead new organizational methods to which they gave military-sounding names—"light cavalry" charges, production "brigades," "campaigns" of the "cultural Army." In the climate of cultural revolution, radical experimentation flourished, and blueprints were drawn up for the socialist cities and “collectivization of life" appropriate for the new world in the making. This kind of cultural revolution was quite unlike the process that Lenin had envisaged under that name. Lenin's idea of cultural revolution was a gradual and nonmilitant raising of cultural standards, achieved without direct confrontation with the old intelligentsia and involving above all the expansion of mass education and the spread of basic literacy.¹ Lenin's usage was the one to which Stalin returned in the late thirties, and the one now accepted by Soviet historians.² Contemporary Soviet writers do not dwell on the outburst of militancy called "cultural revolution" in the First Five-Year Plan (and, similarly, they deny that the Chinese "cultural revolution" deserves that title or has a legitimate place in the normal process of socialist development). The First Five-Year Plan period in general presents difficulties to Soviet historians. The foundations of Soviet economic development were laid at this time, but so, clearly, were the foundations of Stalin's “"cult of personality."Soviet historians must balance the achievements of the period against its “excesses."Among the “excesses," perhaps, were the regime's harsh dealings with the non-Party intelligentsia during the cultural revolution. Among the achievements was the creation of a new "Soviet intelligentsia,"largely recruited from the working class and the Communist party. This is, indeed, a period of contradictions, and we cannot begin to understand the First Five-Year Plan cultural revolution without considering the political and economic context in which it took place. The decision to undertake a program of rapid industrialization—unsupported by foreign credits or even by extensive foreign trade, and without the internal capital accumulation that many thought a prerequisite—was made after long debates in 1927-28. It was assumed, rightly or wrongly, that the peasantry would have to take the burden, and that the resources necessary for industrial investment would have to be “squeezed" out of the agricultural sector. At the first sign that the peasantry might resist the squeezing process—that is, refuse to market grain for the low prices set by the state—the Party leadership reacted with something like panic. Stalin insisted that force should be used against peasant "hoarders."When this proved insufficient, the policy of immediate and, as far as possible, universal entry of the peasantry into collective farms was adopted as a solution to the related problems of state grain collection and political control. The effect of these measures was to provoke a direct confrontation between the state and the peasantry—or, as it was described, between the "proletarian dictatorship" and the kulak “class enemy."At the same time, conflict between the Stalin and Rykov-Bukharin groups in the Politburo produced a top-level political crisis. Even before these events, real or imagined fears of foreign intervention had led to the development of a siege mentality. Faced by actual crisis, the fears of external and internal enemies intensified. The potential enemies within included the kulak, the urban businessman and trader, the old (non-Communist) intelligentsia, and the remnants of defeated political parties and Communist opposition groups. The period was marked by an increase in political coercion of all kinds and an expansion of the sphere of Party intervention and control. However, the social consequences of the new policies were by no means all negative. A high level of urban unemployment, especially of youth, coupled with limited opportunities for peasants to find seasonal or permanent employment in the cities had characterized NEP. There had been a feeling among Communists and Komsomols of lost momentum and lack of directiona suspicion that the leadership no longer had the dynamism to undertake radical social and economic change. The Five-Year Plan restored the Communist sense of purpose and released a considerable charge of energy and enthusiasm for its accomplishment. At the same time, it eliminated urban unemployment and (although the new kolkhozy formally restricted the departure of their members) created the conditions for a massive population movement of peasants from rural areas into towns and the new construction sites. Some of the movement was involuntary, a product of the deportation of kulaks. Nevertheless, from the viewpoint of a social historian, the First Five-Year Plan must be regarded as a period of enormous upward social mobility, as peasants moved into the industrial labor force, unskilled workers became skilled, and skilled workers were promoted into white-collar and managerial positions and higher education. It was, of course, the upward movement from the working class that was stressed as a positive achievement by the regime at the time, and has since been stressed by Soviet historians. Hundreds of thousands of workers and Communists were “mobilized" for study in technical schools and higher educational institutions. Newly trained “Red specialists" moved into the engineering jobs created by industrial expansion (as well as those vacated by arrested "bourgeois wreckers"). The Communist party itself was conducting large-scale recruitment in the factories and becoming, as it had never been under Lenin, a predominantly working-class party. There was an analogy to this process in the intellectual and cultural world, although it often appeared a contrived and artificial one. Groups of Communists established "proletarian hegemony" in various intellectual and cultural professions, and for a few years exercised a belligerent, exclusive, and oppressive dictatorship over their professional colleagues. In fact these Communist groups were usually not proletarian in any real sense, although they made strenuous efforts to establish contact with a mainly indifferent working-class opinion. The two centers of the intellectual "proletarian" movement—the literary association RAPP and the Communist Academy—were faction ridden and, in most practical ways, unproductive. Despite their services in attacking "rightism," the Party leadership had little patience with them. It is this latter aspect of cultural revolution that has attracted most attention from Western scholars.3 The scholarship has been largely focussed on the persecution of the old intelligentsia and the extension of political controls over cultural life. It has treated the First Five-Year Plan period primarily as a transition, arbitrarily and abruptly separating the NEP period of relative tolerance and cultural diversity from the Stalin period of repression and cultural stagnation. The Party, or Stalin himself, has often been seen as holding the levers of change and manipulating them almost at will to reach preconceived goals. In this volume, we have made the first attempt to see the cultural revolution as a whole, and to consider it not simply as a transition but as a discrete phenomenon with its own special characteristics. Instead of concentrating exclusively on the theme of Party intervention in culture (the major theme of previous Western studies), we have looked at what was happening within the cultural professions and sought to relate this to contemporary social and political changes, including the movement for worker promotion (vydvizhenie) into the intelligentsia. The genuinely proletarian component of “proletarian cultural revolution"—working-class upward mobility into professional and whitecollar occupations—is discussed in the articles by Fitzpatrick, Lewin, and Lapidus. Cultural revolution as an antibureaucratic and iconoclastic youth movement is described by Fitzpatrick. In regard to the old intelligentsia, contributors discuss the impact of cultural revolution both on cultural/ intellectual debate and on the conditions of professional life. The "visionary planning" and utopian expectations characteristic of the period are described by Starr, Sharlet, and Lapidus: Starr's study of the town planners gives us a particularly interesting example of regime endorsement of such visionary planning and its partial implementation in practice; Sharlet and Lapidus deal respectively with the theories of “withering away of the law" and “withering away of the school," which achieved wide acceptance during the cultural revolution and were based in part on the observable disintegration of traditional legal and educational institutions. Clark discusses the writers' efforts to reconceptualize their own role in a changing society, comparing their search for contact with the working-class masses with the Russian intelligentsia's “movement to the people" in the 187os. Joravsky, looking at the psychoneurologists, describes a process of cultural impoverishment as the profession accepted increasing restrictions on the scope and quality of intellectual debate. Internal and generational conflicts within professions are examined by Solomon, for the rural scholars, and Enteen, for the historians. In the case of the rural scholars, both Marxist and non-Marxist schools were concerned with the precollectivization, small-farming peasantry, and the regime's adoption of a policy of all-out collectivization brought their enquiries to an abrupt end. In the historical profession, on the other hand, Marxists waged a successful struggle against "bourgeois" historians and then themselves split into warring camps. The internecine struggle among the Marxists that followed is well documented, and gives us an unusual insight into the political processes and implications of in-fighting in a Communist-dominated profession. On the historical continuum, Fitzpatrick investigates the connection between the First Five-Year Plan cultural revolution and the social and political tensions of NEP. Lewin's article describes the complex social situation of the 19zos and 193os, relating the flux and chaos of the First Five-Year Plan period to similar characteristics of the Great Purge years of the later thirties. Joravsky also relates the "great break" of 1928-29 to subsequent developments in the Stalin period, but at the same time points to a continuity in intelligentsia/regime relations through the Soviet period as a whole. The "great break" produced an outright confrontation between the interests of the regime and those of the intelligentsia, he argues, but even under Lenin the regime's demands and assumptions were incompatible with free intellectual enquiry. A contrast between Joravsky's view of cultural revolution and Fitzpatrick's is drawn by Solomon in her article on the rural scholars. In conclusion, Hough considers the implications of our emerging picture of First Five-Year Plan cultural revolution for Western models of Soviet development, with particular reference to modernization (also discussed by Lapidus in her article on education), “Great Retreat" (Timasheff's image of repudiation of revolutionary ideals in the 193os), and the totalitarian interpretation of state/society interaction in the Stalin period. The appropriateness of the totalitarian model was, in fact, one of the questions most frequently raised in discussion at the conference at which these papers were originally presented. A major point of debate was the applicability of the notion of “revolution from above" to the process of cultural revolution. “Revolution from above" has been used to characterize the rapid industrialization drive, collectivization, and the political transformation of the First Five-Year Plan period. The term emphasizes the voluntarist nature of the policies adopted by the Party leadership. The implication is that social and economic forces played a relatively insignificant part; that an activist regime imposed its will on a passive society; and that the Party leadership acted without constraint or encouragement either from the society or from its own rank-and-file. In the cultural sphere, the debate hinges on the extent to which cultural revolution was a movement initiated and controlled by the Party leadership (or by Stalin's group within it) for its own ends. The argument for cultural revolution as “revolution from above" is supported by the leadership's initiative in staging the Shakhti trial of 1928, which set the pattern for anti-intelligentsia action in other areas; the intervention of the leadership in various episodes of the cultural struggle (for example, Stalin's 1929 speech to the Agrarian Marxists and his 1931 letter to the editors of Proletarskaia revoliutsiia); the cultural revolutionaries' attacks on Stalin's "rightist" opponents; the high degree of politicization of the movement; and the claim invariably made by militant groups to be acting "for the Party" or, in some cases, with a mandate from the Central Committee. It has also been argued, however, that there were important elements of "revolution from below" in cultural revolution. This argument—which has implications beyond the cultural sphere—points to the existence during NEP of strong pressures within the Communist Party, the Komsomol, and the industrial working class for more militant and radical policies. It stresses the instability of NEP society and politics, the Communist doubt that the revolution had been irrevocably won, and the continuing force of resentment against the educated and privileged classes of the old regime. The argument is supported by evidence that the Party's “instruments" in harassing the old intelligentsia were essentially self-appointed and often insubordinate to higher authority; that in attacking the old intelligentsia the cultural revolutionaries were overthrowing what they regarded as the cultural “establishment,"and this reflected their general mood of hostility toward constituted authority; and that the radical ideas that cultural revolution brought into prominence—in particular the theories of the "withering away" of state, school, and lawwere both unacceptable to the Party leadership and inappropriate to its purposes. Those (including the present writer) who argued for elements of "revolution from below" tended to reject the dichotomy of state and society and the idea of untrammeled political voluntarism. Cultural revolution, in their view, was not only generated by forces within the society but also served to create societal support (as well as societal opposition) for the regime. The support came from what has been labelled the "new class" the predominantly working-class and peasant group promoted and trained during the First Five-Year Plan that moved into managerial positions in the thirties and has dominated the Soviet political scene virtually to the present day. Like all good arguments, this one remains unresolved. It hardly needs to be pointed out that its relevance is not limited to cultural history. In recent years, scholars have been trying to break away from the spell of the totalitarian model, and find new frameworks for understanding the October revolution and the period of NEP. But there has been little reinterpretation of the period from 1929, which, in more senses than one, remains the dark ages of Soviet history. Stalin's Russia is still almost uncharted territory for the historian.4 This volume, dealing with the formative first years of the Stalin period, suggests some possible lines of reinterpretation of the period as a whole. We hope that the questions we have raised will prove provocative enough to stimulate further research and debate.