## Cultural Revolution as Class War ## Sheila Fitzpatrick In the First Five-Year Plan period, the term “cultural revolution" was used in a special sense, different from earlier or later Soviet usages. It described a political confrontation of “proletarian" Communists and the "bourgeois" intelligentsia, in which the Communists sought to overthrow the cultural authorities inherited from the old regime. The aim of cultural revolution was to create a new "proletarian intelligentsia." The method of cultural revolution was “class war." The concept of class war depended on a definition of the old intelligentsia as "bourgeois" and the Communist party as "proletarian." All Communists agreed on this definition, but not all thought it necessary to make culture a battleground. In the first ten years of Soviet power, the Communist leadership had tended to avoid outright confrontation with the intelligentsia. Lenin had rejected the idea that cultural power, like political, could be seized by revolutionary action. Culture, in his view, had to be patiently acquired and assimilated; Communists must learn from "bourgeois specialists," despite their identification with an alien social class; and refusal to learn was a sign of “Communist conceit."During NEP the leadership as a whole had treated harassment of specialists (spetseedstvo) as a regrettable byproduct of revolutionary zeal rather than a mark of developed proletarian consciousness. In 1927, on the eve of the industrialization drive, the leadership was still talking in terms of a nonantagonistic relationship with bourgeois specialists. The Party's task, Stalin told the Fifteenth Party Congress in December, was "to strengthen the bond (smychka) of the working class with the toiling Soviet intelligentsia of town and country," and industrialization would only tend to reinforce the alliance, since the technical intelligentsia, "being closely linked with the process of production, cannot but see that the Bolsheviks are leading our country forward to better things. . . ."1 On the same occasion, the future “rightist" Rykov and future “Stalinist" Molotov agreed that in the interests of successful industrialization it would be necessary to make a substantially increased investment in culture, particularly in the priority areas of primary education, technical education, and the campaign against illiteracy.² Pravda used the term “cultural revolution" in its Leninist sense (see p. 2) to describe the nonmilitant development of mass education that industrialization would require: Industrialization—our general course—is unthinkable without rationalization. But rationalization, in its turn, is unthinkable without a raising of the cultural level: both the cultural level of “cadres" and the cultural level of the masses. The demand to raise the cultural level of the worker-peasant masses, the demand to carry out a broad and profound "cultural revolution" in the country is evident: it is now really “in the air."3 The switch to a class-war concept of cultural revolution came abruptly a few months after the Fifteenth Party Congress, in an atmosphere of rising political tension. In January 1928 Stalin visited Siberia, where grain procurements had been small in spite of a good harvest, and decided that it was necessary to resort to coercion of the peasantry and confiscation of hoarded grain. This was the beginning of the policy of "class war" against the prosperous peasant, which subsequently led to the forced collectivization of agriculture. In March 1928 the State Prosecutor announced the forthcoming trial of a large group·of mining engineers and technicians from the Shakhty area of Donbass on charges of conspiracy and sabotage. The trial, which took place in Moscow in May and June, received maximum publicity and was preceded by a highly organized public discussion and condemnation of the accused. This was a turning point in Soviet policy toward the bourgeois specialist. From this time, the technical intelligentsia ceased to be seen as the Party's natural ally in industrialization, and became a potentially treacherous group whose real allegiance was to the dispossessed capitalists and their foreign supporters. The purpose of the Shakhty trial, according to an NkvD official quoted by Medvedev,4 was " 'to mobilize the masses,''to arouse their wrath against the imperialists,''to intensify vigilance.'" This vigilance was directed against the intelligentsia as a class enemy. The necessary condition of successful industrialization was no longer (as Rykov and Molotov had thought in December) more engineers and a more literate population, but more proletarian engineers and a population alert for signs of wrecking and sabotage among the bourgeois intelligentsia. The new concept of cultural revolution was defined by Krinitskii, head of the agitprop department of the Central Committee, at a special meeting on cultural questions held while the Shakhty trial was in progress. Under present conditions, Krinitskii said, cultural revolution was inconceivable without class war, and the proletariat must fight “against bourgeois elements which are supported by the remnants and survivals of the influence, traditions and customs of the old society." These bourgeois elements had mounted an attack on the cultural front, "struggling to increase their share, fighting for their own school, their own art, their own theatre and cinema, trying to use the state apparatus for that purpose." Communist cultural administrators (particularly those in Narkompros [Commissariat of Enlightenment of the RsFSR], under the tolerant leadership of the Old Bolshevik intellectual Anatolii Lunacharskii) had failed to recognize the threat, being disarmed by “an anti-revolutionary, opportunist conception of cultural revolution as a peaceful, classless raising of cultural standardsa conception which does not distinguish between bourgeois and proletarian elements of culture, . . . and does not see the fierce struggle of the proletariat against the class antagonist in everyday life, the school, art, science and so on. . . ."s The period of official sponsorship of class-war cultural revolution in the Soviet Union can be dated from the Shakhty trial (early summer 1928) to Stalin's statement of reconciliation with the old technical intelligentsia three years later (June 1931). Subsequently, from the standpoint of Soviet discussion, the episode was buriedindeed, class-war cultural revolution became a theoretical impossibility, as the Leninist definition of cultural revolution was taken back into Soviet usage from the late thirties. Western historians, regarding the First Five-Year Plan period in culture as essentially a transition from the relative permissiveness and pluralism of NEP to the regimentation of “Stalinism," have usually treated the class-war terminology simply as camouflage for the basic process of Communist intimidation of the intelligentsia. However, cultural revolution was not only a more complex phenomenon than this scheme suggests, but also one of peculiar importance for the understanding of Soviet political and social development. This was the period in which the social and generational tensions of NEP came to a climax in an onslaught (which the leadership only partly controlled) on privilege and established authority. But these were also the first and formative years of the Stalin era. We are accustomed to the idea that the First Five-Year Plan laid the foundations for Stalinist industrialization, just as collectivization laid the foundations for Stalinist agriculture. It should surely be recognized that cultural revolution was an equally important part of what has been called the "Stalin revolution." The substance behind the rhetoric of class war was large-scale upward mobility of industrial workers and working-class Party members into higher education and administrative and managerial jobs. Cultural revolution was the vehicle for training the future Communist elite and creating the new Soviet intelligentsia. This feat of social engineering—unprecedented and unrepeated in Soviet experience—was accomplished in the midst of a cultural upheaval some aspects of which were directly manipulated by the Party leadership, others outside the range of leadership vision. Cultural revolution had many facets. It was a worker-promotion movement linked to a political campaign to discredit the "Right Opposition" within the Party. It was an iconoclastic youth movement directed against "bureaucratic" authority. It was a process whereby militant Communist groups in the professions established local dictatorships and attempted to revolutionize their disciplines. It was, finally, a heyday for revolutionary theorists and "hare-brained schemers,' whose blueprints for the new society not only attracted disciples among the Communist cultural militants but also in many cases gained solid institutional support. ## I Cultural revolution was initiated as a revolution from above. The Shakhty trial—and the subsequent show trials of the “Industrial Party" (1930), the Mensheviks (1931), and other groups accused of conspiracy and sabotagecan be seen as a mobilization strategy designed to create an atmosphere of crisis and to justify the regime's demands for sacrifice and extraordinary efforts in the cause of industrialization. The trials built on the popular fears aroused by the war scare of 1927, and purported to demonstrate that the “wreckers and saboteurs" of the bourgeois intelligentsia were potential allies of the encircling capitalist powers in the event of a renewed military intervention. The wreckers also served as scapegoats for economic failures, shortages of consumer goods, and a general fall in urban living standards as resources were channeled into the priority area of heavy industry. In cultural revolution, as in the earlier war scare, the mobilization strategy had the additional purpose of discrediting Stalin's opponents in the Politburo. From ·the beginning of 1928 Rykov and Bukharin had opposed Stalin on the crucial political issues of use of force against the peasantry and industrialization tempos. Through 1928 a great deal of the energy of the propagandists of class-war cultural revolution was devoted to demonstrating that the same Party "Rightists" who were inclined to conciliate the kulaks were also conciliators of the bourgeois intelligentsia, and thus opponents of cultural revolution. This was certainly true of Rykov, who, as head of the Soviet government (chairman of the All-Union Sovnarkom), was seen by contemporaries as the major political figure of the Right. Rykov objected to introducing the “class issue" in the discussion on training of engineers that followed the disclosure of the Shakhty wrecking;6 and, by quoting Lenin's statements on the need to work with bourgeois specialists, he tried to convince the Politburo that persecution of engineers was the wrong policy.7 But Rykov's position may not originally have been a factional one. He was the only Rightist leader with a background in industry, and it was the "industrialists" of the Party leadership who best knew the value of the bourgeois engineers and were most likely to defend them. Like Rykov, the present and future heads of Vesenkha (Kuibyshev and Ordzhonikidze) both reacted to the announcement of the Shakhty trial with public warnings against the danger of spetseedstvo.8 But, since Kuibyshev and Ordzhonikidze were clearly Stalin supporters committed to high tempos of industrialization, their doubts were evidently practical and not ideological or motivated by factional interest. In contrast, Tomskii—the Rightist head of the trade unions—expressed no concern for the bourgeois specialist or opposition to the principle of class-war cultural revolution. It was, indeed, as natural that the representative of organized labor should support cultural revolution, as a policy offering workers the chance of upward mobility, as that he should oppose the increased powers of management vis-à-vis labor that were a concomitant of high-speed industrialization. Throughout 1928 Tomskii behaved more as trade-union spokesman than as a member of a unified Rightist group. The trade unions, for example, were at odds with Narkompros on the question of labor training. In mid-1928, when Rykov and Bukharin were making support for Narkompros one of the issues of contention with the Stalinist group in the Politburo,9 Tomskii joined the cultural-revolutionary attack on the commissariat.10 Bukharin's relation to the new doctrine of cultural revolution was more complicated. His official positions as head of the Comintern and editor of Pravda gave him no institutional interest in defending the bourgeois specialists; and he does not in fact seem to have expressed early objections to the Shakhty trial. His record on the issue of cultural class war was contradictory. On the one hand, he had opposed the “proletarian" RAPp and defended the “bourgeois" non-Party writers in the literary debate of 1924-25; and in doing so he had expressed what was then a leadership consensus that "our policy in general does not follow the line of fanning class war but, on the contrary, goes some way to damp it down". 11 On the other hand, he was the only member of the Party leadership who had been actively involved in the earlier “proletarian" movement in culture (the Civil War Proletkult), and, unlike Rykov, he was capable of taking at least a rhetorically threatening Communist stance toward the bourgeois intelligentsia.12 Stylistic evidence points to Bukharin as the author of Pravda's first editorial statement on the cultural implications of the Shakhty trial, which advocated a militant proletarian isolationism in culture, very much in the spirit of the old Proletkult manifestoes. The proletariat and proletarian Party needed an “armor of proletarian culture" to protect themselves from "alien class influences, bourgeois degeneration, petty-bourgeois waverings, dulling of revolutionary vigilance in the face of the more cultured class enemy," Pravda stated. 13 If this was in fact Bukharin's position, it was closer to class-war cultural revolution than to conciliation. But it became clear very quickly that, whatever Bukharin's opinion of the moment, he was going to be labelled as an opponent of cultural revolution. A few days after the Pravda editorial, the agitprop department of the Central Committee held a meeting on current cultural tasks. Lunacharskii and other known conciliators of the bourgeois intelligentsia were attacked. In an unusual omission, the Pravda editorial was not cited in the keynote speech by Krinitskii, head of the agitprop department. Instead, Krinitskii went out of his way to suggest that Bukharin opposed the new policy—not mentioning him by name, but referring to his well-known statement of 1925 against “fanning the class war" in culture. "Some comrades," Krinitskii said, "may perhaps reproach me: have I not talked too much about the revival of class war, the attempts at bourgeois counter-attack against the triumphant march of the proletariat, the need to give a decisive rebuff to each and every kind of bourgeois maneuver? Isn't this 'fanning the class war'?.. ."14 It is doubtful, therefore, that the three Politburo Rightists took a united stand on the issue of class-war cultural revolution in the spring of 1928. But in political terms this issue was secondary. The important thing was that the Rightists disagreed with Stalin on industrialization tempos and the peasant question. Because of this, Stalin no doubt wished to discredit them by all available means; and, as will be argued later in this essay, "softness" on the bourgeois intelligentsia was a position that the working-class majority of rank-and-file Party members were likely to condemn. From the fact that class-war cultural revolution was used to discredit Stalin's political opponents, it seems probable that the initiative in introducing the new policy came from Stalin or his supporters. The evidence, however, is largely circumstantial. One source states, evidently on the basis of contemporary Party rumors, that the decision to stage the Shakhty trial was made by Stalin over the objections of Rykov, Kuibyshev, and Iagoda, the head of the GPU. 15 In the second half of 1928, during Stalin's battle with the Rightists in the Politburo and the Moscow Party Committee, cultural revolution received remarkably detailed coverage in the press, with the commentaries that persistently associated the “counterrevolutionary" tendencies of the bourgeois intelligentsia with the “rightist danger" within the Party. Since "rightist danger" in effect meant opposition to Stalin, the association was presumably made on Stalin's behalf, if not on his personal initiative. The press coverage of 1928 was heavy with innuendo, since the exact location of the political “rightist danger" had not yet been disclosed. Only one cultural Rightist was clearly identified, and that was Sviderskii removed from the Russian Commissariat of Agriculture because of policy disagreements in the spring of 1928, and from that time head of the Narkompros arts administration. At Narkompros, Sviderskii had no real line because he had no expertise: he was convicted in advance of cultural "rightism" because he had been a Rightist in agriculture.16 Lunacharskii and his colleagues at Narkompros were also accused of cultural "rightism," although, with the exception of Krupskaia, they were not in fact politically associated with Stalin's opponents in the Politburo. However, between April and July 1928 the Central Committee was discussing the question of transfer of control of higher technical schools from Narkompros to Vesenkha; and on this issue Rykov and Bukharin apparently supported Narkompros, while Stalin and Molotov supported Vesenkha. 17 In the summer of 1928 Khodorovskii, the head of Narkompros's technical-education administration, was dismissed, and Vyshinskii appointed in his place. 18 Since Vyshinskii had just served as presiding judge at the Shakhty trial, there was the disturbing possibility that his Narkompros assignment was in the same line of dutyand in fact the second of the show trials (the “Industrial Party" trial of 193o) featured Vyshinskii as prosecutor, charging a number of experts formerly sympathetic to Narkompros's position on engineering training with “wrecking," and citing a volume edited for Narkompros by Khodorovskii as one of the basic documents on which the prosecution had built its case.19 These links were enough to connect the cultural “rightism" of Narkompros with the political "rightism" of Rykov and Bukharin and the wrecking activities of the bourgeois specialists. Stalin's supporters did not neglect to point this out. What was the "rightist danger in art"? Krinitskii offered two answers. On the one hand, it was the danger of bourgeois influence, or of excessive Communist susceptibility to such influence. On the other, it was "the rightist danger in the ranks of the Party transferred into the language of art."20 As the cultural revolution gathered momentum, it became clear that Bukharin was to be its exemplary victim among the political Rightists. This was probably because Bukharin, unlike Rykov or Tomskii, actually was an intellectual with literary and artistic interests and some bourgeois literary friends. He could plausibly be included in the category of “Communist literati" of whom Stalin spoke contemptuously both before and after the cultural revolution—those who “sat for years in [European] cafes, drank beer, and were nevertheless unable to learn Europe or to understand it,"21 and who, on returning to Russia, lacked the stamina to remain in the leadership during successive periods of crisis.22 Bukharin, moreover, was on bad terms with the leading vigilantes of cultural revolution: both the RAPp leadership and the Komsomol Central Committee had taken the brunt of his sarcasm and no doubt had personal scores to settle.23 As Communist scholars in the professions established ascendancy over the local bourgeoisie, their tendency was to fall into warring factions exchanging accusations of political deviation. The deviations most frequently mentioned were “Trotskyite-Menshevist" and “Bukharinist." The scholarly attacks on Bukharin begaņ in the Communist Academy's Institute of World Economy and Institute of Philosophy in 1929.24 A few months earlier, Bukharin had been appointed head of the Vesenkha administration of scientific and technical research institutes. This was not only a politically unrewarding post but a compromised one: Bukharin replaced an earlier opposition leader, Kamenev; Kamenev moved to the still less desirable position of head of the Chief (Foreign) Concessions Committee formerly held by Trotskii;2s and Trotski had just been expelled from the Soviet Union altogether. These appointmnents provided an apt illustration—and, given Stalin's cast of mind, probably not an accidental one—of the downward path: oppositionism led to association with the bourgeois intelligentsia, then to dealings with international capitalism, and finally to disgrace and exclusion from Communist society. The leadership struggles of the twenties had developed the politics of rumor, smear, and guilt by association into a fine art. These techniques were fully in evidence in the cultural-revolutionary campaign against the Right. The anti-Right propaganda created the image of a continuum running from the Politburo Right through Narkompros and the bourgeois intelligentsia to the Shakhty wreckers. As scientific research chief at Vesenkha, Bukharin was virtually bound to associate himself in some way with a “technocratic interest,"26 thus discrediting himself further. Lunacharskii, who left Narkompros in the autumn of 1929, became the victim of rumors that portrayed him as a kind of Communist cultural Nepman, corrupted by privilege, foreign travel, and the good life.27 Both Bukharin and Lunacharskii were elected to the Academy of Sciences (under Party pressure)28 at a time when their political fortunes were at their lowest ebb and the Academy itself was being pilloried in the press as the last refuge of aristocratic internal emigres. Cultural revolution carried the message that conciliators of the peasantry, conciliators of the intelligentsia, bureaucrats (the press represented Narkompros as the archetypal "bureaucratic" commissariat), Nepmen, kulaks, cafe-haunting literati, wreckers, expropriated capitalists, and foreign spies were all on the same side in the political struggle and collectively represented the “rightist danger" to the Party. Stalin's political opponents were not yet accused of direct communication with foreign espionage agents, as they were to be in the show trials of the late thirties. But for a potential Communist leader, the suggestion of association with the privileged and anti-Communist bourgeois intelligentsia was damaging enough. ## II Our discussion so far has dealt with an aspect of cultural revolution that appears directed and manipulated from above. But this is only one part of the picture. Cultural revolution also involved a response on the part of the leadership to pressures within the Communist movement and the society as a whole. The class-war concept of confrontation between proletariat and bourgeoisie reflected real social tensions between the materially disadvantaged and the privileged. The antibureaucratic drive of cultural revolutionoften verging on an attack on established authority per se reflected real grievances of the younger generation. Within the professions, Communists and non-Communists tended to gather in potentially antagonistic camps: the appeal for "proletarian hegemony" in scholarship and the arts did not originally come from the Party leadership, but from groups within the professions and scholarly institutions. The specific forms that cultural revolution took in different areas were largely determined by existing tensions and conflicts. From this perspective, cultural revolution was not only an attempt to resolve the contradictions of NEp, but a product of those contradictions. The class-war component of cultural revolution was built on a solid foundation of working-class and Communist tradition. In this connection, it is important to remember that in the period after Lenin's death both Party and Komsomol took in large new enrollments of workers. By the First Five-Year Plan period, they were mass organizations with predominantly working-class membership: in 1930, 56.3 percent of Party members were of working-class origin and 46.3 percent were workers by current occupation.29 This may have made them more amenable to manipulation by politically sophisticated leaders, as is often suggested in the Western literature, but it surely also made the leaders more sensitive to the working-class opinions and grievances expressed within their Party constituency. A militant class-war tradition in the Party, however, predated the mass recruitment of workers after Lenin's death. It developed during the Civil War—another big period of lower-class recruitment—when the Party became a fighting organization that identified its enemies in class terms. Besides the foreign interventionists, the "class enemies" of the Bolsheviks during the Civil War were the capitalists, the kulaks, the clergy, and the intelligentsia. Despite the revolutionary tradition of the Russian intelligentsia, almost none of its members supported the Bolsheviks in the first months after October. Even students were overwhelmingly opposed to the October revolution; teachers in Petrograd and Moscow went on strike; professional associations refused to recognize Soviet power. During the Civil War, the provincial intelligentsia largely supported the Whites, and many followed the retreating White armies. Large numbers of prominent cultural figures drifted south from the capitals: some later left the Crimea with the evacuation of Wrangel's army, while others, still doubtful and suspicious of the new regime, returned to Moscow or Petrograd. The Old Bolsheviks were surprised and indignant at the solid hostility of the intelligentsia, but remained cautious about classifying the intelligentsia as an outright enemy of the revolution. However, this was not the attitude of the Civil War recruits to the Party, nor probably of the post-Civil War Party as a whole. Rank-and-file Communists continued to regard the intelligentsia as a class enemy, despite the leadership's policy of conciliation of the "bourgeois specialist," introduced at the beginning of NEP. Throughout NEP, many Communists regarded the toleration of bourgeois specialists as a limited and revocable tactic, similar to that governing the Party's relations with kulaks, Nepmen, and priests. The ambivalent attitude of the Old Bolshevik leaders was, indeed, a difficult one to communicate to Communists of the post-October generation. The intelligentsia was described as "bourgeois," yet its membersunlike Nepmen, kulaks, and priestshad the vote, and were supposed to be respected for their skills. In the mid-twenties, the Party leaders sometimes went to considerable lengths to assure the intelligentsia of their goodwill.30 But they did not repudiate the idea of class war. The NEP policy, in Bukharin's words, was not to fan the flames. One of the reasons that members of the intelligentsia were officially referred to as "bourgeois specialists" was that in Communist usage the term "intelligentsia" was pejorative. Proletarian and Communist students in Soviet universities during NEP were warned against succumbing to “intelligentshchina." The Communist students who voted for Trotskii in 1923-24 were held to be corrupted by intelligentshchina and the "pettybourgeois environment" of NEP. The youth cult of the poet Esenin after his suicide in 1925 was condemned in similar terms. NEP provided further grounds for resentment, since in social terms it meant an acceptance of privilege and inequality. The Civil War had acted as a leveller by temporarily reducing the entire urban population to near subsistence conditions. The effect of NEP was to make at least some sections of the population more prosperous. But at the same time there was widespread unemployment in the towns, affecting primarily unskilled workers and the young, but also intermittently touching skilled workers, trade unionists, and Party members. With some exceptions, the intelligentsia rose quickly from the poverty of the Civil War years. By the mid-twenties, the old intelligentsia of the capitals clearly constituted a privileged group that, in material terms, was part of an emerging "Soviet bourgeoisie." Specialists employed by government agencies earned very high salaries. Professors, despite their vociferous complaints of ill treatment, had high salaries and a number of special privileges in areas like housing priority and access to higher education for their children. White-collar workers as a group earned more than industrial workers, were less liable to unemployment, and were better housed.31 To many Communists—especially those whose standards of living had not risen with those of the professionals and "bureaucrats"—the cafes and cabarets of the NEP city symbolized a shameful retreat from revolutionary ideals. The clientele of these cafesNepmen, Soviet bureaucrats, members of the literary and artistic intelligentsia³2combined those apparently disparate categories of the urban population that came under heaviest attack during the cultural revolution. In discussing cultural revolution as a response to social grievances, it is also necessary to consider the cultural revolutionaries' claim that in 1927- 28 the Soviet system was threatened with an actual ‘bourgeois attack" (nastuplenie). To some extent, of course, this can be related to the supposed external threat provoking the war scare of 1927. But there were other specific causes of concern. In 1927-28 there was an outburst of anti-Communist organization by schoolchildren, sometimes overtly political, sometimes aggressively apolitical as in the case of the Esenin cult.33 The schools most affected were the "bourgeois" urban secondary schools. In the countryside, contemporary Soviet sources reported that the churches were making an unprecedented number of converts among peasant youth. Two million young people were said to be enrolled in religious youth organizations in 1928, and the Baptist “"Bapsomol" and Mennonite "Mensomol" supposedly had more members together than the Soviet Komsomol.34 The Shakhty trial itself represented a response to an alleged bourgeois threat. No evidence to support the concrete allegations of sabotage and conspiracy has been produced by Soviet historians in the post-Stalin period, and some Soviet accounts come close to saying outright that-the trial was fraudulent. Nevertheless, the possibility remains that, in a more general sense, rank-and-file Communists were inclined to believe that such a threat existed, and even perhaps to suspect the Party leadership of falling dangerously under the influence of its bourgeois specialists. This suspicion was not totally implausible. For example, at a congress of the scientific intelligentsia held early in 1927, Academician S. F. Oldenburg and Professor N. Ia. Marr launched a violent attack on Lunacharskii for not trying hard enough to raise scientific budgets and academic salaries. The scientists seemed to be implying that if Narkompros failed to satisfy them, they were confident of obtaining high-level Party support. Not only did Lunacharskii bear the attack meekly, but, when the incident was mentioned at a meeting of the Congress of Soviets shortly afterwards, a damper appeared to be put on criticism of the scientists.3s All this was reported in the daily press, leaving readers free to conclude that leaders of the organized non-Party intelligentsia thought that their irreplaceable skills allowed them to negotiate on equal terms with Soviet power, and that at least some persons in the Party leadership agreed. A few months later, in an article published in November 1927, Lunacharskii wrote in guarded terms of the revival of the prerevolutionary concept of "narodnicheskaia intelligentokratiia"—an almost untranslatable coinage suggesting a meritocracy of non-Marxist intellectuals. The intelligentsia, Lunacharskii said, were “awaiting a call from Soviet power to bring the most valuable elements of the aristocracy of the mind into the highest organs of the government." This was a dangerous situation, because there were people who "would like to create a conflict on the issue of participation of 'chosen intellectuals' in power." If such a conflict occurred, Lunacharskii warned, the bourgeois specialists' confidence that Narkompros and their other government employers could protect them might turn out to be misplaced.36 ## III It may be that genuine fears of an emerging and politically ambitious intelligentokratiia were in part responsible for the arrests and prison sentences that were one aspect of cultural revolution. If so, the Party leadership's fears evidently centered on the engineering profession and, to a lesser extent, the Academy of Sciences. In the Academy, more than one hundred workersincluding a few Academicians, a number of historians, and Secretary Oldenburg's assistant—were arrested in 1929 and 1930, and many of these spent the remainder of the cultural revolution period in exile or imprisonment.37 The engineers suffered en masse. The Smolensk Archive contains a report, dated June 1928, that twenty out of forty local engineers were under GPU suspicion, together with a request that “if possible, specialists should not be pulled out in bunches but gradually, so as not to denude industry."38 Kendall Bailes³9 quotes contemporary estimates of arrests of engineers ranging from two thousand to seven thousand—most of them presumably coming from the group of university-trained engineers currently working in large-scale. industry and numbering somewhat over ten thousand. Arrest, of course, was not necessarily followed by imprisonment. But a report of April 1929 from the engineering union vMBIT stated that “after the Shakhty affair the number of engineers in production jobs declined by 17%,"40 evidently through imprisonment and the flight of engineers fearing arrest. Another kind of purge—not involving arrest, but dismissal from a job or expulsion from a school—was going on at the same time. Its victims were "bureaucrats" and "social aliens," and for a number of reasons it deserves to be considered as a phenomenon distinct from the police purging, despite an area of overlap. The main difference between the two (besides the obvious difference to the individual victim between being fired and being arrested) was that antibureaucratic and social purging was to a large extent a product of local initiative and an expression of strongly felt grievances against privilege and the "bureaucratic degeneration" of the revolution. One could, of course, point to the existence of such grievances against the "bourgeois engineer"in the factory: workers commonly resented the privileges offered to persons associated with the old regime, and Communist directors often clashed with non-Party chief engineers. But the post-Shakhty arrests of engineers were not in any direct sense products of these grievances. Local authorities took action against the engineers as a result of central instructions. If they did not take action, they were rebuked, and in uncovering "wrecking and sabotage" they were expected to follow the Shakhty model quite closely.41 The pattern of antibureaucratic and social purging was different. Here, central initiative and instructions followed widespread local practice, and sometimes contradicted it. There was no original central model for local authorities to imitate. The decisions of the leadership that did most to stimulate social purging—for example, the high "proletarian percentages" recommended to universities and technical schools after the July 1928 plenum of the Central Committee, or the tightening of franchise qualifications for the Soviet elections of 1929were framed with other policy considerations in mind, and at most could only be said to imply a tolerance of social purging of institutions. But social purging seems to have been an activity that required only absence of discouragement from the center to flourish, for good Communists had always been suspicious of "bureaucrats" and "class aliens." Cultural revolution produced an upsurge of a condition that had been chronic since 1917 and remained so through the 193os. (On purging as an endemic phenomenon of Soviet life, see Lewin, this volume, pp. 56, 77.) Like most chronic conditions, this one had a tendency to flare up under stress. A society undergoing rapid industrialization, faced with food procurement problems, and aware of the possibility of foreign intervention, war, and internal collaboration with the enemy was under a high degree of stress. The result was that the activists of the society turned on those whoim they had traditionally suspected, using the familiar method of the institutional purge. The Komsomol initiated the antibureaucratic movement with its "light cavalry" raids on the government apparat during the rationalization campaign of 1927. These were mainly directed against corrupt and incompetent bureaucrats, but the offense was naturally judged more harshly if committed by an old “chinovnik" (Tsarist employee) of doubtful social origin. From 1928 purges of the apparat were conducted locally by whatever organization—Komsomol, Party, soviet or worker-peasant inspection—considered itself particularly vigilant. These purges are described by a Soviet historian as “spontaneous" and conducted essentially on the basis of social criteria. He reports that in the Irkutsk okrug, for example, "8oo personsformer officers, policemen and chinovniki—were driven out of government institutions. In their places 130 persons, mainly Communists and workers from industry, came to work."42 Local Party committees conducted extensive purges of the universities, expelling sons and daughters of kulaks, priests, merchants, Tsarist officers, and (less frequently) intellectuals and state employees. These purges come into a special and rather peculiar category, in terms of the source of initiative: they were more or less secretly sponsored by the Party Central Committee and more or less openly opposed by the republican education commissariats.43 Spontaneous local purging of the secondary sohools followed. Government condemnations of social purging were published in the central press, including Pravda, but had little effect. In early 1929, however, the situation became extremely complicated when Pravda published an editorial that, in somewhat Aesopian language, appeared to sanction school purging. This heartened local Komsomol groups, which were in the forefront of the school purging movement, and discouraged local apparatchiki of the educational departments who were trying to follow Narkompros instructions. In Smolensk, for example, the education department had just succeeded in convincing the local Party committee not to purge the schools when the Pravda editorial appeared. Soon after, “a group of young people turned up in the education department and announced that we had to start a purge."4s There was a functional explanation for the school purges, in that local authorities were under pressure to improve the “proletarian percentage" in the schools, and it was easier to expel or refuse to admit “socially alien" children than to recruit children of workers. But there were various and conflicting pressures on local authorities, and the actions of local Communists were often determined by their own assumption that only workers had an absolute right to education, while the rights of other groupslike their right to vote—were conditional and subject to instant withdrawal. The Russian Narkompros took a principled stand against social purging, but in doing so felt that it opposed the will of the working-class and Communist majority. As V. N. Iakovleva, the deputy commissar of education, remarked with unusual frankness, "If we educational leaders are going to say ‘yes' to all these decisions which the masses demand, and are not going to stand up for our point of view energetically, ... then the masses will not even learn from their mistakes. ... It is a question of cultural leadership, and our country is uncultured."46 The most lively antibureaucratic campaign was conducted by the Komsomol, whose activities resembled those reported of the “Red Guards" in the Chinese cultural revolution of the 196os. The Komsomol was a traditional enemy of bureaucracy, but for most of the NEP period its antibureaucratic enthusiasm was regarded with some suspicion by the Party leadership, since it was associated with a tendency to support Party Oppositions and accuse the leadership of "bureaucratic degeneracy." Stalin, it is true, encouraged the Komsomol attacks on bureaucracy in 1928, probably because the campaign against the "bureaucratic" trade union leadership, in particular, was serving a useful purpose from his point of view.47 But it would be a considerable over-simplification to see the Komsomol simply as a Stalinist tool in its cultural revolution campaign against bureaucracy. Komsomol'skaia pravda was firing in every direction, but its main targets make sense in terms of Komsomol priorities, not Stalin's: the newspaper spent more space in 1928 denouncing the (presumably “Stalinist") bureaucrats of Vesenkha for their stand on adolescent employment and training than it did in attacking the “Rightist" bureaucrats of the trade unions; and its favorite Rightist target was the politically insignificant conductor of the Bolshoi Theatre orchestra—the "bourgeois specialist" Golovanov, who was later to be a recipient of a Stalin Prize. The Komsomols were enthusiasts of cultural revolution, which they understood in the most iconoclastic sense as an overturning of “reactionary" and "bureaucratic" authority. They treated cultural revolution as a replay of the October Revolution and Civil War, in which many of them had been too young to participate. It sometimes seemed that they were engaged not so much in class war as in a class war game: “fortresses" like the traditionalist Bolshoi Theatre and the Academy of Sciences had to be "stormed"; cultural .“fronts" had to be defended against bourgeois counterattacks; popular illiteracy had to be liquidated by a “Cultural Army" with the aid of “cultural ambushes" (kul'tzasady), “cultural bombs" (kul'tbomby) and "cultural espionage" (kul'trazvedka).48 It was characteristic of the Komsomol that its chief culturalrevolutionary initiative—the “cultural campaign" or kul'tpokhod against illiteracy49should have been conducted in quasi-military style, and been directed not only against illiteracy but against the educational bureaucracy that had so far failed to cope with the problem. Adult education, including the teaching of literacy, came under the jurisdiction of local education departments. The departments, which were part of the local Sovietapparat with appointed officials, were regarded by the Komsomol as quintessentially bureaucratic organizations. As an alternative organizational form, the Komsomol Central Committee first proposed reviving the popularly elected “educational soviet" with which Narkompros had briefly experimented in 1918.s0 However, the 1928-29 kul'tpokhod against illitęracy produced its own organizational form—the "cultural General Staff' or kul'tshtab. This was established on an ad hoc basis, if possible under the patronage of the local Party committee, to recruit volunteers for the teaching of literacy and to raise funds for the purpose by eliciting voluntary contributions from the population and subsidies from local organizations like the trade unions, the cooperatives, and industrial enterprises. The kul'tshtaby had no paid officials and no budget. But in certain areas, like Saratov, their achievements in the literacy campaign of 1928–29 were considerable, and they were praised by the Party leadership for their energy, enthusiasm, and low-cost results.s1 The Party leadership clearly had no thought of dismantling the existing education departments and replacing them with improvised kul'tshtaby. But this was the objective of the kul'tpokhod enthusiasts. As the Saratov organizer put it, "we began [our] work outside the education system. . . . And that work was in fact an attack on the education authorities and an attempt to reorganize the education system on new bases."s2 The education departments had dual subordination to the local soviets and the central Narkompros. Narkompros might have been expected to react very negatively to demands for the abolition of local departments, but in fact—partly because the departments were not very effectively subordinated to Narkompros, partly because the Narkompros leadership itself was susceptible to arguments against bureaucracy and in favor of revolutionary popular participation in government—the reaction was relatively sympathetic. A popular mass movement for cultural revolution had developed outside the educational bureaucracy, Narkompros informed its local departments in an excited and somewhat incoherent document of mid 1929. Like every revolution, it proceeds spontaneously (stikhiino) to a considerable extent. Many of us did not understand, and some of us to this day do not understand, that the very cultural revolution which we urged and of which we talked so much is already developing before our eyes. Many people imagined cultural revolution as a process coming from above. . . . [But] in fact the cultural revolution, like all revolutions, arose and is developing as a mass movement, a movement which is continually changing its form. . . .53 Shortly afterwards, Pravda called for mass initiative in the rooting out of "bureaucratic methods," and the Party leadership approved the creation of educational soviets as advisory bodies to the education departments.s4 These were essentially not policies of leadership initiative, but of leadership response to what was already going on. Narkompros's response went even further. Early in 193o it was considering abandoning its departments altogether in favor of soviets with partly elected, partly delegated membership.ss However, with official sponsorship the spontaneous and potentially anarchic elements of antibureaucratic cultural revolution tended to disappear. The kul'tpokhod was warmly praised for its achievements in literacy at the Sixteenth Party Congress in the summer of 193o, but meanwhile the Central Committee had found a fine bureaucratic solution to the question of local forms of educational organization: the departments (otdely narodnogo obrazovaniia) were to remain, but they were now to be called organy narodnogo obrazovaniia to indicate repudiation of their past bureaucratic tendencies.56 The same waning of spontaneity can be observed in the movement of social purging. After a year of sporadic and disorganized social purging of institutions, the Sixteenth Party Conference (held in the spring of 1929) decided to authorize a formal purge of the entire government bureaucracy. The central commissariats were purged in the winter of 1929-30 by commissions of Rabkrin (the Commissariat of Worker-Peasant Inspection), backed up by brigades of workers from Moscow factories. Throughout the country about a million and a half Soviet employees went through the purge, and $1 6 4$ ,o0o were fired.s7 The purge was described as part of the general campaign against Rightism, exemplifying the militant proletarian class line. But it was in fact a bureaucratic purge of bureaucracy, quite efficiently conducted by Rabkrin in a spirit of organizational rationality.58 The theme of class enemies was comparatively little emphasized, at least in the center, and voluntary participation and initiative were almost completely absent. ## IV The nature of cultural revolution within the professions was complex. "Class war" in this area was conducted by and on behalf of groups that only claimed to be proletarian, but in fact consisted of Communist intellectuals of overwhelmingly white-collar or intelligentsia background. The Communist intellectuals were often extremely aggressive, but at the same time unsure of their own credentials. They tended to question their own value to society, suggest that factory workers could do their jobs better, and waver on the brink of demanding liquidation of the intelligentsia as a class. What one observer called “the disease of self-flagellation in a collective of intellectuals"s9 became epidemic during cultural revolution. In essence, cultural revolution in the professions meant that Communists were encouraged to go for all-out victory in existing professional conflicts. To some extent, these conflicts were already perceived in classwar terms—particularly in the universities, where the so-called proletarian nucleus of students really was predominantly working-class, and the professors often emphasized their own "bourgeois" or prerevolutionary orientation. During NEP, from the standpoint of Communists in the professions, there was a confrontation of the new Communist culture and the “establishment" culture of the old intelligentsia. The old intelligentsia, however, saw no such cultural confrontation, but only a political threat to culture per se. (The threat, as the old intelligentsia saw it, came from the regime rather than from the Communist professionals, most of whom were young, former students, and not to be taken seriously.) Thus, paradoxically, both Communist and "bourgeois" intellectuals regarded themselves as underdogs during NEP, each group considering that the other had special and undeserved advantages. The most striking example of an existing and already politicized professional conflict was in literatureprobably the only profession where it could be claimed that Communists achieved power during cultural revolution almost entirely as a result of their own efforts. The Communist militants' group was RAPP, an association founded by young intellectuals in the early twenties for the promotion of proletarian literature. By 1924, RAPP was already clamoring for a mandate from the Central Committee to establish the hegemony of“proletarian" Communists over "bourgeois fellow-travellers," and the 1925 Central Committee decree on literature was in effect a refusal of such a mandate. RAPP's original base was the Komsomol, and in particular the Komsomol journal Molodaia gvardiia. This connection is important, for in many respects RAPp's development in the twenties is best understood not in the context of literary debate but in that of generational conflict within the Communist movement. Both RAPP and Komsomol leaderships were chronic sufferers from the disease that Bukharin called "revolutionary avant-gardism." They tended to suspect the older generation of succumbing to the temptations of power, losing revolutionary momentum, and falling into bureaucratic lethargy. They were potential supporters of any "revolutionary" opposition (and, by the same token, enemies of any moderate opposition to a revolutionary leadership). Even after thorough purging of Trotskyites and Zinovievites, the RAPP (then VAPP) and Komsomol Central Committee position on social and cultural questions was hard to distinguish from the platform of the 1926–27 Opposition in its criticism of social privileges and inequality, emphasis on the grievances of workingclass youth, contempt for "bourgeois" literature and "bourgeois"schools, and calls for Communist vigilance and class war.60 Nevertheless, the RAPp leaders commended themselves to the Party leadership by repenting their former Oppositionism and savagely attacking oppositionist tendencies (real or imagined) in other literary groups. By 1928 RAPp, still lacking a formal mandate, had assumed leadership in the campaign to unmask the “rightist danger" in the arts and scholarship. Between 1928 and 1932, the RAPP leaders exercised a repressive and cliquish dictatorship over literary publication and criticism. This dictatorship, supposedly in the name of the proletarian Party, was in fact not under effective Central Committee control.61 During the cultural revolution, there was intense competition between the RApp leaders and the Communist radicals of the Communist Academy and Institute of Red Professors (“schoolboys playing professors" [professorstvuiushchie shkol'niki], as a RAPp leader unkindly described them62). Protagonists on both sides had political ambitions within the Party and attempted to discredit each other by accusations of political deviation. This tendency was widespread among Communist intellectuals, and was, of course, encouraged by the use of cultural revolution as a weapon against the Right Opposition in the Party. (The accusations of "left deviation," made in 1930 and 1931 against those who had been too extreme in attacking the “rightist danger" or had former Trotskyite connections, reflected a rather heavy-handed attempt by the Party leadership to subdue the militant cultural revolutionaries and normalize the atmosphęre in the professions.) The relationship of the Party leadership to the activists of cultural revolution has puzzled both Western and Soviet historians. The activists usually claimed to have a Party mandate, but it was rare that anything resembling a mandate was actually published or even written down. One of the best descriptions of the relationship came from the first of RAPp's Communist victims (Voronskii, editor of the literary journal Krasnaia nov'), who wrote indignantly to the Central Committee press department: "You have unleashed the young comrades, given them such rights and privileges that they have lost all sense of proportion, lost humility. . . . You have unleashed them, comrade Gusev."63 The image of “unleashing" can be applied to groups other than the young Communist militants. Cultural revolution also unleashed the "visionaries" (as Frederick Starr describes them in this volume) and "cranks" (David Joravsky's term) of the NEP period, many of whom are memorably described in Fulop-Miller's The Mind and Face of Bolshevism.64 These characters were usually outsiders in their professions, excited by the revolution but not necessarily Communists, with a radically innovative theory and a small group of committed disciples. In the 192os, all Communists shared to some degree a vision of the future society, transformed by collective spirit, rational scientific organization, and technology. In the Civil War period, and again during the cultural revolution, this vision tended to become intensified and at the same time divorced from practical reality. Communist visions of Utopia and peasant visions of the coming of Antichrist (frequently reported during the First Five-Year Plan period) arose from the same perception that the familiar world was being destroyed. Until Stalin explicitly denied it in the middle of 193o,65 many Communist intellectuals thought—as they had during the Civil War—that Engels' prophecy of the withering away of the state was already being realized. Pashukanis's theory of the withering away of law (see Sharlet, this volume) and Shulgin's theory of the withering away of the school (see Lapidus, this volume) gained great impetus from cultural revolution simply because legal and educational institutions seemed to have begun a spontaneous process of self-liquidation. It was observation, not authority or theoretical argument, that gave such ideas currency. Because cultural revolution was, among other things, an attack on accepted ideas, most of the ideas that flourished under its auspices were radical, and some were distinctly eccentric. Every Communist with a private blueprint, scheme, or invention felt that cultural revolution spoke directly to him. This was also true of non-Communist intellectuals whose projects had previously been ridiculed or ignored. Even government institutions, urged to throw off habits of bureaucratic conservatism, responded to cultural revolution by subsidizing the innovators. Radical plans for the Socialist City were devised by architects and accepted by planning organizations and building trusts (see Starr, this volume). A government commission considered plans for calendar reform, and some enthusiasts counted 1917 as Year One of the new era. The Institute of Labor, run by a working-class poet, contracted with Vesenkha to train a new labor force on the principles of conditioned reflex. Kagan-Shabshai, a private entrepreneur in the field of engineering training with a grudge against what he called “engineering intellectuals,"made very profitable contracts with the industrial trusts to train engineers at “shock-work" tempo. Professor Marr's unorthodox Japhetic theory of language was exalted. Professor Iavorskii's theory of “melodic rhythm," ignored by the reactionary professors of the Moscow Conservatory, was championed by Komsomol music students. The pedologists, who had been struggling to establish a new discipline on the borders of pedagogy and psychology, finally broke down the barriers to their professional establishment in the schools.66 Communist intellectuals had tended to have an uneasy relationship with their own disciplines, as was natural both for the Old Bolshevik generation, whose first profession was revolution, and for the young Communists, who felt themselves to be professional outsiders. They might tend toward intellectual abolitionism in their own discipline, like Pokrovskii in history; they might become reductionists, like the literary "sociologists" or the reflexologists in psychology; they might recommend the transformation of literature· into journalism or theater into "biomechanics."Cultural revolution brought these transformational and abolitionist tendencies to a climax. Communist intellectuals began to predict the imminent merging of town and countryside, education and industrial production, art and life. These predictions were a kind of running commentary on contemporary processes of institutional disintegration and social flux. They were predictions in which hope and fear were mingled: the cultural revolutionaries' favorite concept of “withering away" (otmiranie), however optimistic in Marxist terms, was still in Russian translation a way of dying. ## V We come finally to the movement for “proletarian advancement" (vydvizhenie), which was the positive corollary of the campaign against the "bourgeois" intelligentsia and the social purging of the bureaucracy. This theme, very much emphasized in the Soviet literature on "the forming of the Soviet intelligentsia," has been almost ignored in the Western literature. One of the reasons, undoubtedly, is that a great deal of Western research has concentrated on the cultural professions, in which the attack on “bourgeois"authorities was carried out by Communist intellectuals whose only claim to be “proletarian" was their Party membership. Cultural revolution had, indeed, both pseudoproletarian and genuinely proletarian aspects. In the sphere of pseudoproletarianism, Communist intellectuals sought to make contacts with industrial workers in order to establish their own legitimacy, and Soviet institutions put themselves under the patronage of local factories in order to avoid accusations of bureaucracy. In the rhetoric of cultural revolution, working-class opinion was the touchstone of good and evil, and working-class participation was essential to the success of any undertaking. Thus writers began to read their latest works before factory audiences and worked as consultants on collective histories of industrial enterprises (see Clark, this volume). Universities invited workers to participate in the reelection of professors. Factory brigades were organized to assist the Rabkrin purge of government commissariats. After receiving delegations of Moscow workers (organized by the Komsomol) protesting against its policy of “class neutrality" in education, the collegium of Narkompros began holding its meetings in factories to hear proletarian criticism of its decisions.67 The substantive proletarian aspect of cultural revolution was the promotion of workers into responsible jobs and their recruitment to higher education. This was a period of enormous expansion of high-status professional and administrative jobs. Between the end of 1928 and the end of 1932, the numbers of engineers employed in the civilian sector of the Soviet economy rose from 18,o0o to 74,o0o, while the number of professionals employed in administration, government, and exchange rose from 63,000 to 119,00o.68 The policy of the Soviet leadership was to promote industrial workers and Communists of working-class origin into these jobs. The process of promotion usually involved training at a technicum or higher technical school and was often accompanied by entrance into the Party. The radical reorganization of Soviet higher education in the First Five-Year Plan years was in large part determined by the worker-promotion policy and the new emphasis on technical training. The scope of worker promotion through education cannot be judged with complete accuracy because forged documents of social origin were in use, and children of white-collar and peasant families could become “proletarian" by working for a few years in a factory after leaving school. But, even allowing for exaggeration, the figures are impressive: over 120,o00 university students in 1931 were classified as workers or children of workers, as against 40,000 in 1928.69 By the beginning of the Second Five-Year Plan (1933), half the directors of industrial enterprises and their deputies were former workers.70 But this was only the top stratum of upwardly mobile workers within industry. As the number of jobs at all levels increased, the plants organized their own training schemes and promoted from within. Unskilled workers moved into skilled jobs; skilled workers became foremen, masters, and technicians; technicians became engineers. The school system was also reorganized in a way that maximized working-class access to secondary and higher education. For a few years during the First Five-Year Plan, the "bourgeois" general secondary school virtually ceased to exist, while the working-class factory apprenticeship (Fzu) schools expanded their enrollment from 1.8 million in 1928 to 3.3 million in 1931.71 The Fzu schools, established in the early twenties to train adolescents entering industry, were supposed to be serving the same purpose during the First Five-Year Plan. In practice, however, the majority of apprentices took the opportunities offered to them as working-class students with secondary education, and went on to technicums and universities.72 The worker-promotion policy was clearly part of the “revolution from above." But there is at least a prima facie case for seeing the policy as to some extent a leadership response to working-class grievances of the NEP period. According to Narkompros reports of the twenties (based on substantial though unsystematic sampling of public opinion), workers viewed university education as a right won for the working class by the revolution. When working-class access to university was limited, as it was during NEP, this was regarded as a betrayal of promises. But working-class families were unwilling to keep their children in the upper grades of the "bourgeois" general secondary school. Young adult workers should have the opportunity to go to university through the rabfak, and receive a stipend. For working-class adolescents, the preferred school was the FZu, which taught a trade, paid students an industrial wage, and was free of "bourgeois" influence.73 The education system that emerged during the First Five-Year Plan highly irrational from many points of view, including that of industry corresponded closely to this pattern. But its most striking feature was the emphasis on recruiting adults without a full secondary education to university. This requirement was dictated by the decision of the leadership to send the Party to school. The typical Party member in 1928 was a former worker with primary education.74 Earlier in the twenties it had been assumed that the future Communist elite should be trained in Marxist social science. But the First Five-Year Plan decision was to train Communists especially former workers, and including future administratorsin the engineering schools. The imperative in this situation was an educatjon system that allowed adults with primary education to enter higher technical schools and gave priority in enrollment to working-class Communists. ## VI Stalin's rehabilitation of the bourgeois engineers (June 1931)75 and condemnation of the fruitless theorizing of Communist intellectuals (in the letter to the editors of Proletarskaia revoliutsiia published a few months later76) mark the end of official sponsorship of cultural revolution. In some areas, this intervention brought ongoing developments to a jarring halt. In others, the revolutionary impulse had already exhausted itself and combatants were locked in bitter scholastic disputes and mutual denunciation. With or without intervention, there was a natural time limit on cultural revolution as an enthusiastic dismantling of the institutions and conventions of NEP. The pressures for a restoration of order and rebuilding of institutions were, even in the comparatively short run, irresistible. The finite limits on cultural revolution are particularly evident in the sphere of worker promotion—not the promotion of working-class Communists, which continued at a high level for some years, but the promotion of workers from the factory bench. By 1931, when the factories took the first steps to tighten labor discipline and pull workers back from outside activities,77 schools and universities were already finding it difficult to meet their proletarian quotas. Recruitment at the factory encountered increasing resistance from the enterprises, which were experiencing an acute shortage of skilled labor. The young workers willing and able to go on to higher education had already volunteered. The traditional working class (now called kadrovye or potomstvennye rabochie) was depleted by promotion and assignment to the new construction sites, and was swamped by the vast influx of peasants into the industrial labor force. There were not only practical but also conceptual problems in fighting cultural class war on behalf of a proletariat whose members were to a large extent peasants recently uprooted by collectivization. The imagery of the early thirties was not of battle but of passing on the torch. The Komsomol no longer spoke of kul'tpokhod but of kul'testafeta, or cultural relay-race. In the factories and new construction sites, experienced workers became exemplars and teachers (shefy) to the new arrivals, verbally transmitting the necessary skills and traditions of the industrial working class. Social discrimination was gradually dropped in educational admissions. The education system was reorganized along lines that were conservative and traditionalist even in comparison with NEp, let alone the ultraradicalism of the cultural revolution. In literature, predictably, the militant proletarians proved difficult to displace, but in 1932 RAPp was dissolved, and by 1934 a new Union of Soviet Writers incorporating all Communist and "bourgeois" groups had been created. In scholarship, the Communist Academy—center of cultural-revolutionary activity gradually conceded authority to the Old Academy of Sciences and the reconstituted universities. Formerly disgraced "bourgeois" scholars were rehabilitated. Formerly arrested "bourgeois" engineers were released, usually to occupy positions comparable with those they had involuntarily left. There are three groups whose fate after cultural revolution is of particular interest to us—the Communist intellectuals who had carried out the cultural revolution, the non-Party intellectuals whe had suffered from it, and the promoted workers and worker-Communists who formed the core of the new "Soviet intelligentsia." The Communist intellectuals, suffering the proverbial fate of those who go for a ride on a tiger, turned out to be the ultimate victims of cultural revolution. The general assumption during the cultural revolution had been that the militant radicals had the endorsement of the Stalinist leadership: when Bubnov, for example, replaced the conciliatory Lunacharskii as head of Narkompros in 1929, he found it natural to turn to Shulgin (theorist of the withering away of the school), not because he knew anything about his ideas, but because of the Communist "fighting spirit" he sensed in him.78 Yet it has already been pointed out that the Stalinist endorsement, if it existed at all, was really a very cautious one. On a few occasions Stalin encouraged belligerent activity against Rightists and bourgeois intellectuals,79 but he also took occasional action to protect bourgeois victims like the writer Bulgakov, and in a private letter expressed the opinion (which at the time nobody else could possibly have expressed) that the whole campaign against "rightism" in art was based on an absurd premise.80 In many fields, the Communist faction-fighting during cultural revolution discredited and demoralized the participants, distracted them from their real work, and ended some promising professional developments of the NEP period. The Communist intelligentsia was far too deeply involved in ideological and factional politics to respond to leadership demands for practically useful work. In fact, it was "politicized" to the point of being virtually useless to the Soviet regime, except in the fields of journalism and agitprop. In the aftermath of cultural revolution, those of the Communist intellectuals who were not permanently excommunicated as “"left" or “right" deviationists were left to make the best of professional careers among presumably hostile ex-bourgeois colleagues and vydvizhentsy of completely different life experience and outlook. A few former cultural revolutionariesthe philosophers Iudin and Mitin of the Communist Academy, the writer Fadeev of RAPp—held prominent positions through the Stalin period, but many more suffered premature eclipses in the purges of the late thirties. In general, the young Communists trained for leadership during NEP in such institutions as the Sverdlov Communist University and the Institute of Red Professors turned into something of a lost generation. What was required of a future Communist leader in the Stalin period was not Marxist social science and polemical skill, but technical training and experience in industrial administration. The old intelligentsia came out of cultural revolution in better shape than its members had probably expected, or than Western historians have generally recognized. A very large number of “bourgeois" engineers served time in prison or at work under GPU supervision; some distinguished historians died in exile; and many more intellectuals underwent psychological suffering as a result of the cultural revolutionaries' attacks. However, the old intelligentsia as a whole had not been subject to mass arrest, like priests, or mass deportation, like peasants. Its members (except for the relatively small number of engineers working as convict specialists) were not sent out of the capitals to the new construction sites or to the countryside to teach in rural schools, as apparently happened in the Chinese cultural revolution. No form of labor conscription was ever proposed, even for such socially useful specialists as doctors, teachers, and agronomists. Despite the social purging of scholarly institutions, the acute shortage of specialists in all fields meant that only in exceptional circumstances was a "purged"specialist left without professional employment. The result was that, when the cultural revolution ended and the regime was ready to offer compensation, the old intelligentsia was in a position to receive it. The immediate improvementnot only in comparison with the period of cultural revolution, but also in comparison with NEpwas that the "bourgeois" non-Party intellectuals were no longer subject to attack within their professions by organized Communist groups, or to harassment on grounds of social origin. In many fields, the old professional “establishment" won back its previous authority. Arrested and exiled specialists returned to responsible jobs (sometimes even the same jobs they had held at the time of arrest). Scientific leadership returned to the Academy of Sciences. Traditional artistic institutions like the Bolshoi Theatre recovered preeminence. But there were more positive gains. As part of a general process of social differentiation in the thirties, the privileges of the intelligentsia relative to society as a whole greatly increased. The leaders of the cultural intelligentsia became part of the highest Soviet elite. The “cultural achievements" of the Soviet Unionwhich essentially meant the achievements of the old "bourgeois" intelligentsia during the thirtieswere acclaimed and rewarded by the regime.81 A genuine poll of intelligentsia opinion taken, say, in 1934, would surely have recorded increased satisfaction with the regime (not only in comparison with 1929, but also with 1924) and expectations of further improvement to come. But the “class war" of cultural revolution was waged on behalf of the proletariat, and it was surely the proletarian vydvizhentsy (and to a lesser extent vydvizhentsy from the peasantry) who emerged as its chief beneficiaries. During cultural revolution, hundreds of thousands of workers from the factory and Communists of working-class origin were promoted into technical jobs, management, and administration, or recruited to higher education.82 Working-class children were taken into secondary vocational schools in unprecedented numbers, and the vocational schools in this period acted as channels to higher education. In the years after the cultural revolution, the Soviet Union—like other societies in the process of industrialization—continued to provide great opportunities for upward social mobility simply because of the expansion in numbers of skilled labor and professional and managerial jobs. Although children of white-collar parents had a much better statistical chance of entering higher education during the thirties and forties than children of workers (and children of peasants were in a definitely inferior position), the expansion in higher-status jobs was great enough to leave ample room for the talented and ambitious children of all social classes; and the network of evening and correspondence schools established from 1932 provided additional opportunities for those who had not entered higher education directly. Nevertheless, the generation promoted during the cultural revolution remained unique in many respects. It was the only group whose promotion—from skilled industrial work, or lower-level political and administrative positionswas the result of a conscious leadership policy and an intensive general campaign. Furthermore, it was the group that was the primary beneficiary of a second social upheaval, the great purge of 1937, which removed much of the top stratum of Communist managerial and administrative personnel. The careers of Aleksei Kosygin and Dmitrii Ustinov (the present Minister of Defence)both working-class vydvizhentsy of the First Five-Year Plan period, graduating respectively in 1935 and 1934, and by 1941 holding ministerial appointments in the government of the USSR—exemplify, if in extreme form, the dizzying rise of thousands. The First Five-Year Plan vydvizhentsy are, in fact, the "Brezhnev generation"—the core of the sub-Politburo elite in the forties under Stalin, and of the top political leadership of the fifties and sixties. This is the generation that, more than any other, has influenced the evolution of Soviet political and social culture over almost four decades. It is appropriate to speculate, in conclusion, on the ways in which the experience of cultural revolution may have influenced the attitudes of this generation to culture and social control. The vydvizhentsy were a very different group from the Communist intelligentsia formed during NEP, which provided the militant activists of cultural revolution. Those sent to university during the First Five-Year Plan were in a position to observe the cultural revolutionaries' activities first hand, and it seems likely that many of their observations were unfavorable. The vydvizhentsy, by all accounts, were a highly motivated and practical-minded group, interested in acquiring useful knowledge as efficiently as possible. Their studies were undoubtedly made more difficult by the methodological experimentation and organizational chaos produced in the universities by cultural revolution. The militants of cultural revolution were not only experimenters on the grand scale, but also ideological hair-splitters and obsessive factionfighters. It would not be surprising if many vydvizhentsy came to the conclusionreinforced by the post-1931 decisions of the Party leadershipthat intellectuals of the cultural-revolutionary type were a dangerous breed: factious, vicious, anarchic, and totally lacking in common sense. Certainly the Party leadership of the thirties and forties, of which the “Brezhnev generation" was an increasingly important part, seemed inclined to such an opinion and determined to avoid any repetition of the chaotic .“unleashing" of the First Five-Year Plan period. In the course of the thirties, the vydvizhentsy rose into responsible positions and, in most cases, assumed the life style appropriate to a social elite. The new elite's aspirations towards the kul'turnost' of classical ballet and orange lamp shades in the postwar period have been vividly described by Vera Dunham.83 These aspirations were already evident in the second half of the thirties: a landmark of changing attitudes was the 1936 meeting of “wives of industrial managers," attended by Stalin and other Politburo members, at which women of the new elite described their philanthropic efforts to introduce kul'turnost' into the factory barracks and communal dining rooms.84 Promotion of the “Brezhnev generation" was the major product of cultural revolution, and the subsequent embourgeoisement of the new elite formed the very unrevolutionary cultural climate of the Stalin period. But one cannot discount the importance of the First Five-Year Plan cultural revolution in establishing a model for radical social change. When Khrushchev—one of the older of the First Five-Year Plan vydvizhentsy— sought to initiate such change in the late fifties, he not only revived ideas and terminology characteristic of the cultural revolution but also (notably in the education realm) mobilized some former cultural revolutionaries to the task. Like all complex phenomena, the cultural revolution left a complex legacy. But it is a legacy whose understanding is crucial to our interpretation of Soviet historical development.