# Rural Scholars and the Cultural Revolution Susan Gross Solomon The intellectual and social pluralism that had characterized Soviet cultural life in the 19zos was brought to an end by the so-called cultural revolution or the seizure of power in culture by “"proletarian" intellectuals, which began in late ·1928.1 When the revolution had spent its force less than four years later, Soviet cultural life bore but a superficial resemblance to what it had been for most of the NEP period. The cultural institutions that had enjoyed a fair measure of autonomy in the administration and conduct of their work were firmly under the control of the Party. The intellectual community had been purged of many of its most brilliant members, non-Party and Party alike; these men had been replaced by individuals whose names were on the whole unknown in the arts and scholarship. And the content of most fields of culture had been radically altered; traditional concerns now deemed "counterrevolutionary"were set aside in favor of new preoccupations·that fit the Party's definition of truth and beauty. Among Western students of Soviet history, it has been customary to regard the cultural revolution of 1928–31 as imposed from above, brought about primarily by the intervention of the Communist party in the conduct of the arts and scholarship.2 According to this view, there were important debates within the cultural professions in the 192os, but the fundamental hostility in Soviet cultural life in the NEP period was that between the cultural professions, which were struggling to preserve their autonomy, and the Communist party, which was gradually extending its hegemony over every sphere of Soviet life. The proponents of this view have contended that at the end of the twenties the Party changed its tactics, turning, as David Joravsky has put it, "from fostering to forcing."3 From 1928 on, the Party bent every effort to control culture and, in the face of such intense political pressure, the intelligentsia capitulated. This traditional view has recently been challenged by Sheila Fitzpatrick. On the basis of her research on the politics of Soviet literature and education in the NEP period, Fitzpatrick suggests that much of the initial impetus for the harnessing of the cultural professions came from below, that is "from within the lower ranks of the party, the Komsomol, and Communist vigilante groups such as the proletarian writers and the militant atheists (Militant Godless)."4 In developing this idea, Fitzpatrick draws attention to the conflicts between "bourgeois" and “proletarian" intellectuals that divided the cultural professions throughout the 19zos. According to her, these conflicts were bitter because, more often than not, divergent political commitments were overlaid with differences in the professional standing and orientation of the disputants; in many a profession, young Communist intellectuals new to their field and somewhat ambivalent about its norms found themselves subordinate to non-Communist intellectuals who occupied the most important posts and who regarded themselves as the guardians of professional standards. In Fitzpatrick's view, the in-fighting within the cultural professions was inherently explosive. It was contained in the pre-1928 period only because the Party discouraged the escalation of conflict; as soon as the Party ceased its policy of active discouragement in 1928, the young Communist intellectuals, aggrieved because of their inferior status and position, converted the conflicts into open warfare. Fitzpatrick does not deny the importance of the Party's intervention in cultural life at the end of the twenties, but she places primary emphasis on the tensions that existed within the professions prior to that intervention. At first glance, the difference between the traditional and the new interpretations of the cultural revolution appears to be one of emphasis. Both interpretations accord some importance to the factors of Party intervention and professional in-fighting; the two accounts differ only over the weight assigned each factor. Further reflection suggests, however, that the difference between the two accounts goes far beyond the question of accent. It is rooted in a fundamental disagreement over the cohesion of the cultural professions in the NEP period. The traditional view seems to assume that the intellectuals who were engaged in the disputes were united by a feeling of professional solidarity that transcended their expressed differences. The new view, on the other hand, implies that the cleavages that gave rise to the intraprofessional disputes were so basic as to outweigh the tendency to professional solidarity. The disagreement on this point is an important one, for it raises the more general question of the viability of the NEP experiment in culture. The more recent interpretation of the events of 1928-31 would suggest that the coexistence of social and intellectual opposites, which was the hallmark of Soviet cultural life in the twenties, was so uneasy that some sort of crisis in culture was likely. The traditional view would imply that the NEP experiment in cultural pluralism did have some chance of success because within the intellectual community there was a sense of solidarity that overrode particular disputes. Further examination of these important issues would require detailed studies of the controversies that divided intellectuals working in various fields in the 192os. Optimally, such studies would have a dual focus. First, they would analyze the patterns of cleavage in a cultural profession. How did those working in the field divide according to intellectual position, social profile, professional orientation, institutional affiliation, and political commitments? Were the cleavages overlapping or cross-cutting? And second, the studies would examine the cohesion among intellectuals working in a field. How much substantive consensus was there? On what factors was this consensus based (agreement on theory, method, important questions, criteria of good work)? How much social solidarity was there in the profession? Were the disputants loyal only to their subgroups or did they demonstrate some allegiance to the profession as a whole? What were the bases of solidarity (institutional affiliation, distribution of power and authority among intellectuals, shared professional norms, training)? The assessment of the intellectual in-fighting within a range of cultural professions is well beyond the scope of any single paper. Here we examine in detail the controversy that divided intellectuals working in one field of scholarship—rural social studies.6 ## RURAL SOCIAL STUDIES IN THE 1920s In the first decade of Soviet power, the field of rural studies was the scene of great activity. There had been research on the Russian countryside as early as the last two decades of the nineteenth century,' but the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 brought with it unprecedented interest in the rural sector, upon which depended not only the economic prosperity but also the political stability of the new regime. With the Soviet government now assuming the role of patron and client of all the sciences, the field of rural inquiry burgeoned. New teaching and research centers were founded, new journals were created, and talented young people were recruited. As the field grew, its intellectual content broadened. In the first half of the 19zos (as in the previous decade), the most vital area of rural inquiry was agricultural economics. At mid-decade, the field expanded to include questions characteristic of rural sociology.8 The intellectual growth of rural inquiry was accompanied by its institutional development. For most of the 192os the center of the rural studies profession was the Timiriazev Agricultural Academy.9 With this venerable institution, founded in 1865 on the Petrovsko-Razumovskoe estate outside Moscow, were affiliated a majority of the scholars interested in thé study of the Russian countryside. In the course of the 192os, the Academy expanded its teaching and research activities. It undertook an active policy of recruiting students, so that by mid-decade it was able to boast an enrollment of three thousand undergraduate and graduate students—a figure that made it the largest such institution in all of Europe.1º Two new research institutes were created within the Academy, one on soil science and the other on agricultural economics.11 The latter, whose full title was the Scientific Research Institute on Agricultural Economics (Nauchnoissledovatel'skii institut sel'skokhoziaistvennoi ekonomii), was responsible for some of the most creative projects undertaken during the NEP period. 12 Despite its prerevolutionary origins and its largely non-Marxist faculty, the Timiriazev Academy had close relations with the Soviet government. 13 The Institute on Agricultural Economics served as the research arm of the Ministry of Agriculture, and the Academy's journal, Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, was published in conjunction with that Ministry.14 At the end of 1925 a second center for research on the rural sector came into being. In keeping with the regime's new emphasis on the creation of institutions in which a Marxist science of society could be forged, 15 the Communist Academy opened the doors of its Agrarian Section. 16 Within but a few years of its creation, this Section became the most significant center for Marxist research on the rural sector and as such constituted a genuine alternative to the Timiriazev Academy and its institutes.17 The scholarship produced in these institutions was well known for its quality both inside and outside Russia. Because rural inquiry was totally state-supported and because the countryside was a major concern of practical policy, the rural scholars' choice of problems for study was often influenced by governmental policy commitments. This did not mean that the studies produced were simply apologies for official policy; in fact, in the period 1921-29, the instances in which a scholar adjusted his findings to support the substance of Party policy were exceedingly rare.18 For the scholars engaged in the study of the Soviet rural sector, the decade of the 192os was a turbulent one. Between 1923 and mid-1928 the field was rent by a scientific controversy. The participants in the dispute were divided into two groups: the members of the Organization-Production school (organizatsionno-produktivnaia shkola) and the Agrarian-Marxists (agrarniky-Marksisty). Though part of a single profession, these two groups were remarkably dissimilar: their members differed from one another in age, professional standing, attitude toward scholarship, intellectual preoccupations, and political sympathies. For most of the decade, the Organization-Production scholars were the undisputed leaders of the field. 19 Agricultural economists of some distinction, these men held major posts in the Timiriazev Academy well before 1917. The Organization-Production scholars were not Marxists by conviction nor did they become members of the Communist party after the Revolution,2º yet they continued to teach and conduct research in the Timiriazev Academy throughout the 192os, thus taking a leading role in the training of the first generation of Soviet agricultural specialists. Led by A. V. Chaianov,21 the youngest member of the group, these scholars were among the principal contributors to the Timiriazev Academy's journal and to the series of research reports (trudy) issued by the Academy's Institute on Agricultural Economics. The attitude of the members of the Chaianov group toward their work was that of "cosmopolitans."22 Anxious to preserve their reputations for excellence outside as well as inside Russia, they exchanged research findings on a regular basis with foreign colleagues whom they treated as an important reference group. The second set of scholars, the Agrarian-Marxists, were younger rural sociologists. With the exception of their leader, L. N. Kritsman,23 the members of this group came to maturity after the Revolution.24 In the first half of the 192os, they were still doing graduate work in the Timiriazev Academy, where they studied with and worked as research assistants to the members of the Organization-Production school. The Agrarian-Marxists' careers began effectively at the end of 1925, when they joined the newly created Agrarian Section of the Communist Academy.25 Here they became involved in editing the section's journal, Na agrarnom fronte, 2⁶ and in conducting research on peasant social structure. For this research, the members of the Kritsman group soon acquired reputations in Russia as the foremost Marxist students of the countryside. In the main, the attitude of these young researchers toward their work was that of "locals."27 Unlike their teachers, they evinced little interest in securing recognition from colleagues abroad. Even after the controversy was resolved in mid-1928, there was no peace for the scholars engaged in rural studies. Beginning in late 1928 the field was engulfed by the cultural revolution. Within short order, Marxist credentials became a prerequisite for any scholar who proposed to do research on the Soviet countryside. And the Party was established as the final arbiter of truth in rural studies. 28 As a consequence of these developments, the most productive period in the history of Soviet rural inquiry came to a close. For a consideration of the problems in Soviet history raised at the outset of this article, the case of rural studies has a major advantage. Within the course of a single decade, the field experienced both a protracted internal controversy and the direct intervention of the Communist party in the conduct of inquiry. This combination of events enables one to assess the relative impact upon the fate of rural inquiry of the factors of professional in-fighting and political intervention. ## THE CONTROVERSY: 1923 TO MID-1928 The controversy between the Organization-Production and Agrarian-Marxist scholars took place in two distinct stages. The first lasted from 1923 to early 1927; the second began in early 1927 and ended in mid-1928 with the resolution of the dispute. Both the issues and the conduct of the disputants varied considerably from the first to the second stage. ## The First Stage: 1923-27 In the first phase of the controversy, the two groups of scholars were engaged in a dispute over the goals for their field. They differed primarily over the ranking of research questions; each school considered its own work primary and that of its rival peripheral. Throughout their existence as a distinct school of inquiry, the Organization-Production scholars focussed their attention on the Russian family farm (trudovoe khoziaistvo), a commodity-producing economic unit that functioned without benefit of hired labor. They were interested in explaining the operation of this form of farming, which, according to their estimate, constituted 90 percent of Russian agriculture; and they were concerned with devising methods of streamlining the farm's activities. This mixture of theoretical and practical objectives that characterized Organization-Production work in agricultural economics had its origins in the early work experiences of the members of this group. During the first decade and a half of the twentieth century, most of the Organization-Production scholars were employed as agronomists by the zemstva. 29 Their work in the villages of Russia shaped their social philosophy and defined their intellectual interests. Having witnessed at first hand the limited success of the Stolypin Land Reforms of 19o6–1o, they became convinced that the redistribution of land would not in itself alleviate agricultural backwardness. What was needed was the thoroughgoing reorganization of farming—the intensification of production, the introduction of complex machinery, and the relegation of certain farm tasks to the rural cooperatives. Such reorganization could not be legislated from above, they insisted; it could be effected only by slow and patient work with the peasantry. Thus it was that these men saw agronomy rather than politics as the means to rural improvement. They demanded of the agronomy in which they placed their faith that it be “scientific," founded on a precise understanding of the principles underlying the organization of agriculture and the behavior of the peasant farmer. Their own observations of peasant life reinforced by the comments of other agricultural officials led them to suspect that the predominant form of agriculture in Russia, the family farm, was an unusual economic unit whose springs of action remained to be discovered. To accomplish this important task, the agronomists turned from practical careers to the full-time study of the family farm. The Organization-Production scholars approached their subject as microeconomists. They focussed on the internal dynamics of the family farm and paid no attention—at least initially—to the relation of that farm to the rural sector as a whole. 3º In defense of this focus, the members of the Chaianov group argued that without the study of the operation of the individual farm, all research on the countryside would be superficial.31 Their explanation of the dynamics of the family farm began with an analysis of the psychology of the family farmer. The head of the family farm, so ran the theory, was not acquisitive by nature; he was interested only in satisfying the consumption needs of the members of his family. The pursuit of this objective led the farmer to behave in an unusual way. Until his family's needs were met he would work, often laboring well past the point of diminishing marginal returns; as soon as his family's needs were met, however, the farmer would cease his labors irrespective of the prospects for additional gain.32 The Organization-Production account of the activity of the family farm was essentially a demographic one. "Consumption pressure," the variable identified as determining the economic activity of the farm, was defined by the members of the Chaianov group as the ratio of consumers to workers in the farming family and was declared to vary in accordance with the age (number of years in existence) of the family unit.33 All differences in the economic activity between farms were attributed to variations in family composition; no mention was made of the inequities in the distribution of resources or talents.³4 By 1915 the rudiments of the demographic explanation had been presented. For the next decade, the Organization-Production scholars concentrated their energies on examining every aspect of the farm they had described. They charted the organization of the family farm by studying its resource budget; they explored the effects on the family farm of its participation in rural cooperatives; they isolated the principles underlying the farmer's calculation of the optimum size and patterns of cultivation for his farm; and they traced the evolution of Russian agriculture by examining farming in widely different regions.3s The results of their research persuaded these men that some of the most important categories of classical economics (wages, profit, rent) could not be meaningfully applied to the operation of the small-scale independent farm. Codifying their observations in 1924, the Organization-Production scholars presented an explanation of the dynamics of the family farm, which they daringly entitled a "theory of non-capitalist economics."36 The Agrarian-Marxists brought to rural studies a set of concerns that differed substantially from those of their mentors. They concentrated on the economic and social stratification of the peasantry, insisting that only through an analysis of peasant social structure could the evolution of the rural sector be laid bare. As Marxists, they started from the premise that the Soviet peasantry was in the process of evolving to socialism and they devoted their efforts to studying the pattern of that evolution. In approaching their subject, the members of the Kritsman group were influenced by the fact that they were the first generation of Soviet Marxists to study the Russian countryside. Responding to what they perceived as the demands of this unique position, the young researchers began their work with the declaration that all previous Marxist thinking about the transition of the rural sector to socialism was inappropriate under Soviet conditions.37 In taking this stand, the group's principal target was the theory, espoused by Western and late nineteenth-century Russian Marxists alike, that on its route to socialism the peasantry had to pass through the stage of capitalism.38 The Agrarian-Marxists conceded that this law was valid when applied to the countries of Western Europe or even to their own Russia before 1917, but they termed it “outmoded" in a setting in which political power was in the hands of the proletariat. In place of the Marxist formulations of the past, the Agrarian-Marxists substituted a new theory whose rudiments they extracted from Lenin's last writings.39 They contended that “under the dictatorship of the proletariat" there were two possible routes to socialism. In addition to the traditional capitalist route, the peasantry could now evolve to socialism via the rural cooperatives; the small and middle peasants could join the rural cooperatives and, as members of these large-scale, horizontally organized institutions, could engage in the struggle with capitalist agriculture. Of the two paths to socialism, the Agrarian-Marxists preferred the cooperative route for a variety of reasons. In their view, the cooperative path would promote the development of a homogeneous economy. Instead of the immediate emergence of socialism in industry, with agriculture moving first to capitalism and then to socialism, the cooperative route would permit both sectors of the economy to develop in tandem. Further, the cooperative route would effect with minimum social cost the dissolution of the major obstacle to socialism, the precapitalist (read "independent") peasantry; now for the first time, the small and middle peasant could avoid the agonies of an unequal contest with the rural capitalist and the almost certain proletarianization that would issue from that contest. And finally, the very existence of the cooperative option would testify to the originality—and greatness—of the Soviet experiment. Their partisanship on behalf of the cooperative pattern did not blind the Agrarian-Marxists to the difficulties that would attend its implementation. While asserting that the hegemony of the proletariat had increased the number of possible paths to socialism, the Agrarian-Marxists admitted that the actual choice of path was dependent upon peasant attitudes toward farming. With this factor in mind, the young researchers predicted that in the initial phase of the dictatorship of the proletariat, both paths to socialism would be pursued. While some peasants would choose to enter the cooperatives, others, victims of the traditional attachment to individual farming, would stubbornly cling to their tiny plots and thus contribute to the capitalization of the rural sector. But, insisted the Agrarian-Marxists, as more and more peasants became disillusioned about their prospects of becoming large-scale landowners, they would join the cooperatives, and thus the new route would gradually gain ascendancy over the old.40 In its first phase, the controversy between the Chaianov and Kritsman groups was conducted in moderate tones. Each group devoted its efforts to enunciating its own theory and to pursuing those research projects that it deemed consequential. Serious intellectual criticism of either group by the other was rare; when criticisms were launched, they tended to be directed at particular points rather than at the opponent's position as a whole. Social relations between the two schools in this period appear to have have been most cordial. The two groups met frequently, as both were housed in the Timiriazev Academy, and there is no record of any hostile or acrimonious confrontation. Even more revealing, these years saw the initiation of several large-scale research projects that involved the collaboration of members of both schools.41 Though not the predominant concern of either school, the dispute over the goals for the field tacitly influenced the research of both. The continued insistence of their students upon the importance of studying interfarm relations eventually led the Chaianov group to move into the arena of “macroeconomics" and to examine the relation of the family farm to the larger rural sector. On the basis of their examination, in 1925 the Organization-Production scholars declared that the unique properties of the family farm to which they had earlier drawn attention would permit the small-scale farm to withstand the process of rural capitalization; indeed, they asserted, over time there would take place a marked transfer of lands from capitalist to family farming.42 The implications of this position were clear: the Soviet rural sector would not evolve to capitalism, but would for the foreseeable future remain dependent upon the small commodity producer. At the prospect of such a future, the Organization-Production scholars were not at all dismayed. In their view, the family farm—its activity rationalized as a result of the performance of some of its functions by the vertically organized cooperatives43was well suited to serve as the basis of a modern agricultural sector. At about the same time that the Organization-Production scholars concluded that the countryside was not evolving to capitalism, the Agrarian-Marxists modified their original stand with the declaration that the Soviet peasantry was adopting the capitalist path to socialism. The primary reason for this modification was cognitive. When the young researchers turned to study the rural sector, they were confronted with a glaring disparity between the postulates of their theory and actual conditions in the Soviet countryside. Specifically, even their most cautious prediction about the gradual drift of the poor and middle peasants to the cooperatives was proving over-optimistic; the data they collected showed clearly that the lower strata of the peasants were clinging resolutely to their small allotments and that the cooperatives were being used by the better-off peasants for their own purposes.44 Faced with this reality, the Agrarian-Marxists effected a compromise. They did not repudiate the propositions of the theory they had espoused. They simply structured their research around the hypothesis that the Soviet peasantry was pursuing the. capitalist path to socialism; they undertook extensive studies of rural social structure using indicators designed to detect the growing capitalization of the peasantry.45 This compromise, which had been hammered out by 1926, had two advantages: it allowed the Agrarian-Marxists to conduct empirical inquiry on problems they considered important; and it served to differentiate the young researchers from their mentors and thus constituted an important stage in the Kritsman group's drive to carve a place for itself in the community of Soviet rural scholars. ## The Second Stage: 1927 to mid-1928 In the second stage of the controversy, the issues dividing the two schools underwent an important change. The new phase began in early 1927 when the Chaianov and Kritsman groups met in the Timiriazev Academy's Institute on Agricultural Economics to debate the question of rural differentiation.46 The two groups of scholars came to the meeting with widely divergent views of differentiation in Soviet Russia—its nature, its causes, and its effects on peasant society. The Agrarian-Marxists considered the most important differences among the peasantry to be social in nature and economic in origin. Beginning with the fact that the means of cultivation were in short supply and were unevenly distributed in the rural sector, the researchers showed that the existence of these inequities generated webs of hire-and-lease transactions, whose objects ranged from inventory and livestock to the land itself. By virtue of these transactions some peasants became dependent upon others for the means of their existence. Thus arose the social relations of subordination and superordination, which, to the members of the Kritsman group, constituted the essence of rural differentiation. According to the young researchers, the process of differentiation would end by transforming the rural sector. The peasantry would become increasingly stratified until the rural population was polarized into two groups: rural capitalists and agricultural wage-workers. The middle, precapitalist peasant would be resolved into one or the other—usually the latter—of the two groups and with him would disappear traditional peasant society. The Organization-Production scholars took a very different position. They considered the salient variations between peasant farms to be demographic in origin. According to them, the economic activity of each farm was a function of the ratio of consumers to workers on the farm, and that ratio in turn varied with the number of years the family unit had been in existence. The demographic analysis put forward by the Chaianov group led logically to an equilibrium model of rural development.47 Assuming that the cycle of growth and decay of each farm was determined by the composition of its family, for every farm that expanded its operation there would be another in the process of contracting its activities. Thus any net change in the map of peasant social structure was unlikely and the traditional peasant society of the small independent farmer could be expected to endure for some time. In the course of the discussion in the Timiriazev Institute, it became clear that underlying the schools' dispute over peasant stratification was a disagreement over a more fundamental question—the nature of the Russian family farm. The Chaianov group treated the family farm as a form of biological organism with its own internally determined cycle of growth and decay; external factors were viewed as exerting minimal influence on that cycle. The Kritsman group considered the family farm to be an economic unit that, like other such units, was primarily determined by the socioeconomic environment within which it existed. To be sure, this disagreement had been latent in the schools' earlier divergence over the capitalization of the rural sector. But now the issue of the family farm came to the fore, eclipsing all other points of difference between the two groups. Indeed, from early 1927 on, the controversy in rural inquiry was no longer a disagreement over goals; it had become a dispute on a single point of substance. The emergence of the issue of the family farm as the center of the rural studies controversy was related to certain shifts of emphasis in the rural policy of the Communist party. Until 1926 the regime courted the individual peasant on the theory that the good will of this figure was necessary, as Soviet agriculture would continue for some time to be based on smallscale units of production. Even. the long-range plans for the rural sector drafted during this period reflected this assumption.48 After 1925, however, there was much less emphasis on conciliating the individual peasant. As the Party began to face the challenge of constructing socialism, calls were issued for the strengthening of the large-scale socialist farm sector and for the expansion of the role of the rural cooperatives.49 At about the same time, the deficiencies inherent in small-scale farming were becoming increasingly apparent. This confluence of events highlighted the question of the future of the family farm. That the rural scholars were aware of the urgency of that question was clear from the discussion at the Timiriazev meeting. In addition to the shift in the issues dividing the scholarly community, in the second phase of the controversy there was a noticeable change in the conduct of the disputants. As of 1927, the dispute began to consume most of the energies of the scholars. There was a decrease in the attention devoted by each group to its own work and a corresponding rise in the amount of notice given by each to the research of the other. The intensified scrutiny varied in form. The Agrarian-Marxist scholars conducted a root-and-branch attack upon the Organization-Production position. They undertook extensive research designed to disprove the core propositions enunciated by their teachersso and they attempted to challenge the hegemony of the Chaianov group over certain fields of inquiry by proposing alternative approaches to questions traditionally studied by the Timiriazev professors.51 For their part, the Organization-Production scholars became defensive. They attempted to minimize the novelty of their work on the family farm by drawing links between it and the work done by their students,s² and they worked to reformulate their research so that it would be relevant to the current concerns of the regime.s3 They did not, however, retract any of their core beliefs or assertions. As each of the schools increased its criticism of the scholarship of the other, social relations between the two groups became strained. Collaboration ceased and it became rare for members of one group to acknowledge with sincerity their intellectual debts to their rivals.s4 Probably several factors influenced the change in conduct. The Agrarian-Marxists' decision to read and criticize their rivals' work with care was taken primarily in response to the extension of Organization-Production theory into the arena of “macroeconomics". As of 1925, the Timiriazev professors were claiming to have unlocked the secrets of the entire rural sector. Confronted with this sweeping claim, the Kritsman group realized that piecemeal criticism was useless; to best their mentors, the young researchers would have to cast doubt upon at least some of the basic postulates of Organization-Production theory and propose an alternative account of the phenomena explained by the Chaianov group. The Organization-Production scholars were influenced in their decision to adopt a defensive strategy by the shifts in rural policy described above. The extent to which their intellectual position was out of tune with the commitments of the new age was not lost upon these scholars. Concerned lest they lose their status as experts on Soviet agriculture, the members of the Chaianov group began to deflect attention from their work on the family farm and to present their research wherever possible as relevant to the new directions in rural policy. The changes in the behavior of both sets of disputants were affected by modifications in the professional organization of the rural studies field that occurred at mid-decade. In the first half of the 192os, the Chaianov group had occupied the major posts in the most prestigious institution, with the Agrarian-Marxists filling the subordinate positions. The founding of the Agrarian Section of the Communist Academy and the move by the Agrarian-Marxists to this new section in 1926 altered the balance of power in the rural studies community. Now the young researchers had the independence they needed to launch a full-scale critique of their teachers and the Chaianov group had to adopt a more cautious line, for it no longer exercised undisputed control over the field. Not only did the new professional organization of the field affect the rivals' intellectual conduct, it also influenced their social behavior. The move by the Agrarian-Marxists to the Agrarian Section brought to an end both the teacher-student relations that had been responsible for the cordiality of the earlier period and the collaborative research that had inhibited the levelling of unrestrained criticism by one school against the other. ## Resolution: Spring to Autumn 1928 Between the early spring and the autumn of 1928 the controversy that had divided the rural studies community for over half a decade was resolved. The end came quietly, with no fanfare. The Organization-Production scholars ceased doing research on the family farm and began to study the organization of large-scale state and collective farms.ss For scholars who had been so convinced of the merits of small-scale independent farms and so skeptical of the viability of large-scale socialist agriculture,56 the shift to this new topic constituted a volte face. Indeed, in setting aside their traditional interests for new concerns, the members of the Chaianov group were effectively conceding that the small noncapitalist farm would not play the role in Soviet agriculture that they had envisaged for it. The concession by the Chaianov group is open to two very different interpretations. The Organization-Production scholars may have been prompted to alter their research focus primarily because of the tense atmosphere that surrounded the Shakhty trial. The trial of the Shakhty engineers took place in May 1928, but beginning in March of that year extensive publicity was given to the "treason" of the "bourgeois" specialists.57 It is possible that the Organization-Production scholars conceded their position because they anticipated that, as a consequence of the Shakhty trial, the distrust of non-Communist specialists would spread to those working in cultural fields.s8 Alternatively, it may well have been that the Organization-Production scholars shifted their research focus largely· in response to the Party's patent disenchantment with small-scale farming and its growing emphasis on large-scale agriculture as reflected in the resolution passed at the Fifteenth Party Congress enjoining "the gradual transformation of individual peasant holdings into large-scale farming enterprises."59 Our evidence suggests that the latter explanation is more appropriate than the former. In mid-1928 the members of the Chaianov group do not appear to have foreseen the suspicion of all bourgeois specialists that followed in the wake of the Shakhty trial. In their studies of socialist agriculture written during the year 1928, the Timiriazev professors made no attempt to style themselves as “proletarian" scholars. Instead, they presented themselves as apolitical experts whose skills were technical and therefore applicable in any political context;6º only later did the members of the Chaianov group attempt to jump aboard the political bandwagon. But in mid-1928 the Organization-Production scholars do seem to have perceived that, as a consequence of their identification with the study of the family farm, their status as experts on Soviet agriculture was in jeopardy. That they looked upon their new work as a means to avert obsolescence was clear from the fact that wherever possible they drew attention to the relevance of their current research for the concerns of the regime. In our view, therefore, the concession of mid-1928 should be interpreted mainly as an intensification of the quest for relevance begun by the Chaianov group in the second phase of the controversy. ## RURAL INQUIRY AND THE CULTURAL REVOLUTION:1928-31 In the second half of 1928, almost as soon as the controversy was resolved, the field of rural inquiry began to feel the impact of the cultural revolution. That revolution affected every aspect of the fieldthe administration and structure of the major teaching and research institutions, the composition of the scholarly community, and the content of theory and research on the countryside. The first signs of the change occurred in the professional organization of the field. In September 1928, the Agrarian Section of the Communist Academy was raised to the status of an institute.61 Officially, the change was made in recognition of the achievements of the section in the study of rural social structure. More likely, the change reflected the Party's understanding that for the hegemony of Marxist theory to be established in rural studies (as per the charge to the Communist Academy of May 1928), 62 the Kritsman group would require additional stature. At about the same time, the Timiriazev Academy was reorganized. In June 1928, a new director, M. E. Shefler, was installed.63 Shefler, a member of the Communist party since 1917, waited only a month after his appointment before criticizing the workings of the Academy at a session of the collegia of the Commissariats of Agriculture and Enlightenment.64 Shefler's attack culminated in the drawing up of a five-year plan for the revamping of the academy. For our story, the important aspect of the projected change was the planned bifurcation of the economics faculty into a faculty of state farms and a faculty of collective farms. With the implementation of this change, there would no longer be any faculty in which courses on presocialist (read "family") farming could be mounted. Thus the Organization-Production scholars, who had always done their .teaching in the economics faculty, would be deprived of their pied à terre. In the last third of 1928 the reorganization of the academy took effect. It was followed closely by an attack on the research institution dominated by the Chaianov group, the Institute on Agricultural Economics. In February 1929, a proposal was made in the Presidium of RANION to integrate that institute with the Institute on Land Consolidation and Migration.65 The clear purpose behind the proposal was to ease the Chaianov group out without having to close down its institute. The changes in the professional organization of rural studies were followed almost immediately by alterations in the composition of the community of scholars. These alterations stemmed from the implementation of a policy that required any researcher studying the Soviet countryside to possess credentials as a Marxist. As might have been expected, the first victims of this unwritten rule were the Timiriazev professors. As they became aware of the new policy of “credentialism,"66 the members of the Chaianov group attempted to retain their positions by "confessing" their errors and pledging to conduct rural inquiry along Marxist lines.67 Initially, these “confessions" were accepted at face value. However, as the leaders of the Organization-Production school proved unable to adjust their work to the official view of the rural sector, the genuiness of their confessions was called into question by Party officials working in agricultural science, and the repentant authors were denounced.68 Restrained, monitored, and vilified, the members of the Chaianov group retreated one by one from the field they had once led. By the end of 1929 they had disappeared as a force in rural inquiry. And, Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, the journal in which these scholars had published their most important articles, was replaced by a new journal entitled Sotsialisticheskaia rekonstruktsiia i sel'skoe khoziaistvo, which devoted little space to agricultural policy and even less to articles on agricultural economics. 69 For some zealots, the elimination of the Organization-Production scholars from the field was apparently insufficient. For in 193o the leaders of the school were arrested on the charge (never proven) that they had formed an opposition political party, the Working Peasant Party.70 The emphasis on credentials that had led to the elimination of the Organization-Production scholars from rural studies took its toll on the Agrarian-Marxists as well. At the Conference of Marxist-Leninist Scientific Research Institutions held in April of 1929, the Kritsman group found itself facing two charges levelled against them by scholars boasting superior credentials as Marxists.71 First the attackers claimed that the Kritsman group had allowed the Timiriazev professors to define its Marxism for it. The irony of this charge was bitter. For over half a decade, the Agrarian- Marxists had staunchly battled their teachers in the name of Marxism; now that the Timiriazev professors no longer constituted a threat, that very service was being turned against Kritsman and his followers. To be sure, there was a grain of truth in the accusation. The Agrarian-Marxists had shaped their research in part with a view to refuting their teachers' contention that the rural sector was not evolving to capitalism. Equally important, the Kritsman group had not dismissed out of hand the work of its rivals. In fact, in October 1929—half a year after the April attack—a member of the Kritsman school drew up a proposal for a course in rural studies in which all the major writings of the Timiriazev professors were included as suggested (rather than required) readings.72 The second accusation directed against the group in the Agrarian Institute was that their views contradicted Party policy on the countryside. In particular, the critics cited the failure of the Kritsman group to discuss the virtues of cooperative agriculture. Rhetoric notwithstanding, the doctrinal element in the April attack was minimal. More than anything else, the attack was a reflection of the struggle for power and prestige that was taking shape within the community of Marxist rural scholars. With the Organization-Production scholars removed from the field and the Agrarian-Marxists under fire, the stage was set for the last act in the drama—the establishment of the Party as the final arbiter of truth in rural studies. In December 1929, the First All-Union Conference of Agrarian-Marxists convened in Moscow.73 This Conference, which was the analogue of a similar meeting of Soviet historians held the previous year, brought together some three hundred delegates from all over the Soviet Union. The official purpose of the conference was to foster links between the scholars working at the Agrarian Institute of the Communist Academy in Moscow and Marxist researchers working on the periphery. The evidence suggests, however, that its real aim was to solidify the control of the Agrarian Institute staff over the field of rural studies. In preparation for the December meeting, scholars from the Moscow Institute were sent out to “advise" in the selection of delegates from outlying regions.74 And no less revealing, well in advance of the conference the members of the institute were designated as the leaders of an All-Union Society of Agrarian-Marxists whose formation was to be announced at the December meeting.75 The seven-day conference opened on December 2o against the background of an intensive campaign to make full-scale collectivization an immediate reality. Yet the subject of collectivization did not dominate the meeting.76 Rather, the sessions were taken up with intricate disputes over credentials. Day after day, the scholar-delegates debated the question of who in the community of rural researchers could be considered an orthodox Marxist.77 In these discussions over credentials, there were signs of a growing tendency to assess the value of scholarship on the basis of political criteria. But it was not until Stalin appeared to address the delegates on the seventh and final day of the meeting that the use of such criteria of assessment received official sanction. Stalin's speech to the assembled delegates began rather innocuously. The speaker reminded his audience of the importance of theory in the study of the countryside; to this, he added the notsurprising injunction that only Marxist theory be tolerated in Soviet research on the rural sector.78 Stalin's rather bland remarks on rural studies proved to be but the prelude to the core of his address—the announcement that the kulaks or better-off peasants were to be liquidated as a class.79 The effect of Stalin's announcement wasin the words of one of the delegates“electrifying."so Suddenly the assembled scholars understood that the discussions of the requirements for Marxist rural studies that had occupied their attention for six days were irrelevant. The final arbiter of truth in rural studies was not to be Marxist-Leninist theory as a body of doctrine, but rather the facts as created by the Communist party through its rural policy. Henceforth, the task of theory would be to celebrate those facts and the task of researchers would be to confirm the correctness of theory. In retrospect, it is clear that the conference had its most profound impact on the members of the Kritsman group. They had come to the conference prepared to assume the responsibility for securing the hegemony of Marxist theory and research in rural studies; indeed, the transcript of the December meeting showed them eager to take on their posts of leadership in the new All-Union Society of Agrarian-Marxists. With Stalin's appearance on the seventh day of the conference, the terms of their mandate underwent important change. Now the Kritsman group was to ensure that the substance of Marxist rural inquiry was consistent with the policy of the Communist party. For this new task, the group proved itself remarkably unsuited. And consequently, like their teachers before them, the young researchers were forced to leave the field of rural studies. The saga of their departure was no less pathetic than that of their one-time rivals. In September 193o, Kritsman lost his position as editorin-chief of Na agrarnom fronte, although he did retain a seat on the editorial board. Toward the end of that year, the attacks on Kritsman and his group multiplied81 and some of his younger colleagues issued recantations.82 The attempts to avoid censure proved futile, however. In early 1932 the entire editorial board of the journal was replaced, an action that was justified as necessary in the face of Kritsman's “anti-Leninism."83 With this act, the politicization of rural inquiry was complete. In experiencing politicization, the field of rural studies was far from unique. In the course of the cultural revolution, most fields of social science suffered a similar fate; the fields differed from one another only in the timing and pattern of their transformation. In rural inquiry, politicization began relatively early. The reasons for this are not difficult to surmise. Most of the rural studies conducted during the 192os reflected the assumptions underlying NEP—the belief in the advantages of a transition period in which agriculture would continue to be conducted by the small commodity producer and the conviction that socioeconomic change in the countryside had to be both gradual and unforced. In late 1928, when they began to think seriously of jettisoning NEP, some Party leaders felt it necessary to harness the field of rural studies lest dissentingand knowledgeable voices be raised against the shift in policy. Not only did the politicization of rural inquiry begin early, it was also accomplished with relative dispatch. By early 193o the Communist party through its spokesmen was in effective control of the field. The comparatively quick takeover of rural inquiry may have been made possible in part by the controversy that divided the field from 1923 to mid-1928. The importance and lengthy duration of the debate over the family farm resulted in the polarization of the community of rural scholars. By 1928 the position of a scholar who was not affiliated with either school had become untenable.84 Moreover, the shift in the issues of the controversy from a disagreement over goals to a substantive dispute was accompanied by the narrowing of the content of the field; all research not directly related to the disputed issue was set aside as of 1927. By weakening the fabric of the intellectual community and by impoverishing the substance of the field, the controversy may have had the effect of easing the way for politicization. The fact that the controversy of 1923 to mid-1928 may have facilitated the subsequent politicization of rural inquiry should not lead one to conclude that politicization was simply an intensification of trends already in progress. In fact, the characteristics of the cultural revolution in rural studies—the invocation of “credentialism" as the basis for excluding scholars from the conduct of research and the installation of the Party as the final arbiter of truth in the fieldwere unique to the period after mid-1928. In the first decade of Soviet power, the instances in which the assessment of a work of scholarship was affected by the political allegiances of the investigator were rare. This was, after all, the period in which the Party was encouraging non-Marxist as well as Marxist scholars to engage in social inquiry.8s Moreover, in those years agreement between the findings of research and Party policy was not a requirement. To be sure, because rural studies was a field whose subject matter was of concern to practical policy, there was some premium placed on scholarship that would be "useful" in practice; however, until late 1928 “useful" work was defined as research that bore on questions of importance, not as research that supported the policy line of the Party. These conditions underwent radical change over the period 1928-31. For the scholars engaged in the study of the Soviet countryside, the cultural revolution constituted a real break with the past. ## CONCLUSION Our survey of developments in the field of rural studies revealed that although the in-fighting between the Chaianov and Kritsman groups was bitter in the period prior to mid-1928, it stopped short of all-out war. What were the factors that constrained the conflict in this period? In the case of rural inquiry, there is no basis for the conclusion that it was the Party that was instrumental in discouraging the spread of conflict. Rather, the evidence suggests that the in-fighting among scholars was contained because of the existence of intellectual and social cohesion within the profession. At first glance, it would appear that the intellectual consensus in the field was severely limited. The two schools could not agree on the content of theory, on the methods of research, or even on the ranking of problems in their area of inquiry. The extent of the disagreement between the Chaianov and Kritsman groups should not, however, obscure the fact that the contending scholars did share a common framework of discourse, a framework defined by the assumptions underlying the New Economic Policy. It was by virtue of this shared framework that the disputants talked to—rather than past—one another. So successful was the dialogue between the contending schools that at the end of the 192os the Agrarian-Marxists were accused of having internalized the perspective of their rivals! Similarly, the social solidarity among scholars working in rural inquiry was more extensive than appearances would suggest. To be sure, the members of each school were primarily loyal to their own group, particularly as the controversy gathered force in 1927. Despite sectarian loyalties, there was evident among rural scholars of all stripes some feeling of identification with the field as a whole. Neither group sought to break away from the field in order to create a subspecialty in which its concerns would be dominant; nor did either group attempt to have the other excluded from the field.86 Rather, each school seemed to accept the other as part of its profession. There were most likely several sources of this feeling of solidarity. To begin with, for most of the 192os the field of rural studies was defined so broadly as to include all serious study of the Soviet countryside. The breadth of this definition made possible the identification of two such diverse groups with a single profession. ·But more important, the professional organization of the field in the first half of the 192os encouraged both groups to share certain norms of scholarly work and conduct. Until 1926, it will be remembered, the Agrarian-Marxists studied with and worked as research assistants to the members of the Chaianov group. It seems clear that this early training affected the young researchers profoundly. When they sought to displace their former teachers as the leaders of the rural studies community, the members of the Kritsman group did not suspend the rules of social science method or set aside their commitment to scholarship; instead, they made every effort to outdo their former mentors according to the rules of the game. The young Marxist scholars who conducted research on the rural sector did not have the uneasy relation to their profession that characterized the writers (as described by Fitzpatrick).87 Far from being hostile to or even ambivalent about the norms of their profession, at a crucial juncture the Agrarian-Marxists demonstrated their commitment to using the established route to success. The abandonment of scholarly norms came only in 1929 with the ascendancy of new cadres of “rural scholars." It is interesting to speculate about the sources of the difference between rural studies and literature. Some of the variation in the attitude of writers and rural scholars toward their respective professions may well have derived from dissimilarities in the socialization to which novices in the arts and social sciences were subjected.88 One might hypothesize that there was more encouragement of and scope for originality in the field of literature than in that of rural studies. But there were other factors that contributed to the Agrarian-Marxists' allegiance to traditional norms. For one thing, the long history of the field influenced the type of novice attracted to the study of the countryside; the fact that rural inquiry had been conducted in Russia for nearly half a century discouraged the entrant who was seeking a field with a small body of knowledge that could be easily assimilated. Further, the government's acceptance of rural studies inhibited most potential rebels from overthrowing the established norms of their profession. In the period prior to mid-1928, government agencies regularly commissioned research from leading rural scholars; as we have indicated, the Timiriazev Academy's Institute on Agricultural Economics functioned as the research arm of the Ministry of Agriculture. Thus, young students in the field were educated in the belief that official recognition would be accorded those who extended, rather than destroyed, the corpus of research on the rural sector. The evidence suggests that the Agrarian-Marxists learned their lessons well. The behavior of the Agrarian-Marxists from 1927 on leads to the conclusion that in the field of rural inquiry, the impulse for the cultural revolution did not come from within the ranks of the Communist intelligentsia. Without doubt, the members of the Kritsman group disagreed vehemently with their mentors, whom they sought to displace from positions of leadership. But the young researchers did not attempt to exclude their senior colleagues from the field. Indeed, as late as October 1929, the Agrarian-Marxists were still acknowledging the value of their teachers' contributions. In the field of rural studies, responsibility for the onset of the cultural revolution must be laid at the door of the Communist party and its minions—men with no scholarly credits but with the requisite willingness to act as ideological watchdogs over those who dared to conduct inquiry The fact that our case supports the traditional view of the onset of the cultural revolution should not be regarded as in any way diminishing the value of the new interpretation of the events of 1928-31. Clearly, the transformation of Soviet culture at the end of the twenties did not take place according to any single pattern. In some fields, the young Communist intellectuals chafed at the norms of their profession and therefore, at the first opportunity, converted their disagreements with their non-Marxist (or sometimes Marxist) senior colleagues into all-out war. In other fields, the in-fighting among intellectuals, however bitter, was contained because of the existence of intellectual and social cohesion within the profession; in these cases it was the intervention by the Party and its deputies that set the revolution in motion. With the variations in the development of the cultural professions under NEP an accepted fact, students of the period must now begin the task of identifying the factors that produced those variations. Such work will, we hope, yield an understanding of the potential of the NEP experiment in culture. The facts of the rural studies case as presented here argue against the view that the coexistence of intellectual opposites under NEP was inherently unstable and that some sort of revolution in culture was therefore unavoidable. Our evidence suggests that although the rifts of 1923 to mid-1928 were serious, there was still an overriding commitment among rural scholars of all persuasions to the continuation of pluralism in the field. The Agrarian-Marxists who might have been thought most eager to eliminate their non-Communist rivals showed themselves disinclined to do so. It would appear, then, that the Agrarian-Marxists were concerned to secure for Marxism (and for their own group) a position of hegemony, not monopoly, in rural studies. A pluralism in which Marxism was the dominant but not the only approach to social inquiry would have met many needs. It would have satisfied the desire of the regime for research that was sound and supportive; it would have ulfilled the longings of the Marxist scholars for control of their fields; and it would have preserved the diversity of the intellectual community. Regrettably, this form of pluralism was never tried. In the realm of culture, as in other realms, the limits of the NEP experiment were never reached.