# Marxist Historians during the Cultural Revolution: A Case Study of Professional In-fighting George M. Enteen Even to the nonspecialist, some aspects of the "cultural revolution" in the historical profession are familiar. It is well known that Pokrovskii's group of Marxist historians established its own brand of "hegemony" in the historical field, somewhat comparable to that of the proletarian association RAPp in literature (see Fitzpatrick, this volume). It is also well known that in 1931 Stalin personally intervened in the historical debate with his letter to the editors of Proletarskaia revoliutsiia, and that this intervention was followed by an eventual decline in the prestige and influence of the Pokrovskii school. From these facts alone, one might conclude that the Party leadership first selected an “instrument" for the subordination of the historical profession and later discarded it when it had served its purpose. However, it is the contention of this essay that such an explanation both simplifies and distorts the nature of the cultural revolutionary process in history. The dynamic impulse behind the 1928-31 upheavals in the historical profession seems to have come not only from directives and hints from above, but also from factional struggles generated within the profession. Pokrovskii, who occupied a position in the historical profession comparable with that of Pashukanis in law (see Sharlet, this volume), faced a challenge from other Communist historians who (like Vyshinskii in the legal profession) clearly looked to the Party leadership for support in their campaign against the dominant Marxists in the profession, and partially obtained it. At the same time, almost certainly, the challengers were aided in their campaign by the resentment felt by non-Marxists and non-Communists in the profession toward the Pokrovskii group that had earlier humiliated them. As in the case of law, the logical interest of the Party leadership was probably in conflict with theories of the dominant group of Marxist historians. Pokrovskii's theories were, after all, deterministic, cosmopolitan in spirit, and indisposed to stress the importance of exceptional individuals. But this did not supply the Party leadership with an overwhelming reason to intervene in the historical debate. So long, however, as factional conflict had not been overcome in the Party, the writing of Party history constituted a form of power. The history of the Party was too important to be left entirely in the hands of historians. In this sense the situation resembled that existing, for example, in rural studies (see Solomon, this volume), where collectivization did provide a reason for Party intervention. Although the leadership was only intermittently concerned about historical quarrels, regarding them as of secondary importance, individual members of the leadership were probably inclined to favor different historical factions. Once historians became embroiled in factional conflicts of their own and appealed to the Party leadership for support, Party leadership could not overlook political consequences and stand aloof. The focus of the present essay is on the efforts of rival groups of Marxist historians to win a mandate from the Party Central Committee to guide historical research and publication, to control the staffing of institutions, and to enforce professional norms. This constitutes a case study of infighting within a profession during the period of cultural revolution; and our view is that such a study exposes one of the basic processes of cultural revolution and provides, at the same time, important insights into the political culture of the early years of the Stalin period. Until 1927, a modus vivendi existed between Marxist and non-Marxist historians. But it was a modus vivendi in which non-Marxists effectively dominated the profession: despite hardship resulting from the Civil War and losses through emigration, the so-called bourgeois historians continued their pursuits and retained their leadership in the traditional scholarly institutions. The Marxist historians at first organized themselves separately, and on the periphery of the profession. Leaving the Academy of Sciences to the traditional historians, they organized their own Society of Marxist Historians under the poorer and less prestigious Communist Academy. In RANion¹—the biggest center for historical research and graduate teaching—the faculty included only a minority of Marxists. This was a situation of academic pluralism. But it must be remembered that pluralism was no more secure than the mood of compromise and the policy of reconstruction that had engendered NEp, and those involved viewed it as a confrontation of two camps, in which the stronger would ultimately triumph. In 1927 it was already clear that the belligerent spirit was rising. This must partly be attributed to the social and political tensions produced by the "war scare" of that year. But in the field of history, a local factor was also involved: the militance of the Marxist students. Late in 1927 a student wall newspaper in RANIoN's Institute of History called for an end to "demarxification" and denigration of Lenin, and denounced the aping of Western fashions as the latest word in scholarship. A delegation appeared at the office of Pokrovskii, then head of RAniON, demanding remedy of the situation.² Almost simultaneously with this student campaign against the "bourgeois historians" came a political fight within the party organization of the Institute of Red Professors. The students here—an extremely highly politicized group of Communistswere reacting to the first phase of the battle within the Politburo over grain procurements and the pace of industrialization. As early as February 1928, according to a Stalinist account published in 1931, the future Right Oppositionist N. A. Uglanov (then secretary of the Moscow Party Committee) had used the institute as a forum to express a warning about forcing the pace of industrialization and provoking a confrontation with the peasantry. The Party bureau of the institute supported him, but was apparently unseated in March by demonstration of rank-and-file support among Communists of the institute for the tougher line on economic policy associated with Stalin.³ In the course of 1928, an increasingly vituperative public campaign was mounted against non-Marxist historiography. The most prominent targets were D. M. Petrushevskii, a medievalist who headed the RANION Institute of History and was soon to be elected to the Academy of Sciences; Academician E. V. Tarle, a specialist in modern history who had hitherto been deemed "progressive"; and Academician S. A. Zhebelev, a specialist in ancient history.4 Pokrovskii did not initiate the campaign, and at first even gave some appearance of diffidence in prosecuting it. But by the autumn of 1928, when it was already clear that Stalin was winning his battle with the Politburo Right, Pokrovskii was not only stressing the theme of class conflict in scholarship, but also participating in attacks on specific non-Marxist historians. He may simply have found it expedient to accept the Shakhty trial message that the bourgeois intelligentsia was involved in a conspiracy against Soviet power. But there is also the possibility of real emotional conversion, whether under the influence of his students or (as some evidence suggests) of his experiences at the International Congress of Historians held in Oslo during the summer.⁶ By the beginning of 1929, in any case, Pokrovskii had made a major decision: to attack the institutional base of the non-Marxist historians. At the First All-Union Conference of Marxist Historians, an occasion for celebrating the influence and maturity of Marxist historical scholarship, Pokrovskii agreed to support and champion a proposal to liquidate RANIon's Institute of History and create in its place a new institute under the Communist Academy.7 The Communist Academy, designated in the summer of 1929 as the national center for research and graduate teaching, came to include all the institutes of the former RANION as well as the Institute of Red Professors.8 The new Institute of History opened in the autumn of 1929 with a staff of forty and a relatively modest enrollment of thirty-six graduate students. It was governed by a collegium headed by Pokrovskii and including his close associates, some of whom had been his students in the Institute of Red Professors.9 Beside it in the Communist Academy was the Society of Marxist Historians, the forum for Marxist discussion in the profession and source of many of the attacks on "bourgeois historians." As the most distinguished of Soviet Marxist historians, Pokrovskii dominated the society and exercised great influence over the work of its younger members. The "Pokrovskii school" dominated the Marxist historians and, from 1929, the Marxist historians dominated the profession through their control of scholarly institutions and journals. Yet even as circumstances conspired to heighten Pokrovskii's stature and to popularize his historical views, they set obstacles in his path. The Marxist camp was by no means firmly united under his leadership and that of the Society of Marxist Historians. Among those institutions whose work the society aspired to lead and coordinate were Istpart (the Commission for the Study of the October Revolution and the Russian Communist Party), the Lenin Institute, the Marx-Engels Institute, and the Society of Former Political Prisoners and Penal Exiles, which published the journal Katorga i ssylka. These institutions were of independent genesis and stood outside the Communist Academy system. The Lenin Institute, męrging in 1928 with Istpart to create a large center for the study of party history, established its own facilities for training specialists in 193o, and could scarcely conceal its disdain for the tutelage of the Party Section of the Society of Marxist Historians. The Marx-Engels Institute, headed by the learned and notoriously intransigent Marxist scholar D. B. Riazanov, also failed to express gratitude for projects conceived in the Communist Academy. And the members of the Society of Former Political Prisoners and Penal Exiles, which included both Marxist and populist victims of the Tsarist regime, remained true to their revolutionary tradition by ignoring calls for unity. Pokrovskii's position became less secure as his power over the historical profession increased. It was the phenomenon known in European diplomacy as a threat to the balance-of-power system: consolidation of the profession under Marxist control enhanced Pokrovskii's authority, but at the same time the possibility of his achieving hegemony brought about an opposing coalition within the Marxist camp. Even among Marxist historians, Pokrovskii had always had intellectual opponents. Among them was I. A. Teodorovich, an Old Bolshevik who had come to the party via populism, occupied important government posts until 1928, and was currently working as chief editor of the journal Katorga i ssylka and head of the new International Agrarian Institute, both of which were outside the Communist Academy system. The major conflict between Teodorovich and Pokrovskii developed out of the fiftieth anniversary celebration of the founding of Narodnaia volia—the most famous of all populist revolutionary groups, responsible for the assassination of Tsar Alexander II in 1881. Pokrovskii's view of Narodnaia volia was that its ideas had little in common with socialism and that it was essentially a bourgeois party. Teodorovich, on the other hand, saw a political and ideological continuity between the left wing of Narodnaia volia and the later Bolshevik movement. 1º The judgment of each man appeared to coincide with his own early revolutionary experience—Pokrovskii as a socialdemocrat arguing with the populists, Teodorovich as a left populist attracted to the outright revolutionaries among the social-democrats. Of the two views, Pokrovskii's clearly appeared the more “orthodox" for a Bolshevik. However, it was not ideological orthodoxy that determined the course of the dispute, but something much more like sectarian politics. Pokrovskii's supporters were successful in obtaining a resolution of censure on Teodorovich's view from the culture and propaganda (formerly agitprop) department of the Central Committee. 11 But since the resolution was drafted by a historian of the Pokrovskii school (Tatarov), Teodorovich was not disposed to take it as final. He launched an energetic attack on the cliqueishness (gruppovshchina) of Pokrovskii's supporters, notably Gorin, Tatarov, and Fridliand. The kul'tprop censure, he suggested, could have been avoided had he but “invited Gorin to a cup of tea." Instead, he had taken the path of “calling the attention of Party society to the need of exposing these Communist mandarins of historical scholarship."12 Pokrovskii's behavior did indeed show some signs of the cliqueishness that Teodorovich attributed to his group. He approached intellectual controversies as a political tactician. His former student P. O. Gorin, now academic secretary of the Institute of History, took the brunt of the battle because of Pokrovskii's illness and trips for medical treatment to Europe; but Pokrovskii offered him detailed tactical advice by letter, suggesting which arrangements he should use, warning against certain stylistic devices that left openings for his opponent, and even commenting on his diction. 13 Pokrovskii saw trouble ahead: "the signs multiply,’ as Lenin once wrote, that a great attack is impending on the right flank."14 He was alarmed at indications of wavering in' his own camp when Malakhovskii (a member of the Society of Marxist Historians specializing in the revolutionary movement) “took fright and decided to make peace" with Teodorovich. He noted with concern that Riazanov, of the Marx-Engels Institute, showed sympathy with the opposition. 15 There was some reason for concern. Teodorovich had access to the pages of Bol'shevik, the party's ideological journal, through his old friend Emelian Iaroslavskii—a senior member of the Society of Former Political Prisoners and Penal Exiles, chairman of the Narodnaia volia jubilee commission, and Teodorovich's companion in the Bolshevik underground and Tsarist prison. Iaroslavskii had political stature equalling and probably exceeding Pokrovskii'ssince 1923 he had been Secretary of the Central Control Commission of the Party and a member of the editorial boards of Pravda, Izvestiia, and Bol'shevik. Within the Communist Academy, he had a status junior to Pokrovskii, having become a member only in 1928. But he was, like Pokrovskii, an editor of the journal of the Society of Marxist Historians, Istorik-marksist, and he played an important role in the governing bureau of a new section of the society dealing with Party history, Leninism, and the Comintern. This Party Section appears to have been something of a Trojan horse within the society: it is described by Soviet historians as concerning itself with the work of the society as a whole, and leading to the struggle against “revisionism, pseudo-Marxism, and bourgeois doctrine."16 Iaroslavskii, furthermore, was a member of the governing body of the Lenin Institute—one of those institutions that resisted the tutelage of the Society of Marxist Historiansand chief editor of four weighty volumes of Party history published between 1926 and 1930,17 which contained criticism of Pokrovskii's ideas. In the Narodnaia volia controversy, Iaroslavskii did not offer an ideological defense of Teodorovich's position, but protested that the Society of Marxist Historians should not label Teodorovich as a revisionist "while being silent . . . about the errors of other comrades" whose writings contained "no fewer" errors. Sharing Iaroslavskii's position were Bubnov, a member of the Orgburo of the Central Committee and, as RSFsR Commissar of Education, Pokrovskii's superior in the government hierarchy, and the Party historian N. N. Popov.18 In response to an appeal from Iaroslavskii “not to mutilate an Old Bolshevik"19 (that is, Teodorovich), Pokrovskii replied unrepentantly: since then in the Institute of Red Professors (the last time three days ago in the first-year seminar), as I was criticized in the Society of Marxist Historians (the dispute about Chernyshevskii) and most recently in connection with Dubrovskii's book.... If you consider the judgment about Teodorovich—[that he] is theoretically close to populist authors—incorrect, . .. you can bring the question before the Central Committee. But should I take it upon myself to “suppress self-criticism" by my personal authority then I assure you, dear Comrade Emelian, nothing will come of it besides the loss of this authority.20 Iaroslavskii then took up the accusation of cliqueishness, commenting in Bol'shevik that the recent discussion among Marxist historians showed "how dangerous the situation is for Bolshevik research into the facts of our past when one or another group of comrades declares revisionist anything that does not fit into its schema."21 Gorin, again taking up the cudgels for Pokrovskii, touched lightly on the possibility that Iaroslavskii's attitude indicated at least a tolerance of political deviation: it was no accident that in the past Pokrovskii's views had been attacked by oppositionists like Trotskii and the Bukharinist Slepkov.22 This ploy—a standard but often very damaging one in Marxist scholarly debates during the cultural revolution—was later neatly reversed by Iaroslavskii, who managed to prove that Gorin had once included unacknowledged extracts from Trotskii's writings in his own work.23 Pokrovskii was a founding member of the Communist Academy and, in this period, chairman of its presidium. But the academy grew very rapidly from 1928, and as it did so some of the former esprit de corps was lost. New membersespecially those who were not of the Old Bolshevik intelligentsia—were not necessarily as respectful of Pokrovskii's authority and intellectual stature as the old ones. Among the new members to whom the Old Bolshevik intellectual tradition was alien was L. M. Kaganovich, elected in 1929. Kaganovich headed the Academy's Institute of Soviet Construction. But from 193o, as head of the Moscow Party committee and a secretary of the Central Committee, he also stood second or third in the hierarchy of the Party leadership. At the plenum of the Communist Academy held in June 193o, Pokrovskii's leadership of the academy was subjected to a barrage of criticism, mostly emanating from Kaganovich's Institute of Soviet Construction. A. I. Angarov accused him of overlooking the achievements of that institute. Pashukanis (who had headed the Institute until Kaganovich took over, and remained a member) charged that the Presidium of the Academy had failed to assert leadership in ideological discussions and hinted that Pokrovskii should resign on the grounds of his ill health.24 The Communist Academy was, in fact, ridden with ideological quarrels, the best documented in Western literature being the attack on the philosopher Deborin by a group of junior colleagues.2s Several of these quarrels were resolved in 1931 (the year of the show trial of the Mensheviks) by the ousting of an "elder statesman" of the profession—Deborin in philosophy, Rubin in economicson the grounds not only of intellectual heresy but also of previous membership in the Menshevik Party. Pokrovskii had not been a Menshevik, but he had not been an entirely orthodox Bolshevik either.26 As an elder statesman of the Marxist historical profession, his position was undoubtedly precarious. To clinch a case against him, he reasoned, his opponents would “have to prove that a 'pokrovshchina' in history is the same as a‘rubinshchina' in economics or a 'deborinshchina' in philosophy."27 He hoped they could not do it, but the analogy weighed on his mind. Pokrovskii supported Deborin in the 193o dispute of philosophical "dialecticians" (Deborin's group) and “mechanists," while Iaroslavskii and Pashukanis opposed him.28 But he was not unaware that Deborin's aggressive stance had alienated many of his Marxist colleagues and thus contributed to his downfall. Seen in this light, Pokrovskii's own aggressive stance and the faction-fighting among Marxist historians appeared ominous. Pokrovskii wrote to Gorin: We search out heresy everywhere and will soon find ourselves in the situation of the Deborinites. They, of course, also sought out heresy everywhere and thought that they didn't have to do any work. And then the screws were put to them [ikh prizhali]. And they will put the screws to us if we do not come to our senses in time. . . .29 But Pokrovskii was caught in a vicious circle. Both his group and his opponents' were accustomed to bombard the Central Committee and its kul'tprop departments with complaints and calls for arbitration. Pokrovskii could not end this unilaterally even if, as seems likely, he sensed the danger of airing the historians' dirty linen in front of the party leadership. So the Pokrovskyites continued to complain. In one such letter to the Central Committee, Gorin wrote: Slander, double-dealing, irresponsible public defamation of one's opponents . . . have, unfortunately, been conventional means of struggle. . . . They vote for our resolutions but in practice sabotage them; they declare their full political confidence in Comrade Pokrovskii . .. and simultaneously disseminate underground “cribs" [shpargalki] which discredit Pokrovskii politically. . . .30 In January 1931 Kaganovich, in his capacity as Secretary of the Central Committee, requested a report from Pokrovskii on the state of the historical front, and, shortly after this, Pokrovskii received a note from three members of the Communist Academy Presidium (one of them being Pashukanis) alleging the existence and concealment of theoretical errors and an absence of self-criticism among Marxist historians.³1 In a state of great alarm, Pokrovskii prepared an eighteen-page complaint denouncing opponents by name and defending his historical views.32 This he sent to Kaganovich, to the other secretaries of the Central Committee and to Molotov, chairman of the All-Union Sovnarkom. Specifically, what Pokrovskii wanted was a censure of Iaroslavskii³3 and, presumably, his removal from the historical field. He did not get it, nor did the campaign against him cease. His closest associates were removed, Gorin being transferred from the Institute of History and the Society of Marxist Historians to become President of the new Belorussian Academy of Sciences, despite Pokrovskii's protest to Molotov that this would be “a catastrophe for the Society, and risks its disintegration."34 Nevertheless, Pokrovskii himself kept his job. His leadership of the Communist Academy was reaffirmed in a Central Committee resolution of March 1931, expressing both criticism and approval of the academy's work.3s Obviously it was a compromise resolution. Equally obviously, it offered no solution for the hostilities, now very deep, existing within the Communist Academy leadership and the Marxist historical profession. A new crisis followed the Central Committee's resolution almost immediately. This time it directly involved Iaroslavskii, not Pokrovskii, and the issue was the extremely thorny one of Lenin's attitude toward German social-democracy and the Second International in the prewar period. In 1930 a number of discussions on this subject had been held in the Institute of History, revealing that all interpretations were controversial, including that offered in the recently published volume of Party history edited by Iaroslavskii. The Istpart journal Proletarskaia revoliutsiia published a long article by A. Slutskii, a former Menshevik, now a candidate member of the Party.36 This provoked a fierce rejoinder in the same journal by K. Pol, a former student of Bubnov in the Institute of Red Professors, who detected Trotskyism in Slutskii's work.37 Slutskii sought to reply in the journal of the Society of Marxist Historians, Istorik-marksist. The editorial board was divided on the wisdom of publishing the reply, and Iaroslavskii, who supported publication,38 found himself in a minority. In retaliation, Iaroslavskii held up publication of the journal. Only two issues of Istorikmarksist appeared in 1931, none after August. Proletarskaia revoliutsiia was in a similar situation, with the June issue still not in the press in the second half of October. laroslavskii's strategy may have been to produce an insoluble conflict among Marxist historians and thus precipitate intervention from above, but if so, he miscalculated the nature of the intervention. During the late summer a stalemate prevailed, with discussion in the Institute of History scheduled for the autumn, and Pokrovskii unavailingly protesting to the Central Committee about the withholding from publication of Istorikmarksist.39 Slutskii and his opponent for the discussion (S. S. Bankte) prepared papers, and these were duplicated and circulated. "One may suppose that the abstracts . . . fell into the hands of I. V. Stalin," writes a Soviet historian who has had access to relevant unpublished materials.4º In any case, in the latter part of October, Stalin wrote a letter to the editors of Proletarskaia revoliutsiia41 protesting against the publication of Slutskii's original article—and "blows of steel"fell on the Marxist historians. Stalin's letter did not constitute intervention on behalf of a faction, although we are told that when the Communist Academy struggle reached the Central Committee Pokrovskii's authority was sustained,42 and the letter did contain criticism of Iaroslavskii's work.43 What the letter conveyed was lack of patience with historians. How could they argue about "whether Lenin was or was not a real Bolshevik?"4 (This was Stalin's interpretation of Slutskii's contention that Lenin had underestimated the danger from the “opportunist" centrists of the German Social-Democratic Party.) How could they write political history without understanding politics? ("Who, save hopeless bureaucrats, can rely on written documents alone? Who, besides archive rats, does not understand that a party and its leaders must be tested primarily by their deeds, and not by their declarations?"4s) And finally, what could possibly be the point of publishing articles like Slutskii's? "Perhaps for the sake of a rotten liberalism, so that the Slutskii's and other disciples of Trotskii may not be able to say that they were being gagged? A rather strange sort of liberalism, this, exercised at the expense of the vital interests of Bolshevism. . . ."46 The effect of Stalin's letter was to send the historians (and indeed all other Marxist scholars) into a flurry of self-criticism. A host of meetings was convoked immediately; in time, Stalin's letter was discussed in every institute of the Communist Academy and every Party organization in the country. The Society of Marxist Historians demanded a review of all existing historical literature, and students of the Institute of Red Professors were formed into brigades preparing assessments of large portions of the existing literature for publication in the press. More than one hundred thirty speakers were dispatched throughout Moscow to deliver reports, and even more were later sent to outlying Republics. According to I. I. Mints (now an Academician, then a young Communist historian associated with the Iaroslavskii group), "extermination of cadres of historians began. Many historians were slandered, then repressed. Many were compelled to admit 'errors.'"47 Although Iaroslavskii had been mentioned disapprovingly in the letter, his group took the initiative in the meeting of the Party fraction of the Society of Marxist Historians, and apparently were almost successful in pushing through a resolution upholding their position.48 In the end, however, the resolution went against them: the authors of the four volume Istoriia VKP (b) edited by Iaroslavskii were censured for cliqueishness (gruppovshchina)49—despite the fact that, according to Stalin in the letter, they had erred on “matters of principle." Shortly thereafter, Iaroslavskii recanted before the Central Committee and in letters to the editors of Pravda and Bol'shevik. sº His disciple'Mints also recanted, but still lost his position as Party Secretary in the Institute of Red Professors. Of Iaroslavskii's other associates, A. L. Sidorov and N. L. Rubinstein “went off to do practical work" for a few years, and Dubrovskii suffered a similar shortterm eclipse.51 The Pokrovskii group was criticized for its inability to foster selfcriticism within the Society of Marxist Historians, and, while Pokrovskii's own "basic leadership" was deemed sound, his followers Gorin, Fridliand, and Vanag suffered recriminations, and “materials harmful to Pokrovskii" were quietly circulated (though not published) among historians.s2 But neither group was ousted from the leadership of the profession at this time (1931-32). Iaroslavskii's apologies were accepted early in 1932,53 and he was soon receiving personal instructions from Kaganovich and Stalin as to just how he should revise his Istoriia VKP(b) and how he should present Stalin's role in that history.s4 Mints went to work for laroslavskii in the Commission on the History of the Civil War—a lesser, but still respectable, assignment. Pokrovskii died in April 1932, but was succeeded as director of the Institute of History and chief editor of Istorikmarksist by· his close associate, N. M. Lukin, a specialist in European history, who had taken over Gorin's place at Pokrovskii's side after the latter's banishment to Belorussia. As before, the current tasks of the historical profession (excluding the realm of Party history, which Iaroslavskii's group continued to dominate) were enunciated by members of the Pokrovskii school, notably Lukin and Pokrovskii's former students, N. N. Vanag and A. M. Pankratova. By now, of course, the reader is anxiously awaiting the denouement of Pokrovskii's posthumous fall from grace in a "savage campaign," which, Medvedev tells us, was carried out under Kaganovich's direction. The public repudiation of Pokrovskii came only in 1936.s5 But his disgrace was known to historians from the decree “On the teaching of civil history" issued by the Party Central Committee and the Council of People's Commissars on May 16, 1934. This decree, celebrating narrative history and condemning schematism, was implicitly directed against the Pokrovskii school of Marxist historical writing, but did not mention Pokrovski by name. It was, however, accompanied by two further decrees (August 8 and 9, 1934) on implementation of the May 16 decree, signed by Stalin, Kirov, and Zhdanov, and circulated only among a small group of historians.s6 There are various ways of interpreting this denouement. It can be seen as a belated victory for the Iaroslavskii faction, backed by Kaganovich: Iaroslavskii became a member of the Academy of Sciences; his associates staffed the editorial boards of the leading historical journals; and Iaroslavskii—together with a defector from the Pokrovskii camp, A. M. Pankratova, who had suffered a brief period of exile in the mid-thirties prepared the two volumes of denigration of Pokrovskii that appeared after his public condemnation.57 It can also be seen as a decisive intervention on the part of the leadership, a decision to subordinate the recalcitrant historians once and for all to firm control from above. Stalin, Kaganovich, Kirov, and Zhdanov are all reported to have taken a hand in the redirection of historical research and teaching in 1934, and Stalin's involvement in the writing of the Short Course of Party history published in 1938 indicates that he, at any rate, had decided that Party history was too important to be left to Party historians. Undoubtedly historical writing, like other formns of mass and elite communication, was important to Stalin and almost as important to his lieutenants; and this was especially true of the field of Party and revolutionary history. But there is another dimension. The posthumous denunciation of Pokrovskii was surely a part of the wider trend of repudiation of the Communist intellectuals who were prominent in cultural revolution Averbakh in literature, Shulgin in educational theory, Pashukanis in law, and so on. This repudiation was accompanied by a conservative turn in cultural and social policy, which Timasheff characterized as "The Great Retreat" (see Hough, this volume). Looking at the historical profession in this general context, we may note that the change of course occurred comparatively late; and moreover that it was a direct outgrowth not of the historical faction fights but of the reorientation of education policy (see Lapidus, this volume) initiated in 1931: the 1934 decree specifically concerned the teaching of history, and the advice given at about the same time to a delegation of historians at a Kremlin reception concerned the writing of textbooks.58 In history, the “great retreat" is usually identified with the renewed celebration of the Russian national'traditionthat is, it is described in ideological terms. But in practical terms it also had a meaning: a reacceptance of the old "bourgeois" historians into the leadership of the profession. Again, in comparative terms, this reacceptance came late. The old technical specialists had been rehabilitated by Stalin in 1931; and by the next year they were already occupying official positions and publishing in official journals their uninhibited denunciations of the damage done during cultural revolution to the training of specialists. But from 1934, at any rate, the non-Marxist historians were back in positions of eminence and respect in the profession, writing the textbooks, publishing in the journals, and, ultimately, collaborating with Iaroslavskii in the denunciation of Pokrovskii and, effectively, of the whole effort to create a Marxist historical tradition. The cultural revolution and subsequent “great retreat" radically changed the historical profession. From the mid-thirties, all historians had to pay lip service to Marxism, just as they did (despite the contradiction involved) to the glories of the Russian national tradition. The old factions were dissolved, or went underground. The profession did not become monolithic, an impossibility in an imperfect world. But it became more uniform and at the same time more docile. The hierarchical framework that emerged was more formal and richer in punitive sanctions than a professional hierarchy based simply on deference to achievement. Yet, insofar as it was a hierarchy for the whole profession, professional achievement was one (though not the only) means of commanding deference within it. This was a very different situation from that of NEP, when historians belonged to one of the two opposing ideological camps, or of the cultural revolution, when the Marxist camp achieved dominance only to undermine its own position by faction-fighting. The Marxist historians had not consolidated "hegemony" during the cultural revolution. However, in trying to do so and failing, they may have inadvertently helped provide the preconditions for professional integration.