# The Cultural Revolution and Western Understanding of the Soviet System Jerry F. Hough The First Five-Year Plan has been the center of great scholarly attention in the West, but the main focus of interest has been the transformation in the economic realm—the industrialization and collectivization drives. In the cultural, intellectual, and scientific spheres, as Sheila Fitzpatrick points out, scholars have emphasized the increased repression and political constraints of the First Five-Year Plan period, and, as a consequence, they have seen basic continuity with the even further repression characteristic of the later Stalin years. Indeed, from this perspective, the reemphasis on authority and the revival of the old cultural authorities in the Second Five-Year Plan period could be interpreted as essentially a continuation of the process initiated with the Shakhty trial of 1928the movement toward an authoritarian regime in all senses of the term. Although the late 192os and early 193os must have seemed an exhilirating period of freedom—in fact, of newly found freedom—for many of the radicals and dreamers who were “unleashed," no one would or could deny that these years involved increased repression for a much larger number of intellectuals. The cultural revolution did constitute the first break—what Joravsky would call "the great break"—with the NEP policy of inconsistent but often permissive censorship and uneasy toleration of intellectual diversity, and the fate of both traditional and radical rural sociologists during the cultural revolution was an all too clear indication of what might happen when the regime believed its central interests were at stake. Nevertheless, the history of the Soviet Union cannot be limited to a history of the regime's censorship policy and its purges. The content of substantive policies, the values expressed in them, the interests that they satisfied and failed to satisfy—these too must be part of the political chronicle of the Soviet period, including the Stalin years. And if the subject of debate is the basic nature of the system, its inner dynamism, and even the structure of power within it, the question of the nature and source of substantive policies is a crucial one. In the realm of substantive social and cultural policy, it is clear that we cannot speak of continuity through the Stalin period along a basic line established in 1927-28. The early and mid-thirties saw a second “great break"—a "Great Retreat," in Nicholas Timasheffs phrase.1 In field after field, the regime not only repressed the radical Marxists, but also repudiated the programs with which they .were associated. Wage egalitarianism was denounced, and the authority and status of professional and managerial personnel were strengthened. For the first time, large numbers of persons with higher education were admitted into the Party, while the Party purge of 1932-33 removed a large part of the big workerpeasant intake of previous years. Children of white-collar parents found it easier to enter higher education. Harassment of those formerly called "bourgeois specialists" diminished. The school curriculum became more traditional, academic standards were raised, and discipline was reemphasized. In history traditional Russian heroeseven some of the Tsars returned to relative favor; in literature and art the Russian realists of the nineteenth century were extolled; in psychology the renowned non-Marxist Pavlov—an outspoken critic of the regime in the 192os—was acclaimed. The destruction of churches and personal harassment of believers gave way to a calmer hostility. The Party leadership itself, now eager to be "cultured" (kul'turnyi) unconsciously began to assimilate many of the values of the old intelligentsia. It is, of course, no new discovery that a change of policy occurred after 1931 in the social and cultural realm. The "Great Retreat" is one of the most discussed phenomena of the Stalin era, and many of the foremost analysts of the Soviet experience have tried to explain it. Trotskii spoke of the “revolution betrayed" by the bureaucracy and the enshrinement of the bureaucrat's middle-class values,² and Timasheff seemed to agree, although less pejoratively, in his reference to "the decline of Communism".3 Barrington Moore and Merle Fainsod, perhaps influenced by Talcott Parsons, wrote of “the dilemmas of power" and of "the imperatives of industrialization."4 Yet, for all the discussion of the Great Retreat, none of the Western literature seriously asks the question, retreat from what? The period of the New Economic Policy of the 192os was far from a period of revolutionary militance and insistence on ideological purity in terms of Party policy and indeed the literature that sees the 193os as an ideological retreat treats NEP in very much the same way. Whatever the degree of wage egalitarianism in the state enterprises during NEP, Lenin himself had instituted a system of privileges for the "bourgeois specialists"; and the social spectrum must also include the Nepmen, whose prosperity from private entrepreneurial activity was tolerated by the regime. Moreover, by 1921 the power of the trade union to defend the workers had already been defined in quite narrow terms, and, as Lenin and later Trotskii complained, the influx of Communists into important administrative positions had scarcely put an end to what they called "bureaucratism"—that is, a hierarchy of authority and status. Throughout the 192os, Marxist radicals attacked the cultural administration of Narkompros (the People's Commissariat of Enlightenment) for being too eclectic in its toleration of different art forms, including the most traditional, and, worst of all, for surreptitiously preserving the hated "bourgeois" gymnasium as the basic secondary school under a new name. And, it must be said, there was considerable justice in these criticisms. In addition, higher education continued to be dominated by "bourgeois scholars," and, despite some effort to the contrary, the proletarian component in institutions of higher education was in the 15-20 percent range during most of the twenties and had risen only to 25.4 percent in the 1927-28 school year.⁵ The central contribution of this book is, of course, to remind us that there was in fact reason to speak of a Great Retreat—that between NEP and the high Stalin years there was a distinctive period of militancy, imposition of Marxist orthodoxy, and revolutionary utopianism in the cultural-social realm. The "retreat" of the 193os was, first and foremost, a retreat from the policies of the First Five-Year Plan period, rather than from the policies followed for the greater part of the 192os. It is always unfortunate when any major historical phenomenon slips from the view of historians, and for this reason alone a study of the First Five-Year Plan cultural revolution is a valuable contribution to our knowledge . In this case, however, the gap in the Western literature is not a trivial one, for the failure to understand the discontinuities between the First Five-Year Plan period and the Second has confused a number of extremely important issues in the interpretation of Soviet history. This confusion, moreover, has been a key element in the acceptance of a totalitarian model that distorts our understanding of the Stalin period almost as much as it does the years after Stalin's death. ## I As emphasized in the earlier essays of this volume (and in the discussion at the conference at which they were originally presented), the first consequence of the neglect of the cultural revolution has been a major oversimplification in the conventional analysis of "Stalin's revolution from above."By focussing on the industrialization-collectivization decision and on the factional struggle associated with it, one can easily form the impression that the only actors were a very small number of oligarchs and that the key decisions reflected the values of a tiny handful of men (maybe only one) in the face of an unexpected crisis. In this perspective, the society-state relationship is seen entirely in "we-they" termsas an inert and unsuspecting society subjected to a Third Revolution by ruthless men who had gained unrestricted control of the political apparatus. Indeed, to the extent that the focus really is on the collectivization decision alone and that that decision is thought to have flowed from mistaken assumptions about the grain crisis, the entire "revolution from above"takes on a peculiarly arbitrary character. As the conflicts of the cultural revolution demonstrate, however, NEP "society" itself was quite varied in character, containing significant numbers of radicals and militants as well as moderates and conservatives on nearly all policy questions. One need not be a Marxist to recognize that many workers must have felt suspicion and hostility toward bourgeois specialists and Nepmen, and that many poor peasants must have had a similar attitude toward more well-to-do peasants and rural tradesmen. Aside from class antagonisms in the countryside itself, many city-dwellers must have deeply distrusted the kulaks and been more than willing to interpret any grain shortage in terms of a conspiracy. Millions of unemployed urban workers and city-oriented rural youth yearned for the jobs that rapid industrialization would bring. And then there were those who disdained "bourgeois culture" in one form or another and who were determined to be "modern" in the Marxist sense of the term. Surely it would be wildly misleading to suggest that Stalin was a passive barometer who was simply responding to societal pressures for change even Party pressures for change—when he launched the Third Revolution. But if we are to understand the late twenties and early thirties, it would be equally wrong to assume that these pressures were irrelevant. As Adam Ulam emphasized twenty years ago,6 Communist parties have succeeded in winning power not in advanced industrial countries, as their own ideology would suggest, but in countries at an early stage of industrialization. The explanation for this paradox must be found, Ulam argued, in the appeal that militant Marxism holds for many potentially modernizing elements in such countriespeople who stand to benefit from industrial development and who unconsciously seek an ideology that posits both the inevitability of this development and the ultimate resolution of all discomforts associated with it. If the Communist party's victory in Russia (victory not only in October, but in the Civil War that followed) must be understood in the terms Ulam suggests, and if for these reasons more of the country's modernizers were drawn to the Party after the revolution, then any treatment of the Third Revolution as a totally alien development ignores the societal forces that produced the revolution itself. The militants of the cultural revolution were an important part of NEP society, and nearly every Communist and a great number of young non-Communists shared, with varying degrees of ambivalence, the feelings they expressed. At least in their promotion of industrialization, they also had very considerable support even from the more sober-minded “practical" proponents of industrialization. By losing sight of much of the social dynamics of the period, we have isolated the political leadership from the social setting to which at least in some measure it was responding. A second major consequence of the blurring of distinctions between the First Five-Year Plan period and the years that followed has been a deeply flawed conceptualization of Stalinism. The era has most often been analyzed in terms of the totalitarian model, which serves to highlight those features of the Stalinist system (and others like it) that are thought to distinguish it from more traditional types of authoritarian regime. In most variants of the model, the first distinguishing feature of the totalitarian system is the determination of the political leader to transform society and human nature on the basis of his ideological premises, while the second is his determination to institute an ever-tightening, all-encompassing network of controls in order to emancipate himself from all societal pressures and influences, including those coming from either a broadly or narrowly defined elite. In arguing that the totalitarian model provides a reasonable (if, of course, oversimplified) approximation of the Stalin regime, scholars point to the Third Revolution and its spirit of transformation as evidence of the first feature of the model, and to the growing restrictions on the expression of ideas and on other types of freedom, which reached a peak in the last years of Stalin's life, as evidence of the second. Without any question, the Soviet political system did become progressively more authoritarian as Stalin aged (though there was some ebb and flow in the application of pressure, most notably during World War II). To be sure, the number of deaths resulting from the 1937–38 purge has often been grossly exaggerated,7 and Hannah Arendt's image of a ćompletely terrorized and atomized society has almost no relationship to the reality of the time. (The regime's "mobilization" program was really an unprecedented attempt to integrate, not atomize, a vast number of inexperienced workers and former peasants into a rapidly expanding urban sector.) Nevertheless, even if the picture of purge and terror embedded in the totalitarian model is discounted to a considerable degree, we are still left with the unquestionable fact that intellectuals and policy-oriented professionals in particular had to operate under increasingly rigid restrictions, and that criticism of the dictator and his basic political system became dangerous in the extreme. After the 1937-38 purge, the officials at the very top of the system must have felt a special sense of insecurity—as indeed, according to Khrushchev, they did. Yet the scholarly literature speaks not simply of a system becoming more authoritarian, but of one becoming totalitarian. It emphasizes that the political leadership was engaged in a transformation of society and human nature on the basis of its ideological values and its self-imposed mission to prepare the way for the ultimate Communist stage of history. It is this image that needs to be reexamined. While the cultural revolution and other policies of the First Five-Year Plar period did indeed embody the transforming spirit suggested by the totalitarian model, much of this spirit (except that incorporated in the continuing drive to promote industrialization) disappeared with the repudiation of cultural revolution. The drive to transform man and society became in large part a drive to industrialize the country and to inculcate the values needed for the population to adjust to industrial society and to accept the legitimacy of the political system. With the destruction of the old revolutionaries (and many of the young spokesmen of the cultural revolution) in the purge of 1937-38, the workers and peasants who had surged into higher educational establishments during the cultural revolution became the core of the “Class of 1938," which gained most from the holocaust. But, as Sheila Fitzpatrick pointed out, these men, like workers virtually everywhere, were culturally conservative, highly valuing respectability and kul'turnost', and, paradoxically, their rise only solidified the support for the policy that brought the cultural revolution to an end. While many of the policies of the “Great Retreat" could be explained as the product of the “imperatives of industrialization,"the regime went well beyond any requirements for the establishment of a well-functioning industrial order in its accomodation to the desire of the "new class" for status and rewards. Particularly in the postwar period, as Vera Dunham has shown in rich detail, even the yearning of this group for such symbols of middle-class respectability as lace curtains was given recognition in the literature of the timea major change from the more austere Communist ethos of the 19zos and the First Five-Year Plan period.8 In short, as we contemplate the striking discontinuities in policy that occurred in the late 192os and early 193os, it becomes painfully clear that at no single time during the Stalin period did the Soviet Union actually correspond to the totalitarian model. The model's emphasis upon an ideologically determined drive to transform society-applies reasonably well to the First Five-Year Plan period; and the emphasis upon tightening of control fits well with the authoritarianism and ideological rigidity of the latter Stalin years. However, taken together, the two major aspects of the model are an anachronistic combination. More important, they are essentially an inconsistent combination in human terms, for the type of person necessary to administer and carry through a continuous revolutionary transformation is too undisciplined and disrespectful to fit easily within or be tolerated by—a system with rigid controls and an abhorrence of experimentation. This inconsistency is not a minor flaw in the totalitarian model, for the very persuasiveness of the model as an explanatory tool for the Stalin era has depended on it. It has only been this inconsistency that has permitted such a wide and diverse range of phenomena to fit the model so well. ## II If we focus upon the fact that there was an ideologically infused revolution in the cultural-social realm, which, to a large extent, was abandoned in the first half of the 193os, a series of more specific problems also arise that have not been properly considered by Western historians. In the first place, what are the implications of the cultural revolution and its reversal for our understanding of Politburo-level politics and the power position of Stalin during this period? It would be possible to interpret the cultural revolution as a purely tactical move by Stalin in his struggle against the Right Opposition, or as a reflection of Stalin's own class-war convictions (also expressed in the economic and foreign policy of the period), or as a result of an initiative taken by other members of the elite to apply to the cultural sphere slogans developed in policy areas in which Stalin had a more direct interest. In order to choose between these alternate interpretations with any assurance, we would need far better access to primary sources than we have at present. But what we can do, in the present state of our knowledge, is consider the implications of the various interpretations of Stalin's relationship to the cultural revolution for our analysis of the subsequent Great Retreat. We should realize that our explanation of the first phenomenon should be consistent with our explanation of the second. In practice, such consistency has not always been achieved. Stalin's actions in the late 19zos have often been explained not in terms of ideological conviction but of political manipulation. The General Secretary is described as trying to outmaneuver the Right, making cynical use of the radicals to suppress the non-Marxists, manufacturing a war scare to discredit the opposition and/or convince the population of the need for sacrifices, and so on. Yet in the standard accounts of Politburo conflicts circa 1934, we find a quite different analysis of Stalin's political behavior and motivation. In regard to this period, Stalin is often described as taking an implacably hard-line position as a matter of deep conviction, only to be partially defeated by a faction headed by Kirov that was advocating more conciliatory policies. Whatever Stalin's original attitude to the cultural revolution, the 1931-32 reversal of policy creates enormous difficulties for the view that Stalin was defeated by Kirov in 1934. The difficulties essentially involve the timing of the supposed conflict between Stalin and a “moderate opposition." It is hard to see why Kirov or anyone else should have challenged Stalin on such a platform in 1934, since in most realms (except foreign affairs) the reversal of policy was already in full swing. Even in the industrial sphere, the indicators of the Second Five-Year Plan were more realistic. In agriculture, the decision to recognize the private plot meant that collectivization was to be limited for the time being to the production of grain and technical crops.9 One could try to preserve the Kirov hypothesis by postulating that the defeat of Stalin occurred in 1931 rather than 1934, 1º but this solution too has serious problems. Certainly Stalin went out of his way to identify himself personally with the 1931 reversal of attitude toward the bourgeois specialists, to announce and claim credit for the new social and educational policies introduced from 1931, and even to involve himself in the disciplining of the Communist intellectuals through his letter to Proletarskaia revoliutsiia. Moreover, after Stalin had gained greater freedom of action with the purge of 1937, he never returned to the policies of the cultural revolution. (The comparison with Mao is instructive.) Just as the collectivization decision seems to have been an unanticipated response to an unexpected grain crisis, so it may well be that the Great Retreat was an unanticipated response to the unexpected chaos of the First Five-Year Plan period—and to the discovery that militant agents of social transformation are likely to be as disrespectful of any new Communist establishment as they were of the old bourgeois one, and that they are wildly impractical in their demands for funds. Nevertheless, there must have been a “politics" of this process of discovery. It would seem plausible to identify Molotov—Moscow secretary and Central Committee secretary from 1928 through 1930—as a leading protagonist and defender of the cultural revolution. On the other hand, top economic administrators like Ordzhonikidze and Kuibyshev might reasonably be expected to push for an end to “impracticality" and for the adoption of social policies that benefitted the managerial personnel. The "industrialists" attitudes may well have been shared by Kaganovich, given his later fifteen-year tenure as chief administrator of Soviet heavy industry. The introduction of the first Great Retreat policies closely followed Molotov's replacement as Moscow and Central Committee secretary by Kaganovich. (The hypothesis about Molotov's backing of the cultural revolution tends to be supported by the fact that from 193o he was the Politburo's top foreign policy expert, and at Comintern level Soviet foreign policy retained a “class-war" content well after 1931, even when it was producing disastrous results in Germany. 11) But this is scarcely the place to pretend to definitive conclusions about conflicts within the Politburo in the 193os. We should, however, be aware that more serious scholarly study of politics within the Stalinist leadership might extend and indeed change the picture established forty years ago by Nicolaevsky's stimulating but unfortunately undocumentable reports in Sotsialisticheskii vestnik. Problems of access aside, there are some basic political facts that can and ought to be elucidated. We have not even bothered to sort out the official responsibilties of the various Central Committee secretaries and the deputy chairmen of the Council of People's Commissars during the late 192os and the 193os. As soon as we recognize the discontinuity of policy in the early 193os, the need for an examination of the policies associated with it becomes abundantly clear. The second set of problems suggested by an awareness of the cultural revolution and its repudiation revolves around the relationship of “state" and “society" in the Stalin period. As a number of essays in this volume have shown, the Party leadership was not acting in a social vacuum. One could contend that the partial coincidence between Party policy and the desires of many societal elements is basically irrelevant—that Stalin was responsive to no societal pressures and that it was happenstance that somebody turned out to be pleased with some of his policies—but such a view is difficult to sustain. The exercise of political power is not limited to the casting of a ballot or the formation of a pressure group. A dissatisfied peasantry can provide a well-nigh impenetrable milieu for successful guerrilla action, and, in principle, it should be as difficult to herd peasants into collective farms as into strategic hamlets. Of course, force and coercion can be applied, but it must be applied by real people with real feelings and interests. "Instruments of control" can wither away—as, in fact, they have done in many revolutionary situations. When a political leadership takes steps that please the young, the talented, and the ambitious (the persons who must invariably provide the spearhead if any revolutionary movement is to be successful), when it provides them with upward mobility into the managerialprofessional strata and rewards them once there, it is unreasonable to deny that political power is being recognized by the leadership and is producing at least an anticipatory response. To be sure, one could put the label of "bureaucrats" upon the administrative-professional personnel of the Stalin period, forget about the rapidly growing skilled labor force, and see these "bureaucrats" as part of the state that was dominating and transforming society. Yet, if this is done, we should recognize that we have changed the basic assumptions of the classic totalitarian model, for that model included the professionalmanagerial personnel among the acted-upon rather than among the shakers of society. Moreover, if the professional-managerial strata are included within the "state,"the meaning of that term has been stretched virtually beyond recognition. Barrington Moore is surely right in saying that in any society industrialization is originally imposed on an unsympathetic and often hostile majority by a relatively small minority.12 (Even 20 percent of the population is still a relatively small minority.) Without doubt, such a generalization is valid in the Soviet case. The fact that the proindustrializing minority—the managers, the professionals, the skilled workers, and even many of the young peasants streaming into the city to become unskilled workerswere employed by the government does not make them different in kind from industrializing minorities in other countries. Of course, even though Stalin functioned within a social context and may have perceived the need to ally himself with and respond to societal forces, he clearly did not need to function as an accommodating mediator or broker among the range of societal forces. By responding to a number of pressures from key groups, he "bought" the ability to suppress many other pressures—as well as many individuals associated with them. (His reign, like that of many authoritarian rulers, demonstrated once more that responsiveness to many of the values and desires of a broad societal group or groups does not necessarily mean civil rights for individuals within the group.) It must also be remembered that Stalin's regime was an increasingly authoritarian one. Even in areas such as city planning, where the final outcome of the changes of the early 193os seems to have been a reasonable balance of the interests and values of the professionals within the field, the rigidity of later years often meant that new professional judgments had little opportunity to influence policy, and that even moderate and "respectable" experimentation became extremely difficult. Any new “imperatives of industrialization" that were learned in the last fifteen years of Stalin's life had to wait until 1954-55 before becoming the subject of serious policymaking. The generalizations advanced here on the relationship of "state" and "society" are undoubtedly too sweeping. In reality, both during the cultural revolution and afterwards, this relationship was a complex and varying one. In a specialized field such as psychoneurology, for example, the enthusiasts and “militants" of cultural revolution tended to be professionals. In education, the revolutionary activists were not only professionals but young politicians with a pre-1928 institutional base in the Komsomol and their presence, of course, gave cultural revolution a different configuration from that of psychoneurology. Similar distinctions need to be made in regard to the Great Retreat policies, whose impact was obviously different in the field of history (where the leadership wanted a partial refurbishing of old national heroes, a task for which Marxist historians were obviously unsuitable) than in rural sociology (where the leadership was peculiarly afraid of the results of any scholarly research, whatever the approach and methodology). But we resort to inadequate generalizations primarily because we still have so much to learn. We know more about “society" in the Stalin period than we do about the divisions within the political leadership, but our knowledge on this subject is also very meager. Even for the years of the cultural revolution, there are many professions and policy areas that could not be discussed within the framework of a single book, and the last twenty years of the Stalin period have hardly been touched as far as serious historical research is concerned. David Joravsky's monumental work on Lysenko¹³ is one of far too few recent works that indicate what can be done despite problems of documentation. Yet whatever picture emerges in detail after a comprehensive scholarly examination, it will certainly reveal a more complex “state-society" relationship than we have ever realized in the past. It will, we hope, provide the basis for a much better model of the Stalin regime than the totalitarian model has proven to be. ## NOTES Fitzpatrick: Editor's Introduction 1. Lenin's most widely cited comments on cultural revolution are in his article "O kooperatsii" (1923). À compilation has been made by G. Karpov, Lenin o kul'turnoi revoliutsii (Moscow, 1967) 2. The standard exposition of the concept is given in Stalin's speech to the Eighteenth Party Congress (1938), in I. V. Stalin, Sochineniia I (XIV), ed. Robert H. McNeal (Stanford, 1967), and elaborated in Bol'shaia sovetskaia entsiklopediia XXIV (2d ed., Moscow, 1953), pp. 364–66. For a recent theoretical discussion, see M. P. Kim, "On cultural revolution as a general law of social development in the transitional period," in Obshchie zakonomernosti perekhoda k sotsializmu i osobennosti ikh proiavlenii v raznykh stranakh (Moscow, 196o). 3. The pioneering work was Max Eastman's Artists in Uniform, first published in 1934. Notable monographic studies are E. J. Brown, The Proletarian Episode in Russian Literature, 1928–1932 (New York, 1953); David Joravsky, Soviet Marxism and Natural Science, 1917-1932 (London, 1961); and Loren R. Graham, The Soviet Academy of Sciences and the Communist Party, 1927-1932 (Princeton, 1967). 4. There are, of course, a number of works on Stalin and the purges. But for the student of Soviet society, the major Western studies remain A. Inkeles and R. Bauer, The Soviet Citizen (Cambridge, Mass., 1959), based on data of the Harvard refugee project, and Merle Fainsod, Smolensk under Soviet Rule (London, 1958), based on data from the Smolensk Archives. Fitzpatrick: Cultural Revolution as Class War 1. Quoted Narodnoe prosveshchenie, 1928 no. 1, p. 26 (Stalin, political report of the Central Committee, Fifteenth Party Congress). 2. Quoted ibid., p. 7 (Rykov's report on the Five-Year Plan), and p. 14 (Molotov's report on work in the countryside). 3. Pravda, 30 November 1927, p. 1: 4. Roy A. Medvedev, Let History Judge. The Origins and Consequences of Stalinism (New York: 1971), p. 112. 5. The meeting was held in Moscow 30 May-3 June 1928 under sponsorship of the agitprop department, with other cultural and educational figures as invited guests. The full stenogram is in B. Olkhovyi, ed., Zadachi agitatsii, propagandy i kul'turnogo stroitel'stva (Moscow-Leningrad, 1928). Krinitskii's speech was also published separately as A. I. Krinitskii, Osnovnye zadachi agitatsii, propagandy i kul'turnogo stroitel'stva (Moscow-Leningrad, 1928). The quotations here are from Krinitskii, op.cit., pp. 10, 17; Pravda, 8 June 1928, p. 5; Kommunisticheskaia revoliutsiia, 1928 no. 17–18, p.166. 6. See Lutchenko, in Voprosy istorii KPSS, 1966 no. 2, p. 33. 7. Kaganovich, XVI syezd VKP(b). Stenograficheskii otchet I (Moscow, 193 5), p.147. 8. Torgovo-promyshlennaia gazeta, 11 March 1928, p.2 (Rykov); Pravda, 30 March 1928, p.3 (Kuibyshev); Pravda, 28 March 1928, p.1 (Ordzhonikidze). For the Ordzhonikidze reference, I am indebted to Kendall Bailes. 9. Lutchenko, loc.cit.; Stalin, speech in XVI syezd VKP(b). Stenograficheskii otchet I (Moscow, 1931), p. 293. 10. On Tomski's attack, see Lunacharskii in Pravda, 2 June 1928, p.7, and Gastev in Pravda, 7 June 1928, p.2. 11. Bukharin, "The proletariat and questions of artistic policy," Krasnaia nov', 1925 no. 4, p. 266. 12. See, for example, Bukharin's speech in Sud'by sovremennoi intelligentsii (Moscow, 1925), p.27. 13. “A class trial," Pravda, 19 May 1928, p.1. 14. Krinitskii, op.cit., p.79. 1 5. A. Avtorkhanov, Stalin and the Soviet Communist Party (London, 1959), p.29. 16. The campaign against Sviderskii is described in detail in Sheila Fitzpatrick, "The emergence of Glaviskusstvo. Class war on the cultural front, Moscow 1928– 29," Soviet Studies, October 1971. 17. F. Vaganov, Pravyi uklon v VKP(b) i ego razgrom (1928–30 gg.) (Moscow, 1970), p. 102. 18. The exact date of Vyshinskii's appointment is not known, but he apparently began work in Narkompros in September (interview with Vyshinskii in Pravda, 25 September 1928, p.6). 19. The volume edited by Khodorovskii, Kakogo inzhenera nuzhny gotovit' nashi vtuzy (Moscow, 1928), was a marshalling of specialist opinion in support of Narkompros's policy, which was currently under attack from Vesenkha. Khodorovskii's coeditor, P. S. Osadchii, was a witness and unindicted coconspirator in the "Industrial Party"trial, and several other contributors were accused or named during the Shakhty or Industrial Party trials. Vyshinskii described Kakogo inzhenera as one of "those historic documents on which investigation and subsequent prosecution in the affair of the Shakhti wreckers and the Industrial Party affair were based" (Nauchnyi rabotnik, 1930 no. 11–12, p. 25). 20. Komsomol'skaia pravda, 15 November 1928, p.4. 21. Conversation with Emil Ludwig on 13 December 1931, in I. V. Stalin, Sochineniia XIII (Moscow, 1951), p.121. 22. Ibid., and comment on Communist literati (1925) in Stalin, Sochineniia VII (Moscow, 1947), Pp. 42-43. 23. For much of the NEP period, Bukharin was the Politburo's liaison with the Komsomol and spokesman on youth. However his lack of rapport with the Komsomol may be judged from his description of the typical Komsomol leader as an ignorant, manipulative little apparatchik (speech to Moscow Party conference, 1927, in Krasnoe stuidenchestvo, 1927–28 no. 11, p.32). As for the RAPP leaders, Bukharin had not only disagreed with them but ridiculed them (see his “The proletariat and questions of artistic policy," Krasnaia nov', 1925 no. 4). 24. Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii, 1929 no. 35–36, pp. 227 ff., 297 ff. 25. The new appointmnents of Bukharin and Kamenev were announced in Komsomol'skaia pravda, 1 June 1929, p.4. 26. For evidence of Bukharin's development of tendencies to “technocratic thinking" in his new job, see Kendall E. Bailes, "The politics of technology: Stalin and technocratic thinking among Soviet engineers," American Historical Review, April 1974. 27. Such rumors are, by their nature, difficult to reconstruct. At the agitprop meeting in May 1928, Krinitskii suggested that Lunacharski's interest in commercial profit for the Soviet film industry was “a mistaken transfer of NEP principles into the field of ideology" (Krinitskii, op.cit., p.23). At a teachers' congress in 1929, Lunacharskii was obliged to give a long self-justification in answer to a question on his charging "fantastic" fees for public lectures (TsGAOR 5462/11/12, pp. 45-46). He was reprimanded by the Central Control Commission of the Party for holding up the Leningrad-Moscow express train to suit his own convenience (Pravda, 22 June 1929, p.3). Other rumors concerned his wife (a stage and cinema actress), his contacts with the acting and literary world, his frequent trips abroad, and an unelucidated diamond smuggling scandal involving one of his or his wife's acquaintances. 28. See Loren R. Graham, The Soviet Academy of Sciences and the Communist Party, 1927–1932 (Princeton, 1967), pp. 114-15. Bukharin was elected to the Academy in February 1929, Lunacharskii in January 1930. 29. T. H. Rigby, Communist Party Membership in the U.S.S.R. 1917–1967 (Princeton, 1968), p.116. 3o. For examples, see Sheila Fitzpatrick, "The 'soft' line on culture and its enemies," Slavic Review, June 1974, which discusses the conflict between leadership policy toward the bourgeois specialists and Communist rank-and-file attitudes. 31. The average monthly salary of employees in the central administration of the RSFSR in the first quarter of 1926–27 was 150.95 rubles, as against 60.02 for workers in census industry (Itogi desiatiletiia sovetskoi vlasti v tsifrakh 1917-1927 [Moscow, (1927)], p.342). In 1925, after a double salary raise, university professors could earn 2oo-z5o rubles a month by the customary practice of holding two to three jobs (each with a six-hour teaching load). But, as the professors complained, their salary "still remains lower than the salary of qualified specialists—engineers, chemists, agronomists, bank employees and so onwho work in the so-called productive commissariats" (Nauchnyi rabotnik, 1925 no. 1, p. 177). 32. A vivid picture of the cafe milieu, from a disapproving but fascinated RAPP perspective obviously based on personal observation, is given in V. Kirshon and A. Uspenskii's topical play Konstantin Terekhin (Rzhavchina) (Moscow, 1927). 33. For information on anti-Communist and other organizations in the schools, see E. Strogova in Komsomol'skaia pravda, 1 April 1928, p.2; I. Chernia in Kommunisticheskaia revoliutsiia, 1928 no. 17-18; Narodnoe prosveshchenie, 1928 no. 5, pp.25, 32, 39. On the Esenin cult, see Upadochnoe nastroenie sredi molodezhi. Éseninshchina (Moscow: Communist Academy, 1927), and M. Koriakov, "Eseninshchina' and Soviet youth," Vozrozhdenie (Paris) XV (1951). 34. M. Gorev in Izvestiia, 13 June 1929, p.4; F. Oleshchuk in Revoliutsiia i kul'tura, 1928 no. 10 (31 May), p.21. 35. See report of Second Congress of Scientific Workers of the USSR, Izvestiia, 13 February 1927, pp. 3-4; and report of XIII All-Union Congress of Soviets (speeches of Pozern and Lezhava) in ibid., 17 April 1927, pp. 5–6. 36. A. Lunacharskii, “The intelligentsia and its place in socialist construction," Revoliutsiia i kul'tura, 1927 no. 1, p.32. 37. Loren R. Graham, The Soviet Academy of Sciences and the Communist Party, pp.120–30. 38. Šmolensk Archives, wKP 33: gubkom bureau, 11 June 1928. 39. Bailes, “The politics of technology," loc.cit., p.446. 40. Rabochaia, gazeta, 17 April 1929, p.8. For other reports of intensified spetseedstvo and flight of engineers after the Shakhty trial, see S. A. Fediukin, Velikii oktiabr' i intelligentsiia (Moscow, 1972), Pp. 386–87. 41. The Vakhitov soap factory in Kazan presents an interesting case, because its Čommunist director had in 1926 exercised local initiative against a group of engineers and been rebuked for "harassment."As a result, the Kazan Party organization was slow to draw implications from the Shakhty trial, despite the fact that the local GPu had unmasked a plot closely modelled on the Shakhty scenario, and had to be rebuked for its failure to harass the engineers. Data from Deiatel'nost'partiinoi organizatsii Tatari po osushchestvleniiu leninskikh idei stroitel'stva sotsialistiskogo obshchestva (Kazan, 1971), pp.201–202. 42. K. V. Gusev and V. Z. Drobizhev, eds., Rabochii klass v upravlenii gosudarstvom (1926–1937 gg.) (Moscow, 1968), pp. 144-45. 43. The Central Committee published no instructions on purging, but in July 1928 the Smolensk gubkom obviously received verbal encouragement from the Central Committee rapporteur (Lominadze) to do so (Smolensk Archives, wKP 33, meeting of plenum of Šmolensk gubkom, 16 July 1928). Narkompros RSFSR tried to discourage purging or, when this proved unsuccessful, to restrict it according to guidelines published in Ezhenedel'nik Narodnogo Komissariata Prosveshcheniia RSFSR, 1929 no. 15, pp.18–19. There was open conflict on the question between the Ukrainian Narkompros and Ukrainian Party Central Committee (see Mikhailov, in Kul'turnaia revoliutsiia v SSSR 1917-1965 [Moscow, 1965], P. 325). 44. "Fighting tasks of the cultural revolution," Pravda, 5 February 1929, p. 1. 45. Narodnoe prosveshchenie, 1929 no. 3-4, p.20. 46. Ibid., p.51. 47. Stalin, Sochineniia XI (Moscow, 1949), pp.72, 78–79, 127–36. 48. On the war games of the Komsomol Cultural Army, see L. S. Frid Ocherki po istori razvitiia politiko-prosvetitel' noi raboty v RSFSR (1917-1929 gg.) (Leningrad, 1941), p.141. 49. The kul'tpokhod was announced at the Eighth All-Union Congress of the Komsomol in May 19z8. The best source is V. A. Kumanev, Sotsializm i vsenarodnaia gramotnost' (Moscow, 1967). 50. Komsomol'skaia pravda, 14 December 1928, p.4. 51. See Central Committee resolution “On the Šaratov kul'tpokhod," cited Kumanev, op.cit., P.191, from Pravda, 13 October 1929; Kaganovich and Bubnov, in XVI s"ezd VKP(b). Stenograficheskii otchet. 52. Broido in Na putiakh k novoi shkole, 1930 no. 1, p.57. 53. Novye formy i metody prosvetitel'noi raboty (Moscow: Narkompros RSFSR, 1929), PP.13-14. 54. “Fighting issues of public education," Pravda, 30 August 1929, p.1; Orgburo resolution of 5 August 1929 "On the directing cadres of educational workers," Narodnoe prosveshchenie, 1929 no. 12, p.12. 55. Biulleten'Narodnogo Komissariata po Prosveshcheniiu RSFSR, 193o no. 19, PP.21 ff. 56. Central Committee resolution "On current tasks of cultural construction in connection with the results of the Second All-Union Party Meeting on Education," 25 July 193o, in Biulleten' Narodnogo Komissariata po Prosveshcheniiu RSFSR, 1930 no. 23, p. 5. 57. I. Trifonov, Ocherki istori klassovoi bor'by v gody NEPa 1921-1937 (Moscow, 196o), p. 174. 58. Day by day reports on the purge of Narkompros appeared in Vecherniaia Moskva through December 1929-January 1930. 59. Narodnoe prosveshchenie, 1929 no. 10–11, p.144. 6o. Compare, for example, the Opposition line on problems of working-class youth described in Molodaia gvardiia, 1926 no.9, pp.99–100, with opinions expressed by Milchakov (one of the minority of anti-Opposition members of the Komsomol Central Committee in 1926) in ibid., 1926 no. 4, p.83; or the expressed opinions of the RAPp leader Averbakh with the Opposition line on literature, which he is attacking, in Na literaturnom postu, 1928 no. 8, p.10. 61. Examples of RApp's insubordination include its attacks on Gorkii; Averbakh's repeated refusal to accept a Central Committee posting outside Moscow during the cultural revolution (S. Sheshukov, Neistovye revniteli. Iz istorii literaturnoi bor'by 20-kh godov [Moscow, 1970], pp.223, 322–23, 335); his support of the Shatskin-Sten criticism of bureaucratic attitudes in the Party; and his failure as editor of the RApp journal Na literaturnom postu to publish, or even for some months to comment upon, the Central Committee resolution of April 1932 dissolving RAPP. 62. Averbakh, in L. Averbakh et al., S kem i pochemu my boremsia (Moscow-Leningrad, 1930), p.4. 63. Krasnaia nov', 1927 no. 6, p.242. 64. Rene Fulop-Miller, The Mind and Face of Bolshevism (London and New York, 1927). The book describes virtually every Communist visionary who could be met in Moscow circa 1924 (vastly overestimating their importance at that time). However, many of the men and ideas the author mentions really did become influential during the cultural revolution. 65. Stalin, Political Report of the Central Committee to the Sixteenth Party Congress, in his Sochineniia XII (Moscow, 1949), Pp.369–70: "We are for the withering away of the state. And at the same time we stand for the strengthening of the dictatorship of the proletariat, which is the mightiest and most powerful of all state powers that have existed up to the present time. The highest development of state power with the purpose of preparing conditions for the withering away of state power—that is the Marxist formula. Is that 'contradictory'? Yes, it is contradictory. But it is a contradiction of life itself, and it wholly reflects Marx's dialectic."Even after Stalin's statement, ideas of the withering away of the state, of social classes, and of the distinction between mental and physical labor and town and countryside continued to circulate. Two years later, Molotov had to explain again that no such radical transfiguration could be expected during the Second Five-Year Plan (XVII konferentsiia Vsesoiuznoi Kommunisticheskoi Partii (b). Stenograficheskii otchet [Moscow, 1932], pp.145-48). 66. See comment by A. S. Bubnov in his Statyi i rechi (Moscow, 1959) pp.358-59. The relevant legislation is in Biulleten' Narodnogo Komissariata po Prosveshcheniiu RSFSR, 1931 no. 12, pp.2–3; 1931 no. 14-15, pp.21–26; 1933 no. 11, p.7; 1933 no. 13, p.6. 67. À report on the workers' delegation to Narkompros is in Komsomol'skaia pravda, 6 February 1929, and of the Narkompros collegium meeting at the 'Geofizika' factory in Izvestiia, 26 February 1929. 68. N. de Witt, Education and Professional Employment in the USSR (Washington, D. C.: National Science Foundation, 1961), p.783. 69. Čalculated from Sotsialisticheskoe stroitel'stvo SSSR. Statisticheskii ezhegodnik (Moscow, 1934), pp.406, 410. 7o. K. V. Gusev and V. Z. Drobizhev, eds., Rabochii klass v upravleni gosudarstvom (1926–1937 gg.) (Moscow, 1968), p.157. 71. Sotsialisticheskoe stroitel'stvo SSSR (Moscow, 1934), p.410. 72. See Za promyshlennye kadry, 1933 no. 8–9, p.76; Vsesoiuznyi komitet po vysshemu tekhnicheskomu obrazovaniiu pri TsIK SSSR, Biulleten', 1933 no. 9–10, p.7; A. N. Veselov, Professional'no-tekhnicheskoe obrazovanie v SSSR (Moscow, 1961), p.285. 73. See, for example, comments by Iakovleva, Pokrovskii, and Krupskaia in Narodnoe prosveshchenie, 1929 no. 3-4, pp. 30,43,51. 74. Sotsial'nyi i natsional' nyi sostav VKP(b). Itogi vsesoiuznoi partiinoi perepisi 1927 goda (Moscow, 1928), Pp.41, 45. 75. Speech of 23 June 1931, in'I. Stalin, Sochineniia XIII (Moscow, 1951), pp.69-73. 76.'"On some questions of the history of Bolshevism," Proletarskaia revoliutsiia, 1931 no. 6; also in Stalin, Sochineniia XIII (Moscow, 1951), pp.84-102. 77. Central Committee resolution of 25 March 1931 "On the complete cessation of mobilization of workers from the bench for current campaigns of local Party, soviet and other organizations,"Partiinoe stroitel'stvo, 1931 no. 7, p.63. The resolution also forbade reduction of the working day for factory workers engaged in part-time study or any public or social activities. 78. Bubnov, speech of 23 April 1931, in Kommunisticheskoe prosveshchenie, 1931 no. 12, p.18. 79. For example, in his speech to the conference of Marxist rural scholars, 27 December 1929, in Stalin, Sochineniia XII, pp. 141 ff.; and in his verbal encouragement to the young Communist Academy radicals Iudin and Mitin to attack the ex-Menshevik philosopher Deborin (see David Joravsky, Soviet Marxism and Natural Science 1917–1932 [London, 1961], p.262). 8o. Stalin wrote in a letter to the proletarian dramatist Bill-Belotserkovskii on 2 February 1929: "I consider the very posing of the question of rightists' and 'leftists' in our literature . . . incorrect. The concept of ‘right' and 'left' in our country is a Party concept or, more exactly, an inner-Party concept. 'Rightists' and 'leftists' are people deviating to one side or other of the pure Party line. Therefore it would be strange to apply these concepts to such a non-party and incomparably wider field as literature." (Stalin, Sochineniia XI [Moscow, 1949], p.326.) 81. For further discussion on this point, see my article "Culture and politics under Stalin: a reappraisal," Slavic Review, June 1976. 82. According to one source, between January 1930 and October 1933, 666,ooo worker-Communists were promoted to administrative or managerial positions or sent to higher education (I. F. Petrov ed., Kommunisticheskaia partiia - um, chest' i sovest' nashei epokhi [Moscow, 1969], pp.221-22). I am indebted to Jerry Hough for this reference. 83. Vera S.·Dunham, In Stalin's Time. Middleclass Values in Soviet Fiction (London and New York, 1976). 84. See Vsesoiuznoe soveshchanie zhen khoziaistvennikov i inzhenernotekhnicheskikh rabotnikov tiazheloi promyshlennosti. Stenograficheskii otchet (Moscow, 1936). ## Lewin: Society, State, and Ideology during the First Five-Year Plan 1. F. Lorimer, The Population of the Soviet Union: History and Prospects (Geneva, 1946), pp. 38–39, 40. 2. Ibid., p.22. 3. L. M. Spirin, Klassy i partii v grazhdanskoi voine v Rossii, 1917–1920 (Moscow, 1968), p. 301. 4. Ibid., p.386. 5. Ibid., pp.386–87. His material is from the Central Party Archives. 6. O. I. Šhkaratan, Problemy sotsial'noi struktury rabochego klassa SSSR (Moscow, 1970), pp.351–54. 7. Ibid., p.256. He explains these phenomena as well as the oppositions inside the party at that time—notably the Workers' Opposition—as results of vacillations under the pressure of “spontaneous forces" (stikhiia). 8. A. A. Matiugin and D. A. Baevskii eds., Izmeneniia v chislennosti i sostave sovetskogo rabochego klassa (Moscow, 1961), p.83. 9. Mikhail Zoshchenko (1895–1958), author of many humorous stories of life under NEP; Ilia Ilf and Evgenii Petrov were joint authors of the satirical novels The Twelve Chairs (1928) and The Little Golden Calf (1931). 1o. Computed by Sovnarkom's Committee for the Assessment of the Tax Burden, published in Statisticheskii spravochnik SSSR za 1928 god (Moscow, 1929), pp.42-43, where we also took our figures on the social groups. The figures deal with “employed" (without their families). The figures are rounded off throughout this paper, since we are interested only in the order of magnitude. 11. I. Magidovich, in Statisticheskoe obozrenie, 1928 no. 11, p.8o. 12. Statisticheskii spravochnik SSSR za 1928 god, pp.796-97. 13. A. Ya. Levin, Šotsial'no-ekonomicheskie uklady v SSSR v period perekhoda ot kapitalizma k sotsializmu: goskapitalizm i chastnyi kapital (Moscow, 1967), p.23, for the year 1925–26. 14. Magidovich, in Statisticheskoe obozrenie, 1928 no. 11, p.87. All such figures have to be treated with considerable caution. People were prudent and left undeclared everything they could. But the scope of the capitalist sector is certainly reflected here realistically. 15. The chairman of the agriculture department in Ivanovo-Voznesensk gubernia, himself of peasant stock, stated quite clearly: “The peasant is used to seeing in the government an alien force." Quoted in M. P. Kim, ed., Sovetskaia intelligentsiia: istoriia formirovaniia i rosta (Moscow, 1968), p. 14o. 16. See the excellent paper by V. P. Danilov, “The rural population of the USSR on the eve of collectivization," Istoricheskie zapiski, 1963 no. 74, p.96. 17. See M. Lewin, "Who was the Soviet kulak?", Soviet Studies, 2, XVIII (1966). 18. Iu. V. Arutiunian, Sotsial'naia struktura sel'skogo naselenia SSSR (Moscow, 1971), p.26. 19. Stat. spravochnik ... za 1928 g., p.42. zo. V. P. Danilov, "Towards a characterization of the social and political circumstances in the Soviet countryside on the eve of collectivization,"Istoricheskie zapiski, 1966 no. 79, p.37; N. A. Ivnitskii, Klassovaia bor'ba v derevne i likvidatsiia kulachestva kak klassa (Moscow, 1972), pp.71, 74. 21. Ivnitskii, Klassovaiia bor'ba ... klassa, p.65. 22. In 1928 there were only 233,000 specialists with higher education, and among them only about 48,00o engineers. A further 288,000 people had secondary specialized education. See Trud v SSSR, Statisticheskii sbornik (Moscow, 1968), pp.251, 262. 23. R. Pethybridge, The Social Prelude to Stalinism (London, 1974), p.196. The quotation is taken from the title of a chapter in this book. 24. See table in Kim, Sovetskaia intelligentsiia, p.134. 25. Strumilin's computation, quoted in L. Averbakh, Na putiakh kul'turnoi revoliutsii, 3d ed. (Moscow, 1929), p.72. 26. Rykov and Lunacharskii quoted in Averbakh, Na putiakh kul'turnoi revoliutsii, pp.64 and 68 respectively. 27. Arutiunian, Sotsial'naia struktura, p.38. In 1924 a peasant child would have, on the average, two to three years schooling, children in cities3.1 years per child. Such data give a fair picture of the low starting point, in terms of popular education, the regime had to build on. 28. Averbakh, Na putiakh, p.166. 29. Averbakh, ibid., pp.186–87, quoting Trotsky's “anti-Leninist" opinion from Literatura i revoliutsiia. 30. According to Kim, ed., Sovetskaia intelligentsiia, p.174, workers and peasants occupied half the places in higher educational institutions (“vuzy" rendered as “universities" in text). The other halfand after 1926 even more went to “employees" and "others" (i.e., children of the propertied classes, past and present). 31. Quoted in M. P. Kim, ed., Kul'turnaia revoliutsiia v SSSR, 1917-1965 (Moscow, 1967), p.95. 32. Óblomov is the hero of a nineteenth-century novel of that title by I. Goncharov—a “superfluous man" who sinks into idleness and lethargy on his provincial estate. 33. Quoted in Averbakh, Na putiakh, p.121. 34. Ibid., p.176. 35. R. Pethybridge, The Social Prelude to Stalinism, p. 350; and see his chapter on "Illiteracy. 36. M. A. Vyltsan, Sovetskaia derevnia nakanune velikoi otechestvennoi voiny (Moscow, 1970), p. 142; Lorimer, The Population of the Soviet Union: History and Prospects, p.112, states that the overall growth rate, 1926–39, was 1.23% a year. This was very high when compared with other countries, but it was much higher in the USSR itself in 1926 and i927 as well as, probably, in 1938. Tsarist Russia saw its population grow by 1.74% a year during the period 1897–1914. 37. Sotsialisticheskoe stroitel'stvo v SSSR (Moscow 1935), p. xlviii, claims a population of 165,748,400 at the end of 1932, but the 1939 census found only about 5 million inhabitants more. Something must have been very wrong. The 1937 census was disavowed by the government; many statisticians were purged as "wreckers." 38. For information on otkhod in those years see A. M. Panfilova, Formirovanie rabochego klassa SSSR v gody pervoi piatiletki (Moscow, 1964) 39. Narodnoe khoziaistvo SSSR v 1956 g. (Moscow 1957), p.656; Arutiunian, in A. P. Dadykin, ed., Formirovanie i razvitie sovetskogo rabochego klassa 1917- 1961 (Moscow 1964), Pp.113-15; M. Iu. Pisarev, Naselenie i trud ν ŠSŚR (Moscow, 1966), p.68 and passim. 40. M. Ia. Sonin, Vosproizvodstvo rabochei sily v SSSR i balans truda (Moscow 1959), p.143; Statisticheskii spravochnik SSSR za 1960 g. (Moscow, 1961), p.11o. It is quite revealing to read Stalin saying in June 1931 (Stalin, Sochineniia XIII [Moscow, 1951], p.53): "There is no longer any 'flight of the peasant to the city' or ‘spontaneous movement [samotëk] of the labor force.'" Soviet scholars had to repeat this outrageous misrepresentation for years. What was really happening was pandemonium—both "flight" and "spontaneous movement" as never before. 41. A. V. Kornilov, Na reshaiushchem etape (Moscow, 1968), Pp.158–59; Panfilova, Formirovanie, p.8o. 42. S. Ordzhonikidze, Stat'i i rechi II (Moscow, 1956), PP. 411-12. 43. For some data on this see Ordzhonikidze, ibid.; Pravda, 15 November 1931; Spravochnik partiinogo rabotnika vypusk 8 (Moscow, 1934), pp.846–49; Bol'shevik, 1934 no. 7, p.16. 44. Nicholas S. Timasheff, The Great Retreat. The Growth and Decline of Communism in Russia (New York: E. P. Dutton and Co.), 1946. 45. Ivnitskii, Klassovaia bor'ba, p.242. 46. N. I. Nemakov, Kommunisticheskaia partiia—organizator massovogo kolkhoznogo dvizheniia (1929-32), pp.159, 168. The category of lishentsy was abolished in 1935 (see Pravda, 30 December 1935). 47. Sobranie zakonov i rasporiazhenii raboche-krest'ianskogo pravitel'stva SSSR 1930, no. 50, art. 524. This is an interesting document in which the sociologist and historian may study the condemned capitalist elements, most of whom never saw much of any “capital" in their lives. 48. Sobranie zakonov 1930, no. 19, art. 212, lists such actions as “abuses" and forbids them, but this could not have had any effect since the same people could easily be persecuted under other headings. 49. S. Bulatov, in Sovetskoe gosudarstvo, 1933 no. 4, p.71. 50. Data in Statisticheskoe obozrenie, 1928 no. 2, p.8o; on capital value per average shop or commercial enterprise, see A. Ia. Levin, Sotsioekonomicheskie uklady, p.125. 51. A full list of offenses that either increased considerably or became the object of a special campaign, and therefore looked particularly ominous, is given in Sovetskaia Íustitsiia, 1932 no. 34, p.13. 52. O. I. Shkaratan, Problemy sotsial'noi struktury, p.264. 53. A. Stepanian, in V. S. Semenov, Klassy, sotsial'nye sloi i gruppy v SSSR (Moscow, 1968), pp.20–21. 54. Sovetskaia lustitsiia, 1932 no. 2, p.15. 55. Sobranie zakonov 1932, no. 78, art. 475, and no. 45, art. 244. 56. Quoted in J. Azrael, Managerial Power and Soviet Politics (Cambridge, Mass., 1966), pp.247–48. 57. Kaganovich, in Bol'shevik, 1936 no. 13, p. 54. 58. Kirov, Izbrannye stati'i i rechi (Moscow, 1957), pp.700–707. 59. In my article "Taking Grain," in C. Abramsky, ed., Essays in Honour of E. H. Carr (London, 1974), I describe the mechanism of the procurements and their effect on the development of the kolkhozy. 60. Arutiunian, Sotsiaľ naia struktura, p.1 58. 61. Ibid. One quarter of the peasants still could not read in 1939. 62. Iaroslavskii, quoted in Kim, ed., Kul'turnaia revoliutsiia, p.248. 63. S. Syrtsov, in Bol'shevik, 1930 no. 5, pp.47–49, which is the source of the summary that follows. 64. “Okazënivanie krestian" is the term used by a peasant delegate in VI s"ezd sovetov, bulletin, 1931 no. 2o, p.3. He explained that this meant depriving them of the results of their labor, and said that kulaks laughed at the kolkhozniki because they were now “on rations"(na paike). 65. Machine Tractor Stations (Mts) were set up in 1929 to consolidate tractor and machinery holdings and service the kolkhozy. Later they also assumed functions of political supervision over the kolkhozy. 66. A. Ia. Iakovlev, Voprosy organizatsii sotsialisticheskogo sel'skogo khoziaistva (Moscow, 1933), p. 184. Sheboldaev is quoted from XVII konferentsiia VKP(b), Stenograficheskii otchet (Moscow, 1932), p. 208. 67. L. Kaganovich, in Na agrarnom fronte, 1933 no. 1, p.40. 68. The Central Committee decision is in Partiinoe stroitel'stvo, 1933 no. 5, p.62. The document illustrates the kind of menacing language the Central Committee was then using. 69. N. V. Krylenko was Commissar of Justice of the RSFSR. 70. Sovetskaia lustitsiia, 1932 no.5–6, p.16. The same periodical (1933 no. 15) adds more categories of typical transgressions of the “crude administrative" variety: forcing the kolkhoz to feed all kinds of parasites favored by the raion bosses; imposing illegal corvees; preempting money from the bank accounts of the kolkhozy; taking cattle away from them, and so on. 71. S. Krasikov, Sergei Mironovich Kirov (Moscow, 1964), p.176 72. Summarized from Sputnik kommunista v derevne, 1933 no. 2, p.48. 73. Kirov is quoted from Krasikov, Sergei Mironovich Kirov, p. 176; Stalin from Partiinoe stroitel'stvo, 1933 no. 5, p.3. 74. There was even a formal prohibition against creating mutual aid funds from kolkhoz resources: it could be done only on the basis of private contributions from the kolkhozniki—see Sputnik kommunista v derevne, 1933 no. 2, p.48. 75. Sotsialisticheskoe zemledelie, 1933 no. 16–17, p.9. 76. Arutiunian, Sotsial'naia struktura, p. 57. 77. Ordzhonikidze speaking at the Seventeenth Party Conference in 1932, in Stat'i i rechi II, p.340. 78. Quoted in Kim, ed., Sovetskaia intelligentsiia, pp.48, 56. 79. V. I. Lenin, Sochineniia, XL, 5th ed. (Moscow, 196z), pp.199, 218. 80. Kim, ed., Sovetskaia intelligentsiia, Pp. 126–27; S. A. Fediukin, Velikii oktiabr' i intelligentsiia (Moscow, 1972), p.377. 81. The Shakhty trial of engineers for wrecking and sabotage was held in May-June 1928. See Fitzpatrick, "Cultural revolution as class war," this volume. 82. Kim, ed., Sovetskaia intelligentsiia, p. 127, admits that such fears were well founded, but he puts the blame on “Makhaevite tendencies" among workers and exempts policy makers from any share in it. 83. Pravda, 17 August 1931. 84. Suicides were committed even in such inconspicuous places as Rzhev, where intellectuals could not have been too numerous. The party leadership was disturbed by the phenomenon. See Smolensk Archives WKP 55 (document dated July 1930). 85. Kim, ed., Sovetskaia intelligentsiia, pp.324-25. 86. M. Iu. Pisarev, Naselenie i trud SSSR (Moscow, 1966), p.41. 87. Figures from the 193o survey are in M. P. Kim, ed., Industrializatsiia SSSR 1929–1932 (Moscow, 1970), p. 571; data on the 1933 survey are in Sotsialisticheskoe stroitel'stvo SSSR (Moscow, 1935), p. 522. 88. This is an assessment for the year 1937 made by S. L. Seniavskii, Izmeneniia v sotsial'noi strukture sovetskogo obshchestva 1938–1970 (Moscow, 1973), p.299. According to him, by 194o the intelligentsia (in which he includes only specialists with higher or secondary professional education) constituted only 3.3% of the employed population, whereas the “non-specialized officials"constituted 13.2% of the total employed work force. 89. Sobranie zakonov 1931, no. 44, art. 322. 90. Iu. B. Borisov, in Kim, ed., Kul turnaia revoliutsiia, p.138. Such figures can be used only as indications of trends; their exactitude is very questionable. 91. V.I. Kuzmin, Istoricheskii opyt Sovetskoi industrializatsii (Moscow, 1963), p.149. 92. The preference for “crude leadership" does not mean that every manager actually was a despotic type. There certainly were many of the traditional Russian "paternalist" type and some, a minority, of “businesslike" frame of mind and style (delovye), compromising and conniving. Whatever the typology, their power and privileges were common to the whole category, especially in the more important enterprises and establishments. 93. G. Shklovskii, in Revoliutsiia prava, 1930 no. 7, p.89. 94. Ibid. 95. Ibid., pp.59–61. 96. P. I. Stuchka, in Revoliutsiia prava, 1930 no. 10, p.19. 97. Ordzhonikidze, Stat'i i rechi Il, pp. 228–29. 98. “You can dig there as much as you like, they won't give you exact data." Ibid., p.228. 99. These are quotations from P. Postyshev's speech in Kharkov, in Partiinoe stroitel'stvo, 1933 no. 5: he was expressing the generally accepted tenets of what was then "the Bolshevik art of leadership." 100. Syrtsov, O nedostatkakh i zadachakh (Moscow-Leningrad, 1930), p.15 (speech of February 1930). 101. Bol'shevik, 1934 no. 21, p.12. 102. KPSS v resoliutsiiakh s"ezdov i konferentsii II (Moscow, 1957), pp.541,546. 103. L. F. Morozov and V. P. Portnov, Organy partiino-gosudarstvennogo kontrolia 1923-1934 (Moscow, 1964), pp.139–42. 104. S. Ikonnikov, Sozdanie i deiateľ nost' obedinënnykh organov TsKK-RKI v 1923-1934 godakh (Moscow, 1971), p.212. Lapidus: Educational Strategies and Cultural Revolution 1. An element of ambiguity arises in using the term “cultural revolution," which has both a general and a specific connotation, and describes a broad developmental process as well as a specific historical episode. The two connotations, moreover, are not necessarily congruent. As Sheila Fitzpatrick points out in her introductory essay, the proletarian cultural revolution of 1928–32 in the USSR departed in its scope, methods, and goals from the Leninist conception of cultural revolution as a process of gradual ideological transformation. This redefinition was subsequently repudiated, and the Leninist usage was restored. To avoid confusion, the term will be capitalized when used to refer to the events of 1928–32. 2. See Kenneth Jowitt, "An Organizational Approach to the Study of Political Culture in Marxist-Leninist Systems," The American Political Science Review, LXVIII, 3 (September 1974). For a more general treatment of conflicting perspectives and strategies with respect to cultural revolution in the USSR, see Gregory Massell, The Surrogate Proletariat: Moslem Women and Revolutionary Strategies in Soviet Central Asia 1919-1929 (Princeton, 1974); and Gail Warshofsky Lapidus, Women in Soviet Society: Equality, Development and Social Change (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1977), chapter 3. For a comparative perspective, see Massell's “Family Law and Social Mobilization in Soviet Central Asia: Some Comparisons with Communist China," Canadian Slavonic Papers, no. 2-3 (Summer 1975), and Richard Fagen, The Transformation of Political Culture in Cuba (Stanford, 1969). 3. For the view that the struggle to create a new type of “socialist man" is a special case of the more general transformation of traditional attitudes, values, and behavior in the process of modernization, see the suggestive paper by Alex Inkeles, "The Modernization of Man in Socialist and Non-Socialist Countries," presented at symposium on The Social Consequences of Modernization in Socialist Countries, Salzburg, Austria, September i972. 4. For several examples among many, see George Bereday, William Brickman, and Gerald Read, eds., The Changing Soviet School (Cambridge, Mass., 196o); Alex Inkeles, Social Change in Soviet Russia, chapter 1 (Cambridge, Mass., 1968); Jaan Pennar, Ivan Bakalo, George Bereday, Modernization and Diversity in Soviet Education (New York, 1971). 5. Merle Fainsod, How Russia is Ruled (Cambridge, Mass., 1963), p.111. 6. Richard Lowenthal, "Development vs. Utopia in Communist Policy," in Chalmers Johnson, ed., Change in Communist Systems (Stanford, 1970) 7. KPSS v rezoliutsiiakh i resheniiakh s"ezdov, konferentsii i plenumov TsK (Moscow, 1954), I, p.419. 8. A. V. Lunacharskii, O narodnom obrazovanii (Moscow, 1958), p. 523. 9. For a discussion of the mechanisms used to influence the social composition of educational institutions, the shifting policies that guided their use, and the outcomes of these efforts, see Gail Warshofsky Lapidus, "Socialism and Modernity: Education, Industrialization and Social Change in the USSR," in P. Cocks, R. Daniels, and N. Heer, The Dynamics of Soviet Politics (Cambridge, Mass., 1976); James McClelland, "Stalin's Changing Educational Goals: Proletarianizing the Student Body," Past and Present (forthcoming); David Lane, "The Impact of Revolution on the Selection of Students for Higher Education: Soviet Russia, 1917–1928," Sociology (London, 1973); and Oskar Anweiler, "Educational Policy and Social Structure in the Soviet Union," in Boris Meissner, ed., Social Change in the Soviet Union (Notre Dame, Ind., 1972). 10. Narodnoe prosveshchenie v RSFSR k 1928/29 godu: Otchet NKP za 1927/ 28 uchebnyi god (Moscow, 1929), p.65. The statistical data must be used with great caution, as the pressures for proletarianization encouraged the misrepresentation of social status. Even allowing for a substantial inflationary effect, however, McClelland's careful analysis confirms the trend toward increasing worker representation, partly at the expense of the peasant cohort. 11. KPSS, I, PP.419–20. 12. Nadezhda Krupskaia, Pedagogicheskie sochineniia v desiati tomax, VII, p.12 (Moscow, 1959). 13. Sheila Fitzpatrick, "The 'Soft' Line on Culture and Its Enemies: Soviet Cultural Policy, 1922-1927," Slavic Review, June 1974. 14. Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Commissariat of Enlightenment: Soviet Organization of Education and the Arts under Lunacharsky (Cambridge, 1971), p.22o. 15. Ibid., p.215. 16. Lunacharskii, O narodnom obrazovanii, p.438. 17. Narodnoe prosveshchenie, 1925, 10–11; V. N. Shulgin and M. V. Krupenina, V bor'be za marksistkuiu pedagogiku, and the writings of Shulgin discussed at greater length in this paper. 18. Lunacharskii, Ó narodnom obrazovanii, pp.403-405. 19. See the discussion in Sheila Fitzpatrick, this volume, Pp.9-11. 2o. For an editorial encouraging the purges, see Pravda, 5 February 1929. The opposition of Lunacharskii is expressed in Narodnoe prosveshchenie, 1929, 3-4, 4–5, and Pravda, 1 April 1929; of Krupskaia in Pravda, 8 June 1929, Na putiakh k novoi shkole, 193o, 4-5. A resolution of Sovnarkom opposing the expulsions is included in Direktivy VKP, p. 149. 21. For a detailed account, see Merle Fainsod, Smolensk under Soviet Rule (Cambridge, Mass., 1958), pp.343–63. 22. Ibid., P.345. 23. Ibid., pp.355-56. 24. Nicholas DeWitt, Education and Professional Employment in the USSR (Washington, 1961), p.655. 25. Šee, for example, Krupskaia's remarks at the meeting of the Narkompros collegium, December 1929, in Spornye voprosy marksistkoi pedagogiki (Moscow, 1930), p.49. 26. KPSS . . ., p. 519. 27. F. F. Korolev, Narodnoe khoziaistvo i narodnoe obrazovanie v SSSR (Moscow, 1961), p.24. 28. Spornye voprosy, p.33. 29. This effort to systematize Shulgin's views draws on a variety of his writings over a number of years. Because its purpose is to present a schematic overview rather than to explore the particular context in which each work was written and the specific problems that it addressed, it tends to minimize shifts of emphasis and approach that would emerge more sharply in a chronological treatment. Shulgin's writings include a long series of essays published in Na putiakh k novoi shkole, as well as Osnovnye voprosy sotsialnogo vospitaniia (Moscow, 1926); O novom uchebnike (Moscow, 1927); Obshchestvennaia rabota shkoly i programmy GUS (Moscow, 1926); V bor'be za marksistkuiu pedagogiku (with M. V. Krupenina) (Moscow, 1929); "Vospitanie narodnikh mass s tochki zreniia revoliutsionnogo proletariata," in A. G. Kalashnikov, ed., Pedagogicheskaia Entsiklopediia, vol. I (Moscow, 1927); and V. N. Shulgin, ed., Problemy nauchnoi pedagogiki: pedagogika perikhodnoi epokhi (Moscow, 193o). The most illuminating western treatments of Shulgin's ideas and their significance are Oskar Anweiler's Geschichte dėr Schule und Pädagogik in Russland vom Ende des Zahrenreiches bis zum Beginn der Stalin-Ara (Berlin, 1964), pp.414-28, and a chapter in a forthcoming study by Sheila Fitzpatrick, Education and Social Mobility in the Soviet Union: A Political History of Soviet Education, 1921-1934. 30. Spornye voprosy, pp.1-19. 31. Ibid., p.34. 32. The relevant decrees are gathered in Direktivy VKP (B) i postanovleniia sovetskogo pravitel'stva 0 narodnom obrazovanii, 1917-1947 (Moscow, 1947), PP.151 ff. 33. Kenneth Jowitt, Revolutionary Breakthroughs and National Development (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1971), p.115. 34. For statistics on enrollments by field of specialization, see Nicholas De-Witt, Education and Professional Employment in the USSR (Washington, D.C., 1961), p.638. 35. For a discussion of the changes in psychological theory underlying the reorientation of educational policy, see Raymond Bauer, The New Man in Soviet Psychology (Cambridge, 1955). 36. For an illustration of the new ethos, see George Counts, trans., I Want to be Like Stalin (New York, 1947). Joravsky: The Construction of the Stalinist Psyche 1. Lenin, Sochineniia (4th ed.) XLIV, p. 227. 2. See A. I. Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago (New York, 1973), p. 328, for the quotation from Lenin, and passim, for Solzhenitsyn's views on the cultural revolution. 3. For a lead into the large Soviet literature on the cultural revolution, see "Kul'turnaia revoliutsiia," Sovetskaia istoricheskaia entsiklopediia VIII (1965), pp.279–86, with bibliography. The main official writer is M. P. Kim. See, for example, Kim, ed., Sovetskaia intelligentsiia (Istoriia formirovaniia i rosta 1917- 1965 gg.) (Moscow, 1968). For an antiestablishment historian who dissents from the stress on continuity and insists on a sharp break between the Leninist and Stalinist phases, see Roy Medvedev, Let History Judge (New York, 1972). Relaxation of the strict controls on Soviet historiography would undoubtedly lead to a major debate on this theme. 4. A. Amalrik, Will the Soviet Union Survive until 1984? (New York, 1970). 5. I am summarizing here the picture of the great break that I offered in Joravsky, Soviet Marxism and Natural Science, 1917-1932 (New York, 1961), pp.233-314, and in The Lysenko Affair (Cambridge, Mass., 1970), passim. 6. See Joravsky, Soviet Marxism and Natural Science, ch. 17. 7. E. Kol'man, "Politics, economics and mathematics," Za marksistskoleninskoe estestvoznanie, 1931 no. 1, p.27. This is a speech Kol'man gave to the Society of Materialist-Dialectical Mathematicians on November 29, 193o. It is reprinted in his Na bor'bu za materialisticheskuiu dialektiku v matematike (Moscow, 1931). 8. See, for example, Kommunisticheskaia Akademiia, Institut vysshei nervnoi deiatel'nosti, Vysshaia nervnaia deiatel' nost'; sbornik trudov instituta (Moscow, 1929), pp.ix-x, for a confession of continuing failure in the search for a distinctively Marxist approach. See also Kornilov's frank talk in the introduction to Psikhologiia, 1928 no. 1, p.3. See also Kornilov's introduction and his opening article in Problemy sovremennoi psikhologii (Moscow, 1928), vol. III of Uchenye zapiski Instituta eksperimental'noi psikhologii. 9. See P. O. Efrussi, Uspekhi psikhologii v Rossi (Petrograd, 1923), for an account of the Congress on Psychoneurology in Moscow, January 10–15, 1923, at which Kornilov launched the drive. His “Contemporary psychology and Marxism," Pod znamenem marksizma, 1923 no. 1, contains the "themes of my speech . . ., where I raised, for the first time in the Russian literature, the problem of 'psychology and Marxism'." The quotation is from Psikhologiia i marksizm (Moscow, 1925), p.233. At the Second Psychoneurological Congress, January 3-10, 1924, Zalkind was the most effective orator pleading for a Marxist psychology. See the account in G. Daian, "The Second Psychoneurological Congress," Krasnaia nov', 1924 no. 2 (19), pp. 163–64. Cf. Vrachebnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 1, p. 52, for Zalkind saying that the struggle for Marxism in psychology began in 1919, and “seriously" in 192z, in “the psycho-physiological section of the Institute of Communist Education, which was created on the initiative of APO-TsK,"i.e., the Agitprop Division of the Central Committee. That explicit link with Agitprop, claimed for the first time in 193o, is not evident in the publications of the twenties. 1o. Very extensive searches by Soviet scholars have not turned up, for example, a single reference to Pavlov in the prerevolutionary writings of Marxists, or a single reference to Marxism in the prerevolutionary writings of Pavlovians. Plekhanov and the other Russian radicals who came to intellectual maturity in the 187os had some interest in the philosophical aspects of- psychology, but Lenin's generation had almost none. The whole matter will be examined in detail in a book that I am now writing on the history of the Pavlov school from the 186os to the 1950s. ## 11. See below, p.123. 12. See below, pp. 124 ff., for the first steps toward the deification of Pavlov. For the “Pavlov Sessions" of 1950–51, see Akademiia Nauk SSSR, Nauchnaia sessiia, posviashchennaia problemam fiziologicheskogo ucheniia Akademika I.P.Pavlova, 28 iiunia-4 iiulia 1950 g. (Moscow, 1950), and Akademiia Meditsinskikh Nauk SSSR, Fiziologicheskoe uchenie Akademika I.P.Pavlova v psikhiatrii i nevropatologii; materialy . . . zasedaniia ... 11-15 oktiabria 1951 g. (Moscow, 1951). 13. For recent signs of Soviet scholars struggling to hold to these legends while taking cognizance of facts that tend to undermine them, see M. Ia. Iaroshevskii, Istoriia psikhologii (Moscow, 1966), and A. V. Petrovskii, Istoriia sovetskoi psikhologii (Moscow, 1967). 14. See Joravsky, Soviet Marxism and Natural Science. 1 5. For a brief, frank characterization of the schools, see Iu. V. Frankfort, "On the struggle for Marxist psychology," Krasnaia nov', 1927 no. 10, pp. 169–96. 16. See the account in Zhurnal nevropatologii. i psikhiatrii, 1930 no. 3, pp.98-107. 17. Ibid. Cf. Zalkind's different figures in Pedologiia, 1930 no. 2, pp. 161–62. 18. See items noted in notes 16 and 17. Cf. Vrachebnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 1, p.52. 19. See Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatrii, 1930 nos. 3 et seq., for the Society's journal under the new leadership. 2o. See, for example, B. M. Rozentsvaig, "The bases for the establishment of psycho-neurological clinics," Moskovskii meditsinskii zhurnal, 1929 no. 11-12, pp.85-95; V. A. Giliarovski, "Urbanization and the rise of pathological elements in the neuro-psychic milieu," in Psikhonevrologicheskie nauki v SSSR (Moscow, 1930), pp.334-35; and V. V. Dekhterev, “Establishment of clinics as a basis of struggle with exhaustion of the nervous system,"Klinicheskaia meditsina, 193o no. 19–20, pp.1094-99. 21. Ġannushkin, "On protecting the health of the Party aktiv," Revoliutsiia i kul'tura, 1930 no. 4. 22. Rokhlin, "Mental-health work among the Party aktiv," Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatrii, 1930 no. 3, p.25. Rokhlin repeated this apothegm in a number of publications. 23. See, for example, A. B. Zalkind, "Illnesses of the Party aktiv," Krasnaia nov', 1925 no. 4, pp. 187-203. For a collection of his articles on this subject, see Zalkind, Rabota i byt obshchestvennogo aktiva (Moscow, 193o). Cf. Zalkind, Umstvennyi trud; Gigiena i ratsionalizatsiia umstvennoi deiatel'nosti (Moscow, 1930). 24. See Rokhlin, Trud, byt i zdorov'e partiinogo aktiva (Dvou, 1931), especially chapters 5 and 6. Note his references to previous publications by other authors. 25. Ibid., p. 131, for a summary of five studies of the aktiv in scattered places. Those suffering from nervous illnesses ranged from a low of 41.5% to a high of 88.7% . Cardiovascular disorders ranged from a low of 12.0% to a high of 75.0%. Earlier editions of Rokhlin's book were more forthright than this 1931 edition in their discussion of such problems. 26. See Iv. Strelchuk and Rumshevich, "The life and everyday round of mentally-ill persons in the village," Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatrii, 193o no. 5, pp. 123-3o. For grim figures on the inadequacy of psychiatric institutions, see L. Prozorov, “A survey of the state of affairs in psychiatric care in the RSFSR," ibid. no. 4, pp.120–23; no.3, Pp.109–10; and no. 4, pp.127–28. 27. L. M. Rozenshtein, "The social-prophylactic trend in psychiatry," ibid., 193o no. 4, p.5; and Rozenshtein, "The mental health movement in the USSR and its tasks in connection with reconstruction,"Vrachebnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 2, p. 123. The phrase, "factories producing chronic inmates," is attributed to a Western specialist. 28. Ibid. 29. Rokhlin, op.cit. in note 24, p.9. 30. Ibid., Pp.7-8. 31. The original articles appear in Trudy Psikhiatricheskoi Kliniki MGU (1926), which was unavailable to me. For Gannushkin's confession see his "On the protection of the health of the Party aktiv," Revoliutsiia i kul'tura, 193o no. 4, Pp.43-44. 32. Psikhonevrologicheskie nauki v SSSR (Moscow, 1930), Pp.301-304. Note on pp. 301-302 the denial that transfer of workers from manual to mental labor can cause mental illness. 33. Gannushkin, op.cit. in note 31; and V. A. Vnukov, "The decisive links in the protection of the health of cadres," Revoliutsiia i kul'tura, 1930 no. 4, pp.40– 43. 34. See, for example, Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatrii, 1930 no. 3, pp.22- 23. 35. Ibid., 1931 no. 1, p.3. Cf. no. 2, p.83, for a report of a long publication delay following the Commissar's speech, leading people to believe that he had suspended the journal. Compare the biographies of M. F. Vladimirskii and N. A. Semashko, in Deiateli SSSR and elsewhere, for a striking example of the different types of public health officials before and after the great break. 36. The editors of Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatrii were slightly heretical in their apology, in 1931 no. 1, p.3. They pointed out that the offensive articles they had printed were originally speeches at the Behavioral Congress of January 193o, that they were sent to press before the razvoroshenie (turning upside down) of the Commissariat of Health in the spring. of 193o, and before the razvoroshenie of "theoretical positions" in February-March 1931. 37. S. I. Subbotnik, “For a Bolshevik attack on the theoretical front of psychoneurology," ibid., 1931 no. 2, pp.8–17. Note that Commissar Vladimirskii had singled out Subbotnik for criticism. Ibid., 1931 no. 1, p.3. 38. Ibid., 1931 no. 2, p.14. The "conscious or subconscious enemy" was V. V. Dekhterev, op.cit. in note 2o. 39. Subbotnik, op.cit. in note 37, p.14. Note the attack on former Health Commissar Semashko, on the same page. 40. He then signed himself "Propper."See his biography in Biograficheskii slovar' deiatelei estestvoznaniia i tekhniki I (1958), pp. 260–61. The other two new leaders were V. N. Kolbanovskii and M. B. Krol. Note that all three had a medical background, unlike Kornilov, who was a school teacher before he became an experimental psychologist. 41. Grashchenkov (Propper), "Results of the discussion on the natural science front and the struggle on two fronts in medicine," Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatrii, 1931 no. 5, p.13. See nos. 1 and 2 for the first installments of this long statement of the new position. 42. M. B. Krol, “"Successes of Soviet neuropathology over 15 years," Sovetskaia nevropatologiia, psikhiatrii i psikhogigiena, 1933 no. 1, p.1. 43. S. I. Kaplun, Obshchaia gigiena truda (Moscow, 1940), pp.91–92. 44. Krol, op.cit. in note 42. 45. See Giliarovskii, "Achievements of Soviet psychiatry for the past 15 years and its immediate prospects," Sovetskaia nevropatologiia, psikhiatrii i psikhogigiena, 1933 no. 1, pp.8–17, for a review that seems to show real progress, until one reads Giliarovskii very carefully, with special attention to his omissions. 46. The two specialists were A. R. Luriia and I. D. Sapir. On Luriia, see Joravsky, "A Great Soviet Psychologist," New York Review of Books, 16 May 1974. Isai Davidovich Sapir, 1897-?, was a major figure in Soviet psychiatry and in Marxist discussions until 1931, when he was discredited. He disappeared in the mid-thirties. 47. I have gotten this impression from a hasty skimming of the journals. See especially the index of articles, 1901-1930, in Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatri, 1931, nos. 6 and 8. 48. In June 1932 there was a major conference on schizophrenia. See Sovetskaia nevropatologiia, psikhiatriia i psikhogigiena, 1932 no. 8, pp.454-56, for a brief report. Cf. Vygotskii, "On the problem of schizophrenia," ibid., pp. 3 52–65. The record of the conference, Sovremennye problemy shizofrenii (Moscow, 1933) has been unavailable to me. For an anonymous history of the problem of schizophrenia, with special reference to Soviet controversies, see Sobranie dokumentov samizdata XXII, nos. 1101 and 1104. 49. The phrase is Maiakovski's. See The Bedbug, and Selected Poetry (New York, 1960), p.220. 5o. Vygotskii, "The science of psychology," in Obshchestvennye nauki v SSSR, 1917–1927 (Moscow 1928), p.40, saw psychotechnics as the practical goal of psychological science, "i.e., the mastery in deed of human behavior, the subjection of it to the control of reason." A high point was reached in September 1931, when Moscow was host to the Seventh International Psychotechnical Congress (or International Congress of Applied Psychology, as it is also known). See its Résumés des rapports (Moscow, 1931) and Tezisy dokladov . . . (Moscow, 1931). Cf. reports in Izvestiia, 1931, Sept. 9, 10, 11, and 15. The early thirties was the time when A. K. Gastev and his institute studying the "Scientific Organization of Labor" reached the peak of their activity, before he was arrested and the institute closed down. See his biography in Kratkaia literaturnaia entsiklopediia II (1964), pp.83–84. At the same time, one can see the beginning of the end in such polemics as A. B. Aleksandrovskii, "Against bourgeois tendencies in industrial psychology and the physiology of labor," Za marksistsko-leninskoe estestvoznanie, 1931 no. 2, pp.34- 49. 51. See "For partiinost' in the hygiene and physiology of labor," Pravda, 16 June 1931. See Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii, 1930 no. 39, for an attack on the concept of an optimum rather than a maximum workload. (Thanks to Sheila Fitzpatrick for that reference.) S. I. Kaplun, the leading authority in the field of "labor hygiene," and a chief target of the attack in Pravda, was already backing away from his earlier views at the time of the First All-Union Psychotechnical Congress, May 1931. See his speech in Vrachebnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 13, pp.1014-18. See the 1940 edition of his textbook, Obshchaia gigiena truda, pp.75-76, for his argument that “on the whole, the problem of fatigue as a mass, usual phenomenon, is already undoubtedly gone (bezuslovno sniata)". 52. See Sovetskaia psikhotekhnika, 1930 no. 2-3, p.232, for a resolution adopted at the Behavioral Congress. 53. See especially the report of the First All-Union Psychotechnical Congress, May 1931, in Vrachebnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 13, pp.1014–18. 54. See, for example, A. B. Aleksandrovskii, op.cit. in note 50, p.41. Studies of national character were condemned in the strongest terms. See, for example, M. B. Krol, "Behavioral 'science' in the service of the national-democrats,"Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatrii, 1931 no. 1, Pp.25-34. 55. V. A. Artemov, "On the question of a social industrial psychology" in Psikhonevrologicheskie nauki v SSSR (Moscow, 1930), p.208. 56. For a convenient translation, see Joseph Wortis, Soviet Psychiatry (Baltimore, 1950), pp.242–45. Cf. Raymond Bauer, The New Man in Soviet Psychology (Cambridge, Mass., 1952), ch. 8. 57. Akademiia Meditsinskikh Nauk SSSR, op.cit. in note 12, p.393. The speaker was K. K. Platonov. 58. I. B. Galant,. "Results of mental examination of 335 Red Army men," Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatrii, 1931 no. 2, Pp.18–20. 59. Ibid., p.2o. The article was printed with strong editorial disapproval in the fleeting period when the new Bolshevik editors were balancing between offering autonomous professional advice and catering to official prejudices. For another example, see ibid., 1931 no. 1, p.41, where L. M. Rozenshtein offers “psychohygiene" as “an ally of the command, educational and political service of the Army. 6o. Frolov, "What is the physiology of military labor?" in N. A. Zelenov, ed., Voprosy fiziologii voennogo truda i voenno-professional'nogo otbora (Moscow, 1928), pp.9-3o. The article seems to me a largely meaningless translation of conventional wisdom about army morale into Pavlovian terms. 61. See Sovetskaia psikhotekhnika, 1930 no. 2-3, p.232; Aleksandrovskii, op.cit. in note 50, p.43; and Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatri, 1931, prilozhenie, p.20. 62. Iu. P. Frolov, Vysshaia nervnaia neiatel'nost' pri toksikozakh ... Dlia voennykh vrachei i toksikologov (Moscow, 1944). 63. See Periodicheskaia pechat' SSSR, 1917-1949; bibliograficheskii ukazatel', vol. I, vypusk 1, pp.79–84; vypusk 2, items 3, 79–87, 96–97; vol. VII, pp.84–90. The count includes only journals; that is, it excludes nonperiodical serials. It makes some arbitrary distinctions between educational journals that may be considered psychological journals and those that may not. 64. The one journal in psychiatry and neuropathology was Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatrii, which has undergone repeated changes of title. The one in pedagogy was Sovetskaia pedagogika. Sovetskaia psikhonevrologiia, published in the Ukraine, is a possible third journal: it survived until 1941. It is also noteworthy that psychological publications survived better in Georgia than elsewhere. Finally, it should be noted that the publications of the country's two leading pedagogical institutes were an outlet for articles by psychologists. 65. For a survey of them, see relevant sections of Raymond Bauer, op.cit. in note 56; Petrovskii, op.cit. in note 13; Josef Brozek and Dan Slobin, Psychology in the USSR: An Historical Perspective (White Plains, N.Y., i972); and Psikhologicheskaia nauka v SSSR (Moscow, 1959–60), 2 vols. 66. T. I. Rainov, “Alienation of action," Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii, 1925–26, nos. 13, 14, and 15. 67. That is how the Congress was perceived by the reflexologist A. G. Ivanov-Smolenskii. See his Estestvoznanie i nauka o povedenii cheloveka (Moscow, 1929), pp.93 ff. 68. See the letter from the Institute, in Psikhologiia, 1928 no. 2, p. 175. To be precise, the Communist Academy was represented by its Society of Materialist Psychoneurologists, which was not as Pavlovian as the Academy's Institute of Higher Nervous Activity. 69. That is Vygotskii's characterization of the whole school, of which Kornilov was the leading figure. See Vygotskii, op. cit. in note 5o, p.37. 7o. A. B. Žalkind, "The First Congress for the Study of Human Behavior," Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatri, 1930 no. 6, p.22. 71. A. B. Zalkind, "The First Congress for the Study of Human Behavior," Pedologiia, 1930 no. 2, pp.161–62. 72. A. B. Zalkind, "The behavioral congress and Soviet psychoneurology," Vrachebnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 7, p. 503. Cf. Zalkind's article on the eve of the Congress, which concludes with something like a threat: institutes and societies that do not send delegates will be showing their "ideinoobshchestvennaia bednost'." Ibid., 1930 no. 1, p.53. 73. Zalkind estimated 1400 specialists plus 1600 guests. Op.cit. in note 70, p. 22. Another account reports 3ooo people, about half from Leningrad. Sovetskaia psikhotekhnika, 1930 no. 2-3, p.225. 74. A. V. Lunacharskii, “Art as a form of human behavior," in Psikhonevrologicheskie nauki i sotsialisticheskoe stroitel'stvo SSSR (Moscow, 1930), pp. 222- 49. 75. For the speeches of Karev and Luppol, see ibid., pp.15-77. For the attacks on them by Stalin's young zealots, see Joravsky, Soviet Marxism and Natural Science, pp. 2 50-53. The perceptive reader may note that I have refrained, throughout the present article, from making distinctions of age among the various parties to the psychoneurological controversies. In this respect the philosophical controversies were different; they pitted young, comparatively ignorant Stalinists against older, comparatively sophisticated Marxists. The psychoneurological specialists who were demoted in 1931 were frequently as young as those who took their places, or even younger. Suffice it to note that M. B. Krol, b.1879, became the Party's chief psychiatrist, while S. L. Rubinshtein, b.1889, became the most respected philosophical interpreter of psychology. V. N. Kolbanovskii, b. 19oz, took the place of K. N. Kornilov, b. 1879, as the chief of experimental psychology, and N. I. Grashchenkov, b. 19o1, became chief neurologist, but one can hardly make a rule of thos cases. I. N. Shpil'rein, b.1891, L. S. Vygotskii, b.1896, A. R. Luriia, b.190z, I. D. Sapir, b.1897, A. B. Zalkind, b.1888, and I. F. Kurazov, b.1897, were among the most severely chastised and demoted in the aftermath of the 1931 “discussion." 76. A. A. Iushchenko, “For Bolshevik self-criticism on the front of psychoneurology," Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatrii, 1931, prilozhenie, p.26. Note his explicit tribute to Kol'man for "the timely intervention" that ensured a correct line in the "discussion." For an official summation, see the resolution, "Results of the discussion on reactological psychology," Psikhotekhnika i psikhofiziologiia truda, 1931 no. 4-6, pp.387–91. Also printed in Psikhologiia, 1931 no. 1, Pp.1-2. 77. See, for example, Kornilov, "The contemporary state of psychology in the USŚR," in Problemy sovremennoi psikhologii III (1928), p.24. 78. See, for example, V. M. Bekhterev, Kollektivnaia refleksologiia (Petrograd, 1921), and the review, by V. Nevskii, in Pod znamenem marksizma, 192z no. 3, pp.55-61. Bogdanov may be said to have had social psychology as his central preoccupation in most of his writing. See especially his Nauka ob obshchestvennom soznanii (Petrograd, 1923), and his Tektologiia: vseobshchaia organizatsionnaia nauka, 3 editions, 1922–1928. 79. See I. F. Kurazov, Vvedenie v istoricheskuiu psikhologiiu (Moscow, 1931). Cf. the "rezkii otpor" cited in Pod znamenem marksizma, 1934 no. 5, pp. 188–89. For Vygotskii and Luria, see their joint effort, Etiudy po istorii povedeniia: obez'iana, primitiv, rebenok (Moscow, 193o). For the official reaction, see Joravsky, op.cit. in note 46. Recently it became possible for Luriia to publish the results of his 1931-32 studies of peasants. See his Ob istoricheskom razvitii poznavatel'nykh protsessov (Moscow, 1974). I wish to thank Michael Cole for calling my attention to this book, indeed for lending it to me. 8o. See, for example, the resolution cited in note 76. 81. S. I. Kaplun, "Marx and questions of labor hygiene," Gigiena i bezopasnost' truda, 1933 no. 2; Kaplun, "Lenin and questions of labor hygiene," ibid., 1934 no. 1-z; \$. G. Gellershtein, "On the psychology of labor in the works of K. Marx," Sovetskaia psikhotekhnika, 1933 no. 1; S. L. Rubinshtein, "Problems of psychology in the works of Karl Marx," ibid., 1934 no. 1. To get a sense of the great difficulty in squaring experimental psychology with the views of Karl Marx, see his famous rejection of any approach to psychology except the study of history. A convenient reprint, together with a collection of other excerpts on “existence and consciousness," is in Bottomore and Rubel, eds., Karl Marx: Selected Writings in Sociology and Social Philosophy (New York, 1964), pp.72–73, et passim. 82. S. L. Rubinshtein, Ösnovy obshchei psikhologii (Moscow, 1946), as quoted in T. I. Iudin, Ocherki istorii otechestvennoi psikhiatrii (Moscow, 1951), p.413. 83. Compare Pod znamenem marksizma in the years to 1931, when articles on psychology were quite frequent, with the same journal, 1931 et seq. Ditto for Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii. 84. See Kh. Koshtoiants, "Physiology and the theory of development," Pod znamenem marksizma, 1932 no. 5-6; Koshtoiants's report on the International Congress of Physiology in Rome, ibid., 1932 no. 9–10, pp.238–49; N. Nikitin, "Natural science about man, and socialism," ibid., 1933 no. 6; L. Karlik, "Some results of the work of Professor Speranskii's school," ibid., 1934 no. 3, and so on. See ibid., 1936 no. 9, pp.87–99, for a report of a conference at which the official ideologists, paying heavy respect to Pavlov's school of physiology, demanded that experimental psychology justify its existence. Cf. Za marksistsko-leninskoe estestvoznanie, 1931-32, for many articles on physiology, and none on psychology except for an attack on V. M. Borovskii in 1931 no. 1 (foreshadowing the virtual destruction of comparative or animal psychology). There were also a few articles on psychotechnics in the journal. 85. For one of the last examples, heavily mixed with uncritical admiration of Pavlov's physiological hypotheses, see N. I. Propper (Grashchenkov), "The reflexological trend in physiology," ibid., 1932 no. 3-4. An expanded version is his "Refleksologiia," Bol'shaia meditsinskaia entsiklopediia XXVIII (1934), pp.737- 55. 86. As quoted by M. R. Mogendovich, “The last stage of the Bekhterev school," Psikhologiia, 1931 no. 1, p. 102. 87. Among the first to spread the word were V. M. Borovskii, "Conditioned reflexes from the viewpoint of comparative psychology," in Problemy sovremennoi psikhologii III (1928), pp.26–36; Borovskii, "What is new in the study of reflexes," Pod znamenem marksizma, 1930 no. 2-3; and I. S. Beritov (or Beritashvili) Individual'no-priobretennaia deiatel'nost' tsentral'noi nervnoi sistemy (Tiflis, 1932), which is a revised and expanded version of a 1927 monograph. For a summary of the criticism, together with an effort to save the experimental data accumulated by Pavlov's school, see Jerzy Konorski, Conditioned Reflexes and Neuron Organization (Cambridge, 1948). Konorski was a student of Pavlov's. 88. The most explicit and firm denial has been excluded from both editions of his collected works. Šee Psikhiatricheskaia gazeta, 1917 no. 8, pp.200–205, for his discussion with the Petrograd Philosophical Society. That his repudiation of materialism was common knowledge in the twenties is evident in the remarks of Pokrovskii, quoted below, p.125. 89. Originally in Bukharin's long reply to Pavlov's criticism of Marxism, in Krasnaia nov', 1924 nos. 1 and 2; widely quoted, e.g. by Vygotskii, op.cit. in note 5o, p. 32. At the same time Marxist critics of Pavlov could quote Bukharin's rebuke to those who equated Marxism and reflexology. For that, see Bukharin's speech to the Fifth Comintern Congress, Pravda, 29 June 1924. 9o. Quoted by I. D. Sapir, Vysshaia nervnaia deiatel'nost' cheloveka (Moscow, 1925), p.156. 91. Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii, 1926 no. 16, pp.286–87. 92. Ibid. 93. For evidence of his defiance and ridicule, see Bukharin's 1924 article cited in note 89, and see Kornilov's virtual call for Pavlov's arrest in March 193o. Quoted below, p.126. 94. For Pavlov's stand against the Bolshevization of the academy, see Loren R. Graham, The Soviet Academy of Sciences and the Communist Party (Princeton, 1967), pp.116–18. 95. Šee his biography in Fiziologicheskaia shkola I. P. Pavlova (Leningrad, 1967), pp.254–56. 96. The official record of the Congress consists of two volumes, Psikhonevrologicheskie nauki v SSSR (Moscow, 193o), and Psikhonevrologicheskie nauki i sotsialisticheskoe stroitel'stvo SSSR (Moscow, 193o). I wish to thank Sheila Fitzpatrick for calling my attention to the second volume. L. N. Fedorov's speech was published as “The method of conditioned reflexes in the study of higher nervous activity," Chelovek i priroda, 1930 no. 4. 97. N. I. Grashchenkov (Propper), "The school of Academician Pavlov at the behavioral congress," Zhurnal nevropatologii i psikhiatri, 193o no. 3. 98. Pedologiia, 1930 no. 3, pp.422–23. 99. Ibid. 100. See, for example, the resolution cited in note 76. 101. Among the new top Party specialists in the psychoneurological sciences, Krol showed awareness of the discrepancy between Pavlov's hypotheses and neurophysiology, but Grashchenkov did not. 102. See Materialy k istorii Vsesoiuznogo Instituta Eksperimental'noi Meditsiny (Moscow, 1941). 103. Ibid., p. 10–11. 104. Izvestiia, 16 October 1932. 105. Stalin, Sochineniia XIII, p.410. 106. Izvestiia, 18 October 1932. The quoted words are those of V. N. Popov, chief of the sector of scientific institutes of the Commissariat of Health. 107. See, for example, Karlik's article cited in note 84. There is a very large literature by and about Speranskii. For a convenient introduction see A. D. Speransky, Basis for the Theory of Medicine (New York, 1944). 108. See, most notably, his 1934 response to birthday greetings from the Sechenov Society of Physiologists: “Yes, I am glad that together with Ivan Mikhailovich [Sechenov] and an army of dear co-workers, we won the whole indivisible animal organism—instead of a mere half of it—for the mighty power of physiological research. And that is entirely our indisputable Russian service to world science, to general human thought." Pavlov, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii I (1951), p.13. For Pavlov's conscious estrangement from the mainstream of neurophysiology, see A. F. Samoilov, "A general characterization of I. P. Pavlov as a scientific researcher," Zhurnal eksperimental'noi biologii, series B, 1925, no. 1-2, pp.7–8, 19. 109. 'For a convenient reprint, with the photograph, see Pavlov, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii I (1951), p.19. 11o. For an early expression of this thieme, see Mitin's tribute to Pavlov, in Pod znamenem marksizma, 1936 no. 2-3, p.41. Note that the preceding tribute by Maksimov comes close, but still ascribes “mechanistic materialism" to Pavlov. Solomon: Rural Scholars and the Cultural Revolution 1. For a discussion of the dating of the cultural revolution by current Soviet writers, see Sheila Fitzpatrick, "Cultural Revolution in Russia, 1928–1932," Journal of Contemporary History, January 1974, pp.33-35. 2. In varying degrees, this interpretation may be found in David Joravsky, Soviet Marxism and Natural Science, 1917-1932 (New York, 1961); Edward J. Brown, The Proletarian Episode in Russian Literature, 1928-1932 (New York, 1953); Konstantin Shteppa, Russian Historians and the Soviet State (New Brunswick, N.J., 1962); and Raymond Bauer, The New Man in Soviet Psychology (Cambridge, Mass., 1952). 3. David Joravsky, "The Construction of the Stalinist Psyche," this volume. 4. Sheila Fitzpatrick, “The 'Soft' Line on Culture and its Enemies: Soviet Cultural Policy, 1922–1927," Slavic Review, June 1974, p.269. 5. Sheila Fitzpatrick, "Cultural Revolution as Class War," this volume. 6. For a more detailed treatment of this controversy, see Susan Gross Solomon, The Soviet Agrarian Debate: A Controversy in Social Science, 1923-1929 (Boulder, Colorado, 1977). 7. In the main, this research took the form of statistical studies conducted under the aegis of the zemstva. For synopses of these studies, see N. A. Svavskii and Z. M. Svavitskii, Zemskie podvornye perepisi, 1880–1913 gg. (Moscow, 1926); N. A. Svavitskii, Zemskie podvornye perepisi; obzor metodologii (Moscow, 1961); E. Volkov, Agrarno-ekonomicheskaia statistika Rossii (Moscow, 1923). 8. Rural social studies in America followed a similar path of development. 9. The academy was originally known as the Petrovskii Agricultural Academy. In 1923, it was renamed in honor of K. A. Timiriazev, who had taught in the department of botany and physiology and earned the gratitude of the Bolshevik leadership by announcing his support for the new regime. For a recent Soviet account of the history of the academy, see Moskovskaia Sel'skokhoziaistvennaia Akademiia imeni K.A.Timiriazeva 1865-1965 (Moscow, 1969). 1o. A. V. Chaianov, Petrovsko-Razumovskoe v ego proshlom i nastoiashchem: putovoditel' po Timiriazevskoi Sel'skokhoziaistvennoi Akademii (Moscow, 1925), p.47. A conscious effort was made to recruit students of proletarian background. As a consequence, between 1917 and 1927, the percentage of students of working class and peasant background jumped from 39.6% to 79. 5%. O. M. Targulian, "The Academy over 10 years," Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1927 no. 10, p.52. 11. Targulian, loc.cit., p. 58. 12. The research and pedagogic functions of this Institute were under the aegis of RANIon; the administration of the Institute was under the jurisdiction of Glavnauka RSFSR. 13. For this institution, such ties were a novelty. In the Tsarist period, the Timiriazev Academy had a reputation for radicalism; indeed, between February and June of 1894, it was closed down by the authorities. Moskovskaia Sel'skokhoziaistvennaia Akademiia, p.64. 14. This jourmnal, which began publication in 1925 and ceased in 1929, was formed by the fusion of two journals: Sel'skoe i lesnoe khoziaistvo, the journal of the Cornmissariat of Agriculture, and Uspekhi agronomii, the journal of the Timiriazev Academy. 15. Party policy toward the social sciences in the NEP period was two-pronged. The long-term objective was to foster the growth of a Marxist science of society; the short-term goal was to support existing inquiry whatever the ideological inclinations of the social scientists. Prior to 1926, the Party concentrated on the short-term objective. But beginning at mid-decade, as the pool of Marxist social scientists began to increase, the long-term goal began to displace the short-term one. See Fitzpatrick, "The 'Soft' Line," loc.cit., pp.267–88; Leonard Schapiro, The Communist Party of the Soviet Union (New York, 1964), pp.341-43. 16. The case for the founding of this section was made to the June 1925 meeting of the Presidium of the Čommunist Academy by V. P. Miliutin, who became the first head of the section (“Minutes of the general meeting of mernbers of the Communist Academy, 2 June 1925,"Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii, 1925 no. 12, p.369). 1925 was a year of great expansion for the Communist Academy. In addition to the Agrarian Section, three other research sections were created ("Short report on the activity of the Communist Academy,"Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii, 1926 no. 15, p.305). 17. The Agrarian Section made a conscious attempt to attract young Marxist students doing their graduate work in the Timiriazev Academy (“Activity of the Communist Academy, January-June 1926." Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii, 1926 no. 17, p. 305). As a consequence, the section, which began with a staff of twenty-eight researchers, expanded rapidly. 18. For an assessment of the extent to which and the ways in which governmental policy commitments influenced work in Soviet rural studies, see Susan Gross Solomon, “Controversy in Social Science: Soviet Rural Studies in the 1920's," Minerva, Winter 1976, Pp. 554–82. 19. Some of these scholars were included in Jasny's book on leading Soviet economists of the 192os. Naum Jasny, Soviet Economists of the Twenties: Names to be Remembered (Cambridge, 1972), pp. 196–204. 2o. Some Western historians have suggested that during the period of the Provisional Government, the Organization-Production scholars were affiliated with the Socialist Revolutionary Party. See, for example, E. H. Carr and R. W. Davies, Foundations of a Planned Economy, 1926–1929, I, Part 1 (London, 1969), p. 20; Herbert J. Ellison, "The Socialist Revolutionaries,"Problems of Communism, June 1967, p.7; Basile Kerblay, "A. V. Chayanov: Life, Career, Works," in A. V. Chayanov on the Theory of the Peasant Economy, ed. D. Thorner, B. Kerblay, and R. E. F. Smith (Homewood, Ill., 1968), pp. xxxvi-xxxvii. We were not able to find any evidence to corroborate this claim. In fact, at a conference called in 193o to discuss deviance among academics, the members of this group were not denounced as "former SRs," whereas other scholars were so labelled; moreover, a recent Soviet article on the period lists the Chaianov group as "members of the Organization-Production school" while it denounced other scholars as “former SRs" (N. K. Figurovskaia, "The bankruptcy of the 'agrarian reform' of the bourgeois Provisional Government," Istoricheskie zapiski LXXXI [1968], Pp.30-31). 21. For a biographical essay on Chaianov and an extensive bibliography of his works, see Kerblay, "A. V. Chayanov: Life, Career, Works," loc.cit. 22. For a discussion of "cosmopolitanism" in scholarship, see Alvin Gouldner, "Cosmopolitans and Locals: Towards an Analysis of Latent Social Roles," part one, Administrative Science Quarterly, December 1957, pp.281–306; part two, Administrative Science Quarterly, March 1958, pp.444–80. 23. Kritsman was a Marxist historian who had been active in both politics and scholarly life since the early postrevolutionary days. 24. On the average, the Agrarian-Marxists were fifteen years younger than their rivals. In 1925, they averaged twenty-four years of age; at the same point in time, the Organization-Production Scholars averaged thirty-nine years of age. 25. A few of the Agrarian-Marxists were still doing graduate work in the Timiriazev Academy as late as 1926-27 (Biulleten' Gosudarstvennogo Nauchno-Issledovatel'skogo Instituta Sel'sko-Khoziaistvennoi Ekonomii, 1927 nos. 1 and 2, p.62). 26. This journal was founded in 1925 and continued publication until 1935. For the first half of its life, its editor-in-chief was L. N. Kritsman. 27. Gouldner, "Cosmopolitans and Locals," loc.cit. There was some contact between the Agrarian-Marxists and their Marxist colleagues living outside Russia. For example, two members of the Kritsman group made a visit to the Institute for Social Research in Frankfurt. 28. In the field of rural inquiry—unlike in other fields of Soviet culture—the cultural revolution did not occasion eccentric or utopian thinking. In the period 1928–31, the study of the countryside was treated in deadly earnest. 29. For an account of the work experience of these scholars, see Kerblay, "A. V. Chayanov: Life, Career, Works," loc.cit.; George L. Yaney, "Agricultural Administration in Russia from the Stolypin Reforms to Forced Collectivization: An Interpretative Study," in James Millar, ed., The Soviet Rural Community (Urbana, Ill., 1971), Pp.3–35. 30. As early as 1912, Chaianov expressed his "lack of interest" in studying questions of the national economy. A. V. Chaianov, Len i drugie kul'tury v organizatsionom plane krest'ianskogo khoziaistva nechernozemnoi Rossii, I (Moscow, 1912), p.vii. 31. These scholars did not deny the utility of the Marxists' studies of interfarm relations, but they urged that such studies be regarded as supplements rather than as alternatives to their own microeconomic approach. See N. P. Makarov, Krest'ianskoe khoziaistvo i ego evoliutsiia I (Moscow, 192o), p. 54. 32. The explanation of the family farm put forward by the Organization-Production scholars contained an early version of the backward-sloping supply curve of labor—a fact noted by anthropologists in the West. See J. Boeke, The Structure of the Netherlands Indian Economy (New York, 1942), p.18. 33. The demographic account was most fully elaborated in A. V. Chaianov, Biudzhety krest'ian Starobelskago uezda (Moscow, 191 5). 34. The scholars' failure to consider these inequities stemmed from the fact that they considered the family farm to be inseparably linked to the repartitional commune. 35. The most important of these works were: A. V. Chaianov, "Peasant Farm Organization," in A. V. Chayanov on the Theory of the Peasant Economy, pp.29- 271; A. N. Chelintsev, Teoreticheskie obosnovaniia organizatsii krest'ianskogo khoziaistva (Kharkov, 1919); A. N. Chelintsev, Sel'sko-khoziaistvennye raiony evropeiskoi Rossii kak stadii sel'sko-khoziaistvennoi evoliutsii i kul'turnoi uroven' seľskogo khoziaistva v nikh (Moscow, 1911); A. V. Chaianov, Osnovnye idei i formy krest'ianskoi kooperatsii (Moscow, 1919); A. V. Chaianov, Opyt izucheniia izolirovannogo gosudarstva (Moscow, 1921); A. V. Chaianov, "Optimal sizes of agricultural land-holdings," Problemy zemleustroistva, optimal'nye razmery zemledel'cheskogo khoziaistva, kolichestvennyi uchet effekta zemleustroistva (Moscow, 1922). 36. A. V. Chayanov, "On the Theory of Non-Capitalist Economic Systems," in A. V. Chayanov on the Theory of the Peasant Economy, pp.1-29. This seminal article was originally published in German and never appeared in Russian. 37. The principal theorist of the group was L. N. Kritsman. Kritsman's younger colleagues saw themselves as empirical researchers and were quite content to work within the theoretical framework he elaborated. 38. According to a Western historian of Soviet Russia, this theory was held by the majority of educated Russians and by Russian policy-makers at the beginning of the twentieth century. T. Shanin, The Awkward Class (Oxford, 1972), p.1. 39. Kritsman set forth his theory in two short articles written in 1925. See L. N. Kritsman, "Lenin and the path to socialism," L. N. Kritsman, Proletarskaia revoliutsiia i derevniia (Moscow, 1929), pp. 13-29; L. N. Kritsman, "The union of the proletariat and the majority of the peasantry in the USSR after the victory of the revolution," ibid., pp. 24-46. As Kritsman freely acknowledged, these articles owed much to Lenin's 1923 articles on cooperation. 40. Kritsman, "Lenin and the path to socialism," loc.cit., p.45. 41. These projects came to fruition in the second half of the 192os by which point they belonged clearly to the corpus of work done by the Agrarian-Marxists. For a list of these works, see footnote 45 below. 42. A. V. Chayanov, "Peasant Farm Organization," loc.cit. The first five chapters of this work had been published under a different title in 1923. However, the last two chapters were written specifically for the 1925 edition and were devoted expressly to the macroeconomic question. 43. These scholars advocated a cooperative scheme according to which the family farm would remain the basic unit of cultivation but would perform only those aspects of farming that were most efficiently carried out by a single farm; other tasks would be performed by a group of farms integrated horizontally. A. V. Chaianov, Osnovnye idei i formy krest'ianskoi kooperatsii (Moscow, 1927). 44. For an example of these findings, see Sel'skoe khoziaistvo na putiakh vostanovleniia, ed. L. N. Kritsman (Moscow, 1925). 45. The most important of these works were L. N. Kritsman, Klassovoe rassloenie ν sovetskoi derevni (Moscow, 1926); Ia. A. Anisimov, I. Vermenichev and K. Naumov, Proizvodstvennaia kharakteristika krest'ianskikh khoziaistv razlichnykh sotsial'nykh grupp (Moscow, 1927); I. Vermenichev, A. Gaister, and G. Raevich, 710 khoziaistv Samarskoi derevni (Moscow, 1927); A. Gaister, Rassloenie sovetskoi derevni (Moscow, 1928). 46. For the full stenographic report of the meeting, see N. P. Makarov, "Differentiation of the peasant farm," Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1927 no. 4, pp. 103- 13; A. N. Chelintsev, "On the question of differentiation of the peasant farm," ibid., pp.113-32; A. V. Chaianov, "On differentiation of the peasant farm," Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1927 no. 5, pp.109–22; N. D. Kondratev, "On the question of rural differentiation," ibid., pp. 123-4o; Ia. A. Anisimov, "Differentiation of the peasant farm," Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1927 no. 6, pp.126–28; S. Uzhanskii, "Differentiation of the peasantry," ibid., pp. 129–36; N. N. Sukhanov, "On differentiation of the peasant farm," ibid., pp. 137-47; "Discussion of the paper on differentiation of the peasant farm," Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1927 no. 9, pp. 118–33; I. Vermenichev, "On differentiation of the peasantry," Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1928 no. 1, pp. 105–13. A detailed analysis of the debate can be found in Solomon, The Soviet Agrarian Debate. 47. The affinities between the Organization-Production analysis and an equilibrium model of development have been pointed out in Shanin, The Awkward Class, p.108. 48. For example, see the plan for agriculture drawn up at the end of 1924 by the Commissariat of Agriculture. Osnovy perspektivnogo plana razvitiia sel'skogo i lesnogo khoziaistva (Moscow, 1924). 49. Carr and Davies, Foundations of a Planned Economy I, part one, p.17. 5o. With an eye for the jugular, the Agrarian-Marxists set out to refute the proposition that the family farm was a biological organism with its own internally determined cycle of growth and decay. M. Kubanin, Klassovaia sushnost' protsessa drobleniia krest'ianskikh khoziaistv (Moscow, 1929). 51. Several members of the Kritsman group attempted to develop a Marxist approach to the study of farm structure, a topic over which the Chaianov group had hitherto exercised a virtual monopoly. See V. Liubako and K. Naumov, "On the the question of the construction of organizational plans of sovkhozy,"Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1927 no. 12, pp.3–8; Ia. Anisimov, "Formulation of certain questions about the organization of agriculture in the past,"Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1928 no. 1, pp.3-17; Ia. Anisimov, “Basic premises of the Organization-Production school in the study of the organization of the peasant farm," Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1928 no. 2, pp.3-15; Ia. Anisimov, "Toward the formulation of certain questions about the organization of agriculture applicable to the circumstances of the USSR," Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1928 no. 4–5, pp.16–26. 52. The Organization-Production scholars had refined the use of budgets as a technique of research in the study of farm structure. Until 1927 they had expressed great pride in their innovation, but now they began to minimize its importance. See A. V. Chaianov, Biudzhetnye issledovaniia: istoriia i metody (Moscow, 1929); A. V. Chaianov, Krest'ianskoe svekloseianie tsentral'no-chernozemnoi oblasti (Moscow, 1929). 53. The scholarship that lent itself most readily to this purpose was that on the agricultural regions of Russia. See A. N. Chelintsev, “Agricultural regions, the regional perspectives on agriculture and the trend of agricultural policy measures," Part one, Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1927 no. 9, pp.35-57; Part two, Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1927 no. 11, pp.42–62; A. N. Chelintsev, "Toward a methodology of agricultural micro-regionalization," Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1928 no. 4-5, pp.26-46. 54. The last expression of gratitude by the Agrarian-Marxists to their teachers occurred in 1927. See Anisimov, Vermenichev and Naumov, Proizvodstvennaia kharakteristika, p.31. Even at this point, the young researchers were less than fully gracious about the help they had received. For their part the Organization- Production group acknowledged their debts to their rivals in terms that were excessively flattering. See Chaianov, Biudzhetnye issledovaniia, p.295. 55. A. V. Chaianov, "Methods of compiling organizational plans of agricultural enterprises under the conditions of the Soviet economy," Biulleten' Gosudarstvennogo Nauchno-Issledovatel'skogo Instituta Sel'sko-Khoziaistvennoi Ekonomii, 1928 no. 1-4, pp. 5-15; A. N. Chelintsev, "On the structural principles and productive types of kolkhozy," Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1928 no. 11, pp.22- 38. 56. The members of this group had expressed their skepticism about the viability of large-scale socialist agriculture in the immediate postrevolutionary period. See A. V. Chaianov, "The concept of profitability of the socialist farm," Metody bezdenezhnogo ucheta khoziaistvennykh predpriiatii (Moscow, 1921). As late as 1925, they continued to express the same skepticism. See Chaianov, "Peasant Farm Organization," loc.cit., p.267. 57. For a detailed discussion of the atmosphere that surrounded the Shakhty trial, see Kendall Bailes, "Stalin and the Revolution From Above: the Formation of the Technical Intelligentsia, 1928-1934" (Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University, 1971). 58. The extent to which behavior can be conditioned by the anticipation of developments was discussed in Samuel Stouffer et al., The American Soldier: Adjustment During Army Life I (Princeton, 1949), p.411. 59. KPSS v rezoliutsiiakh II (7th ed., Moscow, 1957), p.437, as cited in Moshe Lewin, Russian Peasants and Soviet Power (London, 1968), p.2o6. 6o. Chaianov, "Methods of compiling organizational plans of agricultural enterprises," loc.cit. Chaianov reinforced his image as a technical expert with a chapter on agriculture that he contributed to a collection of essays published in 1928 under the title Life and Technology in the Future (A. V. Čhaianov, "The possible future of agriculture," in A. Kolman, ed., Zhizn' i tekhnika budushchego [Moscow, 1928], pp. 260–85). The same attempt to divorce politics from expertise was evident in Chelintsev's work of this period. See Chelintsev, "On the question of differentiation,"loc.cit.; and "On the principles of construction," loc.cit. 61. “Activity of the Communist Academy," Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii XXX (1929), p. 252. 62. That charge came out of a meeting of the Central Committee department of agitation and propaganda held from May 30 to June 3, 1928. Fitzpatrick, "Cultural Revolution in Russia," loc.cit., pp.41, 47. 63. For a biography of Shefler, see Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1928 no. 6, p.113. 64. Moskovskaia Sel'skokhoziaistvennaia Akademiia, p.138. 65. “Excerpt from the minutes of the meeting of the RAnioN presidium on the merging of the Institutes of Agricultural Economy and Land Consolidation and Resettlement," dated 1 February 1929, in Organizatsiia sovetskoi nauki v 1926– 1932 gg. Sbornik dokumentov (Leningrad, 1974), p.315. 66. The effects on a community of scholars of an insistence on credentials has been discussed in Robert K. Merton, "Insiders and Outsiders: A Chapter in the Sociology of Knowledge," American Journal of Sociology, July 1972, pp.9-48. 67. Chelintsev, “Ön the structural principles and productive types of kolkhozy," loc.cit., p.27; A. V. Chaianov, "From class-based peasant cooperation to socialist reconstruction of agriculture," Sel'sko-khoziaistvennaia zhizn', 15 February 1929, Pp.2–3. 68. See, for example, O. M. Targulian, "Kolkhoz construction according to Chelintsev and self-collectivization according to Chaianov," Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, 1930 no. 9, pp.8–25. According to Targulian, the sins of the Chaianov group were grievous. While the Party was commending the kolkhozy on ideological grounds, Chelintsev persisted in measuring the performance of those farmns by the normal standards of efficiency. And, while the Party was stressing the pervasiveness of social antagonismns in the countryside, Chaianov was writing about the peasants moving peacefully and voluntarily into collectives (“selfcollectivization"); indeed, Chaianov insisted that only through a voluntary movement could technological revolution be accomplished without a social catastrophe. See A. V. Chaianov, “The today and tomorrow of large-scale farming,' Ekonomicheskoe obozrenie, 1929 no. 9, pp.39–51. 69. This journal was the organ of four institutions: the RSFSR Commissariat of Agriculture, the All-Union Commissariat of Agriculture, the Timiriazev Academy, and the Lenin Agricultural Academy. 7o. For these charges, see the record of a conference called in 193o to denounce the “Kondratev group," whose membership was alleged to include the leaders of the Organization-Production school. Kondrat'evshchina (Moscow, 193o). A recent book by a Soviet author provides some more detailed information on the charges against the group. Apparently, the so-called party was alleged to have had nine underground groups in Moscow, centered mainly in the Commissariats of Agriculture and Finance, in the newspaper Bednota, in the Timiriazev Academy, and in research institutes on agricultural economics. Further networks were uncovered in the provinces with Socialist Revolutionaries and kulaks being among the members. Roy Medvedev, Let History Judge (New York, 1971), Pp.113-14. 71. The conference was reported in some detail in the journal of the Agrarian Institute (formally Section) of the Communist Academy (“Analysis of the peasant household," part one, Na agrarnom fronte, 1929 no. 7, pp.96–106; part two, Na agrarnom fronte, 1929 no. 8, pp.83-106). This was not the first time that members of the Kritsman group had been criticized, but it was the first time that an attack had been directed against their credentials as Marxists. 72. M. Sulkovskii, “An experiment in the making of a seminar program on agricultural economics for socio-economic higher educational institutions,"Na agrarnom fronte, 1929 no. 10, pp.146–55. 73. The full stenographic report of the conference was published in 193o. Trudy pervoi vsesoiuznoi konferentsii agrarnikov-Marksistov (Moscow, 193o). 74. See "The first Urals oblast conference of Marxist agrarian scholars," Na agrarnom fronte, 1929 no. 11–12, Pp.211–14; “Meeting of Communist agrarian scholars under the agitprop department of the Central Committee of the Belorussian Communist Party," ibid., pp.215-18; Trudy pervoi vsesoiuznoi konferentsii agrarnikov-Marksistov, Pp. 104-107. 75. Trudy, P.430. 76. The delegates heard an address on rural policy by M. Kalinin. However, the discussion of collectivization at the December meeting stemmed not from Kalinin's speech, but from that of the economist Iu. Larin, who argued that the kolkhozy were not fully socialist forms of agriculture. 77. By late 1929, cross-fire among Marxist researchers was common throughout the country, and consequently the December meeting was witness to a series of regional disputes. The main confrontation, however, was that within the Moscow contingent; here S. M. Dubrovskii, the Deputy Director of the International Agrarian Institute of the Peasant International, was ranged against Kritsman and his followers. 78. In adding this injunction, Stalin took the opportunity of unmasking certain "bourgeois prejudices" that, he claimed, were still current in Marxist rural research. Trudy, pp.434-46. 79. Ibid., pp.446-48. 80. Interview with S. M. Dubrovskii, 6 May 1969. 81. Apparently a "criticial" discussion of Kritsman's work was planned for early 1931, but there is no record of such a discussion's having been held. "On the work of the Agrarian Institute of the Communist Academy,"Na agrarnom fronte, 1930 no. 10, p.113. 82. Šee, for example, the recantation by Sulkovskii, ibid., pp.146–47. 83. "From the editors," Na agrarnom fronte, 1932 no. 1, p.4. 84. This is best illustrated by the fate of G. A. Studenskii. In the first half of the 192os, Studenskii was affiliated with the Organization-Production group, although he had certain theoretical differences with the group's leaders. At mid-decade, Studenskii attempted to steer a middle course between the Organization-Production and Agrarian-Marxist groups. See G. A. Studenskii, Opyt issledovaniia organizatsi krest'ianskogo khoziaistva tsentral'no-chernozemnoi oblasti (Moscow, 1926); G. A. Studenskii, Problemy organizatsii krest'ianskogo sel'skogo khoziaistva (Samara, 1927). Such a course proved impossible, and Studenskii was castigated by both groups. Toward the end of the decade, Studenskii apparently decided to throw in his lot with the Kritsman group; his bid was not accepted, for he was regarded as having been tainted by his early association with the Organization-Production scholars. 85. As has been pointed out, the latitude accorded to non-Marxist scholars in this period was not guaranteed in law, but it had the sanctity conferred by repeated practice. Fitzpatrick, "The 'Soft' Line," loc.cit. 86. For a discussion of the growth of subspecialties as a response to scientists' dissatisfaction with the allocation of resources and prestige in their fields, see Warren O. Hagstrom, The Scientific Community (New York, 1965). 87. Fitzpatrick, "Cultural Revolution as Class War," this volume. 88. Sorie scholars have suggested that the type of conflict that arises in a field may be related to the form of socialization to which novices are subjected. Jonathan R. Cole and Stephen Cole, Social Stratification in Science (Chicago, 1973), PP.77-78. ## Enteen: Marxist Historians during the Cultural Revolution 1. RANioN—the Russian Association of Social Science Institutes, founded in 1921—was an array of a dozen or more research institutes, including the Institute of History, which were also centers for graduate-school instruction. Combining Marxist and non-Marxist historians in its staff, and having the function of training Marxist students for scholarly careers, RANioN was a chief testing ground for the policy of “using non-Communist hands in the building of Communism. 2. "How the new scientific generation is really being trained (behind the wings at RANiON)," Vecherniaia Moskva, 6 February 1928. 3. V. Zeimal and P. Pospelov, “The ıKP Party cell in the struggle for the general line," Pravda, 1 December 1931. 4. See "Dispute on D. M. Petrushevskii's book," Istorik-marksist, 1928 no. 8, pp.79–129; Pokrovskii's criticism of Tarle in ibid., 1928 no. 7, pp.3-17; Tarle's rejoinder, ibid., 1928 no. 9, pp.101-107. On Zhebelev, see Loren R. Graham, The Soviet Academy of Sciences and the Communist Party, 1927-1932 (Princeton, 1967), pp. 104-108, and L. Hamilton Rhinelander, “Exiled Russian scholars in Prague: the Kondakov Seminar and Institute, Canadian Slavonic Papers/Revue Canadienne des Slavistes (1971), vol. XVI, no. 3, Pp.331–52. 5. See Pokrovskii's article "Class war and the ideological front,"7 November 1928, and his criticism of Tarle cited above. 6. The emigré Russian historian Rostovtsev protested against Pokrovskii's election to the Presidium of the Congress, and this incident made a deep impression on Pokrovskii, who subsequently often alluded to it as an example of class conflict in scholarship. For reports on the Congress, see Pokrovskii, in Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii (1929) no. 30, pp.231-37; and Samuel Harper, "A Communist view of historical studies," Journal of Modern History, 1929 no. 1, pp.77–86. 7. See my article "M. N. Pokrovskii as an organizer of scholarship," Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas (1974), vol. 22, Pp.56–57. 8. Pravda, 13 July 1929; Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii (1929) no. 32, pp.211-12. 9. Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii (1929) no. 33, p.274; (1930) no. 37–38, p.156, and no. 42, p.163; Bor'ba klassov, 1931 no. 1, p.12o; Plan rabot Kommunisticheskoi Akademii za 1928–1929 gg. (Moscow, 1929), p.79. 10. Teodorovich, “On Narodnaia volia," Katorga i ssylka (1929) no. 57–58 Pp.7-44. 11. "Theses for the soth anniversary of Narodnaia volia," Pravda, 9 April 1930. 12. Teodorovich, Istoricheskoe znachenie partii narodnoi voli (Moscow, 1930) pp.240-46. 13. P. O. Gorin, M. N. Pokrovskii, bol'shevik-istorik (Minsk, 1933), p.113. 14. Ibid., p. 102. 15. Ibid., p.101. 16. A. P. Nosov and A. N. Zakharikov, Nekotorye voprosy bor'by KPSS za marksistskoe osveshchenie istorii bol'shevisma 1928–1932 (Moscow, 1962), pp.62- 63. 17. Istoriia VKP (b) (4 vols., Moscow, 1926–30). According to A. L. Sidorov, one of the authors, these volumes were the chief product of “Iaroslavskii and his school" (Istoria SSSR, 1964 no. 3, p. 136). The contributors (with the exception of Piontkovskii) made up the nucleus of Iaroslavskii's faction: they were T. Kramolnikov, N. Elvov, O. Rimskii, I. Mints, I. Nikitin, A. Roos, D. Baevskii, A. Vaks, A. Sidorov, D. Kin and S. Piontkovskii. 18. Teodorovich, Istoricheskoe znachenie narodnoi voli, p.249. 19. Sokolov, "On the historical views of M. N. Pokrovski," Kommunist, 1962 no. 4, p.75. 2o. Nosov and Zakharikov, op.cit., p.75. The ellipses are probably theirs, not Pokrovskii's. 21. Iaroslavskii, in Bol'shevik, 1930 no. 3-4, p.122. 22. Voprosy prepodavaniia leninizma, istorii VKP(b), Kominterna [stenographic report of the 1929 conference on the teaching of Leninism, Party history, and the Comintern] (Moscow, 1930), Pp.183–85. 23. Iaroslavskii, “On the 1905 Revolution," Istorik-marksist (1931) no. 21, PP.151-52. 24. Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii (1930) no. 39, pp. 14-90, especially PP.34-36. 25. See David Joravsky, Soviet Marxism and Natural Science, 1917-1932 (London, 1961), chs. 14 and 16. 26. Pokrovskii had left the Bolsheviks with the Vpered group in 1909, rejoining only in the middle of 1917. 27. L. V. Ivanova, U istokov sovetskoi istoricheskoi nauki. Podgotovka kadrov istorikov-marksistov 1917-1929 (Moscow, 1968), p.180. 28. See Gorin's remarks in Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii (1930) no. 42, pp.62–65 and 148–49. 29. Gorin, M. N. Pokrovskii, bol'shevik-istorik, p.107. 30. Quoted Sokolov, from Central Party Archives, in Kommunist, 1962 no. 4, p.77. Ellipses are, most likely, by Sokolov. 31. Ibid. The members of the Communist Academy Presidium were Pokrovskii, Kaganovich, Miliutin, Kerzhentsev, Pashukanis, Ostrovitianov, Bubnov, Varga, Gaister, Deborin, and O. Iu. Schmidt. 32. The archives contain five separate drafts of the letter. Though one of them is signed by Kaganovich and Molotov, for some reason there is disagreement among Soviet specialists as to which is the final draft (interview with A. P. Nosov, Moscow, December 14, 1966). It seems that Pokrovskii denounced his opponents by name and that some drafts contain more names than others. Passages from the letter of summaries of it have appeared in six recent works: Nosov and Zakharikov, op.cit., pp.87–88; Sokolov, in Kommunist, 1962 no. 4, pp.75–78; Sokolov, preface to M. N. Pokrovskii, Izbrannye proizvedeniia I (Moscow, 1966), p.67; Ivanova, op.cit., p.18o; Sidorov, in Istoriia SSSR, 1964 no. 3, p.63; and E. A. Lutskii, "The development of M. N. Pokrovskii's historical conception," in Istoriia i istoriki (Moscow, 1965). 33. Nosov and Zakharikov, op.cit., p.88. 34. Gorin, M. N. Pokrovskii, bol'shevik-istorik, pp. 109–10. 35. "Resolution of the Central Committee of VKP(b) of 15 March 1931 on the report of the Presidium of the Communist Academy," Pravda, 2o March 1931. 36. "Bolsheviks on German Social Democracy in the period of its pre-war crisis," Proletarskaia revoliutsiia, 1930 no. 6, pp.37–72. 37. “Bolsheviks and the pre-war Second International," Proletarskaia revoliutsiia, 1931 no. 2–3, pp.22–58, and no. 4-5, pp.35–79. 38. Iaroslavskii, "To the editorial board of Bol'shevik," Bol'shevik, 1931 no. 21, p.68; and also Problemy marksizma, 1931 no. 8–9, p.14. 39. Sokolov, in Istoria SSSR, 1969 no. 5, p.47. . 40. Evropa v novoe i noveishee vremia (Moscow, 1966), p. 505. 41. "On some questions in the history of Bolshevism," Proletarskaia revoliutsiia, 1931 no. 6. The letter was also published in a multitude of other journals, and is translated in Stalin, Problems of Leninism (Moscow, 1962), pp.483-97. It is the subject of a recent article by John Barber, “Stalin's letter to the editors of Proletarskaya revolyutsiya," Soviet studies, January 1976, pp.21-41. 42. Sidorov, in Istoriia SSSR, 1964 no. 3, p.136. 43. Stalin wrote: “Even some of our historians—I mean historians without quotation marks, Bolshevik historians of our Party—are not free from mistakes which bring grist to the mill of the Slutskiis and Voloseviches. In this respect even comrade Iaroslavskii is not, unfortunately, an exception: his books on the history of the CPsu (b), despite their merits, contain a number of errors in matters of principle and history." (Stalin, Problems of Leninism, p.497) 44. Ibid., p.483. 45. Ibid., p.492. 46. Ibid., p.484. 47. Vsesoiuznoe soveshchanie istorikov (Moscow, 1964), p.75. 48. See Mints's public recantation, in which, among other things, he confessed the error of voting for an incorrect resolution on November 1o that interfered with the mobilization of historians (Bol'shevik 1931 no. 23-24, p.135); and report in Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii, 1932 no. 1-2, p.42. 49. Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii, 1932 no. 1-2, p.45. 50. Pravda, 10 December 1931; Bol'shevik, 1931 no. 21, pp.84–86. 51. Istoriia SSSR, 1964 no. 3, p.136; Istoricheskie zapiski (1967) no. 80, 123. 52. Istorik-marksist, 1932 no. 23–24, pp.8–9; Sidorov, in Voprosy istori, 1967 no. 3, p.35. 53. Nosov and Zakharikov, op.cit., pp.100–101. 54. Sovetskaia istoricheskaia entsiklopediia VII (Moscow, 1965), p.717. 55. “The teaching of history in our school," Pravda 27 January 1936. 56. For an informative discussion of the unpublished decrees, see M. V. Nechkina, in Istoriia SSSR, 1962 no. 2, pp.73–74. 57. Protiv istoricheskoi kontseptsii M. N. Pokrovskogo and Protiv antimarksistskoi kontseptsii M. N. Pokrovskogo (Moscow-Leningrad, 1939-40). 58. A. I. Gukovskii, "How I became a historian," Istoriia SSSR, 1965 no. 6, pp.96-97. ## Sharlet: Pashukanis and the Withering Away of Law in the USSR 1. See Dekrety sovetskoi vlasti I (1957), pp.124–26. 2. J. Hazard, Settling Disputes in Soviet Society: The Formative Years of Legal Institutions (New York, 1960), p.vi. 3. See the editorial "Our tasks," Revoliutsiia prava, 1925 no. 1, p.3. 4. See R. Sharlet, "Pashukanis and the Rise of Soviet Marxist Jurisprudence, 1924–1930," Soviet Union, 1974, vol. I, no. 2, esp. pp.112–15. 5. P. I. Stuchka, "Culture and law," Revoliutsiia prava, 1928 no. 2, p.2o. Stuchka's emphasis was on the gradual reduction of legal compulsion in the society. 6. Quoted in P. N. Galanza, "The psychological theory of law and Marxism," Uchenye zapiski Kazanskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta (1929), vol. 89, book 1, p.116. 7. Galanza, loc.cit. 8. For an English translation of E. B. Pashukanis' Obshchaia teoriia prava i marksizm, see Soviet Legal Philosophy (Cambridge, Mass., 1951), ed. J. Hazard and trans. H. Babb. For a critical analysis of the initial construction and subsequent development of his theory, see Sharlet, "Pashukanis and the Commodity Exchange Theory of Law, 1924-193o" (Ph.D. diss., Indiana University, 1968), chs. I and III. A contemporary Soviet evaluation of the Pashukanis school is given in M. S. Strogovich, “On the treatment of certain legal problems in the works of P. I. Stuchka, N. V.Krylenko and E. B. Pashukanis" in S. N. Bratus', ed., Voprosy obshchei teorii sovetskogo prava (Moscow, 196o), p.397. (Academician Strogovich was a contemporary of Pashukanis, and in this article he partially “rehabilitated" the conception of a theory of law separate from the theory of the state.) 9. A. Ia. Estrin, "XV Congress of the Party and questions of law," Revoliutsiia prava, 1928 no. 2, p.13. 10. Hazard, Settling Disputes in Soviet Society, p.487. 11. S. Dobrin, "Soviet Jurisprudence and Socialism," Law Quarterly Review (1936) vol. 52, pp.420–21. 12. Stuchka, "Twelve years of the revolution of the state and law" (1929), in Stuchka, Izbrannye proizvedeniia po marksistsko-leninskoi teorii prava (Riga, 1964), p.461. 13. XV syezd VKP (b). Stenograficheskii otchet I (1961), p.527. 14. Paraphrased in R. Schlesinger, Soviet Legal Theory (2d ed., London, 1951), p.202. 15. N. I. Cheliapov, "The Law," in Malaia sovetskaia entsiklopediia VI (Moscow, 1930), pp.811–12. 16. See Hazard, Settling Disputes in Soviet Society, pp.222, 393, 487; J. Starosolskij, "The Principle of Analogy in Criminal Law: an Aspect of Soviet Legal Thinking" (unpublished manuscript, 1954), p. 36. 17. Šee Hazard, "The Abortive Codes of the Pashukanis School," in D. D. Barry, F.J. M. Feldbrugge, and D. Lasok, eds., Codification in the Communist World (Leyden, 1975), pp.158–67. 18. Hazard, "Reforming Soviet Criminal Law," Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology (1938) vol. 29, p. 16o. The most active supporters were Estrin, Ia. V. Staroselskii, G. I. Volkov and S. Ia. Bulatov. 19. Ibid., p.164, note 20. zo. Stuchka; “Twelve years of the revolution of the state and law," loc.cit., p.461. 21. Hazard, "Reforming Soviet Criminal Law," loc.cit., p.165. 22. Proekt novogo ugolovnogo kodeksa RSFSR (Moscow, 193o), p.33. 23. Sovetskoe gosudarstvo i revoliutsiia prava, 1931 no. 4, p.132. 24. N. V. Krylenko, "It is time!", Revoliutsiia prava, 1927 no. 4, pp.88–89. 25. See Hazard, Settling Disputes in Soviet Society, pp.393-94. 26. N. N. Polianskii, Ocherk razvitiia sovetskoi nauki ugolovnogo protsessia (Moscow, 1960), p.40. 27. See Hazard, Settling Disputes in Soviet Society, pp.434-35. 28. N. V. Krylenko, Reforma ugolovnogo kodeksa (Moscow, 1929) p.64. 29. See Dobrin, “Soviet Jurisprudence and Socialism," loc.cit., p.419. 30. See A. Ia. Vyshinskii, Sudostroistvo v SSSR; Sudy obshchestvennoi samodeiatel'nosti (2d ed., Moscow, 1935), chs. 2–6. 31. See H. Berman and J. Spindler, "Soviet Comrades' Courts," Washington Law Review (1963), vol. 38, pp.849–52. 32. Quoted in H. Berman and D. Hunt, "Criminal Law and Psychiatry: The Soviet Solution," Stanford Law Review (195o), vol. 2, p.640. 33. Ibid., p.642. 34. Ibid., p.643. 35. Qutoed in L. Ia. Gintsburg, Programma po khoziaistvenno-administrativnomu pravu (1st ed., Moscow, 1929), p. 5. 36. See S. I. Raevich, in Sovetskoe pravo. Zapiski Instituta Sovetskogo Prava (1929), vyp. 2, p.171. 37. Iu. Geiman, "Economic law approaching the 1zth anniversary of October," Ezhenedel'nik sovetskoi iustitsii, 1929 no. 44, Pp. 1029–30. 38. Quoted in Gintsburg, op.cit., p.3. 39. Ibid., p.5 and Ġintsburg, Programma po khoziaistvennoadministrativnomu pravu (2d ed., Moscow, 1931), p.7. 40. Gintsburg, op. cit. (2d ed., 1931), p.5. 41. Editorial, "On the legal front," Biulleten' zaochnoi konsul'tatsii Instituta Krasnoi Professury, 193o no. 8, pp. 3-4. This journal was edited by Pashukanis and staffed by adherents of the commodity exchange school. 42. D. Pritt, "The Russian Legal Šystem," in M. Cole, ed., Twelve Studies on Soviet Russia (London, 1933), p. 165. 43. Hazard, "Housecleaning in Soviet Law," American Quarterly on the Soviet Union (i938) vol. I, no. 1, p.15. 44. Hazard, "Reforming Soviet Criminal Law," loc.cit., pp. 166–67. 45. Sbornik postanovlenii plenuma Verkhovnogo Suda RSFSR (Moscow, 1932), p.31. 46. Hazard, "Reforming Soviet Criminal Law," loc.cit., p.166. 47. Hazard, Settling Disputes in Soviet Society, pp.393-94. The new Uzbek and Turkmen Codes of Criminal Procedure also contained very few articles175 and 18o respectively. In contrast, the extant RSFSR Code had 465 articles. 48. Za sotsialisticheskuiu zakonnost', 1934 no. 5, p.16. 49. Pashukanis, "On the law departmnent of the Institute of Red Professors," Revoliutsiia prava, 1927 no. 3, pp.160–61. 5o. Pashukanis, "On the theoretical training of workers of Justice," Revoliutsiia prava, 1928 no. 4, p.92. 51. V. Iezuitov and M. D. Rezunov, Uchenie o sovetskom gosudarstve (Moscow, 1931), vyp. 2, pp.2–3. 52. See V. Gsovski, "The Soviet Concept of Law," Fordham Law Review (1938) vol. 7, p.28, note 104, for the names of twenty-seven legal scholars who were affected. 53. M. Dotsenko, "Training of scientific cadres in socialist construction," Biulletin' zaochnoi konsul'tatsii Instituta Krasnoi Professury, 1930 no. 8, p.36. 54. Pashukanis, "On the law department of the Institute of Red Professors," loc.cit., p.161. 55. These course programs or syllabi were prepared by members of the Section for the Preparation of Cadres of the Institute of State, Law and Soviet Construction of the Communist Academy. Overarching all these syllabi was A. K. Stal'gevich's Programma po obshchei teorii prava (Moscow, 1929), which embodied Pashukanis' general theory of law. 56. Gintsburg, Programma po khoziaistvenno-administrativnomu pravu (2d ed., Moscow, 1931), p.9. 57. Iezuitov and Rezunov, Uchenie o sovetskom gosudarstve, pp.9–10. 58. The purpose of the law section was the preparation of qualified Marxist researchers in the field of Soviet law and construction for scientific research institutes, Marxist teachers of Soviet law for Party schools and graduate schools, and theoretically equipped Communists for supervisory work in institutions concerned with questions of Soviet law and construction. Biulleten'zaochnoi konsul'tatsii Instituta Krasnoi Professury, 1930 no.2, p.64. 59. Editorial "On the question of training Marxist-Leninist scientific cadres," Biulleten' zaochnoi konsul'tatsii Instituta Krasnoi Professury, 1930 no. 5-6, p. 3. 6o. See the syllabus for the freshman seminar on the general theory of law in Biulleten' zaochnoi konsul'tatsii Instituta Krasnoi Professury, 1930 no. 2, pp.65- 69. In general, the seminar themes were similar to the chapter headings of Pashukanis' Obschchaia teoriia prava i marksizm, with the exception of the "class" theme, which was not emphasized in the book. 61. Biulleten' zaochnoi konsul'tatsii Instituta Krasnoi Professury, 1930 no. 2, Pp.98-104. 62. Quoted A. Bystrova and L. Gittel', “A short review of the work of the seminar on the general theory of law," Biulleten' zaochnoi konsul'tatsii Instituta Krasnoi Professury, 1930 no. 1, p.46. 63. Sovetskoe gosudarstvo, 1934 no. 2, p.40. 64. A. Ia. Vyshinskii, K polozheniiu na fronte pravovoi teorii (Moscow, 1937), p.18. 65. Biulleten' zaochnoi konsul'tatsii Instituta Krasnoi Professury, 1930 no. 2, Pp.98-104. 66. Hazard, "Housecleaning in Soviet Law," loc.cit., p.13. Hazard wrote: "Law concerning the rights of the individuals was relegated to a few hours at the end of the course in economic-administrative law and given apologetically as an unwelcome necessity for a few years due to the fact that capitalist relationships and bourgeois psychology had not yet been wholly eliminated." 67. “The Five-Year Plan and the Soviet state," Revoliutsiia prava, 1929 no. 4, p.9. 68. O. Dzenis, "Current problems of the state," Biulleten' zaochnoi konsul'tatsii Instituta Krasnoi Professury, 1930 no. 8, p. 6. 69. "The Five-Year Plan and the Soviet state," Revoliutsiia prava, 1929 no. 4, p.6. 70. Pashukanis, "Economics and legal regulation," Revoliutsiia prava, 1929 no. 5, p.37. 71. See Hazard, "Housecleaning in Soviet Law," łoc.cit., p.12. 72. Interview with a Soviet jurist in Moscow, 1964. The respondent specifically referred to the draft criminal and criminal procedural codes inspired by the commodity exchange theory of law as examples of the tendency toward legal nihilism. 73. Berman and Spindler, "Soviet Comrades' Courts," loc.cit., p.852. 74. From a letter of John N. Hazard from Moscow dated 6 September 1937, in D. Barry, W. Butler, and G. Ginsburgs, eds., Contemporary Soviet Law (Leyden, 1974), pp. xxv-xxvi. 75. For an analysis of the criticism and revision of Pashukanis' commodity exchange theory of law, and a discussion of the decline of the commodity exchange school, see Sharlet, "Pashukanis and the Commodity Exchange Theory of Law, 1924–1930" (Ph.D. diss., Indiana University, 1968), chs. V-VII. 76. Vyshinskii, gen. ed., The Law of the Soviet State, trans. H. Babb, Intro. by J. Hazard (New York, 1948), p. 52. For the impact of Vyshinskii's redefinition, see R. Sharlet, "Stalinism and Soviet Legal Culture," in Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation, ed. R. C. Tucker (New York, 1977), pp.155-79. ## Clark: Little Heroes and Big Deeds 1. See, for example, L. Leonov, "Sot', " Novyi mir, 1930 no. 4, pp.27–28, and no. 5, p.36; F. Panferov, "Bruski" (part II), Oktiabr', 1929 no. 7, Pp.25 and 29; 1929 no. 9, p.38; 1930 no. 2, p.111. 2. e.g., F. Gladkov, "Energiia," Novyi mir, 1932 no. 1, p.8; no. 2, p. 112; no. 7–8, p.105. 3. V. Ilenkov, "Vedushchaia os'," Oktiabr', 1931 no. 9, p.15. 4. Ilenkov, op.cit., Oktiabr', 1931 no. 11–12, p.59. 5. M. Gorki, "On little men and their great work," in his O literature (Moscow, 1955), p.339. 6. Ibid., p.337. 7. A similar idea is expressed in Gladkov's Energiia (see Novyi mir, 1932 no. 1, p.15). 8. Gorkii, op.cit., p.339. 9. I. Stalin, “On the tasks of the industrialists," in his Sochineniia XIII (Moscow, 1951), p.37. 10. Ia. Ilin, Bol'shoi konveier (Moscow, 1934), p.76. 11. V. Kataev, "Vremia vpered," Krasnaia nov', 1932 no. 1, p.16. 12. Liudi stalingradskogo traktornogo (Moscow, 1934), p.415. 13. Novyi mir, 1930 no. 1, p.26. 14. Belomorsko-Baltiiskii kanal imeni Stalina (Moscow, 1934), pp.180–82. 15. Liudi stalingradskogo traktornogo, p.406. 16. Belomorsko-Baltiiskii kanal imeni Stalina, p.402. 17. Ibid., pp.153-58, 338–40. 18. Ibid., p.402. 19. Ibid., pp.35–38. 20. Ibid., p.356. 21. Ibid. 22. “Cultural revolution and contemporary literature. Resolution on the report of comrade L. Averbakh at the First All-Union Congress of Proletarian Writers," Na literaturnom postu, 1928 no. 13-14, pp.4-5. 23. A qualification has to be made here. It is not until after the reversal of policy on bourgeois specialists of July 1931 that one encounters such transformations of bourgeois characters. However, since novels take some time to write, most Five-Year Plan novels were in fact published after this date. 24. At this time RAPP was actually a very broad-based literary organization, and I refer here only to the Moscow leadership—L. Averbakh, Iu. Libedinskii, A. Fadeev, V. Ermilov, and others. The position of these men was less extreme than that of their Leningrad rivals of the "Litfront" faction of RAPP. In particular, they questioned the insistence on topicality (Averbakh, “Aristocratic prejudices,"Na literaturnom postu, 1930 no. 7 [April], p.3); and complained about the poor quality of the “mass literature" being published (Averbakh, "On the orientation of the masses and the danger of a dominance of peasant limitations,"Na literaturnom postu, 1929 no. 14 [July], p. 13). See also M. Gelfand and I. Zonin, "Discussion on the creative method," Pechat' i revoliutsiia, 1930 no. 4 (April), pp.5-10. 25. For example, the theorists of Novyi lef (see below, p.2o0). 26. Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 3 (2o Jan.) and no. 9 (3 March). 27. Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 2 (13 Jan.). 28. Ibid., 1930 no. 40 (9 Sept.). 29. Ibid., 1930 no. 41 (14 Sept.). 30. Ibid., 1930 no. 42 (19 Sept.). 31. See "The Literary Five-Year Plan," in H. Borland, Soviet Literary Theory and Practice During the First Five-Year Plan (New York, 1950), pp.20–37. 32. “For union of writer and publishing house" (editorial), Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 8 (24 Feb.). 33. “Can writers be equated with toilers?", Literaturnaia gazeta, 193o no. 6 (10 Feb.). 34. Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 61 (24 Dec.). 35. See H. Borland, op.cit., pp.26–33. 36. L. Averbakh, Kul'turnaia revoliutsiia i voprosy sovremennoi literatury (Moscow-Leningrad, 1928), p.64. For different viewpoints, see Pechat' i revoliutsiia, 1929 no. 1, pp.19–65. 37. Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 44 (24 Sept.). 38. Ibid., 1929 no. 18 (19 Aug.). 39. Z. Elsberg, in Literaturnaia gazeta, 1929 no. 16 (6 Aug.), p.2; I. Grossman-Roshchin, in Na literaturnom postu, 1929 no. 15 (May), pp.4-5. 40. Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 10 (10 March) and no. 48 (19 Oct.). 41. Ibid., 1930 no. 48 (19 Oct.). 42. "Pereval and the art of our times," and "The end of Pereval (from the editors)," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 16 (29 April). 43. See, for example, T. Kostrov, "On realism, the 'living man' and the style of proletarian literature. Comrade Ermilov's brigade on the path to Rome, Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 13 (31 March). 44. Na literaturnom postu, 1929 no. 10 (May), p.2. 45. “The literature of a great epoch" (editorial), Pravda, 193o no. 91 (2 April). 46. Literaturnaia gazeta, 1929 no. 11 (1 July). 47. Ibid., 1930 no. 5 (3 Feb.). 48. Ibid., 1930 no. 41 (14 Sept.). 49. Ibid., 1930 no. 39 (4 Sept.). 50. Ibid., 1930 no. 24 (27 June). 51. "For proletarian cadres, for Bolshevik tempos (for the First Oblast Conference of MAPP)," Na literaturnom postu, 193o no. 2 (Jan.). 52. V. Kirshon, “The first results of the call of shock-workers into literature," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 49 (10 Sept.). 53. K. Zelinskii, "On the literary pages of mass publications," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 3 (20 Jan.). 54. “New literary cadres" (editorial), Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 49 (24 Oct.). 55. Fadeev, in Na literaturnom postu, 1930 no. 11 (June), p.1. 56. Ibid., 1928 no. 13–14, p.8. 57. M. P., "Face to the millionth reader," Literaturnaia gazeta, 193o no. 39 (4 Sept.). 58. [Workers], “A breakdown in GIKhL," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 15 (19 March). 59. "We haye to break the writer's individualism," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1929 no. 16 (6 Aug.), and V. Tsepotev, “A review of criticism from below,"Na literaturnom postu, 1929 no. 8 (April), p. 44. 60. "Union of writers. The governing board meets," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1929 no. 32 (25 Nov.). 61. Editorial, Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 36 (2o Aug.), and "For workers' supervision over the writers' organizations. Appeal of workers from the Vladimir Ilich factory," Pravda, 5 August 1930. 62. Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 49 (24 Oct.). 63. "The contours of the writer's psyche have changed," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 48 (19 Oct.). 64. "We have to break the writer's individualism," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1929 no. 16 (6 Aug.). 65. Editorial, Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 44 (29 Sept.). 00. See, tor example, report trom Amo tactory, Literaturnaia gazeta, 193o no. 5 (3 Feb.); editorial, ibid., 1930 no. 36 (zo Aug.); D. Kalm in ibid., 1930 no. 3 (18 Jan.). 67. The critic M. Chumandrin refers to this movement as a "going to the people" (khozhdenie v narod) in Na literaturnom postu, 1930 no. 17, p.60. 68. Z. V. Udonova, Marietta Shaginian (Moscow, 196o), P.34. 69. Note Gladkov's bitter remarks about writers who spend the briefest possible time at factories and construction sites, in Literaturnaia gazeta, 1929 no. 16 (5 Aug.). 70. See, for example, V. Kataev, "Vremia vpered," Krasnaia nov', 1932 no. 4, p.44; L. Leonov, "Skutarevskii," Novyi mir, 1932 no. 7–8, p. 113; L. Korelin, in Na literaturnom postu, 1930 no. 23-24, pp.32-33 (complaining of such sentiments among the established writers). 71. “1,500 authors and 100 editors," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 56 (17 Oct.). 72. A. Reviakin, "Notes of a rural correspondent," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1930 no. 5 (3 Feb.); "letter of Viktor Shklovskii to A. Fadeev," ibid., 1929 no. 1 (22 April); I. Zhiga, "A transitional genre," ibid., 1930 no. 29 (15 July). 73. N. Chuzhak, ed., Literatura fakta: pervyi sbornik rabotnikov LEF (Moscow, 1929), p. 11. 74. See, for example, L. Averbakh, Kul'turnaia revoliutsiia i voprosy sovremennoi literatury, pp.120–22. 75. S. Tretiakov, "The new Lev Tolstoi," in Chuzhak, ed., Literatura fakta, Pp.29-31. 76. These theories required Soviet writers to present their characters with psychological realism—that is, without undermining the work's ideological message, to give an account of the protagonists' inner thoughts and motives. Members of the Litfront faction consistently opposed this view. 77. V. Friche, "On the question of novel-like genres of proletarian literature," Pechat' i revoliutsiia, 1929 no. 9 (Sept.), p.1 1. 78. Na literaturnom postu, 1929 no. 13 (July), p.54; Pechat' i revoliutsiia, 79. Friche, Pechat' i revoliutsiia, 1929 no. 9 (Sept.), p.10. 80. Z. Elsberg, Literaturnaia gazeta, 1929 no. 16 (5 Aug.) 81. "On the Five-Year Plan and writers' competition," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1929 no. 16 (5 Aug.). 82. The reference is to those sections of Energiia that were published during the First Five-Year Plan. 83. The novel was not actually finished until 196o. The reference here is to those sections that first appeared in 1932. 84. The novel was completed in 1937. The reference here is to those sections published between 1928 and 1933. 85. See, for example, the changing treatment of the villain Lukich in Sholokhov's Podniataia tselina or of Iashka Chukhliav and Kirill Zhdarkin in Panferov's Bruski. 86. "Na proverku!", Literaturnaia gazeta, 1929 no. 16 (5 Aug.). 87. See, for example, F. Gladkov's Energiia, L. Leonov's Skutarevskii, Ia. Ilin's Bol'shoi konveier. 88. This fault is to be found even in V. Kataev's Vremia vpered, otherwise the best Five-Year Plan novel in terms of plot development. 89. Nikanor, in Ia. Avdeenko, Ia liubliu (Moscow, 1933). 90. Belomorsko-Baltiiskii kanal imeni Stalina, especially pp.152–64, 323-42, and 248–62. 91. B. Iasenskii even uses this formula to describe the conversion of an American working-class engineer in his "Chelovek meniaet kozhu,"Novyi mir, 1932 nos. 10-12. 92. Belomorsko-Baltiiskii kanal imeni Stalina, pp.122-38. 93. Kraiskii and Akatuev in Ilenkov's Vedushchaia os'; Petrygin in Leonov's Skutarevskii. 94. "At the meeting of MAPP and Litgazeta,"Literaturnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 19 (9 April); report of A. Isbakh, Na literaturnom postu; 1930 no. 15–16 (Aug.), p.294. 95. See S. Sheshukov, Neistovye revniteli: iz istorii literaturnoi bor'by 20-kh godov (Moscow, 1970), p. 294. 96. T. Trifonov, Literaturnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 14 (14 March). 97. A. Fadeev, Literaturnaia gazeta, 1932 no. 5 (28 Jan.); L, Averbakh, Na literaturnom postu, 1931 no. 25, p.7. 98. L. Averbakh, "On the theme of literature today," Izvestiia, 15 Dec. 1930. 99. Literaturnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 14 (14 March). 1∞0. Ibid., 1931 no. 7 (4 Feb.). 101.. Ibid., 1930 no. 20 (14 April) 102. Ibid., 1930 no. 25 (10 May). 103. Iu. Iuzovskii, Literaturnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 10 (23 Feb.) 104. "Breakdown in GIKhL," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 16 (19 March). 105. I. Makarev, "Showing heroesthe general theme of proletarian literature" (report to the September plenum of RApp), Na literaturnom postu, 1931 no. 35–36 (Dec.), p. 59. 106. “Show the country its heroes!" (editorial), Literaturnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 25 (5 May). 107. Literaturnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 22 (24 April). 108. Ibid., 1931 no. 6 (31 Jan.). 109. I. Stalin, Sochineniia XIII (Moscow, 1951), p. 55-59: speech to the industrialists of 23 June 1931. 110. Editorial, "Literary technique," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1931 no. 13 (9 March). 111. See Sheshukov, op.cit., Pp.313-36; A. K. Romanovskii, Iz istorii podgotovki pervogo vsesoiuznogo syezda pisatelei (Moscow, 1958), pp.9-10. 112. “A living factory," Pravda, 1932 no. 51 (21 Feb.). 113. For example, "Open letter to V. Ilenkov, A. Serafimovich and E. Panferov's group: on the novel The Driving Axle," Literaturnaia gazeta, 1932 no. 13 (17 March). 114. Gorkii, O literature, pp. 565–67. 115. Ibid., p. 564. 116. From approximately 1932, the leader-figures in Soviet novels grew in stature and began to play a much more forceful role in directing the production effort. This change caused some problems for the Five-Year Plan novels whose publication spread over a number of years, and accounts for the lack of consistency in the characterization of positive heroes (e.g., Kirill Zhdarkin in Panferov's Bruski). 117. I. Mashbits-Verov, reviewing Bruski, Oktiabr', 1930 no. 8 (Aug.), pp.197, 208–209. 118. Pervyi syezd pisatelei. Stenogramma (Moscow, 1934), p.4. 119. Ibid., p.5. 120. Ibid., p.4. Starr: Visionary Town Planning during the Cultural Revolution 1. E. Evenbach, Zelenyi gorod (Moscow, 1931), postscript. 2. N. Krupskaia, "Cities of the future," in B. Lunin, ed., Goroda sotsializma i sotsialisticheskaia rekonstruktsiia byta (Moscow, 1930), p.9. 3. V. Bashinskii, "Planirovka gorodov,"Malaia sovetskaia entsiklopediia, VI (Moscow, 1931), pp. 571–72. 4. B. Lunin, Goroda sotsializma, introduction, p.3. 5. W. H. Chamberlin, Russia's Iron Age (New York, 1933). 6. A. F. Britikov lists thirty-eight science-fiction novels published between 1924 and 1927 and only eleven for 1928-1931 (Russkii-sovetskii nauchnofantasticheskii roman [Moscow, 1970], p.86). 7. B. Sakulin's proposal in this vein is considered in E. A. Stanislavskii Planirovka i zastroika gorodov Ukrainy (Kiev, 1971), p.11o, and K. N. Afanasiev, ed., Iz istori sovetskoi arkhitektury, 1926–1932 (Moscow, 1970), p.115, note 12. 8. Iz istori sovetskoi arkhitektury, 1926–1932, p.123. 9. “First declaration of the Association of Urbanist-Architects," Ezhegodnik literatury i iskusstva na 1929 g. (Moscow, 1930), p.541. Reprinted in Iz istorii sovetskoi arkhitektury, 1926–1932, p.125. 10. K. S. Melnikov, 'Prockt "“Zelenyi gorod," MS, Melnikov archive, Moscow; abbreviated reports on Melnikov's project and others in the same competition are published in "The experiment of a socialist garden city,"Stroitel'naia promyshlennost', 1930 no. 5, especially pp.450–58. 11. Ibid., p.450. 12. "Instruction on the settlement of the communal house," Goroda sotsializma, pp. 140–43. 13. A. Lavinskii, "Materialized Utopia," LEF, 1923 no. 1, pp.61 ff. 14. L. N. Sabsovich, SSSR cherez 15 let, gipoteza general'nogo plana (Moscow, 1929); and idem., "Not gradually, but immediately. Are we taking the right path?," Goroda sotsializma, pp.46–47. 15. G. Zinoviev, "From Utopia to real life," Revoliutsiia i kul'tura, 193o no. 1, Pp.4-6. i6. M. Ginsburg had frequently advanced this idea during the late 19zos in his journal Sovremennaia arkhitektura, and later elaborated it in detail in his book Zhilishche; Opyt piatiletnei raboty nad problemoi zhilishcha (Moscow, 1934), wherein he advocates the provisional retention of apartments of varying sizes for various-sized families. 17. Reported by V. Ia. Belousov, "The reconstruction of everyday life and the problem of socialist resettlement," Nashe stroitel'stvo, 1930 no. 11–12, pp.451–52. 18. N. A. Miliutin, "Basic questions of the theory of Soviet architecture," Sovetskaia arkhitektura, 1932 no. 2–3, p.3. 19. A. Pasternak, “Les problemes de l'édification des villes socialistes en U.R.S.S.," L'Architecture d'Àujourd'hui, 1931 (November), pp.5-9 2o. Perhaps the earliest effort in this line is that of the German critic Leonie Pilewski, "Neuer Wohnungsbau in der Sowjetunion," Die Form, 1931 no. 3, p.102. 21. L. Sabsovich, "Why must we and can we build socialist cities?" Revoliutsiia i kuľ'tura, 1930 no. 1, pp. 17 ff. 22. L. Sabsovich, "Not gradually, but immediately;" loc.cit., p.48; Gorod budushchego i organizatsiia sotsialisticheskogo byta (Moscow, 1929), pp.21-23. 23. L. Sabsovich, SSSR cherez 15 let; gipoteza general'nogo plana stroitel'stva v SSŚR (Moscow, 1929). 24. Ibid., Pp.28 ff. 25. Sabsovich, “Agro-industrial cities," in Goroda budushchego, p.72. 26. A. Lunacharskii, "The architectural design of the socialist city," Revoliutsiia i kul'tura, 1930 no. 1, pp. 56–6o; "Culture in socialist cities," Revoliutsiia i kul'tura, 1930 no. 1, pp.38–40. 27. S. Ġ. Strumilin, "The problem of socialist cities," Planovoe khoziaistvo 193o no. 5, especially pp.98–100; idem., "The problem of socialist cities," Izvestiia, 21 and 24 June 1930. 28. T. Khvesin, "How we are building socialist Stalingrad," Revoliutsiia i kul'tura, 1930 no. 1, pp.67–70. 29. B. Strogova refers to Moscow's replacement by a “union of towns" (“An octopus city or a union of towns?", Goroda budushchego, p. 146) 30. M. Okhitovich, "The socialist means of resettlement and the socialist type of housing," Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii, 1929 no. 35-36, pp.335-38; idem., "Notes on the theory of resettlement," Sovremennaia arkhitektura (SA), 1930 no. 1-2, Pp.7–13. 31. Okhitovich, "Notes on the theory of resettlement," loc.cit., p.9. 32. Ibid., p.9. See also M. Okhitovich, "What is the city dying of?", Stroitel'stvo Moskvy, 193o no. 1; and "On the problem of the city," Sovremennaia arkhitektura (SA), 1929 no. 4. 33. Okhitovich, “The socialist means of resettlement and the socialist type of housing," loc.cit., Pp.337-38. 34. See the visionary train station described by A. Zelenko, "The city of the near future," Revoliutsiia i kul'tura, 1930 no. 1, pp.29–35. 35. This project of 1928 is misdated by Kenneth J. Frampton in his otherwise perceptive discussion of it in "Notes on Soviet Urbanism, 1917-1932," Architects' Year Book XII (1968), pp.243-44. 36. Iz istorii sovetskoi arkhitektury, 1926–1932, p.128. 37. M. Okhitovich, "Not a city, but a new type of settlement," Ekonomicheskaia zhizn', 7 December 1929. 38. Okhitovich, "Notes on the theory of resettlement," loc.cit., p.13. 39. Okhitovich, "The socialist means of resettlement and the socialist type of housing," loc.cit., p.338. 40. Sovremennaia arkhitektura, 1930 no. 6, p.26. 41. Iurii Larin, Zhilishche i byt (Moscow, 1931), Pp.4-5. 42. Ginsburg spoke in defense of Okhitovich at the Communist Academy in 1929 (Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii, 1929 no. 35-36, p.338). Leonidov and Pasternak publicly associated themselves with Okhitovich's theories with their plan for Magnitogorsk in 193o (P. A. Aleksandrov, S. O. Khan-Magomedov, Ivan Leonidov [Moscow, 1971], pp. 55 ff.). 43. M. Ginsburg, “The socialist reconstruction of existing cities," Revoliutsia i kuľ'tura, 1930 no. 1, Pp.50–54. 44. Le Corbusier perceived this accurately when he wrote Ginsburg that "Deurbanization is a false interpretation of Lenin's principles. Lenin said 'If you want to save the peasant, you must bring industry to the village'. Lenin did not say 'If you want to save the city dweller'. The two problems must not be confused, and yet they are confused." Sovremennaia arkhitektura, 1930 no. 1-2; translation from A. Kopp, Town and Revolution (London, 197o), appendix 6, p.252. 45. Sabsovich, Gorod budushchego, p. 58. 46. Okhitovich, "Not a city, but a new type of settlement," loc.cit., p.153. 47. S. Frederick Starr, Konstantin Melnikov: Solo Architect in Mass Society (Princeton, 1977), ch.VII. 48. L. Kaganovich, Socialist Reconstruction of Moscow and Other Cities in the USSR (New York, n.d.), pp.85–87. 49. F. Svetlov, S. Gornyi, "The socialist city in the classless society," Planovoe khoziaistvo, 1934 no. 2, p.158. 50. This drawing from Sovremennaia arkhitektura is reproduced in Iz istorii sovetskoi arkhitektury, 1926-1932, p.113. 51. “Questions of planning; the experiment of a socialist garden city," Stroitel'naia promyshlennost', 1930 no. 5, pp.452–53. 52. N. Miliutin, Sotsgorod, trans. Arthur Sprague (Cambridge, Mass., 1975) p.22. 53. Ibid., p.36. 54. Lunacharskii, "Culture in socialist cities," loc.cit., Pp.39–40. 55. Lunacharskii, "Architectural design of the socialist city,"loc.cit., p.6o. 56. Sabsovich, "The maddened petty-bourgeois or the auto salesman,"Ġoroda sotsializma, pp.157–58. 57. Sabsovich, Gorod budushchego, pp.34-35. 58. Sovremennaia arkhitektura (SA), 1929 no. 6, pp.30–31. 59. Sabsovich, Gorod budushchego, p.39. 60. At one point Sabsovich spoke of workers vacationing for half of each year (Gorod budushchego, Pp.34-35). 61. "Second declaration of the Urbanist Architects," Sovetskaia arkhitektura, 1931 no. 1-2, Pp.19–20; reprinted in Iz istorii sovetskoi arkhitektury, 1926–1932, p.132. 62. "Declaration of the All-Union Architects' Scientific Society," Sovremennaia arkhitektura, 1930 no. 3, p.1. 63. Sbornik zakonov USŚR (Kharkov, 1930), no. 21, p.206. 64. Sbornik zakonov USSR (Kharkov, 1929), no. 24, p. 199; Sbornik zakonov USSR (Kharkov, 1930), no. 46. 65. A. Pozdneev, "Organization of the construction of new cities," Planovoe khoziaistvo, 1930 no. 12, Pp.295–304. 66. Protocol of the Combined Industrial-Technical and Social-Cultural Sections, July 11, 1929, in Sabsovich, Gorod budushchego, p.63. 67. See Maurice Frank Parkins, City Planning in Soviet Russia (Chicago 1952), chs. 2–3. 68. V. E. Poletaev, “Housing construction in Moscow in 1931-34," Istoricheskie zapiski, 196o no. 66, pp.6–8. 69. L. Kaganovich, "On the Moscow city economy and the development of the urban economy of the USSR," KPSS v rezoliutsiiakh i resheniiakh syezdov, konferentsii i plenumov TsK IV (Moscow, 1970), pp. 557–58. Official translation, Socialist Reconstruction of Moscow and Other Cities in the USSR (New York, n.d.), p.82. 70. N. Chernia, "Cities of socialism," Revoliutsiia i kul'tura, 193o no. 1, p.11. 71. P. Martell, “Legislation Concerning Residential Development in the Soviet Union," in Lissitzky, Russia: An Architecture for World Revolution (trans. Eric Dluhosch, London, i97o; translation modified by the author against original in Wohnungswirtschaft XXIII [Berlin, 1928], pp. 140-41. 72. Kaganovich, Socialist Reconstruction of Moscow, p.26. 73. Ibid., p.21. 74. Ibid., pp.39, 47, etc. 75. Sabsovich, Gorod budushchego, pp.10-12. 76. G. Lonov, "The new plan of electrification," Planovoe khoziaistvo, 1932 no. 5, p.85. 77. See, for example, G. Krzhizhanovskii, “On the activity of GOELRO," Planovoe khoziaistvo, i930 no. 12, pp.39-47; S. I. Tokachev, "Application of electrical energy to domestic life," Planovoe khoziaistvo, 193o no. 12, pp. 193-96. 78. Ezhegodnik MAO (Moscow, 1930), p.16. 79. Okhitovich, "Not a city, but a new type of settlement," loc.cit., p.155. 4; V. Mirer, "Town planning in Czechoslovakia," Kommunal'noe delo, 193o no. 7; M. Nefedov, "Replanning of Nanking," Kommunal'noe khoziaistvo, 1931 no. 1o; B. L. Kogan, ""Housing construction of the city of Frankfurt," Nashe stroitel'stvo, 1930 no. 11–12, pp.462–69; O. Vutke, “Rapid building in housing construction," Nashe stroitel'stvo, 1930 no. 11-12, pp.473-78; A. Krasinovskii, "The ideas of Corbusier," Kommunal'noe delo, 1929 no. 11; V. Mirer, "Replanning of the city of Tokyo," Kommunal'noe khoziaistvo, 1929 no. 21-22, etc. 81. Stroitel'stvo Moskvy, 1931 no. 1, pp.35 ff. 82. L. Vygodskii, "What is new in urban construction and planning. The expansion of Stockholm," Kommunal'noe khoziaistvo, 1929 no. 7-8, pp. 134-37. 83. "Questions of planning. The experiment of the Garden City," Stroiteľ naia promyshlennost', 1930 no. 5, pp.452–53. 84. Bauwelt XXI (1931), p.703. 85. Ibid., and Sovremennaia arkhitektura, 1927 no. 1, p.12. 86. Kaganovich estimated in 1931 that Moscow needed 50% more canteens and restaurants (Socialist Reconstruction of Moscow, p.30). Iu. Larin, "Urban life and the collectivization of everyday living," Sovetskoe stroitel'stvo, 193o no. 5, p. 21; and idem., "Socialist reconstruction of everyday life,"Zhilishchnaia kooperatsiia, 1930 no. 4, p.8. 104. Strogova, op.cit., p.147. 87. A. Pozdneev, "Organization of the construction of new cities," loc.cit., 299. 88. A. Lunacharskii, "Culture in socialist cities," Revoliutsiia i kul tura, 1930 no. 1, Pp.35-37. 89. Šabsovich, Gorod budushchego, pp. 55-56. 90. Sabsovich, "Not gradually, but immediately," loc.cit., p. 53. 91. Strumilin, "The problem of socialist cities," Planovoe khoziaistvo, 1930 no. 5, pp.98–100. See also his article in Izvestiia, 21 and 24 June 1930. 94. Ibid., pp.88–92. Cf. Miliutin's adaptation of Strumilin's figures, Sotsgorod, pp.116–17. 96. See Holland Hunter, "The Overambitious First Soviet Five Year Plan," Slavic Review, 1973 no. 2, pp.249–52. 97. A. G. Rashin, "Growth of urban population in the USSR (1926–1959)," Istoricheskie zapiski, 1960 no. 66, p.273. 98. Ibid. By 1934, the population of Moscow had reached 4,183,000. 99. L. Sabsovich, "Growth of urban population and socialist reconstruction of everyday life," Na planovom fronte, 193o no. 6. 100. B. Strogova, “An octopus city or a union of towns," loc.cit., p. 144. Thought: Voltaire to Spengler," in The Historian and the City, ed. Óscar Handlin and John Burchard (Cambridge, 1963), Pp.95–114. 102. A. Puzis, in debate at the Communist Academy on 1 October 1929, Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi Akademii, 1929 no. 35-36, p.340. 103. B. Strogova, "An octopus city or à union of towns," loc.cit., p. 144; and Sabsovich, Gorod budushchego, p.47. 105. N. A. Miliutin, "Štruggle for the new life-style and Soviet urbanism," Goroda budushchego, ·p.116. 1o6. Mikhail Koltsov, "On the threshold of your home," Pravda, 1 May 1930, p.6. 108. E. laroslavskii, "The Dreams of the Chaianovs and Soviet reality," Pravda, 18 October 193o. On the accusations against Chaianov and others involved in the "Kondratev affair," see Susan Solomon's article in this volume, pp. 145-46 and note 70. 109. M. V. Kriukov, “A year of struggle on the construction front," Stroiteľ'stvo Moskvy, 1930 no. 11, pp.9–11. 110. Kaganovich, Socialist Reconstruction of Moscow, p.82. 111. Ibid., p.98. 112. From Voprosy Leninizma, cited by F. V. Popov, ed., Planirovka sotsialisticheskoi rekonstruktsii gorodov (Moscow, 1934), p.26. 113. M. Okhitovich, Chto delat'? (Moscow, 1934) 114. General'nyi plan rekonstruktsii goroda Moskvy (Moscow, 1935). 1 1 5. Claude Schnaidt, Hannes Meyer: Bauten, Projekte und Schriften (Teufen, 1965), pp. 27 ff.; Hans Schmidt, "Die Tätigkeit deutscher Architekten und Spezialisten des Bauwesen in der Sowjetunion in den Jahren 193o bis 1937," Wissenschaftlichte Zeitschrift der Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 1967, Heft 3, pp.383-400; J. Buekschmitt, Ernst Mai (Stuttgart, 1963). 116. See, for example, V. Č. Davidovich, T. A. Chizhykova, Aleksandr Ivanitskii (Moscow, 1973), pp.63–79. ## Hough: The Cultural Revolution and Western Understanding of the Soviet System 1. Nicholas S. Timasheff, The Great Retreat: The Growth and Decline of Communism in Russia (New York, 1946). 2. Leon Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed (New York, 1937). 3. The phrase is the subtitle of Timasheff's The Great Retreat. 4. Barrington Moore, Jr., Soviet Politics: The Dilemma of Power (Cambridge, Mass., 195o); Merle Fainsod, How Russia is Ruled (Cambridge, Mass., 1953), Pp.104-109. 5. This paragraph is drawn from Sheila Fitzpatrick, Education and Social Mobility in the Soviet Union (forthcoming). 6. Adam B. Ulam, "The Historical Role of Marxism and the Soviet System," World Politics, October 1955, pp.28–29. 7. Merle Fainsod and Jerry F. Hough, How Russia is Ruled (3d ed., Cambridge, Mass., 1978), ch. 5. 8. Vera S. Dunham, In Stalin's Time (London and New York, 1976). 9. For example, in 1937, a year in which the socialist sector of agriculture did particularly well, the private sector provided 52 percent of the country's potatoes and vegetables, 71 percent of its meat, 57 percent of its fruit, and 71 percent of its milk. Jerzy F. Karcz, “From Stalin to Brezhnev: Soviet Agricultural Policy in Historical Perspective," in James R. Millar, ed., The Soviet Rural Community (Urbana, Ill., 1971), p.54. Figures such as these are often cited to prove the efficiency of the private sector, but, particularly in the early decades, they demonstrate even more that the production of these crops was collectivized only to a limited degree. 10. Kendall E. Bailes, Technology and Society under Lenin and Stalin (Princeton, 1977), ch.VII. 11. See the discussion in Sheila Fitzpatrick, "Domestic Factors in Soviet Foreign and Comintern Policy, 1928–1934" (paper delivered to conference on Domestic Factors in Soviet Foreign Policy, Ann Arbor, Michigan, April 1976). 12. Barrington Moore, Jr., The Social Origins of Democracy and Dictatorship (Boston, 1966). 13. David Joravsky, The Lysenko Affair (Cambridge, Mass., 197o).