Katerina Clark is Assistant Professor of Russian in the Slavic Department of the University of Texas at Austin. She has recently published an essay, "Utopian Anthropology as a Context for Stalinist Literature," in Robert C. Tucker, ed., Stalinism (New York: Norton, 1977), and is currently working on a book on the structure and evolution of the Soviet novel. George M. Enteen is Associate Professor of History at the Pennsylvania State University. His articles on historiography have appeared in Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas, Survey, Soviet Studies, and Slavic Review, and he is the author of a forthcoming study of Pokrovskii. Sheila Fitzpatrick is Associate Professor of History at Columbia University. She is the author of The Commissariat of Enlightenment. Soviet Organization of Education and the Arts under Lunacharsky, October 1917–1921 (London and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1971) and of a forthcoming study of Soviet education policy 1921-1934, Education and Social Mobility in the Soviet Union. Jerry F. Hough is Professor of Political Science at Duke University. He is the author of The Soviet Prefects (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969) and The Soviet Union and Social Science Theory (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977), and coauthor of Merle Fainsod and Jerry F. Hough, How Russia is Ruled (3d ed., Harvard University Press, forthcoming). David Joravsky is Professor of History at Northwestern University. He is the author of Soviet Marxism and Natural Science, 1917-1932 (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1961) and The Lysenko Affair (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 197o). He is currently working on a history of the Pavlov school from the 186os to the 1950s. Gail Warshofsky Lapidus is Assistant Professor of Political Science and Sociology, University of California at Berkeley. She is the author of Women in Soviet Society: Equality, Development and Social Change (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Califomia Press, 1977). Moshe Lewin is Professor of Soviet History and Politics, Centre for Russian History and East European Studies, University of Birmingham, England. He is the author of Russian Peasants and Soviet Power (London: Allen and Unwin, 1968; New York: Norton, 1976), Lenin's Last Struggle (New York: Random House, 1968) and Political Undercurrents in Soviet Economic Debates (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1974). Robert Sharlet is Professor of Political Science at Union College, Schenectady, New York. He is coauthor (with Z. I. Zile and J. C. Love) of The Soviet Legal System and Arms Inspection (New York: Praeger, 1972) and, most recently, of an essay, "Stalinism and Soviet Legal Culture," in Robert C. Tucker, ed., Stalinism (New York: Norton, 1977). He is currently writing a book on Pashukanis and Revolutionary Legal Theory in the USSR, 1917-1937. Susan Gross Solomon is Associate Professor of Political Economy at the University of Toronto. She is the author of The Soviet Agrarian Debate: A Controversy in Social Science, 1923-1929 (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1977). S. Frederick Starr is Secretary of the Kennan Institute for Advanced Russian Studies at the Woodrow Wilson International Čenter for Scholars, Washington, D.C. His publications include Decentralization and Self-Government in Russia (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1972) and Melnikov: Solo Architect in Mass Society (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1976)