# Design with society: why socially responsive design is good enough

Adam Thorpe and Lorraine Gamman\*

Design Against Crime Research Centre/Socially Responsive Design Hub, Central Saint Martins, University of the Arts, London, UK

(Final version received 5 October 2011)

This paper seeks to make the case for socially responsive design. It does this by ofering a broad contexualisation of previous accounts of design, including those made in this special issue, and by proposing new and useful ways of understanding the need to address multiple actors and design agendas in the design process. The paper also reviews and identifies problems with some ideas about collaboration and agency in the context of social design and design-led social innovation. It suggests that equitable arrangements between stakeholders are essential to ensure the successful delivery of design for social change in the real world. It also argues that robust socially responsive design and innovation methodologies and engagement strategies are essential, and need to be mindfully applied by designers seeking to make efective and appropriate contributions to meeting societal goals in new, sustainable ways.

Keywords: socially responsible design; socially responsive design; social innovation; sustainability

## 1. A tale of two paradigms

Design significantly informs a diverse range of cultural forms, processes and social understandings which have historically separated the meaning of ‘designing’ from ‘making’ (Sparke 2009). To locate design discussion we feel it necessary at the outset to ofer a brief review of design history and diferentiate between two distinct design paradigms<sup>1</sup> that have emerged over the past 200 years. The first paradigm we define as aesthetic or market-driven design and innovation, i.e. ‘consumer led design [that] in a market economy goes far beyond the idea of meeting human needs; it seeks to create and constantly to stimulate human desires’ and to make a profit (Whiteley 1993, p. 3). It is also linked to an industrial economy model of production and consumption, one that is typically technology driven, and as Whiteley eloquently explains, seeks to provide goods and services to essentially passive consumers. The second paradigm can be understood in opposition. Socially useful design (Whiteley 1993, p. 110) is led by forces for social change or by social need and often (although not always) relates to what is understood as the social economy, i.e. ‘those areas of the economy which are not geared to private profitability’ (Murray 2009, p. 10).

Our account of two design paradigms is not new. Design thinkers from William Morris to Walter Gropius, from Buckminster Fuller to Victor Papanek, from Richard Buchanan to John Thackara, from Nigel Whiteley to Bruce Mau, started questioning the market-led design paradigm many years ago in making the case for socially useful design. Also, institutions such as the Young Foundation have made the case for the ‘social economy’.<sup>2</sup> Latterly, design-led organisations within the UK, including the Sorrell Foundation, Royal Society of Arts, National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts (NESTA) and the Design Council, are advocating a similarly progressive role for design. Melles et al. (2011, this issue) directly engage with this history and ofer some updating of socially responsible design practice, reframed<sup>3</sup> in response to ideas about the triple bottom line. Melles et al. develop a line of argument, connected to Papanek’s agenda, that calls for a changed role for the designer, one that locates the designer as ‘facilitator of flexible solutions that meet local needs and resources’, and go on to support the critique of Elkington’s (1998) concept of the triple bottom line. They assert that ‘what is sound [about the triple bottom line] is not original and what is original [about the concept] is not sound’. They acknowledge the demonstrated potential of socially responsive design to, ‘create socially responsive design solutions in collaboration with other experts and working closely with users’, giving as examples some of the Design Council sponsored socially responsive design initiatives in the UK, including ‘design against crime’ and ‘design for patient safety’ campaigns. This practice is explored further by Camacho Duarte et al. (2011, this issue), through describing a similar ‘design against crime’ initiative delivered by the Designing Out Crime (DOC) Research Centre at UTS, Sydney, assisted by the Design Against Crime Research Centre, London.

In considering the role of co-design in socially responsible and sustainable design initiatives, Melles et al. note, among a number of objectives for design (and designers), the need to avoid the passivity of consumers. Not surprisingly, at a time when there is pressure for less consumption and greater preservation and distribution of resources, discussion about the roles and responsibilities of design is clearly moving far beyond the ‘socially useful design’ arguments raised by Papanek (1971/1984) 40 years ago, and by Whiteley (1993) almost 20 years ago. Today, many radical design thinkers – design practitioners as well as theorists – are exploring what design can deliver far beyond the market-led design paradigm described above. See, for example, the work of Ezio Manzini, who has catalysed the DESIS international network (DESIS 2011). These thinkers are investigating the role and potential of design within realisation of social innovation, i.e. delivering ‘new ideas that work in meeting societal goals’ (Mulgan 2006) in sustainable ways. As design practitioners, they are transcending the market-led design approaches, engaging with the invention of processes, systems and services that empower communities and shape behaviours towards new more sustainable ways of living. Key features of these new design approaches correlate with systemic changes towards a social economy described by Murray as, ‘a strong role for values and missions; blurred boundaries between production and consumption; an emphasis on collaboration and on repeated interactions, care and maintenance rather than one-of consumption; the intensive use of distributed networks to sustain and manage relationships helped by broadband, mobile and other measures of communication’ (Murray 2009, p. 4).

While gaining broader recognition and appreciation, these new design approaches are not yet dominant in the marketplace. Nor are they widely applied by blue-chip companies, despite acknowledgement of the need for corporate social responsibility (Wood 1991). Over more than a decade working as designers, educators and researchers, it has become increasingly apparent to us that many more design students, design schools and design scholars are now concerning themselves with ‘socially useful’ approaches to design. These approaches foreground societal goals beyond attainment of fiscal profit and are driven by collective social values rather than private financial ambitions. Similarly, many more design agencies and consultancies are now proclaiming themselves proud to be driven by what Leadbeater (2007) has called a ‘we think’ approach. They invite those who were previously construed as ‘consumers’ to get actively involved in ‘open innovation’ (Chesbrough 2003) via engagement in mass customisation, designing and making, to become ‘prosumers’ (Tofler 1980).

Melles et al. (2011) consider this sea change in design and reflect upon whether or not participatory design methods and mindset are essential for sustainable and socially responsible product innovation. They ofer IDEO’s Human-Centered Design approach and Toolkit as exemplifying how this might be done, but note that while the IDEO approach ‘suggests a role for co-design it does not explicitly relinquish expertise to users’. Melles et al. draw upon Sanders and Stappers’ (2008) model of design research and practice to make the case that participatory design, which they suggest should be fundamental to socially responsible design, ‘displaces the expertise and authority of the designer’. They propose that this engenders a significant change in roles, with the designer ‘playing that of a facilitator’. Moreover, that this role ‘in the performance of co-design and co-creation, [ofers] a new addition to the socially responsible design toolkit’.

## 2. Socially responsive design

While we find Melles and colleagues’ account useful, we would like to explore a diferent role for designers in pursuit of the achievement of societal goals than their account posits; one that does not locate the designer solely as a facilitator but rather as a co-actor within a co-design process – sometimes leading as an expert and sometimes not. We consider this pluralism and adaptability of the designer’s role to be crucial and one of responsivity rather than responsibility, which is why we call this practice socially responsive design (Gamman and Thorpe 2006).

In our view, discussion about empowering communities to use what is now often posited as ‘design thinking’ (e.g. Brown 2009) necessitates discussion about the role of the designer. Complex and ‘wicked’ design challenges are characterised by competing and often contradictory drivers, and scenarios in which there are multiple ‘correct’ answers to design problems, depending on context and stakeholder perspective. We propose that tackling such design challenges requires a socially responsive design and innovation approach, as it is not clear which ethical design drivers, or stakeholder agendas, the design should be responsible to. This complexity requires designers and other actors in the (co-)design process to be responsive to the context in which the design activity takes place. Appreciation of context requires designers and other actors to be mindful of competing resource requirements, goals and needs, and to be able to consider and decide which factors are to be prioritised in the design response (given that drivers are sometimes contradictory). The fact that there may be no ‘right answer’, or one that can address all drivers and actors equally, necessitates a co-design approach that is plural and equitable regarding the agency of actors within the design process.

## 2.1. Responsive design in the market-led paradigm

We argue that within the paradigm of market-led design it has never really been possible for any professional designer or design group to deliver ‘responsible design’ in the ‘real world’. The idea that design has a responsibility to society and environment was fundamental to Papanek’s claim that design is the most powerful tool for shaping our environment, society and ourselves (1984, p. ix), and his exhortation that the role of the designer must be revised in line with this responsibility. However, 40 years later the asserted pre-eminence of design looks delusional and ultimately naı¨ ve, certainly in relation to design for the market, because it does not take into account the power structure that informs design production. To be ultimately responsible (rather than responsive) as a designer in the market-led context is an aspiration rather than a description of any real-world practice. Designers do not have the control over resources that would allow them to set and fulfil their own agendas; hence they routinely deliver design that serves the interests of the market over those of society: shareholders over stakeholders.

## 2.2. Responsive design in the socially useful paradigm

Social responsibility in design and of designers operating within the second paradigm of ‘socially useful design’ and ‘design-led social innovation’ is similarly elusive. In short, addressing the ‘wicked’ design challenges typical of social design scenarios requires co-design processes inclusive of diverse actors and agendas. In these scenarios design is delivered ‘with, by and for’ (Fulton Suri 2007) designers working alongside other actors within the community of practice of a project. Collaborative practices integrate individual and collective agencies of the actors within them, and necessitate negotiation of collective goals. Thus, the individual agency of the designer, and other actors, over both the processes and products of (co-)design are inevitably subject to compromise. We posit this not as a shortcoming of co-design, in the context of socially useful design and/or design-led social innovation, but as a condition of it. However, we are arguing that, as a consequence, designers are only able to be responsive rather than ultimately responsible in terms of the way they engage with and deliver local social, political and ethical objectives through design – and that this is good enough.

## 3. The good enough designer

Melles et al. propose a ‘framework of criteria’ that might enable designers to consider the extent to which their design proposals are socially responsible. In considering the challenge of using design to facilitate developing world communities to meet societal goals and needs in sustainable ways, they highlight issues for educators seeking to teach student designers socially responsible design practices, since they cannot necessarily access the communities they seek to serve by design. They recommend that such pedagogic practice be delivered through addressing societal challenges close to home. We agree that geographically accessible communities and challenges should be the focus. However, our reasoning is not limited to the logistics of proximity but rather follows from our notion of responsiveness.

Designers from ‘outside’ communities of any kind (‘developing’ or otherwise) must be mindful not to approach engagement in a paternalistic<sup>4</sup> way, one which