# 1. A tale of two paradigms / 2. Socially responsive design / 2.1. Responsive design in the market-led paradigm / 2.2. Responsive design in the socially useful paradigm / 3. The good enough designer / 3.1. The maternalistic approach to co-design / 3.2. The fraternalistic approach to co-design / 3.3. The spectre of paternalism in co-design / 4. The good enough design process / 4.1. Efectuating change responsively / 4.2. The limits implied in socially responsive design / 5. Good enough design outputs / 6. Conclusion

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Thorpe：《Design with society why socially responsive design is good enough》\Thorpe：《Design with society why socially responsive design is good enough》\Thorpe：《Design with society why socially responsive design is good enough》\auto\Thorpe：《Design with society why socially responsive design is good enough》.md

## 1. A tale of two paradigms

Design significantly informs a diverse range of cultural forms, processes and social understandings which have historically separated the meaning of ‘designing’ from ‘making’ (Sparke 2009). To locate design discussion we feel it necessary at the outset to ofer a brief review of design history and diferentiate between two distinct design paradigms<sup>1</sup> that have emerged over the past 200 years. The first paradigm we define as aesthetic or market-driven design and innovation, i.e. ‘consumer led design [that] in a market economy goes far beyond the idea of meeting human needs; it seeks to create and constantly to stimulate human desires’ and to make a profit (Whiteley 1993, p. 3). It is also linked to an industrial economy model of production and consumption, one that is typically technology driven, and as Whiteley eloquently explains, seeks to provide goods and services to essentially passive consumers. The second paradigm can be understood in opposition. Socially useful design (Whiteley 1993, p. 110) is led by forces for social change or by social need and often (although not always) relates to what is understood as the social economy, i.e. ‘those areas of the economy which are not geared to private profitability’ (Murray 2009, p. 10).

Our account of two design paradigms is not new. Design thinkers from William Morris to Walter Gropius, from Buckminster Fuller to Victor Papanek, from Richard Buchanan to John Thackara, from Nigel Whiteley to Bruce Mau, started questioning the market-led design paradigm many years ago in making the case for socially useful design. Also, institutions such as the Young Foundation have made the case for the ‘social economy’.<sup>2</sup> Latterly, design-led organisations within the UK, including the Sorrell Foundation, Royal Society of Arts, National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts (NESTA) and the Design Council, are advocating a similarly progressive role for design. Melles et al. (2011, this issue) directly engage with this history and ofer some updating of socially responsible design practice, reframed<sup>3</sup> in response to ideas about the triple bottom line. Melles et al. develop a line of argument, connected to Papanek’s agenda, that calls for a changed role for the designer, one that locates the designer as ‘facilitator of flexible solutions that meet local needs and resources’, and go on to support the critique of Elkington’s (1998) concept of the triple bottom line. They assert that ‘what is sound [about the triple bottom line] is not original and what is original [about the concept] is not sound’. They acknowledge the demonstrated potential of socially responsive design to, ‘create socially responsive design solutions in collaboration with other experts and working closely with users’, giving as examples some of the Design Council sponsored socially responsive design initiatives in the UK, including ‘design against crime’ and ‘design for patient safety’ campaigns. This practice is explored further by Camacho Duarte et al. (2011, this issue), through describing a similar ‘design against crime’ initiative delivered by the Designing Out Crime (DOC) Research Centre at UTS, Sydney, assisted by the Design Against Crime Research Centre, London.

In considering the role of co-design in socially responsible and sustainable design initiatives, Melles et al. note, among a number of objectives for design (and designers), the need to avoid the passivity of consumers. Not surprisingly, at a time when there is pressure for less consumption and greater preservation and distribution of resources, discussion about the roles and responsibilities of design is clearly moving far beyond the ‘socially useful design’ arguments raised by Papanek (1971/1984) 40 years ago, and by Whiteley (1993) almost 20 years ago. Today, many radical design thinkers – design practitioners as well as theorists – are exploring what design can deliver far beyond the market-led design paradigm described above. See, for example, the work of Ezio Manzini, who has catalysed the DESIS international network (DESIS 2011). These thinkers are investigating the role and potential of design within realisation of social innovation, i.e. delivering ‘new ideas that work in meeting societal goals’ (Mulgan 2006) in sustainable ways. As design practitioners, they are transcending the market-led design approaches, engaging with the invention of processes, systems and services that empower communities and shape behaviours towards new more sustainable ways of living. Key features of these new design approaches correlate with systemic changes towards a social economy described by Murray as, ‘a strong role for values and missions; blurred boundaries between production and consumption; an emphasis on collaboration and on repeated interactions, care and maintenance rather than one-of consumption; the intensive use of distributed networks to sustain and manage relationships helped by broadband, mobile and other measures of communication’ (Murray 2009, p. 4).

While gaining broader recognition and appreciation, these new design approaches are not yet dominant in the marketplace. Nor are they widely applied by blue-chip companies, despite acknowledgement of the need for corporate social responsibility (Wood 1991). Over more than a decade working as designers, educators and researchers, it has become increasingly apparent to us that many more design students, design schools and design scholars are now concerning themselves with ‘socially useful’ approaches to design. These approaches foreground societal goals beyond attainment of fiscal profit and are driven by collective social values rather than private financial ambitions. Similarly, many more design agencies and consultancies are now proclaiming themselves proud to be driven by what Leadbeater (2007) has called a ‘we think’ approach. They invite those who were previously construed as ‘consumers’ to get actively involved in ‘open innovation’ (Chesbrough 2003) via engagement in mass customisation, designing and making, to become ‘prosumers’ (Tofler 1980).

Melles et al. (2011) consider this sea change in design and reflect upon whether or not participatory design methods and mindset are essential for sustainable and socially responsible product innovation. They ofer IDEO’s Human-Centered Design approach and Toolkit as exemplifying how this might be done, but note that while the IDEO approach ‘suggests a role for co-design it does not explicitly relinquish expertise to users’. Melles et al. draw upon Sanders and Stappers’ (2008) model of design research and practice to make the case that participatory design, which they suggest should be fundamental to socially responsible design, ‘displaces the expertise and authority of the designer’. They propose that this engenders a significant change in roles, with the designer ‘playing that of a facilitator’. Moreover, that this role ‘in the performance of co-design and co-creation, [ofers] a new addition to the socially responsible design toolkit’.

## 2. Socially responsive design

While we find Melles and colleagues’ account useful, we would like to explore a diferent role for designers in pursuit of the achievement of societal goals than their account posits; one that does not locate the designer solely as a facilitator but rather as a co-actor within a co-design process – sometimes leading as an expert and sometimes not. We consider this pluralism and adaptability of the designer’s role to be crucial and one of responsivity rather than responsibility, which is why we call this practice socially responsive design (Gamman and Thorpe 2006).

In our view, discussion about empowering communities to use what is now often posited as ‘design thinking’ (e.g. Brown 2009) necessitates discussion about the role of the designer. Complex and ‘wicked’ design challenges are characterised by competing and often contradictory drivers, and scenarios in which there are multiple ‘correct’ answers to design problems, depending on context and stakeholder perspective. We propose that tackling such design challenges requires a socially responsive design and innovation approach, as it is not clear which ethical design drivers, or stakeholder agendas, the design should be responsible to. This complexity requires designers and other actors in the (co-)design process to be responsive to the context in which the design activity takes place. Appreciation of context requires designers and other actors to be mindful of competing resource requirements, goals and needs, and to be able to consider and decide which factors are to be prioritised in the design response (given that drivers are sometimes contradictory). The fact that there may be no ‘right answer’, or one that can address all drivers and actors equally, necessitates a co-design approach that is plural and equitable regarding the agency of actors within the design process.

## 2.1. Responsive design in the market-led paradigm

We argue that within the paradigm of market-led design it has never really been possible for any professional designer or design group to deliver ‘responsible design’ in the ‘real world’. The idea that design has a responsibility to society and environment was fundamental to Papanek’s claim that design is the most powerful tool for shaping our environment, society and ourselves (1984, p. ix), and his exhortation that the role of the designer must be revised in line with this responsibility. However, 40 years later the asserted pre-eminence of design looks delusional and ultimately naı¨ ve, certainly in relation to design for the market, because it does not take into account the power structure that informs design production. To be ultimately responsible (rather than responsive) as a designer in the market-led context is an aspiration rather than a description of any real-world practice. Designers do not have the control over resources that would allow them to set and fulfil their own agendas; hence they routinely deliver design that serves the interests of the market over those of society: shareholders over stakeholders.

## 2.2. Responsive design in the socially useful paradigm

Social responsibility in design and of designers operating within the second paradigm of ‘socially useful design’ and ‘design-led social innovation’ is similarly elusive. In short, addressing the ‘wicked’ design challenges typical of social design scenarios requires co-design processes inclusive of diverse actors and agendas. In these scenarios design is delivered ‘with, by and for’ (Fulton Suri 2007) designers working alongside other actors within the community of practice of a project. Collaborative practices integrate individual and collective agencies of the actors within them, and necessitate negotiation of collective goals. Thus, the individual agency of the designer, and other actors, over both the processes and products of (co-)design are inevitably subject to compromise. We posit this not as a shortcoming of co-design, in the context of socially useful design and/or design-led social innovation, but as a condition of it. However, we are arguing that, as a consequence, designers are only able to be responsive rather than ultimately responsible in terms of the way they engage with and deliver local social, political and ethical objectives through design – and that this is good enough.

## 3. The good enough designer

Melles et al. propose a ‘framework of criteria’ that might enable designers to consider the extent to which their design proposals are socially responsible. In considering the challenge of using design to facilitate developing world communities to meet societal goals and needs in sustainable ways, they highlight issues for educators seeking to teach student designers socially responsible design practices, since they cannot necessarily access the communities they seek to serve by design. They recommend that such pedagogic practice be delivered through addressing societal challenges close to home. We agree that geographically accessible communities and challenges should be the focus. However, our reasoning is not limited to the logistics of proximity but rather follows from our notion of responsiveness.

Designers from ‘outside’ communities of any kind (‘developing’ or otherwise) must be mindful not to approach engagement in a paternalistic<sup>4</sup> way, one which assumes responsibility for solving the problem(s). To engage in such a way implies an underlying need-based model, rather than working with an asset-based approach, and is ultimately likely to compromise sustainable success.<sup>5</sup> It is interesting that in the related fields of community development (including those with a developing world focus) and innovation and entrepreneurship there is a move away from needbased activity toward asset-based approaches.<sup>6</sup> The asset-based approach is a key facet of socially responsive design and innovation. It assumes that as a designer you do what you can, working with other social actors to leverage the community’s assets to efect positive change, but do not seek to take it upon yourself to try to do it all, for other social actors. In this way, socially responsive design rejects paternalistic approaches in favour of maternalistic and fraternalistic approaches to co-design, distinctions we will go on to explain further.

## 3.1. The maternalistic approach to co-design

The origins of this familial typology for the designer’s role within (co-)design processes are not linked to gender stereotypes, rather they stem from an analogy derived from Winnicott’s account of the ‘good enough mother’ (1953). This psychoanalytic account describes the manner in which a ‘mother’ (‘carer’ is a better contemporary term) facilitates the ‘transitional’ experience of her or his child – the transition between subjective omnipotence and objective reality. Winnicott writes,

The good-enough mother starts of with an almost complete adaptation to her infant’s needs, and as time proceeds she adapts less and less completely, gradually, according to the infant’s growing ability to deal with her failure (p. 93).

In Winnicott’s framework it is the carer’s job to make sure this journey is a gentle one – that the infant is not simply ‘dropped’ into an inappropriate level of independence (Gamman and Makinen 1994). The ‘good enough’ carer gives the baby small doses of what psychologists call ‘optimal frustration’; that is, just enough to create a proper environment for the child to learn and build his or her character, but not so much that he becomes overwhelmed and feels abandoned, or worse, unlikely as it might be, develops a fetish<sup>7</sup> as a coping strategy. We suggest that this individuation process is analogous to some aspects of the delivery of designer-led codesign, and constitutes a maternalistic role for designers. Although design led, the mindful ‘dosing’ of facilitation to other actors within the design process locates the designer as the ‘good enough designer’ in that they do not try to ‘do it all for’ the other actors (or assume that they can!) but actually try to enable other actors in the co-design process to develop and build their own capacity and resilience, and to draw upon their own assets, rather than focus only on unmet needs. However, this practice is not as straightforward as it appears in theory. The dificulties present in ‘dosing’ social innovation in respect of design (designers’) input is articulated by Hillgren et al. (2011, this issue) when reflecting on the communication issues that arose between actors when prototyping a catering service innovation co-designed with a non-governmental organization (NGO) of immigrant women. They observe,

Looking back, we should have helped the women to structure their ofer in a clear way. (We are about to do it now.) However, during the prototyping with HKF [the NGO], it has always been problematic to find a balance between the support we should provide them and making the women feel weak, fragile and overdependent on us.

## 3.2. The fraternalistic approach to co-design

While we recognise that familial metaphors have their limitations, we propose that a further metaphor can articulate another role for designers in co-design processes. This is the fraternalistic role, one that further democratises responsibility (and agency) among actors in the co-design process. We have used the term fraternalistic elsewhere (Thorpe and Gamman 2011) to describe an equitable, mutual and caring concern for and between actors in a project, and towards the project itself. This is a co-operative approach that does not require the designer to lead the co-design process, but rather to collaborate with other (non-design and design) actors involved in the process with equitable agency. A fraternalistic approach to design therefore acknowledges that the designer will contribute according to their context and their abilities, and assumes and afords similar agency and responsibility to other actors in the process.

We believe that both maternalistic and fraternalistic design approaches are preferable to paternalistic design approaches for delivering social change via designled social innovation. This is because fraternalisic approaches aford agency to a plurality of actors and agendas in a co-design process. However, notwithstanding the desire for equitable agency among actors, decisions still have to be made for designs to be defined, developed and delivered. Leadership has its place, although it does not have to reside in one privileged person, discipline or group.

Within a detailed account of design-led social innovation, Hillgren et al. (2011) explore the act of prototyping as a means of enabling exchanges between actors and observe that prototyping ‘evokes dilemmas that cannot easily be solved’. We believe that such dilemmas evidence ‘wicked’ challenges that require a socially responsive approach over a socially responsible one. The notion of social responsivity implies that decisions are made in response to social context and with many actors. This approach to decision making afords multiple agencies, but it does not follow that decisions in these circumstances are necessarily democratic.

## 3.3. The spectre of paternalism in co-design

Criticism has been made of the agency of designers over other actors within social design and social innovation projects.<sup>8</sup> ‘Wicked’ design challenges make it likely that a proposed solution will include decisions that are directly counter to the desires of some stakeholders and actors. Indeed, certain social innovations (e.g. those aimed at addressing obesity) appear to focus on changing behaviours of some individuals for the ‘greater good’ without the individuals’ conscious consent. In the UK, ‘Nudge’ design is an example of such a contentious social innovation. Thaler and Sunstein (2009) argue that ‘Nudge’ seeks to use design to make preferred choices easier for actors to make unconsciously. They use the term ‘choice architecture’ in describing design decisions made to promote a preferred choice (e.g. the choice of healthy foods over less healthy foods via design of point-of-sale and display space in school canteens). Such strategies are not new. They have been used within the market-led paradigm in the pursuit of expanded profits for some time (at the expense of expanded waistlines in the case of ‘supersizing’ meal deals for fast food). However, what is acceptable in the free market is perceived diferently in a socialised and political context, and where the ‘public purse’ is involved. ‘Nudge’ aims to subvert apathy for the greater good. This paternalistic approach to engineering social change has led to a UK Parliament House of Lords inquiry into behaviour change (2011). The resulting report notes that ‘Nudge’ ‘difers from more traditional government attempts to change behaviour, which have either used regulatory interventions or relied on overt persuasion’ (2011, p. 5). ‘Nudge’ design appears to deny those targeted the opportunity to exercise their capacity to actively make choices (have agency).

Mindful of these issues, we argue that accusations of paternalism are only appropriate in respect of design if design decisions are made by designers alone or if the ‘voices’ (and therefore agency) of designers are heard over, and adhered to above the ‘voices’ of other actors. We believe that the co-design processes and methods described in this special avoid paternalism, as does our own approach, which has led to the design of several behaviour-changing interventions including secure cycle parking designs (Thorpe and Gamman 2011). This is because in shaping social innovations, even those that are design led, design and designers apply a fraternalistic, or at worst, a maternalistic approach; here, designers seek to create scenarios and processes that give the best chance of achieving democratic consensus. We argue that as designers working within complex social design scenarios we can seek consensus and create conditions that foster it, but we cannot force it – and that has to be good enough.

## 4. The good enough design process

The non-paternalistic approaches described above might at first appear to require carefully managed ‘democratising’ design processes and methodologies to ensure an equitable distribution of agency among conflicting actors. However, this would be to overstate the role and the ability of design (and designers) in granting such agency within complex social innovation scenarios – it is not within the‘gift’ of design or designers to do so. In fact, within the context of socially responsive design-led social innovations the reverse is true. Proposals that are responsive to context are typically responsive to the assets and resources available to make new ideas work to meet social goals. When actors themselves are viewed as resources, providing social capital and human capital without which social innovations cannot be implemented, an efectuative approach prevails (Sarasvathy 2008). This approach enshrines and integrates fraternalism (a kind of collective agency) within the process while retaining agency for individual actors. This ability to achieve multiple agencies within social innovation processes should not be surprising if we accept that agency exists beyond the ‘gift’ of design (and designers). Others have made this observation. Lukes (2005) points out that theorists including Giddens, Foucault and Bourdieu have argued that power exists in social relations, and that Giddens recognises these power relations as reciprocal, in that they involve degrees of both autonomy and dependence.

## 4.1. Efectuating change responsively

So what is it that produces change? Here we wish to discuss the concept of ‘efectuation’ further, as we believe it can contribute to the discussion of sustainable innovation. The dependence of innovation (social or otherwise) on the ability of multiple agencies and goals to transmute within the process of innovation is clearly articulated within Sarasvathy’s (2008) concept of ‘efectuation’. Efectuation suggests that the future is unpredictable yet controllable, and ofers a new account of entrepreneurship. Sarasvathy describes a set of decision-making principles that expert entrepreneurs are observed to employ in situations of uncertainty. The five principles of efectuation are directly applicable to a socially responsive design context as follows.

. Bird in the hand suggests that actors (designers) work with what they have and see what can be achieved. Actors start with a means assessment (an inventory of community assets) and then construct desirable goals. This interdependence of means and goals suggests the need for co-operation from other actors to access requisite resources, including social and human capital, and leads to:

. The patchwork quilt principle, which proposes that actors (designers) work with the willing and take on their agendas. This suggests an open innovation approach (Chesbrough 2003) and prescribes a process of co-creation with selfselecting stakeholders. Here, the prerequisite of self-selection for participation, among collaborating actors, enshrines a fraternalistic approach.

. The afordable loss principle commends an approach that means actors do not lose what cannot be aforded. It advises actors in the process to commit resources such that suficient remains to support ‘trying again’ (i.e. accommodating the possibility of failure). This approach encourages prototyping and iteration, and accommodates pluralism as well as sustainable development.

. The lemonade principle proposes leveraging contingencies, reframing them as opportunities, thus making use of existing resources (i.e. ‘we have lemons – let’s make lemonade’). For social and human resources to be present for the purpose of realisation of designs (or social innovations), a fraternalistic model is assumed.

. The pilot in the plane principle understands that efectuation is action oriented and actions require decisions. It is this principle that afords agency to individual actors within a fraternalistic process that assumes a collective agency at a meta-level of goal identification. (Efectuation assumes that the addition of new actors within an innovation process implies the review of prior goals and the addition of new ones.)

## 4.2. The limits implied in socially responsive design

Socially responsive design is mindful of its limitations regarding the contribution design can make and the role it can play within social innovation processes and initiatives. Hillgren et al. (2011) highlight these limitations with their reference to Mulgan’s (2009) list of ‘weaknesses’ of design within social innovation. These are lack of economical and organisational skills, and inabilities in driving the implementation process; the high cost of design consultants that often do not have a long-term commitment in the projects; and the superficiality of some proposals which ignore evidence, and field and historical experiences, and which have a tendency to ‘re-invent the wheel’. However, we argue that design and designers are not wholly responsible for these shortcomings. The notion that the designer should ‘have all the answers’ or skills to resolve complex and ‘wicked’ problems, or that they can be responsible for the success or failure of social innovation initiatives, is unrealistic. Such erroneous attribution of responsibility may force designers to overstate or overstretch their contribution to such processes, and in doing so, fail to contribute their own knowledge and skills efectively to address the complex social challenges that require collaboration and contributions from multiple disciplines, agencies and sectors.

Gell (1998) describes a model of interaction (in the context of art, artists and viewers) that denies the possibility of agency without action. Gell describes those involved in such interactions as agents (active and with agency) or patients (passive and agency poor). Potential for agency (and therefore action) is essential for all actors if truly fraternalistic co-design processes are to be implemented in addressing complex and ‘wicked’ societal challenges. Therefore, the ability and opportunity for all actors within a social innovation process to play their role, i.e. to act in the creation and implementation of the innovation, is essential.

Evidently, to achieve this there is a need to accommodate and facilitate pluralism and contradiction within and between drivers and agendas of social actors within social innovation and socially responsive design processes. Hillgren et al. (2011, this issue) and Manzini and Rizzo (2011, this issue) refer to ‘agonistic spaces’ (Moufe 2000), and ‘things’<sup>9</sup> (Bjo¨ rgvinsson et al. 2010) as constructs that can harbour the contradictory agendas and agencies of actors. Hillgren et al. prescribe the act of prototyping as a tool for creating such scenarios, while Manzini and Rizzo describe the benefits of engagement of actors to enhance social transformations.

Both Hillgren et al. and Manzini and Rizzo use the terms ‘planning by projects’, ‘acupunctural planning’ and ‘infrastructuring’ to describe a process of systemic prototyping, developing networks of actors and systems and testing them for their eficacy in facilitating collaboration in seeking to meet societal goals in sustainable ways. Both groups argue that social innovation requires designers to act within an evolved model of participatory design, using their insights and skills to actualise ‘agonistic spaces’, ‘things’ and ‘design devices’. Both argue that these ‘intermediate’ outputs of design enable diverse, and sometimes contradictory, requirements and opinions of actors to co-exist and find systemic synergies that constitute and demand collaboration. In these ways design has a role to play in imagining and creating the context(s) in which exchanges (agonistic and otherwise) can take place, contributions can be made and agency can be aforded. DiSalvo et al. (2011, this issue) also share this position, arguing that collective articulation of issues is a fundamental requirement in social design and innovation.

DiSalvo et al. (2011) present a case study that describes the creation of such a context linked to the delivery of a ‘movie night’ that enabled the articulation of issues of concern by multiple (design and non-design) actors. This ‘collective articulation’ can be seen to provide collective agency among and between actors within the codesign process and help to change the role of participants from that of ‘end users of design that bring problems and needs’ to that of being ‘non-design expert(s) that contribute to the co-design process’. Manzini and Rizzo (2011) note that when assuming this new role participants become active collaborators capable of working out, enhancing and managing new solutions.

The conception of co-design put forward in diferent ways by DiSalvo et al., Hillgren et al. and Manzini and Rizzo locates co-design as a practice where assetbased over need-based approaches are helpful. The role of the designer in such practice is maternalistic in the creation of agonistic space and fraternalistic in the codelivery of socially useful design or design-led social innovation. In such scenarios the role of the designer is one not of responsibility but rather of responsivity.

## 5. Good enough design outputs

The good enough designer is not omnipotent regarding the ultimate outcomes of codesign processes. Able only to be responsive to societal challenges rather than responsible for them, the good enough designer looks to leverage available resources (including human and social capital) to work with social actors to find ways to address societal problems and meet societal goals. Working in efectuative ways, they ‘infrastructure’ co-design processes involving individuals and organisations from diverse communities, disciplines and sectors. The significant outputs of these codesign processes are not limited to the products, systems, services and environments delivered as final outputs that seek to deliver outcomes of social benefit; they also include the designed means, the ‘vehicles’ that enable participants to ‘go on the codesign journey’, and co-navigate towards collectively articulated destinations. Manzini and Rizzo (2011) describe these sorts of outputs, these ‘vehicles’, as ‘design devices’. Another significant contribution from the good enough designer is the coconception and co-implementation of the process of co-design. The process of the establishment of connections between diverse actors, focused on development of design objectives, often itself constitutes the greatest legacy in terms of capacity building among networks of actors so that they can sustain progress towards achievement of (further) societal goals, a process Hillgren et al. refer to as ‘slow prototyping’.

The case study by DiSalvo and colleagues (2011) provides examples of design devices developed within their practice of design for collective articulation. Their ongoing research project, like our own Bikeof project (Bikeof 2008), is an example of a ‘framework project’, ‘slow prototype’ or ‘agonistic space’ that provides a platform to prototype and experiment with new forms of public and participatory social innovation. The movie night described by DiSalvo et al. as a ‘design event’, like the Bikeof Cycle Security Film Festival (2008), is an example of a ‘design device’ as defined by Manzini and Rizzo. Both these design devices created ‘agonistic space’ that facilitated critical feedback, and in which visions and insights were revealed and engaged.

‘Design devices’ create the context for co-design by facilitating ‘collective articulation of issues’. DiSalvo et al. illustrate and validate the manner in which these articulations may be understood as design outputs, viewing the process of enabling, or even catalysing, co-articulation of issues as an ‘intermediate outcome’ (Gamman and Thorpe 2009), which enables progress towards an ‘ultimate outcome’ such as realisation of a social innovation. The designers in the example described by DiSalvo et al. use chalkboards to catalyse engagement with visitors at a trade fair. They write messages on the boards in response to questions received from visitors. The questioning visitors become actors within an iterative co-design process. The appreciation of these articulations as ‘design outputs’ is summarised in one such message: ‘we make conversations not robots’, which serves as practical evidence of Oakley and colleagues’ (2008) suggestion that art and design are able to start diferent ‘conversations’. These chalkboards are literally what Manzini and Rizzo (2011) describe as ‘tools for conversation’.

Good enough design outputs such as ‘design devices’, ‘design events’ and ‘agonistic spaces’ all serve to facilitate innovation processes that do not valorise the contribution of design over other disciplines, knowledge, skills or discourses, nor designers over other actors. This equitable disciplinary collaboration goes beyond participatory design to embrace a truly co-operative design approach, one without which sustainable design-led social innovation is unlikely to be realised.

DiSalvo et al., Hillgren et al. and Manzini and Rizzo provide accounts of participatory design that deliver social innovation via ‘process’ as much as ‘practice’. This is a process in which the creation of networks and interactions of social actors act as systemic prototypes exploring new ways of addressing multiple and sometimes contradictory goals (‘wicked problems’). It is also a practice by which designers collaboratively apply their creative skills in the realisation of ‘devices’ and ‘spaces’ which enable further collaboration to occur. These outputs of design constitute forums, ‘things’ or ‘incubators’, ‘where social innovation can start, proliferate and develop’. DaSilvo et al., Manzini and Rizzo and Hillgren et al. all provide examples of such ‘things’, described as ‘framework projects’, ‘incubators’ and ‘prototypes’ of ‘agonistic space’. These processes and products of design are concurrently the tools and outputs of the socially responsive designer. Manzini and Rizzo conclude that the best a designer can do is to use their creative skills ‘to make things happen’, thus promoting citizens’ participation in large-scale transformations. We would argue that this is not a description of a socially responsible designer that has agency over the outcomes and impacts of their design activity, but rather that of a socially responsive designer, one who is acting to efectuate societal change with available collaborators and resources, and settling for the best that can be achieved in a particular context.

## 6. Conclusion

For all the reasons stated above, we agree with Morelli that, ‘the time has come to review Papanek . . . from a new perspective, which reduces the distance between market-based and socially oriented initiatives’ (2007, p. 3). This new perspective should reduce the apportionment/requirement of responsibility to/of the designer for the outputs and outcomes of design, particularly in the context of social innovation where efectuation is reliant on the participation, and coalescence of agency, of diverse actors. The nature of this design role is responsive to context and available resources, including human and social capital, and as such does not grant responsibility for the final outputs and outcomes of the design process.

This role raises a further, important question that must be addressed if processes of co-design within social design and innovation are to be truly equitable. Despite new perspectives, it remains unresolved how to remunerate social actors for their involvement in, and contribution to, social design and innovation processes. Hillgren et al. touch on it in this issue, noting the reluctance of public service providers to pay for the public services provided by the immigrant women participants. We consider that in terms of sustainable, design-led social innovation, the most significant of the weaknesses of design identified by Mulgan (2009) are ‘lack of economical and organizational skills, [and] inabilities in driving the implementation process’. The fact that co-design and social innovation processes do not typically remunerate ‘nonprofessional’ actors for their contribution to the process demonstrates the need for designers to work alongside other actors and activists capable of negotiating economically equitable and sustainable status for all those that contribute their knowledge, experience and labours. It is a critically important subject beyond the scope of this paper, but one that must be reviewed at a future point if equitable and sustainable co-design is to be achieved. For now, we put economic remuneration aside and propose that socially responsive design is a diferent kind of design from that prescribed by Papanek. It ofers a new account of design, one that abrogates notions of design’s (and designers’) responsibility in favour of responsivity, because we think, in the real world, that is all that can be achieved and that has to be good enough!

