## Acknowledgements Acknowledgements are due to the following for permission to take or reproduce photographs: Victoria and Albert Museum, London; Leicester Museum and Art Galery, Leicester; Ashmolean Museum, Oxford; The Tate Gallery, London; The Society of Antiquaries; Lady Mander of Wightwick Manor, Wolverhampton; the Governors and staff of Pownall Hall, Cheshire; and the De Morgan Foundation. Mrs. M. Canham of the Kingston Museum and Art Gallery, M. D. E. Clayton-Stamm, Esq., Miss M. Weaver and Mr Richard Sword of the William Morris Gallery were particularly helpful, both in providing material and facilities for photography. I am indebted to Miss Felicity Ashbee for permission to quote from C. R. Ashbee's unpublished Memoirs in the Victoria and Albert Museum Library, and to the London Library who lent books over a long period. Sincere thanks are also due to Ray Watkinson for his advice and generous loan of books and information; to my colleagues at Brighton and Kingston Polytechnics, and to the staff of Studio Vista for their care, help and patience. The device reproduced on the title page is C. R. Ashbee's Essex Iouse Press colophon, inspired by the pinks which grew in abundance in the garden of the Guild's Essex House premises in the Mile End Road. # Introduction The Arts and Crafts movement was inspired by a crisis of conscience. Its motivations were social and moral, and its aesthetic values derived from the conviction that society produces the art and architecture it deserves. It was originally a British movement; Britain, first in the field as the workshop of the world, was the first to discover that factory conditions are far from ideal, and the realization that technical progress does not necessarily coincide with the improvement of man's lot brought with it the long campaign for social, industrial, moral and aesthetic reform that is still unresolved today. 'The Arts and Crafts movement represents one facet of that campaign, but because the movement marks a stage in man's efforts to come to terms with industrialization, it was not confined to England. Similarattitudes developedin European countries as they industrialized, and in the United States, so that when the theories of Ruskin and Morris and their successors began to reach a wider audience the response they evoked was gencrally sympathetic, and the products of the British movement were grected with similar acclaim. For a brief period at the end of the nineteenth century British design and British design theory enjoved an unprecedented prestige. To some observers these achievements represented the triumph of individuality: British architects and craftsmen had broken free from the trammels of the past, and had created a new art, a personal aesthetic that would embrace architecture and design as well as the fine' arts. The appeal to individuality, fashion and novelty was obvious, but the British promoters of this revival firmly disassociated themselves from the stylistic extravagances of Art Nouveau. 'Their endeavours were directed, ultimately, towards a social end, the establishment of a society in which all men would enjoy the freedom to be creative. Their concern, therefore, was not focused exclusively on end-products but on the society that shaped them, the men who designed and made them and on the people who bought them. Ashbee perhaps provided the neatest definition of this attitude: 'The Arts and Crafts Movement', he wrote in Craftsmanship in Competitive Industry (1908), 'means standards, whether of work or life; the protection of standards, whether in the product or the producer, and it means that these things must be taken together.' It was this concern to see the problems of design within a social context that was to have the most significant influence on twentieth-century design thinking; Van de Velde, Muthesius, Loos and Gropius, in fact the majority of the'pioneers' who formulated the principles of the Modern Movement, were all stimulated by British precept and example to work towards the creation of an environment that would both serve and express people's needs. The methods each suggested and the solutions they proposed were in themselves radically different, but their concern was with one common goal that of averting mankind's enslavement to the machine by saving the mass product and the home from mechanical anarchy and by restoring them to purpose, sense and life . ..' (Walter Gropius The Scope of Total Architecture). Fundamental to the British Arts and Crafts philosophy, especially in the first stages of its development, was the conviction that industrialization had brought with it the total destruction of 'purpose, sense and life'. These nineteenth-century idealists had learned to spell out the cost of mechanical 'progress' in terms of human misery and degradation; they saw the destruction of fundamental human values reflected in poverty, overcrowded slums, grim factories, a dying countryside and the apotheosis of the cheap and shoddy. In such conditions, they maintained, the good (and therefore the beautiful), whether in art or life, was strangled at birth. As Morris put it: 'Men living amidst such ugliness cannot conceive of beauty, and, therefore, cannot express it'.1 Their rebellion against what they conceived as the indiscriminate exploitation of the many for the profit of the few, led, in Morris's case at least, to a commitment to the idea of revolution; on a less radical plane it led to a rejection, or reinterpretation of the accepted definitions of the design process. For in England the socially aware within the design profession tended to be rebels against orthodox social and academic attitudes, and their non-conformity led to a rugged individualism. Having embraced the Cause, as defined by Ruskin and Morris, each designer learned to forge his own path and establish a personal interpretation of the craft doctrine, so that talents as disparate as those of Crane, Benson, Gimson, Voysey, Mackmurdo, De Morgan, Lethaby and Ashbee were extending the conventions and philosophy of design and ornament, preparing the way, on the one hand, for Art Nouveau, and on the other, through their teaching and incessant personal analyses of the social purposes of design and architecture, for the ideals and dogmatism of the Modern Movement. These were responsible men, intelligent and sensitive cnough to understand that their concern with the values of the past might so conflict with the realities of the present that their work would be rendered useless. Gradually each came to realize—and with cach it tended to be a painful process of self-realization—that machinery need not be a destructive force, and that men, as Voysey put it 'must live and work in the present'. But in spite of the fact that many of these designers did work for industry and supported programmes for the improvement of industrial design standards, none of them were in a position to grasp the nature of the forces that were revolutionizing society. Theirs was a personal and subjective approach, and although they came to appreciate intellectually the fact of the machine as the normal tool of our civilization, they were unable, or unwilling, to absorb, as Lewis Mumford has put it, 'the lessons of objectivity, impersonality, neutrality, the lessons of the mechanical realm'.² Nor were they as confident as their successors in Gropius's generation that men would be able to direct and control technology, and in this, of course, all the indications are that they will be proved right. But here lies the paradox of nineteenth-century idealism; once the idea of practical expediency was abandoned, and design reform was considered a Cause and a Crusade, an element of impotence and unreality entered the proceedings. In Britain Ruskin and Morris and their disciples within the Arts and Crafts movement saw the uncontrolled advance of technology as a threat to man's spiritual and physical well-being, but at the same time they had no clearer understanding of the nature of their adversaryindustry-than had Henry Cole and his associates. They carried their banner in the name of humanity, but the new society that they envisaged bore so little relationship to contemporary reality, that its delights were a snare and a delusion, and possession of its products confined to an appreciative, affluent and intelligent élite. Both Ruskin and Morris died frustrated men, having spent their lives proselytizing a seemingly indifferent public, and Ashbee, in his unpublished Memoirs, defined the nature of his and their dilemma. 'We have made', he wrote, 'of a great social movement, a narrow and tiresome little aristocracy working with great skill for the very rich.'s This ambiguity between their ideals and their achievement was obvious to their successors. Their sympathizers, men like Van de Velde, Muthesius and Gropius, acknowledged the ideal and broke the taboo, attempting to cxtend the values of the Arts and Crafts movement to machine production. But the idealism was open to misinterpretation and many critics were to ignore the underlying social concern and see the efforts of these nincteenth-century reformers at best as quaint and misguided. As early as 1899, for cxample, Thorstein Veblen was equating the desire for the handmade with conspicuous consumption, thus neatly reversing the values that the movement had sought to establish: . . . the generic feature of the physiognomy of machine-made goods as compared with the hand-wrought article is their greater perfection in workmanship and greater accuracy in the detail execution of the design. Hence it comes about that the visible imperfections of the hand-wrought goods, being honorific, are accounted marks of superiority in point of beauty, or serviceability, or both. Hence has arisen that exaltation of the defective, of which John Ruskin and William Morris were such eager spokesmen in their time; and on this ground their propaganda of crudity and wasted effort has been taken up and carried forward since their time.'4 In the twentieth century their reputation has varied with the response to the idea and ideal of the 'machine'as a redemptive force in society. It reached its lowest ebb, predictably enough, with the Futurists, and the technique-oriented theorists of the'2os and'zos. In 1912, for example, Marinetti urged members of a London audience to ... disencumber yourselves of the lymphatic ideology of your deplorable Ruskin ... with his hatred of the machine, of steam and electricity, this maniac for antique simplicity resembles a man who in full maturity wants to sleep in his cot again and drink at the breasts of a nurse who has now grown old, in order to regain the carefree state of infancy... László Moholy-Nagy's The New Vision created a new myth by declaring that the 'Ruskin, Morris circle in the 188os ... opposed the machine so strongly that, in order to deliver their hand-made products to London, they ran a horse-coach alongside the hated railway';6 J. J. P. Oud believed that Ruskin and Morris had committed a cardinal error' and had 'brought the machine into disrepute by stigmatizing an impure use of it as its essence',' and, more recently, Reyner Banham has declared that 'the human chain of pioneers of the Modern Movement that extends back from Gropius to William Morris, and beyond him to Ruskin, Pugin and William Blake, does not extend forward from Gropius. The precious vessel of handicraft aesthetics that has been passed from hand to hand, was dropped and broken, and no one has bothered to pick up the pieces.'s The aim of this book is to examine the nature of the handicraft aesthetic as it developed in England in the nineteenth century, and to outline its impact on design theory in Europe and the United States. The basic hypothesis is that the precious vessel' was not shattered but cracked and tarnished, and its purpose misunderstood, and that the attitudes of twentieth-century designers, even those who feel themselves totally alienated from their counterparts in the First Machine Age, are nevertheless still conditioned, for better or worse, by the efforts of these nincteenth-century reformers to create a world fit to live in. The ways and means differ, as does the nature of the compromise between aesthetic, commercial and functional requirements; but the ideal, as defined by Moholy-Nagy \* remains the same: to 'lay down the basis for an organic system of production whose focal point is man, not profit'. ## I The sources Contemporary historians of the Arts and Crafts movement were confident of its chronology: T. J. Cobden-Sanderson, whose monograph The Arts and Crafts Movement was published in 19o5, maintained that the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society 'initiated the wider movement which, from itself as source, has spread all the world over'; Walter Crane insisted that 'the first practical steps towards actually producing things combining use and beauty and thus enabling people so minded to deck their homes after the older and simpler English manner was [sic] taken by William Morris and his associates'.1 It is obvious, however, that the forces which shaped the movement were in evidence long before the 186os, when Morris was establishing his Firm, and the 188os when the impact of Ruskin's and Morris's teaching crystallized in the Guild ideal and the formation of at least five societies to promote that ideal. The ideology of the movement has a complex pre-history, based in part on a generation's preoccupation with doctrine and 'style' in architecture and design, and in part on reactions, both positive and negative, to the facts of life in a machine age. During the course of the cighteenth century when British invention was laying the foundations of a new economy, progress was seen by many as the inevitable reward for diligence, energy and skill. For a time the growth of cities and the expansion of industry were welcomed as part of an inevitable progress from which all men would ultimately benefit: ## . . . th' echoing hills repeat The stroke of ax and hammer; scaffolds rise, And growing edifices; heaps of stone, Bencath the chissel, beauteous shapes assume Of frize and column. Some, with even line, New streets are marking in the neighb'ring fields, And sacred domes of worship. Industry, which dignifies the artist, lifts the swain, And the straw cottage to a palace turns, Over the work presides. . .. So appear Th' increasing walls of busy Manchester, Sheffield, and Birmingham, whose redd'ning fields Rise and enlarge their suburbs. Lo, in throngs, For every realm the careful factors meet, Whispering each other John Dyer's The Fleece, a poem in praise of the expanding cotton industry, was published in 1757, and was symptomatic of a certain mid-century optimism-an optimism that was reflected (as the poem indicates) in the self-assurance of neoclassicism. The British design achievement of the late eighteenth century—the style anglais as represented by the work of Adam, Hepplewhite, Sheraton and Wedgwood, to name but a few-was admired and imitated in Europe and America, since it combined the virtues of refinement and sophistication with fitness, sobriety and purity of form, and lent itself admirably to semi-craft techniques of production. The growth of industrialization, however, was to choke rather than encourage those very qualities that it had seemed to foster, and by the beginning of the nineteenth century machinery had begun to assume the role of a Frankenstein monster, of man's making, but beyond his control. The romantic poets expressed fears as well as hopes for the Age of Machinery, but the first British writer to apprehend the nature of the forces that were transforming society, and to castigate them with any consistent invective was Carlyle, who defined his position in his essay 'Signs of the 'Times', published in 1829 in the Edinburgh Reviem:\* 'Our old modes of exertion are all discredited, and thrown aside. On every hand the living artisan is driven from his workshop, to make room for a speedier inanimate one. The shuttle drops from the fingers of the weaver, and falls into iron fingers that ply it faster. For all carthly, and for some unearthly purpose, we have machines and mechanic furtherances.. . We remove mountains, and make scas our smooth highway; nothing can resist us. We war with rude Nature; and by our restless engines, come off victorious and loaded with spoils . . . Not the external and physical alone is now managed by machinery, but the internal and spiritual also. Here, too, nothing follows its spontaneous course, nothing is left to be accomplished by old natural methods . . . Men are grown mechanical in head and heart, as well as in hand. They have lost faith in individual endeavour, and in natural force of any kind.' In a little over a generation, therefore, industry seemed to have outgrown its early promise, and far from being considered a source of rejuvenation and vitality, a tool that would unite and improve mankind, it had come to be seen as a negative force, stultifying both artist and artisan, and destroying England's culture, security and traditions. A concrete rather than intellectual demonstration of such attitudes had already been provided by the descendants of Dyer's 'careful factors'-the Luddites of 1811, and the rural machine wreckers of the 183os; but although Robert Owen was replanning the New Lanark Mills in 18oo and Cobbett had embarked on his rural rides in 1821, it was not until the 183os that social and moral considerations began to have any marked influence on aesthetic evaluations. \* It is perhaps worth noting that Carlyle had been engaged in the translation of Goethe's Wilhelm Meister since 1824, and in the third book of the Wanderjahre, which appeared in its final form in 1829, Wilhelm Meister had declared 'this rapid spread of machinery troubles and frightens me. It is gathering like a storm, slowly, slowly; but it is moving towards us and will come and burst upon us.' ## Pugin The precursor here of attitudes that were to become fundamental to the Arts and Crafts movement was Pugin, and his two most important books Contrasts, published in 1836 at his own expense, and True Principles of Christian Architecture, published five years later, express ideas that were to become assumptions with the next generation. In fact Pugin's career, as well as his theory, anticipated in several aspects those of many of his successors. His father, Augustus Pugin, had come to England during the French Revolution, and had worked for Nash, drawing the fashionable gothic details that his clients demanded and Nash detested. Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin was born in London in 1812; as a boy he had provided his father with drawings, and when he was only fifteen he was designing silverware for the Royal Goldsmiths, Rundell, Bridge & Rundell, patrons of John Flaxman, and furniture for Morel and Seddon, who were involved in the restoration of Windsor Castle. Before he was twenty-one, Pugin had worked for two years as a stage designer at Covent Garden-his pièce de résistance being the scenery for the opera Kenilworth; he had married, had been widowed and had married again; he had set up his own firm for the production of gothic ornament which had failed, whereupon he was imprisoned for debt. In 1835 hc was converted to Roman Catholicism; in 1836 he was working with Barry on the Houses of Parliament, and from that time until his death in 1852 he was designing churches and houses, as well as furnishing them. He ran his practice from his own house in Ramsgate, producing stained glass, metalwork, textiles, wallpapers and jewellery (pls r and 2) and employing several assistants, including John Hardman Powell (pl 5), nephew of John Hardman, the metal-worker, and a young man who had worked with Overbeck.ª Like his successors in the Arts and Crafts movement Pugin was concerned, both in his theory and practice, to combat 'the present decay of taste'; like them he believed that architecture should be 'the expression of existing opinions and circumstances' rather than 'a confused jumble of styles and symbols borrowed from all nations and periods', and he was the first of the Gothicists to relate that style to the spirit that had created it. With Pugin, Gothic became an expression of faith, rather than fashion, a matter of principle rather than style; all his aspirations were directed towards the revival of that faith, and with it the restoration of the Christian spirit which had inspired 'the noble edifices of the Middle Ages'. He believed that before the Reformation, stability and order were reflected in man's surroundings, as well as in his life, and for him 'Catholic England was merry England, at least for the humbler classes; and the architecture was in keeping with the faith and manners of the time—at once strong and hospitable'.s Strength and hospitality, he maintained, were remote from the mammon-inspired architecture of his own day: 'The erection of churches', he wrote in Contrasts, anticipating Ruskin's lecture on the Bradford exchange by some thirty years, 'like all that was produced by zeal and art in the ancient days, has dwindled into a mere trade . . . They are erected by men who ponder between a mortgage, a railroad or a chapel, as the best investment of their money, and who, when they have resolved on relying on the persuasive eloquence of a cushion thumping, popular preacher, erect four walls, with apertures for windows, cram the same full of seats . . .' His convictions might, of course, have been somewhat suspect in an age that was solidly Protestant, but in elaborating them Pugin formulated principles of propriety and strúctural fitness that were to be fundamental to nineteenth-century design theory. At the beginning of True Principles Pugin had written: 'The two great rules for design are these: 1st, that there should be no features about a building which are not necessary for convenience, construction, or "propriety"; znd, that all ornament should consist of enrichment of the essential construction of the building.' In the course of his argument he relates these ideas to product design and here his invective against contemporary malpractices anticipates that of Morris: All the ordinary articles of furniture, which require to be simple and convenient, are made not only very expensive, but very ordinary. We find diminutive flying buttresses about an armchair; everything is crocketed with angular projections, innumerable mitres, sharp ornaments and turretted extremitics. A man who remains any length of time in a modern Gothic room and escapes without being wounded by some of its minutiae may consider himself fortunate. He castigates the wares spewed out by those inexhaustible mines of bad taste, Birmingham and Sheffield'; modern upholstery, he says, 'is made a surprising vehicle for bad and paltry taste'; silverwork is 'sunk to a mere trade' and 'glaring, showy and meretricious ornament ... disgraces every branch of our art and manufactures'. His objections relate to all non-authentic styles, whether they are gothic or neoclassic, but neo-classicism was his special anathema, not, as Ruskin was to maintain, because it was 'mechanical', but because it was the expression of a Pagan rather than a Christian culture, and therefore unsuitable for nineteenth-century England. The illustrations to Contrasts demonstrate the debasement of what Pugin calls 'architectural propriety' which had accompanied the debasement of faith and humanity. He depicts nineteenth-century towns, with the sparse façades of the factory, gas-works, Town Hall, the sewage works and Lunatic Asylum crowding against the ruins of the Abbey and the Priory; the traditional protectors of the poor, offering hospitality in their mellowed monasteries, with free gifts of shelter, strong ale, good meat and cheese, have been replaced by the Acropolis-inspired poor-house and the workhouse master with his thin gruel and whip, while Christian prelates conduct their worship at pagan altars. In his concern for the reinstatement of True Principles' Pugin put forward doctrines that were accepted by both 'establishment' theorists at the Schools of Design, and by the dissenters of the Arts and Crafts movement. Patterns on wallpapers, he maintained, should be two-dimensional, never shaded: 'Nothing can be more ridiculous than an apparently reversed groining to walk upon, or highly relieved foliage and perforated tracery for the decoration of a floor'; ornament should be based on forms found in nature like 'the finest foliage work in the Gothic buildings' and when the decoration is two-dimensional 'leaves or flowers [should be] drawn out or extended, so as to display their geometrical forms'. All ornament should be 'appropriate and significant'-there should be no more 'staircase turrets for inkstands, monumental crosses for light-shades, gable ends hung on handles for door-porters, and four doorways and a cluster of pillars to support a French lamp'; the artist, having sought for the most convenient form should then decorate it without concealing 'the real purpose for which the article has been made'.s In spite of his eccentricities and his Roman Catholicism, Pugin's work was in great demand, and his concern for historical authenticity gained him the commission to design the Medieval Court at the Great Exhibition, as well as an extensive practice—he even sent work to America, as he points out in a letter to A. N. Didron.\* His authority was recognized by his own generation; Semper paid tribute to him in Wissenschaft, Industrie und Kunst, and Matthew Digby Wyatt acknowledged the truth and justice of many of his propositions' in the Fournal of Design." His prestige survived for at least half a century, for although he did not gain the Ruskin seal of approval, the Arts and Crafts generation recognized him as a pioneer in their cause. Voysey praised the integrity which made him more than a mere copyist: 'You may search the Houses of Parliamcnt from top to bottom, and you will not find one superficial vard that is copied from any pre-existing building',8 and J. D. Sedding told the Art Congress in Liverpool in 1888 that Morris was 'his true lineal descendant. We should have had no Morris, no Street, no Burges, no Shaw, no Webb, no Bodley, no Rossetti, no Burne-Jones, no Crane, but for Pugin." Pugin, however, stands firmly in his own gencration of design reformers in his attitudes to mechanization. He had none of the Ruskinian loathing of machine processes: his concern was with integrity of design, and he could see no reason why machine techniques, properly applied, should violate that integrity:'... in matters purely mechanical' he wrote, 'the Christian architect should gladly avail himself of those improvements and increased facilities that are suggested from time to time. The steam engine is a most valuable power for sawing, raising, and cleansing stone, timber and other materials',1o and again 'We do not want to arrest the course of inventions, but to confine these inventions to their legitimate uses'. ## The 1835 committee Pugin was not alone in the 183os and'4os in his concern for design standards, since, on a purely practical level, industrialists and their parliamentary lobby were by that time aware that mechanization was creating aesthetic as well as social problems, and that profit might lie in quality as much as in quantity. One of the first to draw attention to this was, significantly enough, Sir Robert Peel, himself an outstanding representative of the new class, the industrialist, whose fortune was founded on his own, his father's and grandfather's enterprise in developing the Lancashire cotton industry. In April 1832, as Sir Herbert Read pointed out in Art and Industry,1 Peel supported a motion in the House of Commons that a National Gallery should be founded on the practical, if somewhat misguided, assumption that contemplation of works of art might help to refine the taste of both manufacturers and artisan; he stated as follows: .. . motives of public gratification were not the only ones which appealed to the House in this matter; the interest of our manufactures was also involved in every encouragement being held out to the fine arts in this country. It was well known that our manufacturers were, in all matters connected with machinery, superior to all their foreign competitors; but, in pictorial designs, which were so important in recommending the production of industry to the taste of the consumer, they were, unfortunately, not equally successful; and hence they had found themselves unequal to cope with their rivals.' 12 In the following years it became increasingly obvious that the French, the Belgians and, to a certain extent, the Prussians, were in the possession of that invisible export known as 'taste' which, it seemed, eluded the majority of British manufacturers and which they would obviously have to acquire in order to become fully competitive. In 1835, therefore, three years after the first Reform Bill, a select committee was appointed 'to inquire into the best means of extending a knowledge of the arts and of the principles of design among the people (espccially the manufacturing population) of the country'.13 The chairman was William Ewart, MP for Liverpool, and manufacturers, importers, artists, educationists and membcrs of Parliament were called to give evidence. And although the formation of the committee was to a large extent part of a campaign to undermine the authority of the Royal Academy,1 this was also the first of a succession of official enquiries aimed at improving standards in industry, and as such it deserves some analysis. For as well as pointing to some of the problems facing the consumer goods industries at that time, the Minutes of Evidence reveal contemporary attitudes to the theory and practice of design and point to the first recognition in Britain of the need for a new kind of specialist, trained to serve industry in a new kind of way. Much of the evidence, in fact, sounds depressingly familiar. Mr Howell, partner in the 'well known firm of Howell & James, Regent Street' was speaking for many when he declared that he had 'never found a good designer in England', that in 'metallic manufactures the French are vastly superior to the English' and that whereas French manufacturers took the trouble to come over and show him actual samples of the wares they produced, or were hoping to produce, their British counterparts presented him with ill-drawn paper patterns giving little or no indication of the final design. Coade and Seely, it was stated, had formerly employed 'some of the most eminent sculptors, among others, the elder Bacon and Rossi'; Rundell and Bridge (Pugin's patrons) used to employ 'Flaxman, Stothard, Theed and Bailey', but like Wedgwood, they could no longer find artists willing or able to work for them. John Jobson Smith, who manufactured iron stoves in Sheffield, had found a designer, a man of natural talent who had 'studied from nature altogether', whose services were so valuable that he was given a share in the business on account of his natural talent'; but like other manufacturers Smith complained of the futility of promoting original work when less 16 scrupulous enterprises copied his designs and undercut his prices. The evidence presented by manufacturers and importers, therefore, all pointed to a dearth of original design talent in Britain, which had led on the one hand to the disreputable practice of copying successful designs, both native and foreign, and on the other, to the need to import at considerable expense, patterns from other countries. It seemed obvious that England's problem lay to a great extent in an educational system that had ignored the facts of industrial life, and the new demands it had created. Charles Toplis, Vice-President of the London Mechanics' Institute, struck at this fundamental weakness when he maintained that while a privileged few 'waste the whole term of education on the profitless acquisition of the Greek and Latin languages ... in sterile schemes of tuition calculated merely to rear man for the cloister, the mechanic, the handicraftsman and the peasant found nothing to aid them in their pursuits'. The Mechanics' Institutes had been founded in 1823, and by 1835 were established in several large cities; their curriculum included 'gcomctry, mechanical drawing and drawing of ornament, the human figure and landscape', but they were not highly regarded. (In fact in his True Principles Pugin had maintained, charactcristically, that they were a mere device of the day to poison the mind of the operatives with infidel and radical doctrines; the Church is the true mechanic's institute, the oldest and the best. She was the great and never failing school in which all great artists of the days of faith were formed.') Their lack of status, however, was inevitable in a society so schizophrenic in its attitudes to mechanization, so unsure of its definitions of art, and so hidebound in its philosophies of education, at least for the 'humbler' classes. But the fact remains that until 1837 these were the only establishmcnts in Britain which attempted, with any consistency, however pathetic, to teach applied' as opposed to 'fine art' to those who might be concerned with industry. France, as witnesses to the committee were at pains to point out, had, since the days of Colbert, learned how to educate and encourage its artisans and craftsmen; Prussia, too, had established schools of design, and it is significant that the first witness to testify before the select committee was Gustave Waagen, director of the Berlin and Royal Galleries, who was asked to describe the Prussian system of design education. At that time Prussia had five schools serving manufacturing communities in Berlin, Breslau, Königsberg, Danzig and Cologne; the pupils, whose fees were paid by the state, were initially 'instructed in drawing, modelling and perspective', and they then spent two years specializing in a chosen branch of design. None of the students, reported Waagen, had any difficulty in finding employment, and design standards, especially in cotton manufacture, had improved. The whole exercise, implied Waagen, went beyond mere commercial gain: 'the object of the institution is to unite beauty and taste with practability and durability' and to restore the happy connection' that existed in the time of Raphael when 'the artists were more workmen and the workmen were more artists'. One of the aims of the Schools of Design, which were established as a result of these investigations, was to restore this 'happy connection'; their concern, to quote the Report of the Committee, which was published in August 1836, was to be the direct practical application of the Arts to Manufactures', and their history is linked with the long and generally futile campaign conducted from South Kensington, to marry art and industry. Confidence that such a union could and must be achieved, however, produced several vigorous campaigners in the cause of industrial design, and a design aesthetic that the Arts and Crafts movement was to inherit. ## Henry Cole and the Summerly venture One of the most energetic and, in his own opinion at least, influential of these reformers was Henry Cole, who was associated with most 'official' attempts to improve standards in industry during the 184os and'ços, and who was to control the Schools of Design for twenty-one years. At the beginning of his two volumes of lengthy reminiscences (Fifty Years of Public Work of Sir Henry Cole, KCB, accounted for in his deeds, speeches and writings),1s Cole supplies a succinct survey of his career and an indication of his industry, eclecticism and self-importance: The principal subjects which I now deal with, are the reform of the system of preserving the records of this country.. . my work in expediting the successful introduction of Rowland Hill's Penny Postage; the administration of the Railways; the application of Fine Art to children's books and then to manufactures, which led to the transfer of my duties to the Board of Trade; the Great Exhibition of 1851 and its successors; the Reform of the Patent Laws; the establishment of Schools of Art and Science Classes throughout the United Kingdom; the South Kensington Museum; Drill in Public Elementary Schools as the basis of a National Army, National Training Schools for Music and for Cookery; the Society of Arts and Public Health.' To all these endeavours he brought the eminently Victorian virtues of diligence and dedication, the ability to rush in where others feared to tread and the enthusiasm of the ambitious amateur. As he indicates in his curriculum vitae, his first attempt to extend 'the application of Fine Art' concerned the publication of a series of books for children, and for this enterprise he enlisted the support of some of the best modern artists', including Mulready, Cope, Horsley, Redgrave, the Linnells and Townsend. The success of this venture, and his determination to extend his reforming zeal into new and profitable areas encouraged him to try his hand at designing. In 1846 the Society of Arts offered prizes for the production of 'objects of everyday use', and Cole, using the pseudonym Felix Summerly, submitted a tea-set which he had designed, and which was made by Mintons (pl 4). Cole had spent three days at Mintons superintending the throwing, turning and moulding' of the set; as he explained in his autobiography, he wished to produce an article combining as much beauty and ornament as is commensurate with cheapness' and he was very concerned with practical qualities, describing how liquid could be poured from the milk jug 'at both angles, right and left, which requires only a motion of the wrist, whilst the usual method needs the lifting of the arm . ..'. The plate, he explained 'is smaller than usual in the rim, because much size in that part is needless'. The tea-set was awarded a silver medal, and it was no doubt this, together with Cole's appointment to the council of the society that same year, which stimulated him to embark on his more elaborate business venture which he called Summerly's Art Manufactures. He founded the firm in 1847, and, as well as working with some of the artists who had collaborated in the children's book venture, he enlisted the co-operation of Daniel Maclise and John Bell, the sculptor (pls 3, 6 and 7). Several eminent manufacturers including Wedgwoods and Mintons, the Coalbrookdale Company, Hollands the cabinct-makers and Joseph Rodgers, cutlers, promised to produce the work designed by Cole's team. In this attempt to encourage the liaison between the artist and the manufacturer, Cole was in fact promoting the design ideals that had been tentatively formulated by the select committee, and which had crystallized in the decade following the committee's investigations into a more coherent design philosophy. 'It is the purpose of this collection', wrote Cole, .. . to revive the good old practice of connecting the best art with familiar objects in daily use. In doing this, Art manufactures will aim to produce in each article superior utility, which is not to be sacrificed to ornament; to select pure forms; to decorate each article with appropriate details relating to its use, and to obtain these details as dircctly as possible from nature. These principles are by no means put forward as forming a universal rule; but it is thought they may be adhered to advantageously in most articles of use, and may possibly contain the germs of a style which England in the nineteenth century may call its own.' In this short passage Cole sums up the preoccupations of contemporary design theorists. The nostalgia for the good old days, the reference to nature as the source book, the ideal of a native style and the idea that art could and should inspire objects of everyday use had been implicit in attitudes expressed by several witnesses to the select committee. But there was to be one important difference between the Cole group and those who drew their inspiration from Ruskin. Dedicated as they were to the improvement of industrial standards, reformers in the Cole tradition could hardly question the whole basis of nineteenth-century society—theirs was, in theory, a practical rather than a moral approach, and they pursued their goals with optimistic zeal, trusting that a slow process of education for the consumer, manufacturer and designer would eventually have positive results. In 1849 Cole decided to reinforce his campaign for design reform with the publication of a monthly magazine which he called the Journal of Design and Manufacture. Its contributors included Cole's Summerly colleagues, and three important new names: Owen Jones and Matthew Digby Wyatt, who were rapidly establishing themselves as influential critics, and Gottfried Semper, the German exile and architect of the Dresden Opera House. The magazine had, as Cole pointed out in an editorial preface, a 'politics of its own', for like many of its successors in the twentieth century the magazine had a twofold aim. The first was to educate the manufacturer, encourage him to use designers and help him to distinguish between good and bad design, and the second was to press for various reforms that would seem to promote the cause of good design. Among the causes embraced by the Journal were the improvement of patent laws, ‘a better tribunal to protect copyright in design' and, more significant, the reform of the Schools of Design, which since their foundation in 1837 had been undermined by crises, resignations, insurrections and uncertainty of purpose. Cole was convinced that he and his supporters could manage things better, and that the only way to counter the daily growing dissatisfaction of the manufacturers' was to reinforce the original aims of the Schools, establishing a strictly vocational form of training, which would turn out students equipped to meet the needs of industry. The foundation of the Journal coincided with Cole's decision to take up the cudgels in the Schools of Design controversy, and the magazine was only continued while it served Cole's purpose. It ceased publication in 1852 when he had successfully lobbied for a select committee to enquire into the affairs of the school and had secured his appointment as secretary and éminence grise to the reformed establishment, which was transferred to South Kensington in 1863. He remained in charge until 1873, and although soon after his appointment classes were established in jewellery, metalwork, pottery, woven textiles, furniture and wood-cngraving, the stress, during the Cole régime, was on rigidly disciplined drawing rather than on design. 'The 'cast iron' systems that were associated with the schools' teaching programmes were not intended to produce artists, but they produced neither designers nor technicians; there was little liaison with industry, and Cole's main achievement, according to Ruskin, was to corrupt 'the system of art teaching all over England into a state of abortion and falsehood from which it will take 2o years to recover'.1" ## The Great Exhibition In 1851, however, Cole was at the height of one of the many pinnacles of his career, for by that time, through his association with the Society of Arts, he had gained the confidence of the reformer royal, the Prince Consort, and had been closely involved in initiating and organizing that shrine (and to some, graveyard) of mid-nineteenth-century design aspirations, The Great Exhibition. This was the first international exhibition ever to be held, and it enabled the British to measure their achievements against those of other nations; but although it provoked a more or less general euphoria, and the conviction, voiced by Prince Albert, that 'Man is approaching a more complete fulfilment of that great and sacred mission which he has to perform in the world', it shocked the design theorists into a new realization of the enormity of the task which faced them. Nearly all the members of the Cole circle were involved, in some capacity, with the exhibition, but although it was to a certain extent their brainchild, they were all unanimous in their condemnation of the exhibits. 'We have no principles', wrote Owen Jones, 'no unity; the architect, the upholsterer, the paperstainer, the weaver, the calico-printer, and the potter, run each their independent course; each struggles fruitlessly, each produces in art novelty without beauty, or beauty without intelligence."7 Nor were these failings confined to the British exhibits; in the opinion of the critics the exhibition revealed a universal lack of standards. 'The absence of any fixed principles in ornamental design is apparent in the Exhibition', thundered The Times, in an article no doubt contributed by a member of the Cole circle (it was reprinted in the Journal of Design); . . . it seems to us that the art manufacturers of the whole of Europe are thoroughly demoralised.'is The most powerful weapons, it would seem, to combat this ignorance were education and indoctrination, and following the exhibition the steady stream of books, articles, magazines and pamphlets on the nature of design and ornament swelled into a flood. From the exhibition itself stemmed two English works: Richard Redgrave's Supplementary Report on Design, a detailed analysis of the principles of form and ornament and a plea for more logic in the application of decoration, and Matthew Digby Wyatt's magnificent Industrial Arts of the Nineteenth Century. Semper's Wissenschaft, Industrie und Kunst, prompted by his impressions of the exhibition, was published in German in 1852, and the French report on the exhibition, drawn up by their delegate the Comte de Laborde, was published in Paris in 1856. These were merely the forerunners; from the South Kensington circle alone came Ralph Wornum's Analysis of Ornament in 1856, Richard Redgrave's Manual of Design, compiled by his son from his various writings in 1876, and the most impressive and influential of them all, Owen Jones's Grammar of Ornament (1856), which by 191o had been reprinted nine times; Morris undoubtedly used this as a source book, and since an American edition was published in 188o, it can perhaps be assumed that Louis Sullivan was aware of it.1 These analyses were aimed primarily at the student and potential designer, and the more modest in format were liberally distributed as 'rewards' by the Department of Science and Art. Later in the century successful practitioners such as Lewis Day and Christopher Dresser added to these contributions, bringing their practical experience as designers to their writing. But this was not all; the manuals and source books were further supplemented by a growing number of magazines. The Art Union Journal had been campaigning for design reform since its inception in 1839; on a less exalted level The Decorator's Assistant 'a weekly record of Painting, Sculpture and Popular Science' first began publication in 1847, and was succeeded in 1858 by The Universal Decorator, a more lavish publication, the aim of which was 'to prove that elaboration of design is not incompatible with the utility of the articles to which it is devoted'. These were directed at the specialist and the practitioner, while the householder was supplied with advice such as that of Sir Charles Eastlake, whose Hints on Household Taste was first published in 1868, and whose six New York editions inspired a demand in the States for what was known as 'Eastlake style' furniture, sturdy, simple and faintly rustic.20 Publications such as these could not fail to influence the aesthetic assumptions of the Arts and Crafts generation. 'Their author's aims and the attitudes they expressed were naturally varied, but from them emerged a basic dogma, a royal road for the designer to follow. The designers of the 188os and 'gos who expressed their contempt for South Kensington rigidity, did not entirely reject their tenets but transformed and personalized them in their search for a new humanism of design. For on paper the rulesseemed sound. Here, for example, Richard Redgrave in the Manual of Design,21 is