# 6 Ashbee and the craft of the machine 'Old Morris was delightful, firing up with the warmth of his subject . . . At length, banging his hand upon the table: "No!" said he. "The thing is this; if we had our Revolution tomorrow, what should we socialists do the day after?" "Yes—what?" we all cried. And that he could not answer. "We should all be hanged, because we are promising the people more than we can ever give them."' The reminiscences are those of Charles Robert Ashbee, a recent recruit to the cause of architecture, socialism and the crafts. He had gone to hear his friend Edward Carpenter speak to the Hammersmith Branch of the Socialist League; the meeting was held in Morris's house and Ashbee was full of enthusiasm for the ideas and idealism of his new colleagues. He had just emerged from a conventional uppermiddle-class education at Wellington and King's College, Cambridge, where he had read history, and was training, under G. F. Bodley, the first patron of the Firm, to be an architect. Of all the designers working within the Arts and Crafts movement, Ashbee probably gained the keenest knowledge of the realities of life for the working man, for he spent the first fifteen years of his career as a designer in the East End, establishing the Essex House Press, as well as the Guild and School of Handicraft there. Ashbee's association with the East End began in 1886 when he was first articled to Bodley. At that time he was living at Toynbee Hall, the pioncer university settlement which had just been founded by Canon Samuel Barnett; Ashbee had no doubt been introduced to the settlement by Edward Carpenter, who had joined the staff of the University Extension Movement when it was founded in 1874. Carpenter was a friend both of Morris and the Socialist Hyndman, and had visited the States in 1877, when he had met Whitman; he undoubtedly made a profound impression on the young Ashbee, who felt that 'the teachings of Edward Carpenter, and the writings of Walt Whitman were a healthy counterblast to the profession, to ecclesiasticism, and above all to the unrealities of Toynbce Hall'.2 For Toynbee Hall, in spite of its good intentions, was a disappointment to him; it had, he wrote, no corporate life; it was neither a college, convent nor a club'a and he was to compare it unfavourably with Hull House,\* which was directly inspired by the London settlement. Ashbee was the only architect in residence when he joined the settlement; his contribution was to start a Ruskin reading class, and, encouraged by its success, he also began to teach drawing and decoration. Members of this class decorated the Toynbee Hall dining-room, and they were to form the nucleus of his Guild of Handicraft, which he founded in 1888 with three members, and a working capital of £5o. Despite the obvious economic difficulties the Guild flourished and expanded; in 18go Ashbee took over the lease of Essex House a stately Georgian mansion in Mile End', at the same time opening retail premises at 16a Brook Street, and in 1898 he founded the Essex House Press, buying two of the Albion presses Morris had used, and employing several of the Kelmscott craftsmen. During the early years Ashbee and his guildsmen were self-taught, acquiring their skills by trial and error; this, according to Ashbee, was the only way a craft could be mastered, an individualistic style emerging from team work and shared expcrience. In Modern English Silverwork, issued by the Essex House Press in 19o9, he describes how 'style and character' are formed by the acquisition of technical skills, allied to a knowledge of past achievements: 'It is in the learning how to do things and do them well, that many fresh design motives are evolved. So it comes that when a little group of men learn to pull together in a workshop, to trust cach other, to play into cach other's hand, and understand cach other's limitations, their combination becomes creative, and the character that they develop in themselves takes expression in the work of their fingers. Humanity and craftsmanship are essential.' Ashbee shared the traditional Arts and Crafts distrust of the 'trade' and of the design schools; as far as he was concerned art school and trade workshop experience were ‘a positive disadvantage', and he described the designing class in the School of Handicraft, which he ran in conjunction with the Guild until 1895, as . . . the backbone of the school. Each pupil is taught first to conceive the design, and then to apply it through the help of the other classes to the different materials, the wood, the metal, the clay, the gesso, the flat surface for painting. The effort here, therefore, is not to emulate the ordinary Technical School but to follow in the lines laid down by leading artists who have the encouragement of the handicrafts at heart, in the belief that the modern cry for the education of the hand and eye can only be fully achieved in the education of the individuality of the workman.' The original members of the Guild were John Pearson, John Williams, W. A. White and William Hardiman; in his unpublished Memoirs Ashbee described how he first came across White at Toynbee Hall, working as an assistant in a City bookshop, and Hardiman's origins seem equally romantic. 'He was one of the finest modellers I ever came across,' wrote Ashbee, 'his touch was exquisite. I made his acquaintance first in 1888 in Whitechapel, where he was carning 15s a week by trundling a catsmeat barrow. He came to the School of Handicraft in the evenings, and I was struck with the extraordinary fidelity and feeling with which he made a copy of the St Cecilia of Donatello.' Pearson, the first metalwork instructor, is more of an enigma, and he may have worked for William De Morgan as a potter before he joined the Guild.? Shirley Bury has also suggesteds that he may have learned the craft through the Home Arts and Industries Association, or taught himself by using one of Charles Leland's\* teaching manuals. Once its teething troubles were over, however, the Guild and its workmen succeeded in establishing a distinctive style in design and execution. Ashbee lists 'pianos, bedsteads, wallpapers, clocks, cast-iron ware and pottery' among the products he designed for industry;" metalwork, silverware and furniture, however, formed the major part of the Guild's production, and the Guild Roll from 1887 to 19o810 includes nineteen cabinet-makers, fifteen mctal-workers and silversmiths, nine jewellers, one enameller, one engraver, one chaser and two blacksmiths among its members. As with the majority of the Arts and Crafts designers, the stylistic influences on Ashbee's work are varied. He acknowledges his debt to Cellini in that the first production of his Press in 1898 was his own translation of the Treatises, and he uses simple robust forms that are reminiscent of mediaeval silverwork, often with the stylized naturalistic motifs that are characteristic of Art Nouveau. Ashbee, of course, would have considered any association of his work with Art Nouveau as an insult; in fact his contempt for the movement inspired him to verse: I'm in the fashion—non controversial, And the fashion is nothing if not commercial, Pre-Raphaelite once, with a tiny twist Of the philosophical hedonist, Inspired by Whistler-next a touch Of the 'Arts and Crafts', but not too much. Then Impressionism, the daintiest fluke; Then the German squirm, and the Glasgow spook, A spice of the latest French erotic, Anything new and Studiotic, As long as it tells in black and white, And however wrong comes out all right, 'Id est', as long as it pays, you know, That's what's meant by L'Art Nouveau!u Ashbee produced a wide range of silverware for private and ecclesiastical clients; each piece was individual and many were works of art in their own right. His designs included simple dishes and salvers, cmbellished by the hammer, as well as more elaborate pieces, incorporating wirework, semi-precious stones and enamel. There are inevitably hints of German squirm and Glasgow spook, but Ashbee's work, always delicate, controlled and understated, met with the approval of the discerning critic: 'Mr Ashbee', according to the Studio,12 'gains an effect of superb richncss, in the right way. That is to say, he knows when to be silent, when to let the broad sweep of undecorated surface prepare you for the final ornamentation which heightens the beauty of the object, instead of hiding it under a superfluous mass of applied decoration.'(See pls 8o-83.) During the last decade of the nineteenth century Ashbee had achieved international as well as national fame. He exhibited in most of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society displays, and 'Magpie and Stump', the family house which he built in Cheyne Walk, London, in 1895, and which was decorated throughout by the Guild (pl 78), was discussed and illustrated in the Studio in 1895, and again in an article by Hermann Muthesius in Dekorative Kuust in 1898. In 1897 Ashbee writes to tell his fiancée that the Grand Duke of Hesse had sent a special envoy from Darmstadt to see his work,1ª and it was as a result of these enquiries that the architect, Baillie Scott, was commissioned to decorate the Grand Duke's Palace, the designs being carried out by the Guild (see pl 88). Then in 1899 Ashbee records that an interesting Hungarian has turned up'; the latter, being the Secretary of the Hungarian Economics Association, was 'in touch with most of the younger economists or such as have had anything to do with the teachings of John Ruskin and their practical bearing, and therefore gravitates like driftwood to Brook Street'.14 The result was a commission 'to do all the furniture and fittings of his house, the silverwork, even to the book-plate of his library at Budapest and Pressburg with a possible new house to follow . . .'; Josef Hoffmann's Vienna Workshops were inspired by the Guild,1s and in An Endeavour toward the teaching of Ruskin and Morris (1goi) Ashbee described how for many years he had been involved in a continuous round of Exhibits to Manchester, Liverpool, Dublin, Berlin, Munich, Frankfurt, Paris and the Cape'. \* Charles G. Leland, an American, was living in England in the 188os, and in a lecture to the Royal Society of Arts in 1885, he described how the impetus for his teaching had come from seeing Egyptian children designing and producing craftwork, and how, during his stay in England he published 'a small work on the minor arts, in which I suggested that classes for studying them might be formed in every village, or its school'. This, he claims, was the inspiration for Mrs Jebb and the work of the Home Arts and Industries Association; he also put his theories into practice in his native Philadelphia, where some zoo schoolchildren produced and sold craftwork. To help these classes, I published in America a series of 12 hand-books on such subjects as design, wood-carving, modelling, embroidery, stencilling, papier-mache, painting, leather-work.' Similar hand-books were available in England, and Mrs Bury cites a report in the Star in 18gg which pointed to the resemblance between the early work of the Guild and Leland's suggested designs for brass and copper. 168 ## The Guild of Handicraft at Chipping Campden In 1go2, however, when the Guild was flourishing and expanding, the lease on Essex House expired, and failing to find suitable alternative premises in London, Ashbee transferred his activities to Chipping Campden in Gloucestershire. This move to the country was no doubt idealistic rather than expedient, and it is interesting to note that Morris and De Morgan had, in fact, considered Campden before they took over the premises in Merton, but had felt that the village, although idyllic, was too far from London.16 The decision to move the Guild was characteristically a democratic one, Ashbee conducting a poll among Guild members: 'The woodshop and smith are solid for going,' he wrote, 'the metalshop and Press are divided.'1 In the end about fifty craftsmen and their families—some 15o people in all—descended on the village, their priorities being to convert and restore the dilapidated cottages, to reestablish their workshops and last but not least, to overcome local opposition and suspicion since the disruption to the pattern of village life, with its traditional hicrarchies, was obviously resented. "The sort of opposition a London community had in the countryside in those days is inconccivable now. When Shakespeare's As you like it was given in the Town Hall the managers of the Church Schools, led by the parson, tried to prevent the children from attending the performance. As for the farmers, they put their representatives on the Technical School Committee established by the Board of Education. 'They did this not because they wanted to hurt the Guild or its enterprise, but because they considered that anything in the nature of educating the labourer would endanger the local labour market.'1s For Ashbee, never a man of half-measures, saw in the move to Campden an opportunity to revive the educational aspects of his work; using a disused malt-house as his school premises he invited the local people, both adult and children, to acquire skills 'such as are not provided in the Campden Elementary Schools, or for which the schools have no conveniences, namely: swimming, gardening, cookery, carpentry, life and duties of the citizen'.19 He also organized Oxford University extension classes and summer schools, and persuaded his friends to lecture there. In 19o5, for example, Walter Crane was talking on Design in Relation to the Crafts, and Edward Carpenter on Small Holdings and Life on the Land. Ashbee also revived dying crafts such as lead glazing, and photographs in Craftsmanship in Competitive Industry show the other activities that the Guild promoted: domestic science classes, drama, physical jerks, the brass band and swimming galas are all recorded. If the physical drill brigade look somewhat incongruous in their flat caps, dark suits, stiff collars, white shirts and ties, this is no doubt due to the newly acquired skills of the ladies, who were taught starching in their laundry classes-Ashbee having discovered that 'when the folk of Campden want their shirts and collars starched they have to send them by carrier to Evesham'.20 So for a brief period at least, Ashbee was fulfilling all his aims, and contemporary accounts give a glowing picture of life at Campden. 'When I saw the workshops', wrote Charles Rowley in A Workshop Paradise21 . . . one could readily imagine that they were native to the place. An old mill with a ground and upper storey lends itself to handicraft workshops of this nature. Every window looks out onto a lovely common garden, every bench has a posy on it. Nothing could be more delightful than to be doing rationally good work in such surroundings.' The exodus to Chipping Campden, however, marked the beginning of the Guild's decline; in 19o7, when the ideals for the Deutscher Werkbund were being formulated, Ashbee was faced with financial crises and dwindling markets, and in 19o8 after three years of acute commercial depression and heavy losses' the Guild was dissolved and reconstructed as a trust, many of its members were laid off and it survived precariously until the outbreak of war in 1914. What had gone wrong? Ashbce himself believed that he could identify several causes for the failure. He realized that the beginning of the decline had coincided with the Guild's move to the country and the economic depression that had accompanied it. When the workshops were in London these lean years' were not so crippling, since his craftsmen could, if the worse came to the worst, find alternative employment until better times. In the country, however, there was no such choice; Ashbee had hoped that the cultivation of allotments would enable his workmen to be more or less self-supporting, but not many rejoiced at the idea of living from the land, which, of course, is easier said than done; cottages were hard to come by and in urgent need of repair, and because of the difficulties of transport and the high charges on the railways, links with London, which were vital to the Guild, were difficult to maintain. These were immediate and practical problems, but Ashbee also had to contend with local indifference to his work which was intensified by the fashion for antiques' ('turned out' as he put it ‘in hundreds to the hum of the latest American machinery'’);23 he found his clients unwilling to pay the rate for the job, especially when dear Emily' as Ashbee and his companions called their amateur competitor, was always 'tingling to sell her work before she half knows how to make it', charging 2d an hour for her labour, where the skilled workman has to sell his for is in order to keep up standard and support his family.'24 In 1go8, however, Ashbee was still convinced that the ideology that had inspired his enterprise was sound, and that some form of guild or co-operative system could and should be established to meet contemporary industrial needs. It was only within such a system, he believed, that individuality and freedom of expression could be preserved; any compromise with the contemporary industrial set-up would bring about the total extinction of leisure and of culture. He wrote in Craftsmanship and Competitive Industry: 'If we have decided no longer to, rebel against the Industrial system, which chains us together, but to quietly and firmly set to work and reconstruct it (abandoning the position of Morris and Ruskin for instance—the intellectual Ludditism) . . . we find industrial organisation ever screwing down and screwing down, we find the drive severer, the competition keener, we find industrial democracy ever closing in . . . the levelling and uniformity more necessary, more terrible. What becomes of the individual, of what weight is the little human soul upon this dark archangel's scale?' Three years later, however, when he published Should we stop teaching Art? Ashbee's attitude had changed, and the extent of this change is reflected in the first 'axiom' upon which the book was based. 'Modern civilization', wrote Ashbee, 'rests on machinery, and no system for the endowment, or the encouragement, or the teaching of art can be sound that does not recognize this.'s Although these opinions were not entirely iconoclastic, they obviously represent a radical reappraisal of fundamental assumptions on Ashbee's part. The reasons for so dramatic a conversion could perhaps be attributed to the climate of opinion, or to Ashbee's response to the failure of the Guild. It is very tempting to assume, however, that Ashbee revised his attitudes as a direct result of his various visits to America, the intellectual challenge of his friendship with Frank Lloyd Wright and his knowledge and study of Wright's theory and writing. ## Frank Lloyd Wright Ashbee visited the States several times; his first visit was in 1896, and his experiences at that time only served to reinforce his belief in the craft ideal. In New York, for example, he spent a day 'going over works and workshops' and was wearied with many hours of commercialism and shown endless symbols of waste and luxury— nothing that revealed any joy in the producer or character in the product'.ss He admired Cornel University, but was appalled by the Drexel Institute in Philadelphia, where the curator had shown him a Doulton vase—in Ashbee's opinion an ‘abomination'—and had never heard of William De Morgan. He visited a metalwork factory, but the only design he could find to admire was a simply hammered vessel; he told the designers it was the best metalwork he had seen in the States, but they laughed and advised him 'not to tell the boss', since it was expensive and quite unsaleable'. His next visit, in 19oo-1, however, was to prove more challenging. This was a fund-raising lecture tour, sponsored by the National Trust, and Ashbee went aiming to 'tilt at the great industrial windmill'. His first impressions were negative; he saw himself 'pleading for a cause not so much lost as forgotten' and declared that the crafts in America 'no longer served any purpose'. 'Furniture,' he wrote, 'metalwork, the things of the house, jewelry, the hand-printed book, modern design. . . such things in the new world were done by the machine,' and badly done, since 'the machine in its relation to life is not so much hostile as unintelligent'.7 For consolation he visited the graves of Emerson and Thoreau, and he stayed with Dr Emerson, the son of Ralph Waldo, at his house near Concord, admiring an educational system which allowed 'all the Concord children, boys and girls to learn together .. . everyone standing an equal chance'. He saw the Roycrofters at work, and was not impressed; but he also met a young press runner, Mr Rogers, head of the Riverside Press, who . . . is fighting the old battle of commercial v. artistic success, and trying to put some spirit of good into the stacks of trade printing he had to do'.2ª His most momentous encounter, however, was with Frank Lloyd Wright. Ashbee first met Wright, who was just then turned thirty, in Chicago in December 19oo; he was therefore one of the first Europeans to see and comment on his work, and to single him out from the groups working in Chicago at this time. Ashbee was staying at Hull House, a far more invigorating proposition, he found, than Toynbee Hall; it had, he felt, an eager corporate spirit, 'a capacity for enjoyment' and a far more realistic awareness of the problems of city life than its British counterpart. Chicago itself he found at once dynamic and horrifying. 'Smoke, darkness, noise: the clashing of car bells, engine bells, steamer bells; the grating of endless trolleys as they dash along the street, the shrick of the AMeRiCAN vorce trying to make itself heard above the uproar. The rattle and thunder of the elevated railway, the unearthly buzzing of clectric cabs, and the thudding of the power houses that shake a whole street.' Ashbee obviously found Wright and his colleagues as bewildering and as stimulating as the city itself, but he was shrewd enough to recognize the force and potential of Wright's personality. 'Wright', he wrote from Chicago, 'is far and away the ablest man in our line of work that I have come across in Chicago, perhaps in America. He not only has ideas, but the power of expressing them, and his Husser House, over which he took me, showing me every detail with the keenest delight, is one of the most beautiful and individual creations I have seen in America.' The Husser House, which was designed in 1899, was typical of Wright's Chicago houses of the 189os; it was a long, horizontal structure, built in brick, with the characteristic Sullivaninspired terracotta decoration bencath the caves. Its living areas, dining-room and living-room, cach with their own fireplace, were interconnecting and were all on the first storey, to give the occupants a view of Lake Michigan. An architectural solution of this kind, individual, traditional, yet with radical elements, sympathetic both to the site and the materials used, with its hints both of Voysey and the Japanese, could not have failed to impress Ashbee, who would be aware both of the inspiration and the intellect that formed it. For Wright, who was of course familiar with the work of Ruskin and Morris,\* shared his radicalism, his mistrust of Beaux-Arts intellectualism' and certain convictions concerning the nature of architecture with the British Arts and Crafts Movement. When he wrote (in A Testament) that The artist-architect will be a man inspired by love of the nature of nature, knowing that man is not made for architecture; architecture is made for man'ai he was speaking the language of Morris, Ashbee, Webb and Lethaby. A common ground had been prepared by the general interchange of ideas throughout the century, and the links between the British and the American Arts and Crafts moveient were reinforced by publications such as The Craftsman.\* As far as Wright was concerned, however, the resemblances between the two ideologies were only superficial, and Ashbee was to find that Wright, in this instance, regarded him more as a challenge than as an ally in the same cause. 'He threw down the glove to me in characteristic Chicagoan manner', writes Ashbee, 'when we discussed the Arts and Crafts. "My God", he said, "is machinery, and the art of the future will be the expression of the individual artist through the thousand powers of the machine—the machine doing all those things that the individual workman cannot do. The creative artist is the man who controls all this and understands it."'as Wright was obviously using Ashbee as a sounding board for his lecture The Art and Craft of the Machine which he delivered in Hull House in 1gor. In pronouncing the machine 'the normal tool of our civilization' Wright was, in effect, bridging the gulf between the nineteenth and the twentieth century, and in insisting that genius must dominate the work of the contrivance it has created' he was paving the way for the doctrinal dilemmas of the Modern Movement. It was to be several years, however, before this text reached Europe, and at this stage, as far as Ashbee was concerned, the challenge, though remarkable enough to write about in his journal, went no further than a conversational sparring match between two architects. Wright, Ashbee noted 'was surpriscd to find how much I concurred with him, but I added the rider that the individuality of the average had to be considered, in addition to that of the artistic creator himself.aa This concern for the welfare of the workman, especially when the 'artistic creator' proclaimed his God to be machinery, was of course to be expected from a champion of the English Arts and Crafts ideals. Nevertheless Ashbee realized that the American city created new problems, which would need new men and new solutions: 'Yes, it was the great drive, the strain and stress of this terrible and wonderful city that set him moving with the rest, and I am not sure that strong as he is, he will ultimately be able to give that expression to his ideas of which he is capable and worthy. He introduced me to his master, Sullivan, in whom the Chicago spirit finds such anxious and restless expression. Wright is greater than his master, and will become the leader, if he is not that already, of the little group of artists, architects for the most part, whom he has around him ... Chicago's burning activity kindles such brotherhood with a flame peculiarly its own.'a4 Ashbee himself returned to England, and to Chipping Campden, greeting the green fields and farmsteads with relief. In 19o8, however, after the reconstruction of the original Guild, he returned to the States again, lecturing on such subjects as the Arts and Crafis and Education and the Arts and Crafts and the Spirit of Socialism to enthusiastic audiences' in Montana and Stanford. He also renewed his friendship with Frank Lloyd Wright, and in spite of differences of temperament and ideals, the two men were obviously mutually sympathetic, since their correspondence continued in a sporadic fashion until 1938.s Wright in fact stayed with the Ashbees in Chipping Campden in September 191o, and it was probably during this visit that he asked Ashbee to write the introduction to the second Wasmuth edition of his work, which was published in Berlin in 1911. (This publication virtually introduced Wright to Europe since the first Wasmuth folio was produced in an expensive and limited edition.) Ashbce, therefore, must have been working on the introduction while he was preparing Should We Stop Teaching Art?, and the need to define his attitudes to Wright, together with his knowledge of Wright's In the Cause of Architecture, which was published in igo8, and from which he quotes in his Wasmuth introduction, no doubt contributed to certain fundamental changes of attitude expressed in Ashbee's own book. Not that Ashbee adopts a sycophantic attitude to Wright; in fact the two seemed to have been on the verge of a quarrel during Wright's visit, one main bone of contention apparently being Ashbec's attitude to the Japanese influence on Wright's work.a6 Nor was Ashbee wholeheartedly in favour of Wright's approach. 'I have seen buildings of Frank Lloyd Wright's', he wrote in the introduction, 'that I would like to touch with the enchanted wand; not to alter their structure in plan or form, or carcass, but to clothe them with a more living and tender detail.'a7 He insisted, however, that the importance of Wright lay in his 'determination, amounting sometimes to heroism, to master the machine and use it at all costs to find the forms and treatment it might render without the abuse of tradition' and that one recognises in his architecture the struggle for mastery of the machine, and that is the true province of his powers'.as Ashbee praised American architects' willingness to experiment with new materials and their intelligent use of machine techniques; he also admired the democracy' of the American architectural spirit, which, he said, found expression in office buildings, libraries, clubs, schools and universities—a theme he also stresses in Should We Stop Teaching Art?, when he contrasts the American and British approach to architectural problems. 'With us', he wrote, 'Architecture is, so to speak, a traditional luxury, in which a wealthy university or wealthy individual may indulge, but in which the people share less and less; in America, it is more of à democratic need for which provision has to be made.' 'In America', he continued, 'there is a greater sweep, a more logical planning, a wider outlook, a more conscious grasp of the coming needs of the community, and more specific handling of industrial methods. There may not be the tender solicitude as with us for aesthetic traditions, nor the same taste or feeling or refinement, but the loss of these is atoned for in the fulfilment of other, and for the moment, greater needs.'s9 He quotes the Larkin Building as an example of how architecture can meet the ńeeds of contemporary society, describes how the Chicago architects 'largely inspired by Frank Lloyd Wright' are solving the problem of art and machinery, and in a chapter headed 'How we should set about to eliminate ugliness' states that we 'should study the conditions in Germany and America, where they are in many ways more advanced than we are in treating the problem of the Arts as a social matter—a part of life'. Should We Stop Teaching Art?, as Ashbee explains in his introduction, was intended to be part of a larger work called The Man and the Machine, which would discuss the general problem of the 'Arts under Mechanical Conditions'. He wrote it at a time when there was yet another crisis in the art schools, so that the book was, to a certain extent, a personal analysis of the nature and purpose of art education. Characteristically, he insists that art education has failed because its organizers have ignored one of the fundamentals of Ruskin's teaching, namely that 'we cannot teach Art as an abstract skill or power. It is a result of a certain ethical state of the nation'. And he linked the failure of the art schools with that of the Arts and Crafts movement, whose principles, he maintained, were more consistently and logically studied in Germany and America'. His ideal would have been to see the preservation and extension of guild and workshop techniques in the craft-based industries, while in the heavier industries 'the more the machine is used the better'. He believed that the art schools would serve a more realistic purpose if they were reorganized as guildtype workshops, the students serving an apprenticeship before being accepted for a 'trade', but at the same time he urged that the schools should establish more valid links with industry, thcir rôle being to establish standards and advise on models for standardization. There are obvious links here with Gropius's ideals for the Bauhaus when he first established the school in Weimar, and although Ashbee does not mention the Deutscher Werkbund which had been established four years earlicr, his recommendations bear a close relationship to Werkbund thinking. For by 1911 Ashbce can no longer deny the machine-made object an aesthetic value, nor does he believe that the 'beauty' of the machine product should relate to that of its craft equivalent: 'It is often supposed that there cannot be beautiful machine products, or that the beauty of a mechanical object lies in its conformity to the standard of a hand-made piece. But experience does not bear out this supposition. In modern mechanical industry "standard" is necessary, and "standardisation" is necessary. The principle in each is sound and the community needs both.' Ashbee's reference to standards and standardization and their relationship to the crafts and industry is very Muthesian, as is his new found conviction that the survival of arts can only be achieved through an understanding and acceptance of economic and technical change. 'If we want the Arts', he maintained, 'we must enable them to meet the new industrial and economic conditions of our time.' He insisted that the whole problem of architectural as well as design training should be re-examined; architecture, he said 'should be studied both as an Art and a Science', and should concentrate on modern mechanical industry' rather than being confused 'as it is at present with painting or with Arts and Crafts'. Craftsmanship, however, would still play a key role in both design and architectural training, since it would provide 'the grammar of the Industrial Arts, Architecture and Industry'. There are, of course, inconsistencies and elements of the quixotic here, but Ashbee tempered these with much sound sense, especially when he called for a more realistic and systematic form of architectural training; he also anticipated the contemporary preoccupation with cataloguing systems when he pointed to the need for a rationalization of material relating to the building trade: 'If I were to let the catalogues, calendars, circulars, advertisements and letters of enquiry accumulate as they litter into my office from week to week, I should, after a few months, not be able to enter it at all . . . There should be a proper sorting, grading and testing of all this building trade matter.' He was also moving towards the conception of the designer as a problem solver rather than as a creator of beautiful objects—a conception that was latent at the Bauhaus and fundamental to the teaching at Ulm, and one that contemporary art education has only just begun to grasp. 'What the manufacturers themselves often fail to see,' he pointed out, 'for their point of view is much limited to the study of their own processes, is that the mechanical system in many directions has come to an end, that here and thcre it has reached a point where it can go no further, and that progress and profit can now often be made only by organisation, concentration, combined finance and the cutting of certain mechanical processes altogether. He quotes Veblen's Theory of Business Enterprise, published in 19o4, to support him, and suggests that industry needs the services of men who will act both as watch-dogs and advisers—anticipating in some measure the post-war consumer movements and the work of organizations such as the Svenska Slöjdförenigen and the British Council of Industrial Design. In 191 Ashbee was confident that Britain had the potential to face the problems of mass production; the men were there, he said, and so were the machines, 'but we have not yet found the right way of using cither'. 'The right way' had, by this time, been diligently sought after for nearly a century, but before the outbreak of war it was generally assumed by British theorists that in spite of all their endeavours, the Germans and the Americans were nearer to finding a solution than they were. For as Morris had once pointed out 'a reform in art which is founded on individualism must perish with the individuals who have set it going'; and this, it seemed, was to be the fate of the British movement which in spite, or perhaps because of its social preoccupations, relied on individual rather than collective solutions. The most urgent task for the twentieth century, therefore, was to reconcile the claims of the individual with the requirements of the mass market, to equate subjectivity with standardization, and, in effect, to apply the Arts and Crafts ideals of fitness and truth to material to the machine-made product. The British acknowledged their dilemma; they could diagnose their sickness, but they could not cure it, and to them it seemed that the Germans had become their torchbearers. For the Germans were formulating ideals both for architecture and design that made sense on every level—social, economic and aesthetic. ## 7 Towards an efficiency style In their efforts to effect a union between art and industry, British design reformers had several times throughout the nineteenth century turned to Germany for both precept and example. The Arts and Crafts generation, however, tended by its very nature to insularity, and its members rarely looked to contemporary achievements abroad for instruction or inspiration. When, like Ashbee, they began to do so, it was because they saw in American and Continental developments a valid extension of the craft ideal, rather than a complete break with the values that they had established. The humanizing of technology, therefore, and the harnessing of its achicvements to social ends became the primary concern of the twentieth-century inheritors of Morris's ideals, and on this basic level thcre are obvious similarities between British theory, and that, for example, of Le Corbusier and Gropius. The first two decades of the twentieth century, however, were to culminate in a sense of frustration and lack of achicvement on the part of British designers and design theorists. They were, after all, unlike their Continental counterparts, inheritors of values that had been established by an carlier generation, rather than pioneers of new ideas, and when they attempted to translate these values into corporate, rather than individual endeavour they met with little response. The garden city movement, for example, now considered as valid a solution to the problem of suburban living as say, Weissenhof, had a tepid reception, and, to some critics at least, the idea of the 'New Town' seemed at best a ludicrously Utopian concept. (We have got to make the best of our existing cities,' said the Fabian News reviewer of Howard's Tomorrow : a Peaceful Path to Real Reform, 'and proposals for building new ones are about as useful as would be arrangements for protection against visits from Mr Wells's Martians.'¹) Again, the most significant architectural contribution at the turn of the century came from Mackintosh, whose genius the majority of his contemporaries failed to acknowledge. And if Continental designers enthused about British applied design they were not, paradoxically, so much concerned with those areas (other than printing and typography) that had preoccupied the Arts and Crafts movement, but with British boots and shoes, leather work, sports equipment and plumbing—areas, in fact, in which a tradition of British quality and practicality had been established.² For, as Lethaby was to point out: 'We do not allow shoddy in cricket or football, but reserve it for serious things like houses and books, furniture and funerals.' And in this context, it is perhaps significant that Lethaby, who made the most important contribution to British design and architectural theory during this period, failed, unlike Gropius and Le Corbusier, to produce a radical architecture to match it, and the Bauhaus 178 succeeded, where the British Arts and Crafts schools failed, in establishing valid links with industry. ## Lethaby and the Central School Lethaby, nevertheless, is a far from negligible figure, and until the Bauhaus was established, his Central School was considered the most progressive art school in Europe. (Muthesius, for example, cited it as the 'best organised contemporary art school'.4) It was founded in 1896 when Lethaby, then aged thirty-nine, had been working as Norman Shaw's right-hand man for almost seventeen years; he was one of the initiators of the Art-Workers' Guild, whose ideals the school attempted to realize, and from whose membership most of the staff was drawn, and for two years before the school was founded he and George Frampton,5 his co-principal in the early years, had been acting as art advisers to the Technical Education Board of the then London County Council, the sponsors of the school. According to the Board's Report for 1895-6, the aim of its new school was to encourage the 'industrial application of decorative design'; first and foremost, however, it was a school of craftsmanship its pupils went there to make, not draw, and it was for this reason, the Board insisted, that admission to the school is only extended to those actually engaged in one or other of the crafts, and the school makes no provision for the amateur student of drawing or painting'.s In Lethaby's new school, therefore, drawing and painting were taught, not as ends in themselves, but as part of a training in craftsmanship; again Lethaby insisted that all his staff were practising designers, and he campaigned for the right to employ part-time teachers, so that designers could, without abandoning their profession, convey somcthing of its practical realities to their students. During its first twelve years the school was housed in makeshift premises in Upper Regent Street. Here 'listeners to Halsey Ricardo's lectures would perforce sit there with their umbrellas up',' but physical discomforts did not detract from the sense of achievement, for staff and students alike experienced the reality of Lethaby's vision of a new unity between hand and brain. Priscilla Johnston's biography of her father conveys something of the atmosphere of Central life at this time: "This building was a kind of improvisation consisting of two houses joined together by a dilapidated conservatory, full of odd corners, cieaking wooden staircases and small rooms packed as full as they could hold with eager students. Over it presided Lethaby who had brought it into being and who must have filled it with an extraordinary sense of unity, for all, staff and students alike, were united in their love for him. His staff, it was said, never felt that they were working under him, but with him: even the students felt themselves to be pioneers taking part in an exciting experiment.'s Because it was an experimental school working towards the realization of Arts and Crafts ideals, Lethaby was able to gather together a distinguished staff. In the early years, as well as Halsey Ricardo, who lectured on architecture, there was R. Catterson-Smith who taught wallpaper and textile design (he was to become director of the Birmingham School of Art); Frank Morley Fletcher, later director of the Edinburgh College of Art, specialized in the wood-cut; Douglas Cockerell, who joined the staff in 1897, taught book-binding (he had learned the craft from Cobden-Sanderson and was to become adviser to W. H. Smith & Son, whose partner, St. John Hornby, was one of the first patrons of Eric Gill). In 1899 Edward Johnston began to teach himself and his students illuminating and lettering as an art'. ('Johnston's students', wrote his daughter, 'had every reason to regard themselves as pioneers. There was no question of his playing the expert; he told them how little he knew and how much there was to discover and enlisted their help.') In addition F. W. Troup, an architect who taught lead-casting was assisted by W. Dodds—plumber: 'the latter a description of an instructor's qualification unlike at that time to be found in the prospectus of any other art school'.9 After its move to new and purpose-built premises in Southampton Row in 19o8, the school was able to establish five major departments, each devoted to the traditional Arts and Crafts specializations. By 1914, for example, when Fred Burridge was Principal, the first floor was 'practically a self-contained school devoted to the work of the silversmith and the allied crafts of the goldsmith and jeweller, including diamond mounting, gem-sctting, chasing, engraving, die-sinking, repoussé work, metal casting and enamelling'; 1º the furniture department was on the third floor, and one of the instructors here was George Jack, of the Morris Firm; there was a section devoted to dress design, embroidery and needlework, while the stained-glass students working 'in beautifully lighted classrooms on the top floor' were carefully instructed in the technicalities peculiar to their branch of the arts'.u The department whose work was to have the most influence, however, throughout Europe as well as in England, was that of book design and printing, which had grown from Johnston's preoccupation with lettering. 'This was set up in 19o5 at the request of Emery Walker and T. J. Cobden-Sanderson; J. H. Mason, chief compositor at the Doves Press, was appointed first instructor in printing, and by 1914 a book could be 'produced in its studios complete in every respect-printing, illustrations and binding'.1 As well as the staff—Johnston himself, Mason and Douglas Cockerell—their students, including Eric Gill, Noel Rooke, Graily Hewitt, Anna Simons (and Cobden-Sanderson who joined Johnston's class at the age of sixty) were all exploring and extending the pioneer work of Emery Walker and the Kelmscott Press, and thus consolidating Britain's reputation as pioneers in the twentiethcentury revival in book production. Johnston, however, was at first reluctant to extend his interest beyond lettering to typography; his objections to designing type, according to his daughter, arose from his conviction that an object could only properly be designed by the craftsman who made it because the design should be the outcome of the craft itself and not arbitrarily determined on a drawing board. Thus he considered that the proper person to design type was the punch-cutter.' His resolu-180 tion was cracked, however, by the enthusiasm of Count Kessler, who as early as 191o was planning the Hamlet that was to be printed by his Cranach Press in Weimar eighteen years later. Johnston, working in collaboration with Edward Prince, who had cut Morris's Golden type, designed types for Kessler, and the fact that the latter came to England for his craftsmen (Edward Gordon Craig produced the wood-cut illustrations, G. T. Friend completed the cutting after Prince's death, while J. H. Mason supervised the type-setting and printing) is a tribute to Britain's reputation in this field. In fact, when Bernard Newdigate visited the exhibition of Graphic Arts in Leipzig just before the outbreak of the war he reported seeing 'the hand of Johnston on every stall and on every wall'.1ª In England, however, not all Johnston's enterprises were meeting with immediate acclaim, and the magazine Imprint, which had been founded by Gerard Meynell in 1912, and which he edited together with Ernest Jackson and J. H. Mason, survived for less than a year. Collaboration with Meynell, however, led to Johnston's meeting Frank Pick, and the commission to design the type-face for London's Underground. Johnston, therefore, the total purist who had dedicated his career to Writing, Illuminating and Lettering became one of the founders of modern typography. 'He approachcd the problem', wrote his daughter, 'with the austerity of an engineer'; his primary concern was with legibility, and because he belicved that legibility was linked with familiarity, he based the new face on what he defined as classical Roman capital proportions'; starting from this premise, he insisted, 'the alphabet designed itself'. Eric Gill, whose Gill Sans was designed for the Monotype Corporation in 1928, frankly acknowledged his debt to Johnston's London Underground type, and so it can be claimed that Johnston, the calligrapher, changed the face of modern commercial printing. This, according to Lethaby, was the way matters should be organized, the craft (representing the union between hand and brain) inspiring the machine, and it is significant that it was for Imprint that he wrote Art and Workmanship, the essay most frequently quoted in connection with his work and his ideals. 'A work of art', he wrote in this essay, 'is first of all a well-made thing. It may be a well-made statue or a well-made chair, or a well-made book . . . Most simply and generally art may be thought of as the well doing of what needs doing.' And again "The master-workman, further, must have control from first to last to shape and finish as he will. If I were asked for some simple test by which we might hope to know a work of art when we saw one, I should suggest something like this: Every work of art shows that it was made by a human being for a human being.'s This basic and deceptively simple humanism, therefore, was the cornerstone upon which Lethaby based his design philosophy; design, for him, was concerned with people, and no one, theorist or practitioner, would get very far if he ignored this basic fact. 'I don't believe in genius one bit,' he wrote, 'nor anythig else abnormal. I want the common-place.'is Lethaby's commonplace, however, like Webb's, reflected the highest rather than the lowest common denominator. It represented common sense and practicality and assumed the existence of a kind of folk-knowledge or instinct concerning the way 181 things should be built and made. Such knowledge, however, was in danger of extinction, and it was threatened, not primarily by industrialization but by the pursuit of the phoney and pretentious, by what Lethaby called 'sham artistic twaddle'.17 'Don't think of nice drawings or style-names and art talk,' he told the RIBA in 1917, 'but in facts of life and building.'is Art, he insisted, was a natural human aptitude which has been explained almost out of existence'1s and 'the long word Architecture has destroyed the art of building'. For although Lethaby spent his formative years working for Norman Shaw, it was Ruskin, Morris and above all Philip Webb whom he acknowledged as his 'workmasters'. He paid his tribute to Webb in the biography that was first published in serial form in The Builder in 1925, and the virtues he ascribed to Webb reflect Lethaby's own ideals, for it was Webb, he said, who taught him that 'architecture was not designs, forms and grandeur, but buildings, honest and human, with hearts in them'. To Lethaby, therefore, the past was a living book from which architects could learn the facts both of life and design; unlike many of his contemporaries on the Continent he did not believe that the new century had created new men, and if it had introduced new materials these must be used in the service of humanity rather than as a demonstration of the alien concept of 'modernity'. His teaching at the Central School, therefore, was based on the axiom 'Would you know the new, you must search the old',2a and like Morris, he acclaimed the work of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, not because it was engaged in an intense study of antiquity' but because it 'became a school of rational builders and modern building'.a4 And so it was totally in character that, having spent some twenty years teaching design at the Central School and the Royal College of Art, he also spent twenty years as surveyor of the fabric of Westminster Abbey, and that his numerous publications should include titles such as Lead Work Old and Ornamental and for the most part English (1893), Westminster Abbey and the King's Craftsmen (1906), Greek Buildings represented by Fragments in the British Museum (1923), as well as his better-known collected essays Form in Civilisation (1922), his Architecture, Mysticism and Myth (1892) and the Home University Library Architecture(1911). For Lethaby was a scholar as well as a champion of the past (like Morris he apparently astounded the experts by his ability to date and identify their fragments and specimens). Again, like Morris, his scholarship did not lead him to promote book-learning as an end in itself: he condemned any form of education, from the infant school up, that put 'subjects in place of substances', and he attempted, with little success, to abolish the examination system at the Central School. ('In a practical matter like art', he wrote, 'we might even hope to break through the mystery mongering of educationists and their pathetic belief in written papers.')27 His concern was with a living tradition in the practise of design and architecture, not with the academic 'disease of unreality' that had destroyed the art schools, and his absorption with 'architecture as a direct and developing art'ss was to lead him to a functionalist conception of design that had similarities with that of the Werkbund, Le Corbusier and Gropius. For since art and architecture were 'practical matters' it followed that science had as vital a rôle to play in their develop-182 ment as tradition: thus Lethaby came to insist that ‘architects must be trained as engineers are trained' and to regret that his knowledge of 'steel and concrete construction' was so much more scanty than his knowledge of Cathedral building.30 Lethaby's insistence that the living stem of building design can only be found by following the scientific method'a became more emphatic in the years leading up to World War I, and by 19zo, three years before the publication of Le Corbusier's Vers une Architecture he is declaring that"House like" should express as much as "ship-shape". Our airplanes and motors and even bicycles are in their way perfect. We need to bring this ambition for perfect solutions into housing of all sorts and scales.'as The house of the future', he wrote in another essay in that same year, 'will be designed as a ship is designed, as an organism which has to function properly in all its parts.'sa The task facing the new generation, therefore, was to bridge the gulf between art and science, to equate art with practicality and to create an efficiency The possibility of Britain evcr being able to achieve this, however, seemed remote. Even before World War I created its own crises the British economy had begun to decline: British industrialists were no longer self-confident pioneers, and Germany and America were well ahead in the race for modernization' and technical progress. While the Edwardian age produced its architecture of conspicuous consumption— banks, luxury hotels, prestige office blocks, country houses and public schools— Edwardian industry was realizing too late the cost of resting on its laurels. The staple industries of Britain—coal, cotton and shipbuilding-were entering their steady decline; the metal industries of the West Midlands could no longer rely on a stable home market to keep their enterprise afloat, and the depression which had destroyed Ashbee's Guild of Handicraft brought with it grinding poverty for both country and town. Faced with these crises, the flirtations between art' and industry ceased. The consumer goods industries, no longer able to compete with Germany and America, concentrated their attention on the less sophisticated and demanding markets of Asia and Africa. Neither the South Kensington nor the Morris inspired campaigns for design reform had succeeded in influencing the 'taste' of the masses; the museums and art galleries, conceived as places where the workman and his employer might spend happy hours in self-improvement, became shrines for the connoisseur and the scholar; in school ‘art' was (and too often still is) a subject for the intellectual lightweight, the lesser being who could not cope with an academic or athletic course; the art school, in spite of the revitalizing efforts of Lethaby and his followers, still ranked as a poor second best to the university, or as a useful finishing school for one's girls. The situation seemed even more desperate than in 1835, and the suggested remedies had, in fact, analogies with the earlier experience, for it was generally assumed among the new generation concerned with design reform that the key to future progress lay within industry, rather than with the craftsman. The catalysts on this occasion were the financial failure, in 1912, of an Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society display, and the resounding success of the Werkbund's exhibition in Cologne in 1914. Some of the members of the Arts and Crafts Society had been to Cologne, and it was largely as a result of their reactions to this experience that the Design and Industries Association was formed in 1915 to promote ‘a more intelligent demand amongst the public for what is best and soundest in design' as well as the idea that many machine processes tend to certain qualities of their own'.ss The founder members of the DIA included Ambrose Heal and Harry Peach, both designers and retailers, J. H. Mason from the London Central School, and Harold Stabler, the silversmith who at that time was teaching at the Royal College of Art; Lethaby and Benson gave them their full support, and the association began, even during the war years, to attempt 'to come to terms with design in all our industries'.se It was, however, with some irony that these early DIA members acknowledged, as Ashbee had done some three years earlier, that British precept had inspired German practice, and that ideals formulated over two generations in England were evidently to be realized, with a seemingly remarkable rapidity and efficiency, by the Germans. ## European interpretations The history of Hermann Muthesius’ mission to England is now a familiar one; he was attached to the German embassy in London with a brief to report on the progress of British architecture, and his stay lasted seven years. When he returned in 1903, he began to write extensively about British architecture and design (the three-volume Das Englische Haus was published in 19o5). His stay in London, however, had coincided with the launching of both the Austrian and the German Secession movements; in 1895 Otto Wagner, newly appointed as professor of architecture at the Academy in Vienna had declared in his inaugural lecture that all modern forms must correspond to new materials and the new requirements of our time, if they are to fit modern mankind'.37 The Wiener Secession was officially launched in 1897; Olbrich designed its exhibition building in 1898, and subsequent Secession exhibitions gave pride of place to British work, notably that of Mackintosh. In 19o3, for example, when Josef Hoffmann launched the Wiener Werkstätten, he modelled them on Ashbee's Guild of Handicraft. By this time, however, similar organizations were already flourishing in Germany. The Deutsche Werkstätten für Kunst und Handmerk were founded in Munich in 1897; Dresden established Werkstätten the following year and by 1914 there were Werkstätten in Hellerau, Berlin and Hanover. In the carly years the founder members of these groups, who included Richard Riemerschmid, August Endell and Peter Behrens, were working in the Secession or Jugendstil, and the British arts and crafts designers, epitomizing the fruitful union of Kunst and Handwerk, were encouraged to contribute to Werkstätte displays. As early as 1904, however, Riemerschmid, with his brother-in-law Karl Schmidt, was exhibiting machine-made furniture, and by 1914 German Typenmöbel—made up from massproduced standardized components—was familiar enough to merit a mention in the Studio Year-Book. In the same issue in which the editorial on British developments had deplored 'the lack of originality' in that country's design achievements and had 184 declared that the application of art to industry' was a matter of vital importance', L. Deubner was writing about the success of the German Werkbund, which had been founded seven years earlier, and pre-viewing its forthcoming exhibition in Cologne. He described German progress in the wise use of the machine, demonstrating his point by citing the example of their 'type' furniture, which was being designed, he said, by some twenty architects, including Riemerschmid, Behrens and Adelbert Niemeyer. "The great economic mode of this type of production', he reported, arises from the fact that all these single parts, of which there are something like 8oo different kinds, can be made in large quantities and with the most advantageous employment of machine labour, while the extensive range of combinations ensures to the complete article an individuality and character of its own, without betraying the use of machinery in its production.'as The idea that the use of the machine was in some way a betrayal died hard, even in Germany, where a powerful lobby of industrialists were as anxious as the designers and theorists of the Werkstätten to cstablish both practical standards for their activities and a philosophy that would define and justify them. The formation of the Werkbund and the subsequent attempts to clarify its goals aimed to provide both standards and a philosophy, but in its early years the Werkbund became the focus of a battle of design ideologies which centred round the conflicting claims of the individual versus the mass product, the need to establish a Zeit (contemporary) as opposed to a Jugendstil, and the need to define this Zeitstil. Muthesius, its founder, was, in this first decade, at the storm centre. As a civil servant and a representative of the Prussian Board of Trade he appears to have been realistic, unpretentious and essentially practical, and it was these qualities that he admired in the English. On his return to Germany he condemned his compatriots' efforts to inspire an art-industry, mainly on the grounds that they looked to the past, rather than to the present or to the future for their inspiration, and were thus failing to produce designs that would meet contemporary needs and, equally important, designs that would be exportable. For Muthesius was a businessman as well as a theorist; he was as anxious as any German to establish a sound philosophic context for his countryman's activities, but at the same time he would always insist that the problem must be considered from an economic point of view, and that standards, control and discipline belonged equally to the philosophic and economic realms. The first confrontation came in 1907 when Muthesius gave a speech to the newly founded Trade School in Berlin in which he condemned contemporary practice for perpetuating outmoded design clichés, rather than demanding products that were appropriate to the time, and in which he called for the spiritualization (Durchgeistigung) of form.9 His criticisms were deeply resented, especially by the Berlin Kunstgewerbe, who described him as a pernicious influence, an 'enemy of art' and called for his resignation. A meeting was called to discuss the Muthesius case, and Peter Bruckmann, a cutlery manufacturer, has described the proceedings. Bruckmann explained that he did not know Muthesius at the time, but as a manufacturer (he employed designers such as Riemerschmid (pl 86)) he was impressed by Muthesius' opinions. He went along as a supporter of Muthesius' cause and found two other allies there—Dr Wolf Dohrn of the Dresden Werkstätten, and Joseph August Lux, a critic. 'Dohrn, Lux and I', he wrote, 'took on . . . the whole assembly. We were given ten minutes in which to put our case.' He then goes on to summarize his own speech in which he called for a rapprochement of artistic and business interests, explaining that his aims were the same as those of Muthesius. 'Our concern today', he said, 'is with new ideas, ideas that have already spread throughout Germany ... Even if you attempt to drive Herr Muthesius from his post, these ideas will still remain. You are shooting arrows at the sun (cheers). I do not say that Herr Muthesius is the sun (more cheers). No, the sun is the new modern design which will not only liberate fashion, but will become essential to our work and our culture.' Dohrn and Lux supported him with equal fervour, and all three left the meeting in total uproar. All this took place in June 19o7, and the Werkbund was formed four months later. Its title, with its stress on work' rather than ‘art' or 'craft' was intended to convey a spiritual as well as a practical union, and its founder members were equally divided among designcr/architects and those representing manufacturing intcrests. The architects included Peter Behrens who had just been appointed consultant to AEG; Bruno Paul, who had designed Typenmöbel, and who, also in r9o7, was made head of the Berlin Gewerbeschule, Richard Riemerschmid, Theodor Fischer and Adalbert Niemeyer, as well as Josef Hoffmann and Josef Olbrich from the Wiener Werkstätte. Bruckmann, the Gebrüder Klingspor, Poeschel und Trepte, the Kunstdruckerei Künstlerbund Karlsruhe, as well as the Munich, Dresden and Vienna Werkstätten were among the manufacturers. From its outset, therefore, the Werkbund included printers, industrialists, members of the progressive craft organizations and influential young architects, and as such it proved a more vigorous body than the DIA. Proof of this lay in its rising membership figures \* (all members were elected, and could in fact be debarred if they failed to maintain the required standards), and in the fact that by 1914 it was able to sponsor an exhibition of the scope and influence of that of Cologne. It was some time, however, before the polemics of the organization were defined, and even within the Werkbund, which was united in its campaign against historicism, there were conflicts concerning its first clearly expressed aim-that of ensuring 'quality' in design and workmanship. The word Qualität recurs like a talisman throughout early Werkbund writing. The purpose of the organization, according to a programme drawn up in 191o, was to 'select the best in art, industry, craftsmanship and trade. It will co-ordinate all those efforts to achieve quality that are evident in industrial endeavours. It will provide a rallying point for all those who are able and willing to achieve such quality, and for those who recognize design (gewerbliche Arbeit) as a part, and no small part of our culture.'41 Such a programme, however, had its ambiguities, and these centred round the definition of quality, the definition of the artist's rôle in this search for quality, and the exact nature of the artist's contribution to industry. As Secessionists all Werkbund theorists took for granted one basic tenet of Arts and Crafts thinking, namely that artists were more than easel painters, and that art should express and embrace the whole of life. Contemporary life, however, was being shaped by revolutions in science and technology; it expressed itself in mass-production, mass communication, new means of transport and expanding cities. And if the artist's function in this changing world was difficult to define, it was even more difficult to establish those qualities that would ensure 'good' design. Various points of view were expressed: Friedrich Naumann, for example, in the Werkbund Yearbook for 1913 declared that 'taste' was a personal matter, so subjective that no one could presume to state categorically what was good and what was bad. The Werkbund, he declared, condemned that which was obviously bad, but would never set out to sponsor one specific style; it was against a 'thoughtless conglomeration of alien components in design', and was striving for unity in domestic design, architecture and fashion.4 This, of course, was close to British arts and crafts thinking, which did not seek to impose a 'style' but assumed that appropriate forms would emerge if the artist had proper regard for materials and function. (Assumptions that were shared by Gropius when he founded the Bauhaus.) Riemerschmid, who also made an important contribution to Werkbund theory, accepted this basic premise. 'Life, not art, creates style,' he wrote.4s 'It is not made, it grows.' His conviction that 'every cpoch creates its own style' led him, like Ruskin and Morris before him, to condemn contemporary society; our cities, our streets, our houschold equipment, our luxuries and those things we call 'art', he wrote, all these betray our meanness and vulgarity. You will never find 'art', he insisted, where artists have been at work. This statement, however, marks his transition from nineteenthto twentieth-century attitudes, for Riemerschmid looked to the dockyards and the factories, rather than to the past, for his sources of modern design: liners, aircraft, machinery, technical structures, he declared, revealed forms that were 'taut, austere, confident and unpretentious', forms, in fact, that were truly expressive of the epoch that had created them. There are obvious analogies here with Loos, with the Futurists, and above all with Le Corbusier's Vers une Architecture.44 Corbusier, of course, was familiar with Werkbund thinking, for when the Art School in his native Chaux-de-Fonds had sent him to Germany in 191o to study German architecture and design, he had worked for a few months with Gropius and Mies van der Rohe in Behrens' office, and he had also spent some time with the Werkstätte at Hellerau, where Karl Schmidt and Heinrich Tessenow, both Werkbund members, were planning their garden city. Vers une Architecture, could, in fact, be described as a Werkbund document, for although few of its members would have gone so far as to declare that engineers are 'healthy and virile, active and useful, balanced and happy in their work', most would have understood the motivation that lay behind such enthusiasm. More in keeping with Werkbund thinking was Corbusier's cult of the everyday object, and when he wrote 'Our modern life ... has created its own objects: its costume, its fountain pen, its eversharp pencil, its typewriter, its telephone, its admirable office furniture, its plateglass, and its "innovation" trunks, the safety razor and the briar pipe, the bowler hat and limousine, the steamship and the airplane', his pronouncements have a distinctly Werkbund ring. This acceptance of the twentieth-century environment, the conviction that beauty, significance, order and objectivity were manifested in its everyday objects, as well as in its engineering achievements, and the preoccupation with equivalences between the Greek and contemporary experience are fundamental to Continental design and architectural theory in the first decades of the twentieth century. While Lethaby was exploring his ideal of the commonplace, the concept of 'modernity' and its apt expression in a machine aesthetic were analysed in journals such as L'Esprit Nouveau and, in a less iconoclastic vein, in the yearbooks of the Deutscher Werkbund which were published annually from 1912 to 1915. The yearbooks carried articles by prominent Werkbund members such as Muthesius, Gropius, Behrens and Riemerschmid; they included photographs of applied and graphic design which confirm that there was, at that stage, no coherent Werkbund style; the monumental and the trivial predominate, and within this context the achievements of Van de Velde and Riemerschmid seem outstanding—far more sophisticated than contemporary work by Gropius and Behrens. But although the yearbooks have obvious similarities with the Studio, they completely break from the art journal precedent in the inclusion, among the photographs, of illustrations of cars and locomotives, liners, bridges, railway stations and aeroplanes, and in the tone and content of some of the articles which accepted the technological revolution, and assumed that the engineer could make as valid a contribution to a contemporary design aesthetic as the artist/ craftsman. There are certain analogics here with contemporary Futurist polemics; the more radical members of the Werkbund, however, were in no way anarchistic, and they anticipated the purists of the 'zos in their admiration for the Greeks. Greece was to them synonymous with order, clarity, logic and discipline, and Greek architecture was a demonstration of these virtues. Such architecture was controlled and rational, pure and predictable; its creators were concerned, not with self-expression but with the eternal concepts of space, structure and harmony, concepts which could be expressed by the use of predetermined orders. Ornament which arose from the use of these orders was in itself logical, and as such, justifiable. The recognition of a need to establish a rational order and clearly defined standards in architecture and design was therefore inherent in Werkbund thinking prior to World War I; engineering design was admired and approved because it was a scientific discipline, subject to mathematically defined laws. The men who built the bridges, locomotives, aeroplanes and liners that were documented in the yearbooks could not afford to be subjective, for in these areas 'style' was both determined by and expressive of function and materials; the forms thus achieved, however, were inherently beautiful, just as Greek architecture was beautiful. Architects, too, should welcome contemporary scientific disciplines if they were to produce work that was socially viable and to achieve a harmony and beauty that was expressive of the new society, for architec-188 ture was both a science and the highest form of art. These theories, which were suggested in various Werkbund articles, notably those of Gropius, were fully elaborated in Corbusier's Vers une Architecture, which extends and distils this aspect of Werkbund thinking. 'Architecture', wrote Corbusier, 'is governed by standards. Standards are a matter of logic, analysis and precise study. Standards are based on a problem which has been well-stated. . . We must first of all aim at the setting up of standards in order to face the problem of perfection.' This preoccupation with perfection and the conviction that it could be achieved by harnessing and harmonizing the potentials of modern life is characteristic of design theory in the 'zos. It is inherent in both de Stijl and Bauhaus ideology, but the latter inherited conflicts that the Werkbund, in spite of the convictions of its more radical members, had not entirely resolved. For the Werkbund, as an association of artists, craftsmen, theorists and industrialists dedicated to the improvement of both craft and industrial design, contained within its theory opposing definitions of perfection, and conflicting attitudes as to how and why it should be achieved. 'The setting up of standards' was its fundamental aim, but the attempt to define these standards split the Werkbund into two opposing factions. On the one hand there were the individualists who upheld the claims of the Fugendstil by insisting that the artist was a free agent in whatever medium he worked, and on the other were thosc who insistcd on standardization in the interests both of art and economy. Champion of the subjective approach was Henry Van de Velde, who, at the invitation of the Grand Duke, had been working in Weimar since r9oz, and who had established the arts and crafts school there that was to become the Bauhaus. His 'opponent' was Muthesius, dedicated to the promotion of German trade and patron of young and avant garde architects such as Walter Gropius, Peter Behrens, Hans Poclzig and Bruno Paul.4s The Cologne exhibition provided both protagonists with a platform to air their views, and at the Werkbund's annual meeting in 1914 they defined their attitudes in open debate.4 Muthesius opened the meeting with his classic defence of standardization. 'Architecture', he said, 'together with all the activities of the Werkbund, is moving towards standardization (Typisierung); only by means of standardization can it achieve that universality characteristic of ages of harmonious culture.' Only through standardization, he continued, could a style be achieved that was both universal and significant, a style that would establish Germany as a leading nation both in trade and culture. To this end he called for propaganda to publicize German achievements abroad and for support for exhibitions to promote the best German work; the primary aim of the Werkbund, he insisted, was to purify and ennoble German production and thus to establish an export trade in German design. To Van de Velde, on the other hand, such preoccupations smacked of materialism and betrayal: 'So long as there are artists within the Werkbund,' he declared, 'and so long as they are able to influence'its fate, they will protest against the imposition of orders or standardization. The artist is, in essence, a total individualist, a free, spontaneous creator: he will never, of his own accord, submit to a discipline which imposes on him a canon or a type.' Standardization to Van de Velde, therefore, was