# Acknowledgments I WISH TO EXPRESS MY GRATITUDE TO THE MANY PEOPLE WHO counseled or otherwise aided me in assembling this book. My sense of indebtedness is especially great to the staff members of Consumers Union—especially Mildred Brady and Florence Mason—who showed such patience in supplying me with information and advice. I also feel particularly indebted to William Zabel for the many hours he spent in 1958 helping me understand some of the then-known ramifications of planned obsolescence. It is not possible to cite by name all of the several hundred people who contributed to this book by offering insights, information, or criticism. And some, I know, would not wish to be identified. However, I would like to express my special appreciation to Leland Gordon, Raymond Loewy, Warren Bilkey, Robert Cook, Louis C. Jones, Loring Chase, George Stocking, R. E. Runzheimer, Charles and Nancy Saxon, Edward and Jane Eager, and, of course, Kennett and Eleanor Rawson and my wife Virginia. Finally, no statement of indebtedness would be complete for a book such as this if I did not take account of the help I received from the viewpoints and conclusions of others who have wrestled with some aspects of the problems that will be dealt with here. Fifteen persons who come most immediately to mind as having stimulated my own thinking are: Harrison Brown, Stuart Chase, Joseph Clark, John Kenneth Galbraith, Robert Heilbroner, Aldous Huxley, Joseph Wood Krutch, Paul Mazur, Reinhold Niebuhr, Fairfield Osborn, David Potter, Joseph Spengler, Barbara Ward, Colston Warne, William Whyte, Jr. VANCE PACKARD ## Contents ## Part I ## THE DEVELOPING DILEMMA 1. City of the Future? 2. The Nagging Prospects of Saturation 3. "Growthmanship" ## Part II ## IN RESPONSE, NINE STRATEGIES 4. There's Always Room for More 5. Progress Through the Throwaway Spirit 6. Progress Through Planned Obsolescence 7. Planned Obsolescence of Desirability 8. How to Outmode a \$4,000 Vehicle in Two Years 9. America's Toughest Car—and Thirty Models Later 10. The Short, Sweet Life of Home Products 11. Fashion Lines for the Kitchen 12. The Repairman's Paradise 13. Progress Through Planned Chaos 14. Selling on the Never-Never 15. Hedonism for the Masses 16. Progress Through Proliferation of People ## Part III ## IMPLICATIONS 17. Ever-Mounting Consumption? 18. The Vanishing Resources 19. The Commercialization of American Life 20. The Changing American Character ## Part IV ## SOME SUGGESTED COURSES 21. Restoring Pride in Prudence 22. Restoring Pride in Quality 23. Respecting the Eternal Balance 24. Facing the Unmet Challenges 25. Achieving an Enduring Style of Life Reference Notes Index A society in which consumption has to be artificially stimulated in order to keep production going is a society founded on trash and waste, and such a society is a house built upon sand. —DOROTHY L. SAYERS in Creed or Chaos PART I The Developing Dilemma