# CHAPTER 1 # City of the Future? WHAT WILL THE WORLD OF TOMORROW BE LIKE? IN THE COURSE OF this book we shall examine a number of probabilities based on projections of current trends. Spokesmen for industry like to speculate about tomorrow even more than the rest of us. They invite us to peer out onto the horizon and see the wondrous products their marketing experts are conceiving for us. We are encouraged to share their dreams and to tingle at the possibility of using voice writers, wall-sized television screens, and motorcars that glide along highways under remote control. Most of these marketing experts, despite their air of chronic excited optimism, are grappling with a problem that would frighten the wits out of less resolute people. That problem is the specter of glut for the products they are already endeavoring to sell. If we could probe the real dreams of these marketing people as they slumber restlessly at night, we would find—when a smile finally settles on their faces—that they are not dreaming merely of more bewitching products to sell to us. More likely, they are dreaming that they are in their private world of the future, where selling has again become easy because the haunting problem of saturation has been vanquished. This Utopia might be called Cornucopia City, and its setting is out on the misty horizon of time. In Cornucopia City, as I understand it, all the buildings will be made of a special papier-mâché. These houses can be torn down and rebuilt every spring and fall at housecleaning time. The motorcars of Cornucopia will be made of a lightweight plastic that develops fatigue and begins to melt if driven more than four thousand miles. Owners who turn in their old motorcars at the regular turn-in dates—New Year's, Easter, Independence Day, and Labor Day—will be rewarded with a one-hundred-dollar United States Prosperity-Through-Growth Bond for each motorcar turned in. And a special additional bond will be awarded to those families able to turn in four or more motorcars at each disposal date. One fourth of the factories of Cornucopia City will be located on the edge of a cliff, and the ends of their assembly lines can be swung to the front or rear doors depending upon the public demand for the product being produced. When demand is slack, the end of the assembly line will be swung to the rear door and the output of refrigerators or other products will drop out of sight and go directly to their graveyard without first overwhelming the consumer market. Every Monday, the people of Cornucopia City will stage a gala launching of a rocket into outer space at the local Air Force base. This is another of their contributions to national prosperity. Components for the rockets will have been made by eighteen subcontractors and prime contractors in the area. One officially stated objective of the space probing will be to report to the earth people what the back side of Neptune's moon looks like. Wednesday will be Navy Day. The Navy will send a surplus warship to the city dock. It will be filled with surplus play-suits, cake mix, vacuum cleaners, and trampolines that have been stockpiled at the local United States Department of Commerce complex of warehouses for surplus products. The ship will go thirty miles out to sea, where the crew will sink it from a safe distance. As we peek in on this Cornucopia City of the future, we learn that the big, heartening news of the week is that the Guild of Appliance Repair Artists has passed a resolution declaring it unpatriotic for any member even to look inside an ailing appliance that is more than two years old. The heart of Cornucopia City will be occupied by a titanic pushbutton super mart built to simulate a fairyland. This is where all the people spend many happy hours a week strolling and buying to their heart's content. In this paradise of high-velocity selling, there are no jangling cash registers to disrupt the holiday mood. Instead, the shopping couples—with their five children trailing behind, each pushing his own shopping cart—gaily wave their lifetime electronic credit cards in front of a recording eye. Each child has his own card, which was issued to him at birth. Conveniently located throughout the mart are receptacles where the people can dispose of the old-fashioned products they bought on a previous shopping trip. In the jewelry section, for example, a playfully designed sign by a receptacle reads: "Throw your old watches here!" Cornucopia City's marvelous mart is open around the clock, Sundays included. For the Sunday shoppers who had developed a churchgoing habit in earlier years, there is a little chapel available for meditation in one of the side alcoves. Is Cornucopia City to become not a feverish dream, but, instead, an extreme prototype for the City of Tomorrow? Certainly in the next twenty years the broad outlines of Cornucopia City will come to seem less and less fanciful, if current trends continue. Already a chapel has been built in a shopping center outside Miami. Already the General Dynamics Corporation has under development a lifetime electronic credit card. Already watches are being sold as fashion accessory items. Already paper houses are being marketed. Already the life expectancy of motorcars has been showing a notable drop. Already supermarkets are staying open around the clock in many areas, with push-button markets under development. Already the stockpiling and disposing of subsidized but unwanted agricultural products have become a world-wide scandal. Already some home furnishings are being built to break down within a few years, and product makers have been showing a disconcerting fascination with the idea of setting "death dates" for products. And, finally, already the pressures to expand production and consumption have forced Americans to create a hyperthyroid economy that can be sustained only by constant stimulation of the people and their leaders to be more prodigal with the nation's resources. This presents us with another specter, one so disconcerting that Americans have thus far chosen to suppress awareness of it. That is the dangerous decline in the United States of its supply of essential resources. Once fabulously rich in these, the United States is now a have-not nation and is becoming more so every month. United States industrial firms are grinding up more than half of the natural resources processed each year on this planet for the benefit of 6 per cent of the planet's people. In the lifetime of many, if not most, of us, Americans will be trying to "mine" old forgotten garbage dumps for their rusted tin cans. The people of the United States are in a sense becoming a nation on a tiger. They must learn to consume more and more or, they are warned, their magnificent economic machine may turn and devour them. They must be induced to step up their individual consumption higher and higher, whether they have any pressing need for the goods or not. Their ever-expanding economy demands it. If modifications are forced upon the private-enterprise system of the United States in the future, it will be because that system did too good a job of filling many of the needs of the people. Defeat on such terms, we should all agree, would be saddening. Man throughout recorded history has struggled—often against appalling odds—to cope with material scarcity. Today, there has been a massive break-through. The great challenge in the United States—and soon in Western Europe—is to cope with a threatened overabundance of the staples and amenities and frills of life. Conceivably, even the longimpoverished and slower-starting Soviet Union may someday find itself trying to deal with an overflowing of goods. The United States, however, already is finding that the challenge of coping with its fabulous productivity is becoming a major national problem and is inspiring some ingenious responses and some disquieting changes. This book will deal with the systematic efforts being made to encourage citizens to be more careless and extravagant with their nation's resources, and what these efforts imply. When I refer to the waste makers at large in the land, I refer primarily to those who are seeking to make their fellow citizens more prodigal in their daily lives. In a broader sense, however, it could be asserted that most Americans are becoming waste makers. If I can help it, there will be no villains in this book. A charge of rape cannot be sustained by any adult when consent or co-operation has been given. Prodigality is the spirit of the era. Historians, I suspect, may allude to this as the Throwaway Age. Further—and let's face it—a good many Americans and Europeans have a pretty direct stake in the failure or success of businessmen in inducing us all to be more wasteful. The wife of a supermarket operator, the engineer working for an appliance company, the schoolteacher who owns a few shares of stock in a motorcar company—all these kindly people may feel uneasy about the wastefulness they see, and yet they have a vested interest in its accelerated perpetuation. And the professional marketer whose efforts to induce prodigality they may deplore is simply the trained expert employed to work on behalf of the firms that contribute to their own support. While our focus will be on the wastefulness being promoted by United States industry in order to sell its ever-mounting stockpiles of products, we should recognize that wastefulness has become a part of the American way of life. The landscape of the globe is becoming strewn with armaments and other materiel abandoned by employees of the United States government. A spokesman for the United States Army Ordnance Corps acknowledged in 1960 that the Army had goofed in losing track of a million dollars' worth of motorcycle parts squirreled away in a Georgia warehouse. When they were found after fifteen years, the parts had become worthless except for scrap. And it was disclosed that the Navy had been paying \$21 for lamp sockets selling for 25 cents in retail stores. And many labor practices, too, have become a part of this pattern of wallowing in waste. Many workingmen today show more concern for feather-bedding, gold-bricking, getting onto their boats, or collecting their "rocking chair" compensations, than they do for developing a standard of workmanship for themselves that is worthy of pride. They want their tri-level house in the suburbs but often aren't willing to put in a decent performance to earn it. In a restaurant in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, I overheard a businessman, with tears in his eyes, tell his wife he had decided to abandon his business because his employees were goofing off so badly that he could not get a decent day's work out of them. But all these forms of wastefulness in American life seem to stem in large part from the fantastic productivity of the nation's mechanized, often automated offices, factories, and farms. That productivity is the central fact. And its impact is seen most conspicuously in the efforts of United States business to cope with it by promoting ever-higher levels of private consumption and a philosophy of waste. Where are we drifting under the pressures to make us more wasteful, imprudent, and carefree in our consuming habits? What is the impact of all this pressure toward wastefulness on the United States and on the behavior and character of its people? These, I think, are momentous questions. Let us explore them with all the compassion and forbearance we can muster.