CHAPTER 2 # The Nagging Prospects of Saturation "Marketing men across America are facing a fact that is hard for them to swallow. America's capacity to produce may have outstripped its capacity to consume."—ERNEST DALE, Graduate School of Business and Public Administration, Cornell University. TODAY, THE AVERAGE CITIZEN OF THE UNITED STATES IS CONSUMING twice as much in the way of goods as the average citizen consumed in the years just before World War II. Nearly two fifths of the things he owns are things that are not essential to his physical wellbeing. They are optional or luxury items. And there are signs that physical possessions are becoming too plentiful to accommodate comfortably. Visiting foreigners comment that the abundance of America seems to spill over into the aisles of stores, spread along the highways, and bulge out the doors, windows, and attics of houses. There is this general evidence of profusion of material wealth even though there is a substantial residue, numbering millions of families, that remains unquestionably ill-fed, ill-clothed, ill-housed. And the television set may be substituting for adequate food in the family budget. In a good-humored forecast of things to come, the senior editor of Sales Management asserted on May 6, 1960: "If we Americans are to buy and consume everything that automated manufacture, sock-o selling and all-out advertising can thrust upon us, each of our mounting millions must have extra ears and eyes and other senses—as well as extra income. Indeed, the only sure way to meet all the demands may be to create a brand new breed of super customers." Consumption must rise, and keep rising. Some marketing experts have been announcing that the average citizen will have to step up his buying by nearly 50 per cent in the next dozen years, or the economy will sicken. In a mere decade, advertising men assert, United States citizens will have to improve their level of consumption as much as their forebears had managed to do in the two hundred years from Colonial times to 1939. The recent exhortations for greater consumption have been inspired by bulging inventories of goods, which in turn are caused primarily by two factors. One is the ever-growing efficiency of the United States productive force, thanks in large part to the introduction of automated equipment in the offices and factories of nearly a hundred thousand United States companies. During the postwar years, the amount of goods and services that one man can turn out in an hour has increased about 3 per cent every year. This increased output can be absorbed if each citizen consumes more, or if there are, each year, more citizens. Otherwise, there will be less work. The other factor is the great expansion of United States productive facilities based on the conviction in executive suites that the public can be induced to consume more each year. In 1959, the advertising and marketing journal, Printers' Ink, asserted: "Our automobile plants could turn out eight million cars this year if they dared." But it said the industry would be lucky to sell about half that number. And it added that several other major industries were facing the same "dilemma." Labor leader Walter Reuther complained that in four years the United States had "lost" nearly one hundred billion dollars' worth of potential output because of "under-utilization" of its productive capacity. Much of the postwar boom in sales has come from supplying products that were badly wanted, if not badly needed. But after a dozen years the specter of satiation is rising to challenge the sellers of many products. A true salesman rejects the concept that a market can ever be satiated; but even the salesmen are beginning to admit that much of the urgency is going out of the demand for their products. Sales Management conceded: "The American consumer has been surfeited with all kinds of wonderful products since the end of the war. He's probably tired, a little jaded, eager for something different." Today, about nine out of ten American homes contain at least one refrigerator, one television set, and one electric or gas stove. And seven out of ten have a vacuum cleaner, an electric toaster, and an electric food mixer. There are more passenger cars in the land than there are families. If you are a producer and most families already own your product, you are left with three possibilities for making further sales. You sell replacements; you sell more than one item to each family; or you dream up a new or improved product—or one that at least seems new or improved—that will enchant families that already own an "old" model of your product. (A fourth possibility is to move into a different line.) The challenge of finding significant improvements that can be made in existing products, however, is becoming more difficult each year. How much more can a toaster or sofa or carpet sweeper or sewing machine be improved, really? When the Appliance Technical Conference was held in Chicago in 1958, the vice-president of engineering for Whirlpool Corporation made a notably candid statement. He said: "The industry has wrung the last possible ounce of research out of the present appliance products. We can only offer prettier equipment." He urged the industry to start basic research in the properties of clothing and meats in order to come up with radically new products. All this is not to suggest that genuine technological improvements are not being made—or in prospect of being made—in some products. The push-button and long-distance dialing telephone and the jet passenger airplane are improvements that have produced considerable enchantment among consumers. There is the probability that Americans soon will be offered improvements in home products that will produce a degree of enchantment in some circles: refrigerators with no moving parts, ultrasonic dishwashers that reportedly will remove fried egg from plates, remote-control stoves, lighting based on electroluminescent phosphors for ceiling or wall panels. But how much should we rejoice when a company introduces a toaster with nine buttons, which make it possible to obtain a piece of toast in any of nine shades? How much should we rejoice when another company introduces a mechanical martini-stirring spoon, which relieves the person stirring from the labor of twisting his wrist? And what American housewife is dreaming of the day when she can prepare breakfast by simply flicking a bedside switch, which will turn on an electronic recipe maker coded on punch cards? A columnist for Advertising Age, the forthright E. B. Weiss, took note of the general drying up of spectacular product improvements when he wrote: "Certainly when one compares the 1959 models of autos and major appliances and TV sets with the 1956 models, one must be compelled to wonder whatever happened to the great scientific improvements that must have been the result of hundreds of millions spent by these manufacturers over this period in research work of every kind." A year earlier, Mr. Weiss complained that much of the product improvement "has tended increasingly toward small details of trim, as in the case of the upswept rear fins on cars of late vintage, and toward gimmicky gadgets of little true importance." The changes that were being wrought in the laboratories frequently were simply superficial changes and improvements that could be used as selling points by copy writers. Whenever engineers in the appliance industry assembled at conferences in the late fifties, they frequently voiced the lament that they had become little more than push buttons for the sales department. It should also be noted that much of the straining to bring out new products was inspired to a very large extent by a desire on the part of producers to gain more shelf space in the supermarket jungle. Consumer Reports, which is issued by Consumers Union, explained the strategy in this way: "A good deal of what is called product research today actually is a sales promotion expenditure undertaken to provide what the trade calls a profitable 'product mix.' A judicious product mix is, among other things, a combination of brands designed to commandeer for the advertiser the greatest possible shelf space in the supermarket." The result was often a multiplication of brands. A single soap company thus might have three liquid detergents competing with one another. Frequently the so-called new product was simply a new packaging concept. A professor of pharmacology at the University of California charged that much of the publicized money going into the research of new drugs was actually being spent in a quest for patentable variations on things that were already selling well. During this same period, Americans were seeing a similar slowdown in the unveiling of brand-new kinds of products. At a time when appliance dealers were pleading for something new and exciting to stir public interest, Home Furnishings Daily reported: "Major advances in existing appliances and introduction of completely new appliances cannot be expected for at least several years." When Fortune magazine reviewed the fifties for its readers from business management, it stated that in consumer goods "the fifties held few surprises." Among the few significant new products it could think of were tranquilizing pills. And it could point to such notable improvements on existing products as power steering, power brakes in motorcars, and stereophonic sound in phonographs. But these, it conceded, "were relatively modest accomplishments, from a technical point of view." It stated that during the fifties the makers of consumer products had not brought forth "a single innovation comparable to the automobile (which became commercially important at about 1910), the radio (early twenties), the mechanical refrigerator (mid-twenties), the automatic washing machine (late thirties), home air conditioning and television (late forties)." Furthermore, it said that no product of impact comparable with the automobile, radio, television, etc., was in sight for the sixties. Fortune professed to find it somehow comforting that business had learned how to increase sales year after year when it had little significantly new to offer the public. Writer Roger Burlingame also previewed the sixties and reported he could see nothing at the moment that was basically new in products for the use of the common man. The exciting advances were being made in such fields as preparation for space travel. The growing dependence of the United States economy upon programs financed by the federal government that might in a more sane day be abolished also has created apprehension among those concerned about the future of the economy. Several billion dollars are being spent each year to encourage fanners to raise crops the country does not want or need. Farmers happily pour fertilizer in record-breaking carloads into soil that should be resting. Billions of bushels of the resulting crops are moved into government-built storage bins, costing billions of dollars, made from millions of tons of metal that is scarce in the United States. Some have called the program plain corruption. And Max Moxley, farm editor in Sterling, Kansas, complained, "Our farm prosperity is entirely artificial. There's surplus grain piled everywhere you look. It rather takes away the joy of a good harvest for me. I'm sure the whole folly will come falling down around our ears—and soon, perhaps." Even more massive and crucial in terms of its stimulus to the United States economy has been the defense spending, which has reached nearly fifty billion dollars a year—or a tenth of the nation's entire output of goods and services. Many United States senators find themselves under strong pressure to protect big aircraft and missile contracts, Naval installations, and Army bases in their states. Any cutbacks would throw some constituents out of jobs, and hit some of their local industries. In 1959, when stock-market prices dipped briefly after President Eisenhower announced that he was meeting with Russian Premier Khrushchev, some financial analysts reported the dip was caused by "peace jitters" among the traders. Financial columnist Sylvia Porter noted that every time there has been a suggestion of a major cut in Pentagon spending "the stock market has gone into a tail spin." On the other hand, in May, 1960, when the Russian capture of the U-2 plane was followed by the collapse of the summit meeting, Wall Street stockmarket prices advanced during seven successive days. The Russians, too, apparently had been having internal trouble because of the "peace scare." Various accounts of the turn to greater belligerence on the part of the Soviet Union cited as influential the lobbying of two hundred and fifty thousand Soviet officers who were scheduled, under disarmament plans, to be demobilized. They reportedly did not relish the prospects of going into civilian jobs as rank-and-file comrades. The recession in the late fifties served as a sharp reminder to many of the developing dilemma posed by the need for ever-greater production. Recessions were nothing new. But this one was the most severe of the three postwar recessions. In many industries, companies found themselves with heavy inventories of goods and began cutting back production. The public was still buying, but not fast enough. A bewildered advertising executive was reported complaining that up until the last few months Americans had been the most desiring people in the world. As unemployment became a worrisome problem, a marketing journal warned that the unemployed worker produces nothing that can be advertised and sold, and he consumes little beyond necessities. Marketers reacted to the challenge of coping with mounting glut during the recession by shifting to the really hard sell. In Flint, Michigan, sales executives began firing a cannon every time a motorcar was sold. Citizens across the land were admonished by industrialists and government leaders of all stripes to begin buying for their own good. At a press conference, President Eisenhower was asked what the people should do to make the recession recede. Here is the dialogue that followed: "A.—Buy." "Q—Buy what?" "A.—Anything." The President was advised that this was possibly an oversimplified response in view of the fact that his own Secretary of the Treasury was then urging people to put their money into government bonds. The President then said the public should buy only what it needs and "wants." An appliance store in Killingsley, Connecticut, immediately responded by putting this sign in its window: "OKAY IKE, WE'RE DOING OUR PART!" The countryside rang with slogans that drummed home the patriotic or selfish reasons why everyone should pitch in and consume more. In Detroit, a forty-five-voice chorus cried out five hundred times a week over television and radio: "Buy days mean paydays . . . and paydays mean better days. . . . So buy, buy! . . . something that you need today." Other slogans beamed at the American public were: "You auto buy now." "Buy now—the job you save may be your own." "Buy and be happy." "Buy, buy, buy; it's your patriotic duty." "Buy your way to prosperity." The Advertising Council unleashed a campaign to create "Confidence in a Growing America." And the State Commerce Commissioner of New York conferred with business and labor leaders and then launched a campaign to persuade the public to "Buy it now!" The onus was on the consumer to save the day. Whether dutiful consumers licked the recession is not clear. The federal government, while it acted quietly, certainly played a major role. It poured several billion extra dollars into the economy for such things as pay raises, farm subsidies, missiles, and highways, thus unquestionably helping to quicken the enfeebled national economic pulse. But consumer spending was probably decisive, because there never was any serious over-all decline in buying by consumers. In fact, four billion dollars more was spent for goods and services in 1958 than in 1957. Consumers spent less for big-ticket items such as appliances and motorcars, but their spending for services such as amusement and for "soft goods" such as food, clothing, tobacco, and drugs rose all during the recession. By 1959, prosperity had returned even to the automobile and appliance industries. Cash registers were ringing merrily. Finally, too, but with plaguing slowness, the massive clot of unemployment began to dissolve into manageable proportions. Automation in three years had wiped out nearly a million jobs in industrial production, forcing many people to find jobs in the service industries. Meanwhile, increases in output per man seem likely to rise by about 40 per cent by 1970, and at least a million additional workers will be coming onto the labor market each year. The problem of absorbing them comfortably is likely to be most challenging. The United States economy is depending on the willingness of consumers and the government to spend more each year than they have the preceding year. Some economists suggest that whenever United States citizens fail to step up their over-all consumption by at least 4 per cent in any given year they are inviting a "failure-to-grow recession." How to live with mounting productivity is each year becoming a more urgent problem for Americans, and soon it will be plaguing Western Europeans. In the United States, unused productive capacity is edging up almost every year. It has quadrupled in a decade. In the early months of 1960, U.S. News & World Report indicated that the cornucopia of the United States was perhaps working too well when it said: "Goods are superabundant. Unsold cars in the hands of dealers are at a near record level. So are inventories of many kinds of household equipment. Steel output is having to be cut back." This was when consumers were breaking an all-time record in their spending. At about the same time, President Eisenhower in his annual economic message said that prosperity could be sustained only if consumers—as well as management and labor—"perform their economic functions." Seymour Harris, Harvard University economist, aptly summed up the challenge facing the United States by stating: "Our private economy is faced with the tough problem of selling what it can produce." ## CHAPTER 3 ## Growthmanship" "Men's appetite for goods must be quickened and increased." — PAUL MAZUR. OUT OF ALL THE ANXIETIES CREATED BY THE DESIRE TO ESCAPE THE developing dilemma and to make the economy hum at ever-higher levels has come a clamor for "growth." Economic thinkers of many stripes have joined in the call. Certainly this is the first time in history that the felt need for growth has been so self-consciously vocalized. Marketers talk of the need to increase sales of consumer goods and services by a hundred and fifty to two hundred billion dollars within a decade. Labor spokesmen have called for "rapid expansion." Political candidates for the Presidency in both parties have called for more growth. Conservatives who became uneasy about some of the novel ideas their rivals were offering to promote growth sneered that the rivals were making a high-level game of "growthmanship." In 1960, both party platforms called for more growth and differed only on how it should be achieved. Some people have pointed to the Russian claims of rapid growth as a justification for the United States to embark on a crusade to increase its total output. With many of these, any output is considered to add to the military potential of the nation whether it involves more deodorants, more hula hoops, more electric rotisseries, or more pinball machines. The fact that the United States is already outproducing Russia in consumer durables by at least twenty to one is generally ignored. Also ignored is the fact that Russia has managed to startle the world by sending a giant satellite around the moon with a total national output that has been less than half of that of the United States. Russia simply has a different set of national priorities. Furthermore, the Soviet example being held up as a challenge to the United States becomes less impressive on close inspection. Its rate of economic growth, for example, is less remarkable than that of Mexico, Japan, or West Germany. Compared with that of the United States, its percentage of annual growth of output seems impressive simply because it is starting from a lower base and because it is an underdeveloped country trying to catch up with an overdeveloped one. Economist W. Allen Wallis, special assistant to the President, observed in 1960: "Even if Russian growth rates continue higher than ours, the absolute gap between us will continue to increase for some time to come. . . . There is no possibility that the Russian economy will overtake ours at any time in the visible future—certainly not in this century." Still, the Russian growth rate is widely held up as a minimum challenge for Americans if they are to hold up their heads in the world. Whether the growth is particularly needed to promote the well-being of the American people is rarely even considered. No one has considered that you can make a country overgrow just as the Pentagon has concluded that you can "over-kill" any possible enemy if you keep on producing hydrogen bombs beyond any rational need. And few have considered that while some selective kinds of growth may well be needed in the United States, other kinds are undesirable or would produce only surfeit. It is just assumed that any growth is good. Growth is fast becoming a hallowed word alongside Democracy and Motherhood. Some—but not all—planners in the federal government have also been preoccupied with the idea that any growth is good for the country. As novelist John Keats pointed out, "Washington's planners exult whenever a contractor vomits up five thousand new houses on a rural tract that might better have remained in hay." <sup>1</sup> In mid-1960, reports from Washington revealed that there was a strong feeling within the Administration that more liberal allowances should be made for the obsolescence of business equipment in order to "foster economic growth," by permitting faster tax write-offs of existing equipment. How will all the sought-after growth be achieved? That has been the chief point of contention. Businessmen have been wary of some of the ideas tossed around by politicians and liberals as smacking of boondoggling. They are passionately convinced that the great challenge facing the nation is to make sure the citizenry will be induced to enjoy more and more of the good things of life—which they, of course, will be more than happy to produce. To a pre-1950 economic thinker this would seem like no challenge at all. Historically, economists have assumed that people will automatically consume eagerly everything that their nation's economy can turn out for them. This concept is often referred to as Say's Law. A French economist of the past century, Jean Baptiste Say, concluded that production is bound to equal distribution. Say's Law was conceived in an era of scarcity. There was so much poverty of even the necessities of life that a ready and eager market was assumed. In the mid-twentieth century's era of abundance, however, his law became less and less relevant. Desire did not necessarily keep pace with productive capacity. More pertinent for the new era were the concepts of Paul Mazur, partner of a Wall Street investment house, who has become widely accepted as a leading apostle of "consumerism." Early in the fifties, he pointed out that every recent United States recession had been caused by the failure of business to gear its production down to what could clearly be consumed, or a failure to see that consumption kept pace with production. The result was jammed warehouses and a depressed market. In his The Standards We Raise, widely admired at least by the marketers of industry, he asserted: "The giant of mass production can be maintained at the peak of its strength only when its voracious appetite can be fully and continuously satisfied. . . . It is absolutely necessary that the products that roll from the assembly lines of mass production be consumed at an equally rapid rate and not be accumulated in inventories." Thus the challenge was to develop a public that would always have an appetite as voracious as its machines. The chief economist of the world's largest advertising agency, J. Walter Thompson, asserted in 1960 that Americans would need to learn to expand their personal consumption by sixteen billion dollars per year if they were to keep pace with this production ability. All this backlog of what he called consumer need was awaiting "activation by advertising." This, he said, represented the "real opportunity" of the day. The central problem was to stimulate greater desire and to create new wants. And this was becoming a little more difficult each year. In the late fifties, Advertising Age carried this headline: "CREATING DESIRE FOR GOODS GETS HARDER." It quoted the chief of research of a Los Angeles newspaper who stated: "Productive capacity has outstripped our efficiency in creating desire for goods." He added that it was becoming increasingly hard to create a burning desire for things. People should be persuaded to expand their wants and needs, and quickly. The head of J. Walter Thompson made that point and explained: "We must cut down the time lag in expanding consumption to absorb this production." This agency's various pronouncements on the state of the nation indicated that it had become infatuated with the phrase "time lag." Everything could be blamed on the time lag. This implied that Americans had great unrecognized wants which they would inevitably discover eventually. They just had to be educated and activated. The agency's research director, however, warned that "the velocity of change in living standards needed to match the most conservative estimates of future productive ability nearly staggers the imagination." The emerging philosophy was most fervently and bluntly stated perhaps in two long articles in The Journal of Retailing during the midfifties. The author was Marketing Consultant Victor Lebow. He made a forthright plea for "forced consumption." <sup>2</sup> "Our enormously productive economy . . . demands that we make consumption our way of life, that we convert the buying and use of goods into rituals, that we seek our spiritual satisfactions, our ego satisfactions, in consumption. . . . We need things consumed, burned up, worn out, replaced, and discarded at an ever increasing rate." At other points he spoke of the "consumption requirements of our productive capacity" and of the "obligation" of retailers "to push more goods across their counters." As businessmen caught a glimpse of the potentialities inherent in endlessly expanding the wants of people under consumerism, forced draft or otherwise, many began to see blue skies. In fact, Sales Management featured a blue sky on the cover of one of its issues as the sixties approached with this exhortation from management to marketers: "Go GET US A TRILLION-DOLLAR ECONOMY." At the time this order was given, the United States economy was still approaching the half trillion mark. Such heady resolutions could be implemented if the public could somehow be induced to feel the need to buy more and more products and services. Men's appetite for goods needed indeed to be quickened and increased. Old-fashioned selling methods based on offering goods to fill an obvious need in a straightforward manner were no longer enough. Even the use of status appeals and sly appeals to the subconscious needs and anxieties of the public—which I have examined in earlier works 3 would not move goods in the mountainous dimensions desired. What was needed was strategies that would make Americans in large numbers into voracious, wasteful, compulsive consumers—and strategies that would provide products assuring such wastefulness. Even where wastefulness was not involved, additional strategies were needed that would induce the public to consume at ever-higher levels. Happily for the marketers, such strategies were emerging or were at hand. They had been forged in the fires of the fifties and were being perfected for use in the sixties. It is nine such strategies and their implementation that we shall explore in detail in the next thirteen chapters. They need to be understood because, for better or worse, they are influencing profoundly the climate in which the people of the United States—and, to a growing extent, the people of the rest of the Western world—live. PART II In Response, Nine Strategies