CHAPTER 4 # There's Always Room for More "Every family needs two homes."—THE DOUGLAS FIR PLYWOOD ASSOCIATION. AS THE MARKETING EXPERTS GROPED FOR WAYS TO KEEP SALES soaring in the face of mounting saturation, one of the first thoughts that struck them was that each consumer should be induced to buy more of each product than he had been buying. The way to end glut was to produce gluttons. But, of course, it would not be put that baldly. Consumers should be provided with plausible excuses for buying more of each product than might in earlier years have seemed rational or prudent. Thus it was that carpet makers announced, through their Carpet Institute, that each family should buy more rugs because "HOME MEANS MORE WITH CARPET ON THE FLOOR." Rug retailers were advised in Home Furnishings Daily that they could expand their sales in three ways: sell more rug per room (the ideal was wall-to-wall); sell more rooms in the house as rooms that deserve coverage by rugs; and "trade up"—selling prospects higher-priced material than they had planned to buy. The makers of one deodorant introduced a he-she kit for husbands and wives, so that they could get two applicators rather than one in each master bathroom. Men previously had tended to use their wives' applicator rather than buy their own. Hosiery manufacturers began trying to sell more pairs of stockings to each American woman by introducing colored stockings. Women were told that their stockings should match whatever costume or accessories they would be wearing. This concept of more-sales-throughmatching took hold in a number of fields. A spokesman for Revlon, Inc., the cosmetics firm, explained that one of the secrets of the company's fabulous success during the late fifties was that it "taught women to match their nail enamel to their moods and occasions, so that they bought more." The major makers of women's swimming suits not only managed to double the average price of suits in a decade, but managed to put more swim suits into each woman's wardrobe. Women who once possessed only one suit were owning several. One of the Big Four swim-suit producers, Catalina, began promoting the idea of having one suit for the morning sun, one for the noonday sun, and a third for the evening sun. And another of the Big Four, Rose Marie Reid, began urging that women use one suit for swimming, one for sunning, and one for "psychology." Makers of eyeglasses set their sights on the goal of selling more spectacles per head. The Optical Wholesalers National Association began promoting the notion that every person wearing glasses needs more than one pair. A spokesman explained: "We want glass wearers to own several pairs now—not only for safety but for style as well." He explained that glasses had definitely become a fashion accessory. "There are plenty of women today," he added triumphantly, "who buy a new pair of glasses to match every new outfit. Style-conscious men own several pairs, too. They buy them for business and sports wear—just like a suit." The concept of color "matching" in order to broaden sales was also used in promoting home accessories. A spokesman for Kleenex tissue announced over a television network that "there's a color for every room in your home." And the Bell System sought to get more telephone extensions in each home by the same there's-a-different-color-for-everyroom approach. American Telegraph and Telephone urged, in fact, that families install a second, entirely new line into the house for extra convenience. A Midwestern telephone company official told me of a study made in motels that showed that telephoning could be increased about 20 per cent by the use of phones in a color other than the conventional black. Apparently bright colors promote an impulse to call someone just for the heck of it. A campaign by the world's largest manufacturer of wedding rings to popularize the "double ring" ceremony greatly increased the sale of gold wedding rings. Several hundred radio commentators and society editors began making special note of the fact if the groom, as well as the bride, wore a nuptial ring. The makers of a number of products for the home concluded that no home was really a home if it did not have doubles in the products they were promoting. The president of Servel, Inc., announced that the American standard of living now called for "two refrigerators in every home." The chief of the washer division of the American Home Laundry Manufacturers Association declared that a well-equipped home should have two washers and two driers. Meanwhile, the Plumbing Fixture Manufacturers Association began promoting the "privazone" home. In a privazone home, each member of the family has his own private water closet. Radio manufacturers disclosed with pride that they had succeeded in selling an average of three radios to every family in the land. Perhaps the ultimate of this two-or-more-of-a-kind concept—which began so humbly in the twenties with the political promise of two chickens in every pot—was the promotion of the idea of two homes for every family. Home builders began pressing the idea. Others joined in. Building suppliers, appliance manufacturers, and advertising agencies excitedly grasped the potentialities inherent in spreading the idea that every family needed a town house and a country house, or a work house and a play house. The marketing possibilities were spelled out by an official of the plywood association in these terms: "The second home is going to . . . provide tremendous markets for everybody in the buildingmaterials field, for appliance manufacturers, builders, and developers, lending agencies, etc. We in the plywood industry are leading the parade." Another leader of the two-house parade was the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency, which began pointing out in business journals the inviting potentialities of the two-house family. "With the two-house family," it said, "America has clearly entered a new age of consumption for household equipment." It pointed out that the twohouse family is likely to have: three or four bathrooms, two to four television sets, two fully equipped kitchens, four to twelve beds, multiples of furniture, linens, rugs, china, etc. And, of course, a two-house family would have to have more than one car. J. Walter Thompson called for an "aggressive advertising and selling" campaign to overcome the public's "habit lag" in sticking with one car when two cars were obviously desired for modern living. One attempt at aggressive re-education was conducted by the Chevrolet company. Its announcer on the Dinah Shore program began talking of those deprived citizens who were victims of "one-car captivity." The essence of the message, as television critic John Crosby assimilated it, was that, "You peasants who own only one car . . . are chained to the land like serfs in the Middle Ages." The way to liberation, of course, was to buy a second car. And business writers reported that the idea was rapidly taking hold. By 1960, one family in six had become a multiplecar owner. In the Los Angeles area, the ratio was far higher. A largescale Eastern farmer tells me that every single one of his farm hands now owns two cars. Some car owners might complain that the streets and highways in many sections of the United States were already agonizingly overcrowded, but marketers felt a great increase in motorcar ownership was needed. J. Walter Thompson found that there was a "latent potential demand" for thirty million additional cars on the road. That would bring the total number of motorcars on the roads up to about ninety million. (Other estimates indicated that at the present rate of economic and population growth there should be four times as many motorcars on United States highways by A.D. 2000!) Another tack that the marketers took was to try to induce Americans to demand more with each product bought. It should be either bigger or more complex, or both, in order to be appropriate for modern living. The goal was to justify a higher price tag. Victor Lebow in his blueprint for "forced consumption" put this imperative of a higher price tag in these words: "The second essential is what we might call 'expensive consumption. ' " Even dolls became bigger and more expensive. The lawn mower offers an excellent illustration of the strategy of upgrading the nation's concept of what is appropriate. A simple-minded, intensely rational person might assume that hand mowers would be increasingly popular today and that power mowers would be almost impossible to sell. After all, lawns are getting smaller all the time. And adult males are feeling more and more the need for physical exercise as they spend more time in sedentary, short-week jobs. They come home from the office beating their chests and growling for exercise. The situation that has developed, however, shows how dangerous it has become to try to anticipate consumer behavior by the application of humorless logic, and ignoring the role marketing strategies may play. The lawn-mower industry was able to convince American males that it was somehow shameful to be seen pushing a hand mower. And power mowers were promoted as a wonderful new gadget. Powermower sales rose seventeenfold in fifteen years! By 1960, more than nine out of every ten lawn mowers sold were powered. Such powered mowers cost from three to five times as much as hand mowers. Furthermore, having a mere motor on your mower was not enough in some neighborhoods. You also needed a seat on it. Hundred of thousands of American males began buying power mowers with seats. These, of course cost ten times as much as a hand mower. A Midwestern auto-accessory chain began using a "save your heart" theme to promote sales of self-propelled power mowers. One trade journal reported that this merchandiser "makes it a practice to trade customers up into higher-priced units." And so the mower industry was able to keep its dollar volume rising in a most satisfying manner. Apparently more advances were still to come. Newsweek carried a prediction that by 1970 electronic lawn mowers would be sweeping over lawns on preprogramed patterns without human attendants. A few months ago, I was present when a technical expert from the British Standards Institution inspected a display of American refrigerators and stoves. He kept shaking his head in amazement. Some of the stoves had twenty-eight dials and push buttons. He smiled. But it was the gargantuan size of the United States products that most puzzled him. "Why so big?" he kept asking. One stove had eighteen inches of empty surface space between burners. "We wouldn't ordinarily want so much space," he said. It was explained to him that Americans had been conditioned to demand a big-looking stove—and to excuse it on the ground of needing work space. We turned to the giant "fridges," as he called the refrigerators. He observed: "We keep in an ordinary pantry many of the things you put in the 'fridge.' " As with most marketing techniques, the strategy of loading more and more of the product onto each consumer was brought to fullest flower in the motorcar industry. Each year during most of the fifties, Detroit doggedly and energetically added "more car per car." The now familiar additions—all costly— took the form of greater bulk, greater power, more power accessories, and more chrome. Chevrolet offered a good case in point. During the thirty-year period ending in 1958, the Chevrolet car grew four feet in length and underwent a fivefold increase in horsepower. Its passenger car had more horses under its hood than many large trucks. Originally few buyers had shown much interest in its most dressed-up, most expensive model, the Bel Air. But over the years the Chevrolet selling staff succeeded in trading up so many prospects to the Bel Air that it became the company's most popular model, and in 1959 the Impala was introduced to top the Chevrolet line. The result of all this customer loading in the motorcar industry was that, by the late fifties, a United States workingman had to work fiftythree hours longer in order to buy its cheaper models than he did a decade earlier. (And this figure does not make any allowance for the greater burden of installment charges in the late fifties; nor does it take into account the far greater cost of upkeep.) As motorcars became heavier and more powerful, the many power accessories quickly sucked the life out of batteries and required expensive replacements. Laurence Crooks, automotive consultant to Consumers Union, summed up the greater wear and tear of the big motorcars that were developed in these words: "Nearly every factor which increases engine output has a price in wear or durability. . . . Multiple carburetors, high-lift valves, stiffer valve springs, bigger manifolds, all take their toll in one way or another." And then there were the once lowly mufflers. The rate at which they collapsed underneath the large, highly powered motorcars became the basis for one of the nation's fastest-growing industries. Mufflers were burning out substantially faster than they had a decade earlier. A halfbillion-dollar industry emerged to replace mufflers. Partly the ravaging of mufflers was due to the higher acidity of high-octane gasoline that was recommended for the high-powered motorcars. Partly it was due to the greatly increased use of dual exhaust systems supposedly required to cope with all those extra horses under the hood. Dual exhausts began protruding from a third of all motorcars sold, and were esteemed as symbols of prestige since they first appeared on very high-priced motorcars. The trouble with the duals was not only that they added to the cost of the vehicle and cost twice as much to replace but also that they corroded faster, especially in stop-and-start city driving. With the duals, mufflers often did not become hot enough to clear out the eroding condensation. But perhaps most important, the boom in mufflers was greatly stimulated by shrewd merchandising. Until the fifties, mufflers had been sold matter-of-factly. Marketers hadn't seen the possibility of promoting them as profitable impulse items for uneasy motorists. Now muffler makers were finding they could often double muffler sales at a service station within a few weeks merely by putting up a curbside sign reminding motorists that their mufflers might need replacing. In two years, Midas, Inc., built up a network of muffler-installation dealers. Aside from the quality of its product, in order to help attract customers on further grounds, it beamed much of its multimillion-dollar advertising campaign at housewives. Midas painted its mufflers a golden color. And it hired psychologists to instruct its installation personnel how to behave in a refined manner around the ladies who would be waiting for their mufflers to be replaced. The greatest toll of the large and complex motorcar, however, was in the way that the land yacht guzzled gasoline and oil. Despite vague open-end claims in the motorcar ads about fuel economy ("up to 15% savings"), gas mileage dropped relentlessly. Tide, the advertising journal, reported that mileage dropped from close to twenty miles per gallon to fifteen miles per gallon in the first eight years of the fifties. The motorcar industry's annual ritual of the Economy Run became an embarrassment. This run had been conceived to prove that the new cars were better than ever. The decline in miles per gallon was obscured for a number of years by the fact that the winners were judged on a tonmile basis. This is the amount of work done by a gallon of gasoline, as in moving a ton of motorcar through one mile. On this basis, the winners usually were multitonned monsters. Popular Science made a long-range analysis of actual miles-per-gallon figures of the races and concluded that by 1958 mileage had "sagged down" to almost 14 per cent below the twenty-year average. And this occurred despite the great advances in the ingenuity of drivers in nursing their motorcars along the course. For the average motorist the mileage decline meant he had to buy approximately one hundred more gallons of gasoline per year. A number of New York City garage managers concluded that in four years their parking capacity had shrunk 15 per cent because of the growth in the size of motorcars. They began applying a surcharge on the biggest of the big motorcars. It was in this setting that the makers of small foreign cars first began making noticeable inroads on the United States market. The Detroit planners had not counted on this factor to upset their controlled market. Until the foreign cars appeared, they had succeeded in frightening Americans away from the idea of a compact car by referring to it in derogatory terms such as "stripped down." As Eric Larrabee put it, in Detroit "the equations are fixed: small equals cheap equals bad, and large equals expensive equals good. Detroit has no way of appealing to the small-car customer without insulting him; it offers him the tail end of the procession, and never lets him forget it." As pressure grew upon Detroit to offer the public the option of buying less ponderous motorcars, one automobile executive reflected the general lack of stomach for meeting such a need when he said: "If the public wants to lower its standard of living by driving a cheap, crowded car, we'll make it."1 And so it was that compact motorcars started emerging from the plants of Detroit's Big Three. Furthermore, they emerged with every contrivable manifestation of exultation. Now citizens were able to read stirring accounts which revealed how the chiefs of some of the major companies had really, in secret, been dreaming of and planning for this great day of offering a compact car for nearly a decade. At first Detroit expected—and undoubtedly hoped—that the compact market would be confined to a modest percentage of the whole market. Any such hopes were dashed as millions of Americans— delighted to be rid of their oversized gas guzzlers without suffering serious social stigma—sought to buy the modest-sized American and foreign-made motorcars. In a sense, the Detroit-built dam broke. There were clearly limits to the power to manipulate public taste. United States compacts and small foreign motorcars began accounting for a third of all sales. Some dealers begged Detroit not to feature the smaller cars so much in advertising because their profit per unit was smaller on the small cars (even though business journals reported that very generous profit allowances had been arranged in the pricing structure). Many marketers of motorcars began taking an exceedingly dim view of the rush to compacts. Printers' Ink reported: "Companies and dealers are both glum about the trend. It means shaved profits per unit on the smaller cars, increased sales effort to move more cars." Some economists expressed concern, too, about what the trend implied for the steel industry. The compacts required a half-ton less steel per car. And they wonder how a drop in gas consumption will influence roadbuilding plans that were based on assumed revenues from taxes. Gradually, however, the motorcar marketers began seeing that the situation was not without promise. They discovered that it might be possible to return to a situation in which the American family would again be spending more dollars each year for its transportation. If the public had the choice of motorcars of all sizes, it should be easier to lure more families into the ranks of the two-car families. It was now perfectly safe and appropriate socially to park a compact car in front of one's house provided one also had a regular-sized car parked there. A Ford engineering executive told a convention of admen that in the days ahead the size and kind of car one owned might not be as important as the number of cars one owned. The marketers also began seeing another basis for optimism. They decided that the prospects were good for gradually raising the price they received by adding size, accessories, and luxury touches to the compacts. Fortune magazine rhetorically asked its executive-type readers in late 1959: "Can the [motorcar] industry still go on increasing its take per unit?" The magazine's answer was a resounding yes. It explained: "There are good reasons why it can. To begin with, the compact versions of the expensive cars doubtless will not be low-priced compacts—any more than the Jaguar sedan, though it is a compact auto, is a low-priced one . . . the industry doubtless will apply the more-carper-car formula to smaller cars as well as to larger autos. . . . many devices may make compact cars more expensive than the 1960 models—such as air conditioning, automatic transmissions, and stationwagon versions of the compacts. . . . Other accessories may well be loaded on even the most austere cars." Some of the other journals with a wide readership among marketers also rang out the hopeful news of trends to come. Business Week reported, "Detroit has started a new lap of the horsepower race, this time with the new compact cars." The Chrysler Valiant, for example, could now be had with 148 horsepower instead of 101 horsepower. Advertising Age quoted a cheerful Buick dealer in Houston as stating: "Having little cars won't make any difference to us. We'll build customers up to a little better car." And U.S. News & World Report predicted that "newcomers in the field will be substantially larger and more luxurious than those now on the market. The present compacts are already adding extra features." And so happy days would come again. But more about strategies to induce us to step up our consumption of motorcars later, when we take up planned obsolescence. Another general tack the marketers took was to try to induce people to get rid of the products they already owned. In its broadest form this took the form of encouraging people to throw things away.