# Progress Through the Throwaway Spirit "/ do love having new clothes . . . but old clothes are beastly. . . . We always throw away old clothes. Ending is better than mending . . ending is better than mending . . . ending is better. . . ." Soft voice of sleep teacher indoctrinating the young while they sleep in Aldous Huxley's Brave New World. IN THE HAIR-RAISING UTOPIA THAT MR. HUXLEY PROJECTED FOR SIX centuries hence, babies come in bottles and the zombie-like citizens move about in doped-up bliss. To keep the industrial machines humming, each citizen is "compelled to consume so much a year." To that end, newness as a trait is cherished. And sleep teachers stress love of newness because they have the responsibility of "adapting future demand to future industrial supply." The dictator of the Utopia, Mustapha Mond, at one point explains: "We don't want people to be attracted by old things. We want them to like the new ones." When Huxley wrote his book in 1932, he was visualizing what might come about in the distant future. But within a quarter century the people of the United States, without any help from dictators or out-andout sleep teachers, were exhibiting a throwaway mood that would tickle even Mustapha Mond. Much of this was deliberately encouraged. The voice of the television announcer—in 1960—chanted, "You use it once and throw it away. . . . You use it once and throw it away." This specific chant was used to promote the sale of a deodorant pad. And a steel company, in a television commercial, showed a pleased housewife dropping a metal can that had contained soft drinks into the wastebasket. No fussing with returns! Residents of the United States were discarding, using up, destroying, and wasting products at a rate that offered considerable encouragement to those charged with achieving ever-higher levels of consumption for their products. A business writer for Time magazine related, as the sixties were about to begin: "The force that gives the U.S. economy its pep is being generated more and more in the teeming aisles of the nation's stores. . . . U.S. consumers no longer hold on to suits, coats, and dresses as if they were heirlooms. . . . Furniture, refrigerators, rugs—all once bought to last for years or life—are now replaced with register-tingling regularity." The new mood of the disposable era was reflected in the pages of the Engineering News Record, which observed: "Nowhere in the world except in the U.S. would a skyscraper office building in sound condition be torn down merely to be replaced by another one." Dennis Brogan has characterized modern Americans as a people "who go away and leave things." The voluptuous wastefulness of modern Americans could be seen not only in their littered parks but in market surveys. The industrial-design firm, Harley Earl Associates of Detroit, reported. "In most households we found there were two to five rolls of Scotch tape—but no one could locate any of them." Americans have developed their own democratic version of sleep indoctrination of the young. There are the soft, insistent commercials the youngsters hear during their weekly twenty-odd hours of television watching. And there are the breakable plastic toys, which teach them at an early age that everything in this world is replaceable. An American sales executive told me of the shock his Dutch mother exhibited at the wastefulness of Americans when she visited his Connecticut home town for the first time. Apparently she could not endure what she saw. On the last day of her visit she took the son triumphantly to the closet of her room. The closet was stacked high with neatly folded metal foil, plastic containers, paper wrappings, and cord. Americans like to think that in the earlier days, if not today, frugality was the rule. The maxim, "Waste not, want not," was often repeated. The pioneers of the United States did cherish and guard their bread pans and iron pots. When they moved on and had to leave furniture behind, they did not drive to the dump as modern Americans do. Instead, they held an auction. Each fabricated item was cherished, perhaps because it was hard to come by. It had what economists call high marginal utility. On the other hand, all through the last half of their history, since A.D. 1800, Americans have been careless with their nation's natural resources such as buffalo and timberlands, perhaps because they once seemed to have so much of them. Louis Jones, director of the New York State Historical Association, told me: "I think prodigality has been a bright-colored thread running through all of our history from the Revolution on." Mr. Jones made the point, however, that in earlier days much greater care was taken to produce "a product that would satisfy a customer for a long time." Durability was esteemed. And the national ideal was to make the most of what one had. Against this background let us take note of some of the efforts that have been made to promote the throwaway spirit in North America recently. Steaks and other meats have appeared in disposable aluminum frying pans. When the steak is done, just throw away the pan along with the nasty old grease. Muffins come in throwaway baking tins. Hungarian goulash began being offered in throwaway plastic boil-in bags. Charles Mortimer, the chairman of General Foods, exulted that Mrs. Consumer was learning to expect "dinners which can be popped into the oven, heated, served in the pan, and the pan tossed into the trash can after dinner!" Even the bother of popping the dinner into the oven apparently was soon to be ended. A sales executive of the Aluminum Company of America announced that the day was at hand when packages would replace pots and pans. Electric food packages were being planned with their own plugs, and single-use cooking containers were being prepared for pre-packaged meats. Pre-prepared, no-fuss, no-mess meals bought at extra cost may make sense for the minority of families where the wife holds a job. But for the great majority of families there was little such justification. Yet all were coaxed to indulge. A number of companies began perfecting new push-button foods that would squirt up out of metal aerosol cans. Under development were such squirtables as omelettes, angel-food cake mix, fruit whips, catchup, barbecue sauce, and spreads for cocktail crackers. More than a hundred million cans of squirtable whipped cream were being sold a year. Just throw away the dead squirt can. One aspect of the aerosol cans of special interest to those anxious to promote higher levels of consumption was that the dead cans often were still not empty of food. The compressed gases inside that have been widely used tend to lose pressure before the containers are empty of food. Packagers speculated on "what the consumer will accept as a reasonably economic amount of the product." <sup>1</sup> In short, how much food could remain inside the dead can without causing resentment or suspicion? My eighteen-year-old son first demonstrated to me the food loss when an aerosol can of chocolate sauce for Sunday-night sundaes seemed to be empty. Disregarding warnings not to "puncture" the can, he hammered a hole in the bottom of the can and retrieved several spoonfuls. In two other instances he retrieved enough whipped cream from apparently empty cans to cover two and three strawberry shortcakes lavishly. Now we whip our own. Fortunes were made as the craving for convenience which Mr. Mortimer referred to swept the nation. A company called Standard Packaging, which specializes in making "disposables," tripled its sales in four years to become a hundred-million-dollar corporation. This company makes trays that can be cooked, bags that can be boiled, bowls and other eating utensils that can be discarded to eliminate dishwashing. Its hard-running young boss, R. Carl ("Hap") Chandler, explained happily: "Everything that we make is thrown away." <sup>2</sup> Sales Management sought to analyze the secrets of Stan-Pak's phenomenal success. One of its headlines offered this clue: "STAN-PAK'S RESEARCH EXPLOITS LAZINESS." It went on to explain that as the company conceived the future, "Tomorrow, more than ever, our life will be 'disposable.' " All this packaging and disposing were not a free dividend to the consumer. In some instances the package was costing ten times as much as the product inside. Salt coming in small throwaway containers costs seventeen times as much as salt bought by the pound. The metal aerosol can with squirt mechanism and chemical propellant adds at least a third to the cost of getting a topping for a sundae. By the time Americans finish paying for all the inviting packaging they are induced to buy, the annual bill is twenty-five billion dollars. That is just the cost of the packaging, the wrapping. It is a figure worth pondering for a moment. Divide it by the number of families in the United States, and you come up with a staggering statistic, one almost beyond belief. The average United States family today spends five hundred dollars of its income each year just for the package! And this apparently is only the beginning. As Mr. Chandler pointed out in referring to the vistas opening for packagers in the food field: "The growth in convenience foods is going to be terrific. We're just at the beginning of the era." Industrial designers were solemnly explaining in trade journals that often the package called for more careful research and planning than the product it contains. The throwaway mood was meanwhile invading many fields far removed from food. Here are some random examples: A throwaway mousetrap housed inside an aluminum shield was being marketed. No messing around with the mouse. Just throw away the whole unit. You don't even have to look at the victim. Rochester Razor, Inc., began selling, in vending machines, a throwaway plastic razor with built-in blade. The complete unit goes into the wastebasket after use. Corporate Research, Inc., placed on the market disposable paper camping equipment, including tents and sleeping bags, for modern campers. One large New York department store advertised paper coveralls— the main point being to throw them out. Millions of Americans, instead of seeking an old-fashioned "lifetime" watch, began buying inexpensive but serviceable watches and then threw them away when they needed repairs, or when a more up-todate model hit the market. A men's clothing chain in New York announced, "Watches have become carefully styled items in a man's wardrobe." It was offering them as accessories. Bud Berma Sportswear, Inc., made an unusual offer to tempt men who already owned a sports jacket. It promised a five-dollar prize to any man buying one of its jackets, provided he mailed in his old jacket for disposal. The firm promised to give it "to some needy person overseas." And it added: "For your generosity to someone in need, you get this luxurious Bud Berma sports shirt in a choice of seven handsome colors" as a bonus. Your author recently lost a dental inlay after accepting a piece of taffy from his daughter. In the emergency I sought the services of a strange dentist in the New England town where I happened to be at the moment. Only two weeks before I had received a thorough checkup from my regular dentist, a man outstanding in his field. The new dentist packed my mouth with gauze and a suction tube to drain saliva. While waiting for his preparation to harden, he began tapping and picking at my other teeth. I could not protest because of all the packings. He announced worriedly that two of my existing fillings were in "bad shape" and needed replacing. He probed around some more among my thirty-odd fillings and then finally declared: "As a matter of fact, it would be a good idea to replace all your fillings. They're getting pretty old. It would save you money in the long run." I made strangled sounds and shook my head violently. He changed the subject. Each year American housewives were throwing away hundreds of pounds of food scraps that used to be fed to dogs. Meanwhile, they were spending a third of a billion dollars for prepared dog food. The most popular, by 1960, was pressure-blown puffed meal chunks. A color consultant from Toronto explained to the Inter-Society Colour Council meeting in New York an ingenious scheme which a client company had conceived for increasing the sale of potato peelers. He began by pointing up a puzzling fact. Although potato peelers "never wear out," enough are sold in two years in his country to put one in every home. What happens to them? He gave this answer. "Investigation reveals that they get thrown away with the potato peelings." One of his colleagues, he added, had then come up with a dazzling plan for helping along this throwaway process. He proposed that their company paint its peelers a color "as much like a potato peeling as possible." However, a potato-colored peeler wouldn't have much eye appeal on the sales counter. They decided to solve that by displaying the peeler on a colorful card. Once the housewife got the peeler home and removed the bright card, the chances that she would lose the peeler were excellent. He explained how this would work to the benefit of the company in these terms: "As most people wrap their peelings in newspaper . . . we figure that if they once lay the knife down, it will disappear and be thrown out. Next year we expect to double our sales." A friend who ordered new kitchen cabinets from a national cabinetproducing company found that the factory had sent wrong-sized doors. A representative immediately ordered new doors. But what about the wrong-sized doors? The representative replied: "Oh, shucks, throw them away! That is cheaper than taking them back." In some cases the consumers have no choice but to be waste makers because of the way products are sold to them. Many paste pots come with brushes built into the cover, and the brushes fail by a half inch to reach the bottom. No amount of wiggling or maneuvering will reach the remaining paste. Thus millions of "empty" paste jars are thrown away with a few spoonfuls of paste still in them. Likewise, millions of "used" tubes of lipstick are thrown away with a half inch of lipstick remaining in the tube because the mechanism will not bring up all the lipstick. And then there are the billions of pills that are thrown away because the druggist's label does not indicate what ailment they were intended to relieve. The label will say "2 pills, 3 times a day" but usually it will not say "For chest congestion," etc. Even the brand names—which are occasionally listed—are not much help. Because of the proliferation of brand-name drugs, there are many thousands of names. I find in my own medicine chest eight bottles of nearly full pills whose labels have no meaning to me or to my wife Virginia. One says "Polaramine," another says "Emprazil," a third says "Niamid—3 each day." Still another merely states, "One, three times a day." And one reads, "2 at start, 2 this evening, then one three times a day." In a less wasteful society it would seem reasonable to expect that the bottles would note the ailment they were prescribed to relieve, and the expected life potency of the pills or fluid contained in the bottles. The throwaway strategy was especially tempting to the makers and sellers of automotive supplies such as spark plugs, since billions of dollars' worth of materials was involved. Sometimes, however, the marketing forces found themselves pulling in opposite directions. For a number of years the American Petroleum Institute urged motorists to throw away their dirty old sludge and install bright-new oil every thousand miles. Motorcar manufacturers, in contrast, have stressed that their gentle cars could nurse oil for a long, long time. In 1959, Ford was promising prospective buyers that they would need to change oil only once every four thousand miles. Later that year, the Petroleum Institute grudgingly made a gesture toward bringing its advice within shouting distance of that being offered by the motorcar manufacturers (some of whom were promoting oil filters). It proposed that motorists change their oil according to a formula that ran like this. In winter change every two thousand miles or every thirty days, whichever comes first. And in summer change every two thousand miles or every sixty days, whichever comes first. Under this formula, the majority of drivers usually would be changing their oil long before the two-thousand mark was reached. Runzheimer & Company reports that with well-managed company fleets oil is likely to be changed somewhere between two thousand and three thousand miles, depending on a number of factors including the grade of oil used. Where sixty-cent oil is used, for example, the change is likely to occur at three thousand miles. The makers and sellers of "permanent" antifreeze—a quarterbillion-dollar market—had got themselves into a particularly awkward spot in their sales claims. In fact, businessmen might find their dilemma poignant. As Sales Management explained it, they were being forced to "un-merchandise their earlier advertising." <sup>3</sup> They were now protesting with quivers of anguish in their voices that the public had taken their "permanent" claim too seriously. It seems that motorists took their claim that antifreeze was "permanent" so seriously that almost half were using their antifreeze for more than one winter. More shocking to the marketers was the discovery in a du Pont survey that almost half of the dealers believed antifreeze was really "permanent." Another 12 per cent wouldn't be pinned down on the subject. The result of all this faith in the permanence of antifreeze was that the sale of antifreeze was slipping. As Sales Management put it: "A large segment of the motoring public swears on last year's antifreeze and the marketers are boiling over. . . . When the marketers unwittingly labeled glycol 'permanent' they oversold the product—and undermined future sales. Many brands are labeled permanent, including some of the top-selling private labels and two of the four manufacturers' makes. Olin Mathieson and DuPont huff and puff about re-use—but Olin calls its glycol product 'Permanent Pyro' and DuPont calls its Zerex 'Permanent Type Anti-Freeze.' " A massive re-education campaign was launched by many antifreeze makers. Some began talking about their "all-winter antifreeze." The gist of the new theme widely sounded was that antifreeze—even "permanent" antifreeze—was good for one winter only. One company made a dealer movie in which bad guy John Carradine rumbled ominously, "Why torture your motor?" However, another company was offering a "full year's" protection at double the cost of glycol. And one brave, company—duPont—revealed it hoped to promote a really permanent antifreeze for about \$7.50 per car. Or at least it is permanent if it doesn't give a warning by changing color—from red to yellow— because of contamination due to cooling-system failure. The most flagrant attempt to promote a throwaway mood was that of the Holland Furnace Company of Holland, Michigan. This company is the largest seller of replacement furnaces in the nation, with five hundred retail branches. In 1958, the Federal Trade Commission ordered Holland to stop the strategy that had been used by some of its salesmen to frighten furnace owners into replacing existing furnaces with new Holland equipment. What follows in the next two paragraphs is taken from reports of the commission. The salesmen involved, according to the Federal Trade Commission, sometimes posed as government or utility inspectors in order to get into the homes. And some misrepresented themselves as "heating engineers." A householder in the St. Louis area testified that two young men came to her house and said, "We are from the government inspecting furnaces," and asked for admission to the house. She refused them permission and called the police. When the men were picked up by the police and questioned, they identified themselves as Holland salesmen. They denied telling her they were government officers but admitted they had told her they were working with the "government fuel-conservation program." Once the Holland canvassers gained access to a home—either by pretext or in response to invitations resulting from company advertisements offering cleaning service or free inspections—"in many instances" they dismantled furnaces without the owners' permission. In some cases, the Federal Trade Commission asserted, "they then refuse to reassemble them when requested, misrepresenting that this would involve grave danger of fire, gas, and explosion." In other cases, it said, they declared that the existing furnaces were beyond economical repair or that companies making them were out of business. "Some of the furnaces condemned by these agents," the Federal Trade Commission order <sup>4</sup> asserted, "were proved to be either in safe condition or safely repairable." The Federal Trade Commission order upheld its examiner's ruling that Holland's "false claims and improper business methods had caused many owners to discard competitive furnaces prematurely in fear of grave danger from continued use of this 'condemned' equipment." The company denied or minimized the various accusations and turned to the federal courts for relief. At this writing—two years and three court decisions later—the matter is still under litigation.