# Progress Through Planned Obsolescence "Once in my life I would like to own something outright before it's broken! I'm always in a race with the junkyard! I just finish paying for the car and it's on its last legs. The refrigerator consumes belts like a goddam maniac. They time those things. They time them so when you've finally paid for them, they're used up."—Lament of Willy Loman in Arthur Miller's Death of a Salesman. WILLY'S LAMENT, OF COURSE, WAS JUST THE INTUITIVE OUTBURST OF a badly exasperated man. But businessmen themselves, when in a joking mood, sometimes ask the definition of the phrase "durable goods." Their playful answer: any products that will outlast the final installment payment. What are the facts about the alleged short life of American consumer goods? And if their life sometimes seems unreasonably short, is it so by design? The recent fascination of many businessmen with "planned obsolescence" has been one of the major developments of the postwar period. Its use as a strategy to influence either the shape of the product or the mental attitude of the consumer represents the quintessence of the throwaway spirit. Financial columnist Sylvia Porter reported in the late fifties that "behind closed doors in the executive suites of giant corporations from coast to coast" the wisdom of pursuing policies of planned obsolescence was being argued. She added: "Never has a debate of this sort—which touches the foundation of the American standard of living—erupted so openly." Even on the floor of the United States Congress a representative from Missouri offered his sympathy to the millions of people "who find their new gadgets of all kinds falling apart in use." The phrase "planned obsolescence" has different meanings to different people. Thus many people are not necessarily defending deliberately shoddy construction when they utter strong defenses of obsolescence in business. The Management Review of the American Management Association, for example, reprinted an article with the headline: "Obsolescence Can Spell Progress." This article referred to the kind of obsolescence that is "a healthy dissatisfaction with doing things less well than they can be done." A somewhat different meaning apparently was involved when Retailing Daily printed the assertion that "it is not only our privilege to obsolete the minimum home and many home furnishings. It is our obligation. We are obligated to work on obsolescence as our contribution to a healthy, growing society." And Brooks Stevens, a leading industrial designer, explained obsolescence planning in these terms: "Our whole economy is based on planned obsolescence, and everybody who can read without moving his lips should know it by now. We make good products, we induce people to buy them, and then next year we deliberately introduce something that will make those products old fashioned, out of date, obsolete. . . . It isn't organized waste. It's a sound contribution to the American economy." Other designers, I should add, disagreed with Stevens' viewpoint. The American people themselves have been conditioned over the years to respond favorably to some kinds of obsolescence. Many might be appalled at the idea of owning a motorcar that would splendidly meet their transportation needs for twenty or thirty years. Webster's dictionary defines obsolescent as meaning going out of use. For our purposes in examining modern marketing practices, we should refine the situation by distinguishing three different ways that products can be made obsolescent. There can be: Obsolescence of function. In this situation an existing product becomes outmoded when a product is introduced that performs the function better. Obsolescence of quality. Here, when it is planned, a product breaks down or wears out at a given time, usually not too distant. Obsolescence of desirability. In this situation a product that is still sound in terms of quality or performance becomes "worn out" in our minds because a styling or other change makes it seem less desirable. The first type of obsolescence—the functional type—is certainly laudable when planned. We all applaud when piston-driven passenger planes are outmoded by swifter, quieter jet planes. We all applaud when the hard-to-see twelve-inch television screen gives way to the twentyone-inch screen. We all applaud when we can dial a number hundreds of miles away rather than work through operators. Many of us applaud when high-fidelity recordings start to give way to stereophonic sound, even though it means doubling much of the equipment. In this last instance, however, it should be noted that there has been—and increasingly will be—overtones of manipulation. Stereo was held back in its development for many years because there was felt to be no urgent need for it. The original patent for stereo was taken out by a Briton in 1931, and soon thereafter some American companies acquired the rights. By the late fifties, however, tens of millions of Americans owned comparatively new phonographs, and the demand for additional new-model hi-fi sets was slowing. In fact, a glut in the pipelines of distribution threatened. A dramatically new product was felt to be needed to force dealers to clear the channels and to induce owners of existing hi-fi sets to feel their product was now inadequate. Stereo was rushed into production to ease the impasse. And stereo, it should be noted, offered the possibility of continuing to create obsolescence for a long time to come. After the market for two-channel stereo is saturated, the producers can switch to three-channel stereo. At these higher levels, however, the obsolescence created is apt to be more of desirability than of function. As a matter of fact, by 1960 several major producers had introduced three-channel stereo equipment. On tape, four-track, five-track, and even eight-track stereo are projected. A trade journal, however, reported it was unable to find any manufacturer who was willing to claim that three-channel stereo was a true technical improvement. But most of them felt the public could easily be influenced by numbers. Let us grant that we are all heartily in favor of the functional type of obsolescence that is created by introducing a genuinely improved product. In this book we shall confine our scrutiny to the two more controversial types of obsolescence creation—of quality and desirability. We shall first take an over-all look at the evidence of the use of obsolescence of quality as a strategy to promote sales. This type of obsolescence—when deliberately planned—is certainly the most dubious of all the types. What is the state of the quality of consumer products in America today? Obviously, in many fields, the quality is good. The makers of men's socks should be applauded for greatly prolonging the life of their product, often by combining nylon and wool. For most men, the exasperation or embarrassment of finding a hole at the heel is becoming a more and more infrequent occurrence. But in many other products significant deterioration appears to have set in, and often by intent. At this point two comments by experts might be noted. The first witness is Gordon Lippincott, one of the nation's leading industrial designers. Mr. Lippincott, co-chief of the firm of Lippincott & Margulies, stated in 1958: "Manufacturers have downgraded quality and upgraded complexity. The poor consumer is going crazy." The other witness is Colston E. Warne, president of Consumers Union, the world's foremost nonprofit product-testing organization. At approximately the same time that Mr. Lippincott spoke out, Mr. Warne expressed his concern about the emphasis developing in recent years on "hidden quality debasement," "built-in obsolescence," and a "growing disregard" for maintaining quality levels. In addition to having obsolescence deliberately built into it to shorten its life, a product may be shoddy for a number of reasons. The shoddiness may be due to haste caused by the strain of bringing out a new model every year. It may be caused by skimping on the product itself in order to feed advertising and sales costs. Or it can be caused by just plain corner-cutting. The point to remember, however, is that all these forms of shoddiness aid in producing obsolescence in the product, and the obsolescence puts the owner into the market for a replacement. If the debasement of the product is not obvious to the owner, or if he has low expectations, there is no serious complication in selling him a replacement. On the other hand, if the debasement becomes conspicuous, the seller is in trouble. Businessmen over the years have developed a variety of phrases to describe that critical point when their product will, or is likely to, collapse. They speak of "the point of required utility," of "time to failure," or "product death date." Establishing the probable lifetime of a product is not too difficult. Often you can do it by determining the life span of its weakest link. The life of a product tends to be as long as that link, especially if that link is difficult to replace. Oliver Wendell Holmes anticipated the work of modern design engineers when he wrote of that wonderful one-hoss shay which was built in such a logical way that on a given day "it went to pieces all at once." Even the best of products, of course, wears out sometime. Therefore a company cannot be legitimately criticized for estimating the death date of its product. It is vulnerable to criticism, however, if it sells a product with a short life expectancy when it knows that for the same cost, or only a little more, it could give the customer a product with a much longer useful life. In such situations one may properly wonder about the company's motives. I should stress that all which follows here does not change the fact that many hundreds of American companies still do their very best to give their buyers a long-lasting product, especially in fields not heavily dependent upon replacement sales. The idea of creating obsolescence of quality through material failure is not a new concept. In the late twenties, Advertising & Selling carried a statement by J. George Frederick on the problem of increasing consumption. He dismissed as a "mere minor stopgap" the proposals of political liberals that more money be put into consumers' hands. A far more powerful lever, he said, was the "principle" for which he had dreamed up the name "progressive obsolescence." This simply meant indoctrinating the people who do have spending money with the habit of "buying more goods on the basis of obsolescence in efficiency, economy, style, or taste." Obsolescence planning was spelled out much more bluntly—and specifically in terms of quality—a few years later in a speculative article entitled "Outmoded Durability" in Printers' Ink (January 9, 1936). Its author was Leon Kelley, identified as an executive of Fishier, Zealand & Co. The article's subtitle was: "If Merchandise Does Not Wear Out Faster, Factories Will Be Idle, People Unemployed." Mr. Kelley explained that man traditionally has cherished the notion that durability is a prime feature of merit in products and that the longer a thing lasts the more completely you realize a return on the money you paid for it. He cited the grandfather's clock that had been in his family for two hundred years and still worked fine. Advertisers, he said, have tended to stress durability of their product as a major feature. This harping on durability, he said, was out of date and should stop. It didn't meet the needs of the times. To illustrate those new needs, he cited a radio repairman who berated him because he still had the same radio after six years, even though "it functions better than ever." The radio man complained, "The trouble with this country is we expect things to last too long. If you're a good 100 per cent American, you ought to buy a new radio!" Kelley also cited a department-store executive who told him that if everyone insisted on long wear there would be few repeat sales. Next, Mr. Kelley mentioned a survey that had been made of the attitudes of men in the home-furnishing field toward durability in collapsible portable chairs. It was found that nine out of ten experts preferred a chair selling at \$1.00, capable of serving the customer approximately one year, to a chair that would cost \$1.25, which might well last for about five years. He concluded that United States marketers faced the task of selling the public away from the deep-rooted idea it had about durability. It could be done, he suggested, either by soft-pedaling durability or by deliberately promoting the idea of "non-durability." He worried whether such a campaign would have unanimous support of the marketers. "Will a few chiselers undercut the majority by screaming 'durability' to the public in spite of the general campaign?" he asked. In any case, he concluded that a trend away from durability had set in and would proceed with "gathering momentum." He said that it would take hard work and study to find the "right answers" to the many complex questions that are raised by this trend. Meanwhile, there was evidence that some companies already were giving thought to modifying the expected lifetime of their products. Certain practices of General Electric came to light during a United States government suit involving General Electric's international agreements in the late thirties.<sup>1</sup> It should be stressed that the incidents that follow occurred during the thirties, when General Electric was under different management from what it is today. In one memorandum introduced as an exhibit during the proceeding, a company engineer outlined to his superior a program for increasing sales by increasing the efficiency and shortening the life of flashlight lamps. He pointed out that progress already was being made. Originally the flashlight lamps outlasted three batteries. Then they were made to last only through two batteries. And now he was proposing that the lamp life be adjusted to last through one battery. "If this is done," he pointed out, "we estimate that it would result in increasing our flashlight business approximately 60 per cent." Another exhibit contained a message that a General Electric official wrote to an official of the Champion Lamp Works notifying him of a decision "to change the life of the 200-watt 110-120 volt PS 30 bulb lamp from 1,000 hours . . . to 750 hours." He added, "We are giving no publicity whatever to the fact that the change is contemplated." And again, in 1939, an exhibit showed a General Electric official wrote to one of the company's licensees, Tung-Sol Lamp Works, notifying Tung-Sol of the following approved change: "The design life of the 2330 Lamp has been changed from 300 back to 200 hours. . . . It is understood that no publicity or other announcement will be made of the change." In the case of lamps it can be argued that one way to increase a bulb's burning efficiency is to shorten its life. (Another way is to increase the quality of materials and the workmanship.) It seems apparent, however, that officials in the cases cited were motivated not only by a desire for greater lamp-burning efficiency but also, quite possibly, by a desire to promote the sale of replacements. A letter was introduced in which a General Electric official pointed out that the customer "is prone to judge quality by life alone." And he added: "We realize that the constant reduction of lamp life that we have been in the process of carrying on has kept the volume of business up, but cannot refrain from giving a word of warning and a suggestion that it is about time to call a halt on this in view of the competitive situation." Automotive designers, too, were apparently becoming intrigued by the possibility of practicing death control on their products. In 1934, two different issues of the Journal of the Society of Automotive Engineers quoted speculative comments by speakers at recent S.A.E. meetings. One stressed the "desirability of building automobiles with a limited life." Another suggested that all the parts of trucks might be designed for "controllable wear" as well as imperceptible wear. The war years temporarily eased the "gathering momentum" away from durability noted by Mr. Kelley. But by the fifties the problem of mounting productivity of consumer goods was again bearing down upon producers. Many of their marketers began talking uneasily about the need for more obsolescence. And business journals pondered the problems involved. The February, 1959, issue of Dun's Review and Modern Industry carried an article by Martin Mayer, author of Madison Avenue, U.S.A. It was entitled: "Planned Obsolescence: Rx for Tired Markets?" Mayer noted one of the discouraging facts in a manufacturer's life when he observed: "The more durable the item, the more slowly it will be consumed." He suggested that manufacturers could make some headway against this dilemma by making the older product seem obsolete (by creating obsolescence of material, function, or style). "The trick isn't foolproof," he warned, "but it ought to work a good part of the time—and perhaps can even be planned, assuring the manufacturer of a large, steadily increasing replacement market." Mayer observed that once the matter of subjective judgment is put aside, "it is clear that a pattern of successful style obsolescence must eventually be reinforced by a decrease in the durability of the product." A number of designing engineers entrusted with shaping United States products meanwhile began showing acute cases of guilty conscience about some of the things they were expected to do. After all, they hadn't been taught during their idealistic days back in college how to build products that would fall apart after an appropriate period of service. When members of the American Society of Industrial Designers met in the mid-fifties, Harvard Professor and Brigadier General George F. Doriot gave them something to chew on by chiding them because of the quality of their products. He told of his own sad experiences as the owner of an electric range that required servicing every six months, an electric hot-water heater that flooded his basement, and a washing machine that jumped and ran around. Professor Doriot charged: "You have been called upon to put a varnish of appearance and attractiveness on things that are going down badly. . . . You are increasing the cost of things and their service. I call that cheapening design, and you will eventually lose your reputation." The engineering journals uneasily mulled the pros and cons of planned obsolescence through materials failure. In April, 1956, Electrical Manufacturing ran a think piece called "Design for Planned Obsolescence." It said that the "lifetime" guarantee, once a potent sales appeal, was losing its charm as restless Americans faced with the need of an expanding economy were in a mood to accept planned obsolescence. "The hard logic of our national economy," it said, "would support the need for a broad policy of planned obsolescence in order to take the maximum advantage of our potential for productivity and technological progress." What does this mean, it asked, "to those men who are responsible for the design engineering of these products? First of all, it means that design for planned obsolescence becomes a legitimate objective." It added that the customer today "will readily purchase an appliance say to serve him no more than two or three or five years, to be replaced at that time by a newer and presumably better model. But he will not accept this limited life for the appliance if he is to be burdened with service and maintenance problems and costs during the same period." It suggested that "civilian" products should be designed the way military products are designed: for "a reasonably short life span" but for dependability during that short life. Another journal which anguished over the problem of obsolescence, and more critically, was Product Engineering. Its editor charged: "The doctrine of 'planned obsolescence' is carried so far that the product can scarcely hold together for shipment. And maintenance is so difficult and unreliable that replacement is easier." A reader of this journal protested planned obsolescence and offered a really drastic proposal. He wrote: "Let's stop all this researching and developing for a while! We're up to our glasses in 'progress' now. . . . We are inundating ourselves with junk. Science devises junk; industry mass-produces it; business peddles it; advertising conditions our reflexes to reach for the big red box of it. To be sure, we are skilled junkmen—but what of us? How far have we advanced? We are junkoriented cavemen!" The most agonizing soul-searching, however, took place in the pages of Design News, a journal for "Product Designers and Engineering Management" during late 1958 and early 1959. And in the process a lot of cats came out of bags. It began when the editorial director, E. S. Safford, offered an editorial entitled: "Product Death-Dates—A Desirable Concept?" Mr. Safford got right down to cases. "It is of marked interest to learn from a highly placed engineer in a prominent portable-radio manufacturing company," he began, that his product is designed to last not more than three years. "Is purposeful design for product failure unethical? The particular engineer in question stoutly defends his company's design philosophy in two ways: first, if portable radios characteristically lasted ten years, the market might be saturated long before repeat sales could support continued volume manufacturing . . .; second, the user would be denied benefits of accelerated progress if long life is a product characteristic." The editor's informant went on to explain that it takes sales to get money in order to develop "better" performance, "better" styling, and "better" prices for products. Editor Safford conceded that the consumer's "ten-year investment in portable radios was substantially higher than it would have been had his first radio lasted." But this "force feeding" of the consumer, the editor continued, had "contributed to progress." The contribution? The consumer had paid out over a ten-year period "three times the amount he would have voluntarily spent for this product—if the product had not been designed for short-term existence." How all this "progress" was producing a "better" price or "better" performance for the product was never quite made clear. "Should engineers resist such a philosophy" if their management specified that it wanted a "short-term product"? Editorial Director Safford did not think they should. He said, "Planned existence spans of product may well become one of the greatest economic boosts to the American economy since the origination of time payments. "Such a philosophy," he continued, "demands a new look at old engineering ethics. Respected engineers have long sought to build the best, or the lightest, or the fastest, or at the lowest cost—but few have been called upon to provide all of this with a predetermined life span. "It is very possible that a new factor is entering the economic scene, through the skill of the engineer. This factor is Time, in a new costume, requiring new techniques, new concepts—perhaps new ethics. "Is this concept bad? We don't think so. Progress in science is accelerating at an exponential rate, and the beneficiaries should be the underwriters." This call for a re-examination of "old ethics" and the development of "perhaps new ethics" which would countenance death-dating of products hit some raw nerves and brought down a squall of comments on the editor's head. Reactions came from all over the nation and from engineers and executives working with both large and small companies. (Some of the larger: Whirlpool Corporation, Remington Rand, General Electric, and Fairchild Aircraft & Missiles.) The General Electric man disagreed "in principle" with the editorial but liked it and called it "quite stimulating." On the other hand, the Remington Rand man expressed extreme annoyance. Another engineer congratulated the magazine for raising "this tremendously significant and important subject of product death rates. Whether desirable or not, everyone knows that the concept of limited-life product exists." Several of the letter writers offered cautious agreement with the thesis of the editorial. They tended to take a let's-be-realis-tic attitude. The Fairchild man thought it "unfortunate" that the nasty phrase "planned obsolescence" had been hung on a type of engineering that "is practiced by nearly all design groups, in all fields, under the guise of economy or efficiency." In designing airplanes, he pointed out, "it is essential that the component or structure which has the least (but acceptable) expected service-life be used as the criterion against which the service life expectancy of every other component is judged. This may be termed 'planned obsolescence' or it may with equal honesty be termed 'Efficient Design.' In short it is wasteful to make any component more durable than the weakest link, and ideally a product should fall apart all at once. . . ." The Whirlpool engineer-executive likewise made the point that "without a design-life goal, some parts of the product might last far longer than others and incur a needless cost penalty in the process. Setting the actual design-life objective is certainly a policy issue faced by a company's top management. . . . It would undoubtedly vary from one product to another and perhaps be reviewed and changed from time to time as economic or other conditions change. In my experience, a tenor fifteen-year design-life goal is much more common than the threeyear life mentioned for one product." A reader might wonder why a product's life expectancy should change simply because "economic or other conditions" change. Another let's-be-sensible letter writer pointed out that a major electrical company builds industrial fluorescent light bulbs so that all bulbs burn out at approximately the same time. "This makes it economically practical to change all the bulbs in one area of a building just before they burn out. It seems to me that we could use a lot more of this type of research." The majority of the engineers and executives reacting to the editorial, however, seemed angry and bewildered. They appeared to have little enthusiasm for the "new ethics" they were being invited to explore. One said he was "shocked." Another said, "I boiled." A third snorted, "Ridiculous." A fourth called planned obsolescence "a spreading infection." A fifth said, "It is pretty sad when not only manufacturers but a nationally circulated magazine such as Design News takes a 'customer be damned' attitude." A sixth suggested, "It is even a crime against the natural law of God in that we would waste that which He has given us." And a seventh—an engineer of the Itek Corporation—sneered, "Please—let 'em last at least as long as the installments! Which they often don't." The objections to designing death dates into products were primarily three: 1. Death-dating might give engineering a black eye. Jack Waldheim of Milwaukee—who, when the going got hot, was invited to write a "guest editorial"—said, "Such sophism on the part of the spokesmen for our profession can kill with distrust the public respect for our skill. . . . We [would be] placing ourselves in the position of expertly skilled con men." 2. Death-dating would stultify imagination and creative ability. Arnold Johnson of Loewy Hydropress complained that the United States appeared to be turning "its engineers into destroyers; destroyers of their own creativity to satisfy the market. This surely will lead to the destruction of the engineers' ability to create." 3. Death-dating was cheating the customers out of hard-earned money. Harold L. Chambers of Remington Rand observed: "I greatly doubt that any one of us [designers] would wish to apply this 'principle' of planned short-term failure to his own purchases of home, auto, piano, and other durable goods involving considerable expense. Why, then, support pressing this principle on 'someone else'?" Another letter writer wondered how the death-date planners themselves would like to find they had bought a pencil with one-fourth inch of lead in it. Several expressed the opinion that if engineers did engage in designing products for a given life expectancy, then ethics should compel them to insist that those death dates be printed on the product. One was not optimistic that sales departments would permit that. Managements might fear, he said, that such information would be "misunderstood" by consumers.