# Planned Obsolescence of Desirability "Fashion is a form of ugliness so intolerable that we have to alter it every six months."—OSCAR WILDE THE TECHNIQUE OF MAKING PRODUCTS OBSOLETE BY DESIGNING THEM to wear out or to look shoddy after a few years has limited utility. This limit on the usefulness of planned quality obsolescence inspired marketers to search also for other ways to render existing products obsolete. The safer, more widely applicable approach, many soon concluded, was to wear the product out in the owner's mind. Strip it of its desirability even though it continues to function dutifully. Make it old-fashioned, conspicuously non-"modern." As Paul Mazur pointed out, "Style can destroy completely the value of possessions even while their utility remains unimpaired." Ideally, of course, it would be most satisfying to create this obsolescence in the mind by bringing out a substantially better functioning product. But in fast-paced modern marketing there is very often little new, basically, that can be offered. The manufacturer can't wait for the slow workings of functional obsolescence to produce something really better. Or he feels he can't. So he sets out to offer something new anyhow, and hopes that the public will equate newness with betterness. Fortunately for him, mid-century Americans are prone to accept that equation. The challenge in using this second form of obsolescence creation as a strategy is to persuade the public that style is an important element in the desirability of one's product. Once that premise is accepted, you can create obsolescence-in-the-mind merely by shifting to another style. Sometimes this obsolescence of desirability is called "psychological obsolescence." Designer George Nelson bluntly summed up the challenge of producing the appearance of change when he stated, in Industrial Design: "Design . . . is an attempt to make a contribution through change. When no contribution is made or can be made, the only process available for giving the illusion of change is 'styling.' In a society so totally committed to change as our own, the illusion must be provided for the customers if the reality is not available." Market researcher Louis Cheskin of the Color Research Institute is another knowledgeable observer who spoke frankly of the lack of significant improvement in United States products. He explained: "Most design changes are made not for improving the product, either esthetically or functionally, but for making it obsolete." Mr. Cheskin made what he felt was an important distinction between planned obsolescence of quality and planned obsolescence of desirability as far as conscience is concerned. He frowned on planned obsolescence of quality as antisocial and also dangerous. "We know a company," he continued, "that actually produced a product for the home to break down in two to three years. It broke down in less than a year. That was bad for the company." On the other hand, he contended that planned obsolescence of desirability—or "psychological obsolescence"—was "socially justifiable because it redistributes wealth." Industrial designer J. Gordon Lippincott, on the other hand, appeared less certain of the justification of planning obsolescence through such devices as the annual model change. "Industrial designers today," he said, "have become commercial artists rearranging a lot of spinach to come up with a new model. If we eliminate yearly models, we put a premium on better design. If you're going to live with something a long time, it has to be designed more subtly." In contrast, he said, contemporary gaudy styling "loses its glamour only one notch slower than a streetwalker at dawning." All the emphasis on style tends to cause the product designers and public alike to be preoccupied with the appearances of change rather than the real values involved, and also tends to force more and more extravagance in the design as the designers grope for novelty. The famed Parisian couturier of the twenties, Paul Poiret, observed: "All fashion ends in excess." In countries such as Switzerland, where designers must still produce forms that are not quickly dated, they shun the excessive use of ornamentation or abstract form. A producer of products can bring about a pronounced style change in several ways. For example: He can change the predominant color used. In the late fifties, a great deal of work was done to groom colors for future leadership. In some instances, the "color forecasting" done by industry consultants strongly suggested collaboration if not conspiracy. Consumer Reports related, in the late fifties, the success that color consultants for a leading plastics producer had been having. In 1955, the consultants had "forecast that pink would be the leading color. It was. In 1956, turquoise was the predicted leader. It was. This year the prediction was lemon yellow," and it added that if the sale of lemon-yellow baby bathtubs, wastebaskets, bowls, and such could be trusted, then the forecasters were again right on top of the trend. The producer can change the degree of ornamentation, as from severely plain to gaudy or ornate. A prototype for this kind of change was offered by the classic Greek columns, which evolved from the simple Doric through the slender, ornamented Ionic, to the excessively ornamented Corinthian. Or to take another classic model, after the Middle Ages the style of buildings and their furnishings moved from the bold, crude, clean-lined Renaissance style to baroque, characterized by elegant curves, and then on to rococo, with its fantastic mass of curlicues. These changes took centuries and evolved normally. Modern designers began striving to propel the public through comparable swings of style for their particular products within the span of a few years. Or, finally, the producer can change the profile, as when he moves the tail fin or hemline up or down, or changes his basic emphasis from vertical to horizontal lines. In the fifties, designers in a great many fields earnestly studied the obsolescence-creating techniques pioneered in the field of clothing and accessories, particularly those for women. Women's clothing and accessories, by 1960, had become a twelve-billion-dollar industry, much of it created by obsolescence planning. As Mr. Cheskin observed: "Every industry tries to emulate the women's fashion industry. This is the key to modern marketing." The women's fashion field was ideal for leading the way in planned obsolescence of desirability because here psychological wants have been most rampant. Heine noted long ago that "when a woman begins to think, her first thought is of a new dress." For centuries women have craved for an excuse for a new dress, and so have become coconspirators with the dress marketers. Only those women in the very lowest and very highest social classes in the United States have actually come close to wearing out their dresses in recent years. When a woman already has a closetful of good-as-new dresses, the best excuse she can offer her husband (who usually considers himself financially hard-pressed) for further splurging is that every dress she owns is out of style. In recent years the dressmakers have stepped up the pace of style obsolescence, so that by 1960 fashion ran through a full cycle every seven to ten years. Women's suits were following a fairly tight ten-year cycle. The seven-to-ten-year cycle was acknowledged by style consultant Tobé, who is as close as anyone to being the dictator of style in the United States. Thousands of women's-wear stores depend upon her for guidance. As early as the thirties, an executive of Filene's in Boston was calling for the creation of more obsolescence in women's clothing "to take up the slack." The most forthright statement of the widely felt need for stepped-up obsolescence of style was made in 1950 to several hundred fashion experts meeting in Manhattan. The speaker was B. Earl Puckett, chairman of Allied Stores Corporation. Basic utility, he said, "cannot be the foundation of a prosperous apparel industry. . . . We must accelerate obsolescence. . . . It is our job to make women unhappy with what they have. . . . We must make them so unhappy that their husbands can find no happiness or peace in their excessive savings." And the following year, Alfred Daniels, merchandising executive for New York's Abraham & Straus, confided to businessmen in The Harvard Business Review that he had learned to promote, more or less continuously, new things for women. "Anything new," he said, just as long as it was in fair taste. In the trade, he said, this was called "running up and down stairs." The trick, he explained, was to "get a lot of fashion cycles working" within the general trend, which some say is more difficult to manipulate. As an example he explained that there may be an "Oriental influence" taking place within the general trend in apparel design for women. The fashion merchant will know about this trend, but "he doesn't need to know how it came about. If he is curious he can call up some fashion expert, who may tell him it is a result of pressure by Mongolian idiots." Mr. Daniels added with no evident regret: "Today the fashion cycle moves so quickly it is a blur." As for the practice of taking the hemline up and down, it is somewhat more difficult to create obsolescence by taking the hemline up than it is by lowering it. When you are going upward with the hemline, women who are durability-minded or who have stubborn husbands may get out their shears and each season take an inch or so off the bottom of their skirts. To cope with this tendency, a New York fashion advertiser explained to me, you need to do something else while you are raising the hemline. So you widen the waist. Thus American women had the "sack" look—or the chemise—while the hemline was being raised for them in the mid-fifties. Once the designers had reached the maximum height that decency permitted, they ameliorated the ghastly sack look by moving into the high-waisted "Empire" style and then started the hemline down again. And from the high-waisted Empire they quickly moved to the low-waisted look. Meanwhile, designers were broadening the shoulders to create obsolescence. Since shoulders had been narrow, with little material available, there wasn't much that a woman could do to fix over her existing dresses. Bathing-suit makers had a somewhat different way of creating obsolescence. A buyer for Dallas' Neiman-Marcus explained why the bikini would be the big item for 1960: "The well-traveled waistline has been going up and down since fashion de-emphasized the bosom, and the spotlight is now on the navel." Women's shoemakers meanwhile were creating not only obsolescence but havoc by promoting the pointed-toe shoe with its accompanying manifestation, the spike heel. The pointed toe was deplored by doctors and the pin-point heel by the National Safety Council. An Oklahoma scientist has calculated that the spiked heel gives the woman's weight a focused impact equivalent to that of an elephant for a given spot hit by the heel. Tile floors began breaking up under the impact across the nation. It might be noted that considerable success was also being achieved in creating obsolescence in the engagement and wedding rings that lovers give their betrothed. Old-fashioned people might still hold to the idea that such rings should be cherished till death parts the couple. But credit jewelers had different ideas and succeeded in persuading hundreds of thousands of married women to trade in their "old rings for new-styled ones." Cosmetic makers, too, were busily introducing style concepts in their selling. One of the secrets of the success of Charles Rev-son, founder of Revlon, was that he brought fashion to nail polish with widely publicized changes of styles in shading every six months. The shades he unveiled every six months made his old shades obsolete. At one early stage, for example, he sold women on boldness in nail enamel, then subsequently unsold them on bold in favor of muted enamel. Mr. Revson once explained to me: "Women can take to new things faster than men do. That spells opportunity to you." He said with some scorn that men are more stubborn about accepting style changes. Men have been the despair of aggressive marketers as they have, in vast numbers, dropped vests and hats and have insisted on wearing their shoes until they are literally worn out. Now, the men's apparel industry has moved rather spectacularly to try to copy the obsoleting techniques used so successfully in women's apparel. The promoters of style swings for men had far to go to match the style change every three months achieved in the women's fashion field, but they had succeeded in achieving a major change for men once a year. It used to take four or five years to see a major change. The growing preoccupation of the makers of men's wear with "forced" obsolescence was revealed in a report on the forty-first convention of the National Association of Retail Clothiers and Furnishers in 1959. It said: "Although only one speaker brought the subject into the open, forced obsolescence in men's clothing and accessories was a behind-the-scene issue. . . . Several representatives of clothing manufacturers suggested their industry could profitably follow the lead of the women's-wear industry and create obsolescence by more frequent style changes." <sup>1</sup> A few months later, the president of the Reliance Manufacturing Company, in a talk to his salesmen, stated that the "demands" of style obsolescence had become "the major marketing trend in men's wear today." In fast succession during the mid- and late fifties and early sixties, men were led through the gray-flannel-suit phase, to the charcoal gray, to the Ivy League look, to the cutaway-style Continental look. Ties and lapels became visibly narrower, collars stubbier. Padded shoulders disappeared, as did the loose-falling jacket. An analyst for The New York Times concluded that by 1960 "a man wearing a suit and furnishings produced a decade ago would appear completely out of style." One afternoon recently, your author had to buy a hat and raincoat. At the store where the raincoat was to be bought, the clerk purred: "Would you like the short new length, or the old regular length?" (I took the "old regular.") And at the hat store the clerk tried to explain to me: "Hat brims are shorter this year." A few days later, I read a statement by the president of the Hat Corporation of America, who said: "To make men part with their money, the only thing to sell is fashion. . . . We've got to keep them busy changing their hats." Men's shoes, too, were finally being planned for obsolescence. The Journal of Commerce quoted shoe manufacturers as stating that "we will be making shoes for men, women, and youngsters so distinctive that anyone who clings to the old styles will be conspicuous." Low-cut brogues were being replaced by tapered high risers. The aim was to provide what the manufacturers called their first obsolescence factor in thirty years. The Leather Industries of America, in fact, began a national campaign to persuade women to buy shoes as gifts for their husbands. Its director agreed that up until recently such a notion in gift-giving would have been inconceivable because men's shoes were "dull." But he added: "Today, men's shoes rival women's in fashion changes. A woman can be convinced that her husband is badly dressed if he wears conventional shoes all the time." In 1960, the head of the House of Worsted-Tex, one of the nation's largest makers of men's clothing, happily reported that men had been given an entirely different look in a mere five years. He said, "They no longer want just a suit. They want a certain look of elegance, smartness, and success." He added that with the rapid acceleration of new models the industry was finally achieving the style obsolescence it had so long sought. And he concluded that the industry should be prepared to accept the increased costs "that go with such comparatively rapid style changes." Apparently, at least some of these costs were to be passed along to the consumer. The price of suits went up an average of five dollars within a year. Even pre-teen boys' shoes were slated for obsoleting. They were being designed away from their "sexless" look to a "real nervous" look of flashy casualness. Meanwhile, the obsolescence planners were going to work on children's clothing. Women's Wear Daily <sup>2</sup> counted up three factors working to assist the marketers of children's wear at back-toschool season. Factor One was the growing birth rate. Factor Two was the fact that "children still outgrow their clothes." Factor Three was "the advantage of styling obsolescence." The last factor, the journal said, "must be dramatized, utilized, and publicized for all it's worth." And marketers "must pull out all stops." Quite possibly the recent mood of the American people encouraged the promotion of forced obsolescence of desirability in a variety of fields. Louis Cheskin suggests that psychological obsolescence is a symptom of our times related to the prevalence of "boredom, lack of self-expression, absence of free and truly friendly communication between neighbors and friends, and a general lack of rational values." The Chicago Tribune's market researchers in their studies of the people in the teeming suburbs found that "the inhabitants of new Suburbia are vitally concerned with taste and style." And housing consultant Stanley Edge observes that the new suburbanites "want to go along with the rest of the crowd." On the other hand, the idea of promoting style obsolescence regardless of the public's particular mood undoubtedly struck some hardheaded manufacturers as dictated by logic. Periodic style changes in a product not only create new potential customers but put the nation's merchants on the spot to increase their sales of the product in question. The restyled product can have the effect of stimulating the dealers by persuading them that they have something new to sell. Also, periodic style changes enable the manufacturers to keep closer control over the sales quotas of their dealers and to force the dealers to launch crashselling campaigns to clear out their back rooms of old models during the last weeks before the new models are introduced. For all these reasons the techniques of forced obsolescence of desirability pioneered in the apparel field were soon widely copied by the makers of an astonishing variety of goods, hard and soft. We have, then, two controversial marketing strategies based on the creation of obsolescence. One is the creation of obsolescence of quality. The other is the creation of obsolescence of desirability. (In addition, there is the obsolescence created by genuine gain in function, which, as noted, we all applaud.) Let us now look at two fields where the two controversial forms of obsolescence creation have been most energetically attempted. One is in the home and its furnishings. The other is in the motorcar industry. We will consider the motorcar industry first, since this industry is widely regarded as the keystone of the American industrial economy, and since literally billions of dollars a year are spent in obsolescence creation, particularly of desirability.