# How to Outmode a \$4,000 Vehicle in Two Years "One of the strangest, yet best recognized, secrets of Detroit is 'planned obsolescence'—a new model every year."—BUSINESS WEEK. AN AUTO-PARTS DEALER IN SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, OFFERED ME THE opinion that as far as he could figure the United States motorcar had become "a women's fashion item." And an advertising executive working on a motorcar account confessed: "You want to know what sells cars today? It's style, period!" The advertisements certainly seemed to spell out his conviction. Some samples: Ford: "Nothing Newer in THE WORLD OF STYLE"—or later, "Vogue magazine says Ford is a Fashion Success." Chevrolet: "Styling That Sets a New Style" De Soto: "Best Dressed Car of the Year" Oldsmobile: "Start of a New Styling Cycle." When the new 1960 Pontiac was unveiled, The New York Times described its sculptured lines—"a horizontal V front"—and added this observation: "Emphasis is almost entirely on styling, for there are no major mechanical changes." The automobile industry was the first major group to become fascinated with the increased sales that might be achieved by imitating the women's-fashion stylists. Decades ago, General Motors took the automotive leadership from Henry Ford I by successfully insisting that competition be on the basis of styling rather than pricing. Mr. Ford in fifteen years had brought the price of his Model T motorcar down from \$780 to \$290, by sticking to a basic design except for minor changes. Such fanatical dedication to the ideal of an ever-lower price tag made competition on the basis of price most unattractive. Competitors such as General Motors did not relish trying to match Old Henry in either production know-how or pricing, so they emphasized a yearly change and a variety to choose from. In the twenties and thirties, significant technological innovations such as balloon tires, shock absorbers, and four-wheel brakes were available almost every year to captivate the public. By the early fifties, however, the automobile industry was finding itself with fewer and fewer significant technological improvements that it felt were feasible to offer the public. Consequently, at all the major automotive headquarters—Ford now included—more and more dependence was placed on styling. One aim was to create through styling "dynamic obsolescence," to use the phrase of the chief of General Motors styling, Harley Earl. The motorcar makers began "running up and down stairs," as fashion merchandiser Alfred Daniels put it. "New" became the key word as the manufacturers sought to make car owners feel like old fuds in any vehicle more than two years old. When the 1957 motorcars were launched, Chrysler revealed that it had "The Newest New Cars in 20 Years." Nash had "The World's Newest . . . Car." And Pontiac was "Completely New From Power to Personality." A columnist for Advertising Age noted that Buick—which he called the least changed of the new models—had used the word "new" twenty times in an advertisement. He added: "We find it difficult to assume that such complete and utter nonsense is justified by the need to sell 7,000,000 cars in 1957. If our national prosperity is to be founded on such fanciful, fairyland stuff as this, how real and tangible can our prosperity be?" That, indeed, seemed a fair question. And glory be to an advertising-industry man for raising it! The intensified preoccupation with obsolescence-through-styling brought new power to the automobile stylists and more than a little grumbling from engineers, who felt they were receiving less and less attention when it came to fixing the format of automobiles. General Motors' Mr. Earl defined the stylist, incidentally, as "a man who is dissatisfied with everything." At Ford, styling was taken away from engineering and made a separate department. The \$200,000-a-year head of this styling department, George W. Walker—"the Cellini of Chrome"—was at one time a stylist for women's clothing. When the 1958 models were launched, he frankly conceded that he designed his cars primarily for women. "They are naturally style conscious," he said, and even though they may not drive the car in many cases they seem to have a major say in the choice of a new car. When the president of General Motors found himself testifying before a Senate subcommittee in the late fifties, he alluded to the "application of fancification to our automobiles." At another sitting he said, "Styling has become increasingly important in determining the share of the market." Let us pause and examine in some detail just how "fancification" and other styling devices were systematized to produce obsolescence of desirability in the traveling machines made in the United States. To comprehend the strategic mapping going on behind all the commotion about styling, we need first of all to understand the shell game Detroit plays with the public. The body shell is crucial to obsolescence planning. If motorcar salesmen had their way, automobile makers would issue a vehicle that at least looks brand new each year or half year. Unfortunately for them, it costs many, many millions of dollars for retooling to overhaul a motorcar's physical form in any fundamental way. Consequently, even in seeking the superficial outer appearances of change, the motorcar makers have depended to a large extent upon illusion created by changes of decoration rather than of the body shell. As recently as 1956, the Detroit motorcar makers customarily made a major overhaul in their shell only every third year. During the two intervening annual models they simply rejiggered grilles, lights, fenders, and so on. By 1957, the industry was heading toward an overhaul of the shell every second year. One year was becoming known as the year for "basic" change and the other the year for the "trim" change. And by 1958, insiders were whispering the news—stunning to competitors—that General Motors was going to overhaul the shells of its five motorcars every single year. Each car was to be a new car each year. General Motors was able to achieve this break-through by an interesting expedient made possible by its gargantuan size. It chose to create a new look for its five cars each year by sacrificing some of the distinctiveness in the appearance of each of the five, Chevrolet, Pontiac, Oldsmobile, Buick, Cadillac. (This was before the compacts.) In short, all General Motors cars would bear more than a little family resemblance. The bold decision was made to bring out a brand-new shell each year and to use it for all five cars. Almost all models of all five cars each year would have substantially the same body. The basic body shell was to be stretched amidship about three inches for some of the big Cadillacs and Buicks. Later, there were reports that the three "luxury" compacts, which General Motors began unveiling in late 1960, would also have their own common body shell. When General Motors' five standard-size cars for 1959 were unveiled, Joseph Callahan, the engineering editor of Automotive News, reported that "at least 12 important stampings are identical on all 5 cars." 1 Among the twelve he mentioned were a number of door panels, the upper back panel, three cowl panels. "The big advantage of the common body," he explained, "is that the manufacturer of a multiple line of cars can save some of the millions it annually spends to create style obsolescence." Obviously the major hazard in such an approach was the possible appearance of sameness in all General Motors motorcars. Action was taken to reduce this hazard by attaching different trimmings to the basic shell. Strips of painted metal were attached to the doors to produce distinctive sculptured looks. And Callahan added: "Differences also were produced by using a variety of chrome trim, rear deck lids, quarter panels, bumpers and bumper guards. Of course, many interchangeable parts are reworked for different cars and models. Reworking is achieved by changing the location of holes, making minor changes of shape, attaching extra pieces, etc." Automotive insiders began speculating—and still are—whether the less gigantic Ford and Chrysler companies would be able to follow General Motors' all-new-shell-every-year program. A Senate subcommittee report on "Administered Prices" in the automobile field expressed concern about General Motors' move. It stated: "General Motors . . . alone has the financial resources to play this form of nonprice competition to the full: all other companies have good cause to be deeply alarmed over the future." <sup>2</sup> Meanwhile, advertising journals surmised that eventually the automobile industry might be able to reach a new-car-every-six-months cycle of innovation. How could the stylists know what shell to use when they had to design at least three years ahead of the car's unveiling? The styling experts at General Motors held an advantage in trying to anticipate— without exercising more than moderate clairvoyance—what shell or silhouette was likely to be considered smart-looking by the public three years hence. General Motors bought about half of all automobile advertising. Since the silhouette had to be frozen so far in advance of unveiling, General Motors was aided in securing a favorable response from the public three years later by its superior image-building power. As the Senate report pointed out: "Because of its great sales volume it [General Motors] has an immense impact in framing consumer attitudes toward style changes." During Senate hearings George Romney, president of the then-small American Motors, which pioneered the American-built compacts, testified to General Motors' power to mold public taste when he talked about the wrap-around windshield—and the "millinery" aspect of car making. He said that if a small company had introduced the wrap-around, it probably would have been a flop. It took a big company to swing it. Familiarity, he said, brings acceptance. Mr. Romney then made this remarkable comment: "Now, Senator, in this millinery aspect, in the fashion aspect, a company doing 45 to 50 per cent of the business can make an aspect of car appearance a necessary earmark of product acceptance by the public just as a hat manufacturer—a woman's hat manufacturer—who sold 50 per cent of the hats would have a much easier time of making all other hat manufacturers put cherries on their hats if the cherries were decided by it to be the fashion note for this year." (Mr. Romney spent several heartbreaking years trying to interest the American public in the rationality of compacts and probably succeeded only because of the dazzling logic of his case—and the fact that many American sophisticates had turned to small foreign cars for relief from Detroit's gaudy giantism. This made it psychologically safe for Americans to be seen in small cars.) During most of the fifties, the General Motors stylists decided that the trend in silhouettes should be toward cars that were ever longer, ever lower, and ever wilder at the extremities. By 1959, one automobile executive was confessing: "In length we have hit the end of the runway." A Chicago official estimated that just getting cars back to the postwar length would release eight hundred miles of street space for parking. There was no question, however, that millions of Americans still wanted the biggest-looking car they could get, particularly if they lived in wide-open areas where parking was not a serious and chronic problem. Detroit producers who tried to bring out cars that defied the direction in styling General Motors had set—such as Chrysler in the early fifties—were badly mauled. By the late fifties, Poiret's law that all fashion ends in excess was indubitably being demonstrated in the automotive field. The Big Three stylists were speculating how many more inches they could lower the silhouette before snapping human endurance and overstraining their own ingenuity. A four-wheeled vehicle can be squashed only so far. They used smaller wheels. They sacrificed rigidity. Some of them spread the wheels still farther apart as the only way left to get the engine lower. Meanwhile, the hump down the middle grew. The joke spread that the front seat of the new wide, wide cars could hold two grownups and a midget. One reason General Motors accepted the revolutionary idea of putting a rear-end motor in its Corvair was that this helped solve the hump problem. As early as 1957, Automotive Industries reported that the low silhouette had become so low that "many people feel we have reached bottom." It added, however, "There is a feeling that stylists are aiming even lower." The sight line of drivers had dropped nine inches below the sight line of prewar autos. The following year, The Harvard Business Review carried an illuminating paper on product styling by Dwight E. Robinson, professor of business administration at the University of Washington. His investigations had taken him, among other places, to Detroit's secretive studios for styling. He reported: "Stylists recognize that the extreme limits on lowness imposed by the human physique are only a few inches away and [will] come close to realization in the 1960 models." By 1959, Pontiac's Bonneville hardtop stood just four and a half feet high, a full foot lower than the Pontiac of a decade earlier. Some drivers of late-model makes of cars—where seats were nearly a half foot closer to the floor than they had been a decade earlier—reported they were wearing bicycle clips to keep their pants cuffs from dragging on the floor. People also began discovering that sitting in a low-seated car throws more of the weight onto the end of the spine, a more tiring position for long trips. In July, 1959, The Wall Street Journal reported an astonishing incident that indicated the style swing must certainly finally be approaching its nadir. At General Motors' own annual meeting, shareholders stood up and lamented their personal difficulties in trying to work their bodies into late-model General Motors cars. One man from New Jersey exclaimed, "I bumped my knee and my head getting into" a 1959 Oldsmobile. He was received by a burst of applause. An average-sized man from Massachusetts exclaimed that he found he couldn't sit in a 1959 Buick with his hat on. And he added: "It's a disgrace for a woman to have to get in and out of such low cars." The reporter commented that General Motors' Chairman Frederic G. Donner "listened impassively and without comment" to these laments. Six months earlier, the same Mr. Donner was quoted in Sales Management as supporting what it referred to as "artificial obsolescence." Mr. Donner was reported stating, "If it had not been for the annual model change, the automobile as we know it today would not be produced in volume and would be priced so that relatively few could afford to own one. Our customers would have no incentive or reason to buy a new car until their old one wore out." He clearly was concerned about giving car owners "an incentive or reason" to turn in their old cars before they wore out physically. Meanwhile, stylists were striving to justify the new low, low cars on high philosophic or sound functional grounds. A Chrysler stylist told a Detroit gathering of the Society of Automotive Engineers that the low silhouette was all a part of a broad trend to the "low look" in contemporary design. He cited everything from ranch houses to sofas. Others cited the low center of gravity in the new cars as a great aid in cornering. Actually, the banked curves of most of the recently built highways made this a puny plus factor. As for the trend to wildness at the extremities, this was evidently related stylistically to squashing down the midsection. If you believed the motorcar advertisements, you assumed there was sound functional reason for the fantastic outcropping of tail fins on motorcars in the late fifties. The fins were said to stabilize a moving car in a crosswind. Professor Robinson commented: "I found few designers in Detroit willing to say there is much scientific support for these claims." Instead, Professor Robinson concluded that the fins began jutting up on the drawing boards as the stylists sought to push the midsection lower and lower. He asserted: "The analogy between this squashing effect and tight lacing at the waist and expansion of the skirt in the crinoline era is almost irresistible." He went on to say, "The tail fin— supposedly derived from the airplane tail—may be interpreted as the last resort of over-extension, an outcropping that quite seriously serves much the same purpose as the bustle or the train." By the time the 1961 models were appearing, the retreat from the long, low look had begun. Tail fins on almost every make of car— evidently by common consent of the stylists—became visibly smaller. Flared blades gave way to rolled edges. The groping by automobile stylists for cheap ways to make their new-model cars look different also resulted in a fascination with adding lights during the late fifties. General Motors cars, which once had managed to get about at night with only three lights (two in front and one in the back), began carrying up to fourteen outside lights fore and aft. Apparently the automobile stylists couldn't agree whether all these banks of lights were most needed on the front of the car or on the rear. Some stylists placed them mostly on the front (Cadillacs, Chevrolet Impalas had eight there), whereas others loaded the lights mostly on the rear. On some cars some of the tail lights were dummies, or nonfunctioning. By 1960, however, anyone who owned a two-year-old car with a dozen or more outside lights could reasonably be expected to feel his car had been dated in an uncomfortable way. Now the designers were achieving a new look by subtracting lights! Likewise, the millions of two-toned and three-toned cars stamped out by the Detroit automobile makers in the mid- and late fifties had become sirens old before their prime. Detroit began promoting monotones. Only on the rooftop was a second color now occasionally permitted. Even the swing of a portion of the market to compacts was not an unrelieved disaster from the styling standpoint. The compacts made the long, fat, gaudy makes of the late fifties—especially those in the lower-prestige lines—seem terribly gauche. Every swing, whether seemingly sensible or seemingly insensible, helps create obsolescence. It is the swing that counts. It should be noted that Europeans had less and less basis for feeling smug about the way Americans were being enticed by "dynamic obsolescence" in the automotive field. Until 1960, most European makers took pride in their refusal to make changes just for the sake of change. But as the Europeans built up their auto-making capacity at a furious rate to cash in on the opening in the United States and around the world created by Detroit's commitment to gargantuan vehicles, these Europeans found themselves—with the introduction of American compacts—hustling to build markets. This led them to begin making more frequent visible changes in style, in the Detroit manner. Their problem in thus creating obsolescence of desirability in their home markets was, however, complicated. Most European car buyers still had the idea that a motorcar should last a good long time. A sales official of the British Motor Corporation, Ltd., was heard to complain<sup>3</sup> : "All you've got to do is drive out on a Sunday and have a look. You'll find people out washing and polishing cars that are twenty years old. Why, the blighters think more of their old cars than they do of their wives!" American automakers, when they would talk about their strategy of planned obsolescence of desirability at all, insisted that the annual model switch was essential to the American way of life. A Ford executive argued: "We are confident that the annual change cycle has advantages for the national economy in terms of employment, and it is essential for competitive reasons. The change in the appearance of models each year in creases car sales." The Big Three of Detroit were spending more than a billion dollars a year to put a new dress on their cars each year. To put it another way, since the consumer of course pays in the end, the average new-car buyer was paying more than two hundred dollars extra to cover the annual cost of restyling the cars. And this did not include the actual cost of the non-functional "bright-work" or "goop" placed on the cars. That added at least another hundred dollars. A further cost of the annual styling was the loss in quality. Laurence Crooks of Consumers Union put it this way: "The annual model change has a great deal to do with lack of quality in cars, and any speeding up of this changing . . . always redounds to the discredit of the cars. It takes a long time to perfect a car and get the bugs out of it." Because of all these factors related to style change, American cars were declining in value at a precipitous rate. The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia made a study of this aging problem of "second-hand sirens" and concluded that motorcars were depreciating twice as fast as they reasonably should. It explained: <sup>4</sup> "Because yearly model changes make a car look older than it actually is, mechanically speaking, the price drops faster than the remaining mileage potential. . . . A car four years old with roughly two-thirds of its active life left usually sells for about one-third of its original price. Variety and change accelerate obsolescence." (This calculation assumed a potentially "active" life of twelve years. Actually, that figure appears to be out of date. By 1960, the tendency to junk cars before they were ten years old had become the prevailing pattern. Runzheimer & Company, the expert on fleetoperation costs, found that Detroit-made cars were depreciating almost twice as fast as the little snub-nosed Volkswagen, whose manufacturers consistently scorned the annual model change. While keeping the same profile over the years, however, it quietly introduced hundreds of small changes.) American motorists by 1960 were trading in their "old" car by the time it reached an average age of two and a quarter years. The Ford Motor Company in one of its advertisements said this showed how smart and shrewd the average motorcar owner was becoming. At that age, it pointed out, the car starts showing minor ailments and dents. Further, it stated, "The car is two years old in style. Its fine edge is gone." For many of the cast-off beauties produced in the late fifties the "fine edge" certainly was gone. Used-car dealers were calling them "Jonahs." Their heels now seemed run over, their mascara was running, and their chrome jewelry tarnished; their bulk was excessive and their power windows, brakes, and steering wheels frequently malfunctioning. The styling trend in American automobile design as 1961 approached was away from pink dinosaurism, and toward a more formal design. A design consultant for one of the Big Three automobile producers confided to me what the "main styling stream" was likely to be in the early sixties. He said that a more upright, classical, and austere look was in the works. Professor Robinson gained much the same impression in his chats with Detroit designers. The trend, he gathered, would be away from the squashed-down, streamlined look to a more "squared-off, boxy look." (There was also at least a promise of more "functional innovation.") He found designers showing fascination with models of early American cars, with their boxy, squared-off looks. Professor Robinson commented: "None of them expressed any astonishment when I raised the question of the likelihood of a revival movement." The motorcar profile was not only destined to become more upright, but it evidently was essential that any change in profile should be quite drastic. Professor Robinson explained why the change would have to be made abruptly rather than gradually: "Having utilized gradual compression and lengthwise expansion of the body as a means of differentiating new models from old for so many years, it would be entirely self-defeating for the industry to start building them [just] a few inches shorter or higher. . . . The reason? It would be tantamount to repeating the dimensional style characteristics of 1957-58. The cars would then be duplicates of silhouettes already cluttering up the usedcar lot. . . . A fashion can never retreat gradually and in good order. Like a dictator it must always expand its aggressiveness—or collapse." Eric Larrabee found in the late fifties that harassed motorcar designers were wondering how much longer their magic would continue to work. However, they were alone in their uneasiness. He related: "Everyone else in Detroit seems to believe that the designers will be able to go on pulling new models out of the hat indefinitely." In mid-1960, a spokesman for one of the Big Three was hinting that "specialized vehicles" were being carefully considered—presumably to promote the more-cars-per-family trend. And he suggested that because of the staggering costs and diminishing effectiveness of resculpturing cars each year, the annual model changes would start involving less "massive and exotic changes." It turned out, however, that even the compacts that appeared in 1960 were being drastically restyled for 1961. Earlier, as the sixties loomed, U.S. News & World Report carried a report for its business readers on "The Big Changes Coming in Autos." A subhead read: "Ahead: Much Restyling." Let us look next at evidences of obsolescence in quality in the motorcar field. Some of the evidence of quality loss can be attributed, as indicated, to the frequent shifts in design produced by the straining to create obsolescence of desirability. But there is also some evidence of quality loss that cannot be explained by frequent styling changes.