# America's Toughest Car— and Thirty Models Later "Letting his fins down, Clare Briggs, Chrysler vice president, last week . . . said, auto service is bad, and the quality of cars is 'not as good as 10 years ago.' The auto industry, admitted Briggs, 'has treated the public badly, to say it mildly.' "—TIME, June 2, 1958. A FRIEND OF MINE WAS INTERESTED IN MR. BRIGGS'S CANDID observation that he wrote asking Mr. Briggs to amplify why he felt this drop in quality had occurred. Second thoughts or more cautious counsel had apparently persuaded Mr. Briggs to put his fins back up. He replied by sending a clipping in which an automotive driver praised the Chrysler Corporation's then-current Imperial. In the article, the Imperial was hailed, but for reasons that had little bearing on durability. Examples: the car's pick-up, looks, deep door pockets, deep carpeting, big trunk, maneuverability, quiet motor, brakes, turn indicator switch, side mirror. In fairness to Mr. Briggs it should be stated that his own company has had a reputation for being more engineering-minded than some of its major competitors. But still his observation about the general decline in the quality of cars was a squalid commentary on an industry that boasts of spending hundreds of millions of dollars each year on "research and development." Little of the money appears to have gone to improve the longevity of motorcars. In 1956, the motorcars being led to the scrap-yard chopping blocks were three years younger than the motorcars being scrapped in the late forties. The Automobile Manufacturers Association chose to explain away this awkward fact by asserting that motorists in the fifties coddled their cars less than those in the forties, when motorcars were in short supply, and when Americans found how surprisingly long a car could be kept running. The association preferred to compare the 1956 longevity with the prewar 1941 longevity. Even here, however, it had little to shout about. In the fifteen-year span, the automakers had managed to add only a fraction of one year to the life expectancy of automobiles. During the same fifteen years, medical science had added many years to the longevity of the nation's human beings. It should also be added that in those fifteen years there had been a great increase in smooth, paved roads. Meanwhile, the major motorcar makers had almost entirely stopped stressing durability in their sales appeals. In late 1958, Printers' Ink conceded that "there is a widespread feeling that 'they don't make cars the way they used to'—either mechanically or from the point of view of interior decor." And an official of the Automotive Finance Association in testifying at a Senate subcommittee hearing told of a survey he had conducted with association members on the state of the automobile industry. He quoted one member as responding: "The quality of today's automobile does not compare favorably with past years. . . . The price of the product continues to go up and the quality continues to go down. Improvement in automobiles in the past few years has strictly been tinsmith work." Meanwhile, Automotive News reported charges that new cars were missing bolts, that they suffered from malfunctioning parts, squeaks, rattles, and other maladjustments that had become "the rule and not the exception in present American cars." The charge was made that motorcar manufacturers had been resorting to "slipshod assembly method" and that the "poor quality of mass production cars" was becoming evident. The American Automobile Association released some figures on automobile breakdowns which indicated that the mounting garage bills of individual motorists were not isolated cases. It disclosed that although motorcar registrations rose by less than one million from 1957 to 1958, the number of motorcar breakdowns leaped upward by five and one half million! Sale of automobile parts soared year after year. Partly, of course, this was caused by the increase in the number of cars on the road. But partly, the executive vice-president of a Long Island ignition parts manufacturing firm told The Wall Street Journal in 1960, it was because "manufacturers are building them so they'll get to the junk pile faster. . . . But they're compensating," he added, "by making them give better performance." As an example, he said, the shock absorber was currently being designed to give more cushioning but not to last as long as older types. Also, he observed, "today almost as soon as new cars hit the street they need replacement parts for all the gadgets they are loaded with." How much of this evident obsolescence of quality was planned? Certainly, as indicated, some of it was due to the industry's haste in rushing out its annual models each fall with rejiggered trimmings and added accessories. But some of it also undoubtedly was due to the reluctance of many of the manufacturers to make a car that would hold the affection of its owner for more than a very few years. In all of the arguing about motorcar design, the makers kept their eye on the ball. And that ball was their total annual dollar volume in sales. If maximum dollar volume was their goal, then the temptation was great to do three things: upgrade the price of the car; sell the car to as many people as possible; and make sure the buyers would be on the market again before too long to buy another car. The inevitable result of such thinking was best summed up in a letter to The Wall Street Journal in the late fifties by Mr. Glenn Ashworth of Morgantown, West Virginia. Mr. Ashworth was critical of current automobile design. It was apparent from his technical discussion that he was knowledgeable on the subject. He attributed the current state of motorcar design to this factor: "Maximum sales volume demands the cheapest construction for the briefest interval the buying public will tolerate." In one succinct sentence Mr. Ashworth enunciated what appears to be an Iron Law of Marketing in mid-century America. Willingness to follow the dictates of the Iron Law seems to vary by divisions within an automobile-making company. Engineers tend to resist the law more than stylists, who are much more sales-oriented. This difference in willingness to bow to the law has produced significant differences in the rate at which quality deterioration appears in different sectors of the motorcar. The parts of the motorcar still clearly controlled by the engineers— those out of sight under the hood—have tended to maintain their quality longer than the visible parts more fully controlled by the stylists. The chief of Runzheimer & Company, which specializes in estimating costs of automobile fleet operations, takes a dim view of some aspects of recent automobile design, but he has found that the innards of motorcars have shown consistent improvement. "Mechanical dependability, reflecting design of the vital motive and transmissions parts and quality of metals used, has greatly increased during the past twenty years." And he offered the interesting incidental information that "noticeable deterioration in over-all car performance, and the consequent increase in over-all operating costs, usually begins somewhere between 45,000 and 60,000 total miles." It is during this mileage span, he indicated, that it makes sense to think about turning in your car on a new one. One engineering journal carried the charge in 1959 that engineers were falling down on the job because little was being achieved in prolonging the life of engines and improving their thermal efficiency. At least, however, the engineers were not charged with building engines for shorter life spans than formerly. Laurence Crooks, the chief automotive expert at Consumers Union, has concluded that today's engines are "very good." However, his comments became scathing when he talked about the trend of automobile design as a whole. His auto-testing experience has convinced him that "the quality on the whole has been going downhill. . . . Stuff keeps falling off." Mr. Crooks spoke nostalgically of the 1941 Chevrolet as a motorcar that really had built-in quality and sensible proportions. To cite another example, he said that few cars today were as solidly and sensibly built as the postwar Hudsons. And the 1952 Chevrolet is a car he remembered with fondness. He felt that the 1959 Chevrolet was no match for the 1956 model. Speaking of the quality of cars in general, he told me in 1959: "Cars were better built five years ago for the state of the technology existing at the time than they are today. The cars then were more honestly built." The bodywork of motorcars and their structural rigidity were not as good as they had been a decade ago, he felt. And this widespread lack of structural rigidity had played a major role in promoting "creative obsolescence." Nothing makes a car seem old faster than rattles. And motorcars produced in recent years have tended to develop rattles faster than they did a decade earlier. Further, he said, "the rattling gets worse as the car grows older. With the vogue for hardtops—into which less structural stiffness can be built—this characteristic is getting worse." In 1959, The Wall Street Journal took note of all the complaints about late-model cars by conducting a survey. It quoted the owner of an automobile repair shop in Detroit as saying that engine quality was commendable but that "the bodies today are cheesy. They're full of rattles." Another thing that makes a fairly new car seem cheesy and old— regardless of its dependability in transporting its owner—is exterior rust and corrosion. In the late fifties, many models developed mottled looks with a rapidity that appalled their owners. Some motorcar makers such as Oldsmobile installed corrosion-resistant aluminum grilles as a sales feature because of all the unhappiness, but others evidently were content to let the discolored splotches appear. Frequent resculpturing of the exterior was said to be one cause of the difficulties. The widespread use of salt on roads might also be a factor. But some of the corrosion, it was charged, was being deliberately encouraged. Financial writer Sylvia Porter quoted officials of an industrial-design firm as asserting that "alloys are designed to rust instead of last." Consumer Bulletin, published by Consumers' Research, Inc., took note of all the complaints about quick-rusting bodywork by reporting: "There seems to be no doubt that bodies of present-day cars could be made to last much longer than they now do, but manufacturers are fully aware that if they make their cars too durable, future sales will suffer; consumers will naturally tend to keep their cars longer before turning them in if bodies have well resisted corrosion and other types of damage that mar appearance." These "other types" of damage that mar appearance with distressing frequency often appeared inside the car: tattered floor mats, sagging springs, grimy or worn upholstery. A new-car dealer told Automotive News in 1957 that he was "ashamed'' of most of the recent models he had sold which then had up to 20,000 miles on them. He said, "The interior trim looks as if it may have been dragged behind for at least half of the miles. . . . The upholstery in the cars today may be fancier and have the 'metallic buildup story' but brother, watch out! If the manufacturers cannot sell with the new cars a good, durable, longwearing upholstery, why not send the new cars out without the seats upholstered and let us install good seat covers?" In considering the shrinking durability of modern cars, we should also take note of the shortened life span of a number of individual parts. Take tires. A leading chemical scientist working for a tire company told me in the early fifties that he had high hopes a tire would be developed that would last 100,000 miles. Perhaps he was just being woolly-headed, but at any rate in the following years when technological miracles were said to be happening on all fronts, the life expectancy of tires kept going down and down. The Wall Street Journal reported in 1959 that "tire company engineers privately concede tires are wearing out faster these days." The manager of the American Chicle Company's fleet of 430 cars told Journal investigators, "We've not only noticed that we get less mileage, we've computed it to be 25% less." He added that his tires were now averaging about 15,000 miles. A few months earlier, the Journal of the Society of Automotive Engineers carried a report by an official of the Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company stating that in three recent years treadwear life on American tires had dropped 18 per cent. A comparative analysis of tread-mileage on firstline 6.70-15 tires of various makes tested by Consumers Union in two different years showed these spreads from best to poorest: 1954—The range was from 22,000 to 31,000 miles. 1958—The range was from 18,000 to 27,500 miles. Conditions for the tests can never be precisely duplicated, but still these figures would suggest a sharp downward trend was occurring in tire tread-mileage. One explanation offered by tire-company officials for the decline in the life expectancy of tires has been the trend to smaller fourteen-inch wheels as a styling feature. But note that the above comparisons were all made on the basis of a fifteen-inch wheel! Undoubtedly, the trend during most of the fifties to higher-powered, bulkier cars and power brakes helped the decline along. The Wall Street Journal's report on the tire situation included two observations of particular interest. It said that "auto companies generally maintain a stony silence when questioned about complaints of declining tire mileage." And what about the tire companies? The Journal reported: "Of course there's no reason to believe that the tire companies themselves are particularly upset about faster-wearing tires, although it's a blow to their engineers' professional pride. Tires which wear out rapidly mean more sales." Or take the mufflers. We noted in Chapter 4 that they have been burning out faster than they did a decade ago. This shortened life span, in fact, could be stated quite precisely. Automobile mufflers in 1958 had only one half the life expectancy of mufflers bought a decade earlier. Design Sense, published by Lippincott & Margulies, the industrial-design firm, took note of the shortened life span of mufflers in calling on industry to take advantage of new technologies to give longer life to products. "To take just one example," it said, "a major steel company has had available for some time—with no takers—a lead-coated steel which, for just 8¢ more per auto muffler, would give a product that would last the life of the car. Instead, automakers are still installing mufflers that must be replaced on an average of once every two years at a cost to the consumer of \$18 to \$27 per muffler." But perhaps a change was coming. At least American Motors— which was leading the fight against obsolescence planning in both the automotive and appliance fields—announced a ceramic-coated exhaust system for both muffler and tail pipe of its 1961 Ramblers. The process was first developed by the military for jet planes and was said to make exhausts virtually impervious to corrosion. The company said in making the announcement that, while the process is more expensive, it is in line with the company's policy of seeking greater product durability. Motorcar makers interested in building a more durable vehicle might well examine for inspiration Citroën's "Deux Chevaux," which reportedly often runs 100,000 miles over all sorts of roads with practically no maintenance. It has an eighteen-month waiting list of eager Frenchmen. Or better still, the motorcar makers might try copying some of the features of the Model A Ford, perhaps the most rugged motorcar ever built. Many hundreds of these four-bangers are still getting daily use in North America three decades after they were built. They have been used to tow cars two decades younger to the scrap-yard crushing machines; and are eagerly sought by collectors and hot rodders alike. The Model A's straightforward frame (a simple set of rails with three connecting members), its rear end, its differential gears, and its engine have proved in thousands of hot-rod races to be very rugged indeed. One of the happiest motorcar owners I know is a sales representative who must often travel fifty thousand miles a year and has long felt bedeviled by the high maintenance cost of his cars. He heard that the Checker company—maker of taxicabs—was starting to make a few thousand extra cars each year for sale to the general public. Every time he went to New York, he made a point of riding in Checker cabs and pumped the drivers on performance. He relates, "They always gave it high praise for durability, and seemed unanimous that it goes one hundred thousand miles without a valve or ring job." He encountered several drivers whose cars had passed the two-hundred-and-fiftythousand mark in mileage. The simplicity of maintenance also appealed to this man. Quickness of repair is vital for cab operation. He points out, "The four fenders are bolted on, and when they are damaged the replacement cost is only about twenty-five dollars." Several months ago this man bought a Checker Superba and has become very fond of it. He explains, "We all love the level floor in the passenger compartment—no hump—and the wonderful visibility, the headroom, the wide doors, and the short turning radius." (It can turn around in a thirty-seven-foot circle.) Now let us turn from the American motorcar to the American home and explore the extent to which obsolescence through deterioration of quality is promoting sales of the products that go into the home. Here, the evidence of deterioration is substantial indeed.