# The Short, Sweet Life of Home Products "My mother had the same washing machine for twenty years. She has the same refrigerator now she had when I went to high school thirty years ago. . . . We [my own family] built a 'leisure house' five years ago. . . . We're on our second washing machine and our second drier. . . . We threw out the disposal. . . . We're on our third vacuum cleaner."— Industrial designer J. GORDON LIPPINCOTT. PROBABLY WE ALL TEND TO LET NOSTALGIA COLOR OUR recolections as to the durability of our family possessions in earlier decades. Still, the trade press in the home-furnishing field is not given to nostalgia, and all during the past decade it reported evidence of a lowering of quality of such goods as rugs, furniture, upholstery, television sets, refrigerators, stoves, and lamps. One retailer was reported observing: "There's no such thing any more as a consumer durable. They are all semi-durables, with the accent on the semi." He found the serviceable life expectancy of a range then to be about seven years, and some of these new automatic washers not even three years. (Other sources gave longer life expectancies.) One of the trade journals that carried discussions of quality deterioration in some lines was Home Furnishings Daily. In 1957, it carried two articles on lower quality found in house-wares (such as toasters). Its investigator reported: "Many housewares manufacturers are cheapening the quality of their products, and are likely to step up this process even more in the months to come." Later that year, the journal made a survey of 127 appliance dealers and reported finding increasing difficulties caused by faulty appliances and television sets being sent back by customers, often a few weeks or months after purchase. According to the dealers, their worst problems came in these fields, listed in descending order of aggravation: 1. Washing machines 2. Refrigerators 3. Driers 4. Television sets 5. Washer-dry combos 6. Ranges 7. Air conditioners 8. Freezers. The particular parts that were reported causing the most trouble were, first of all, timers. Others cited were controls, motors, cabinets, finishes, components and soldering, tubes, thermostats, pumps and switches, wiring and defrosters, transmissions and valves. Behind the difficulties, the dealers felt, were such causes as lack of quality control, poor inspection, poor craftsmanship, poor engineering, and "workers who don't care." Other complaints focused on the word obsolescence. A financial columnist for The New York Herald Tribune grumbled about the fascination with "dynamic obsolescence" being shown by appliance makers and said, "The only dynamism we've spotted in the appliances around our house is the way they deteriorate after not too much use." And the chief of the product-testing department of a business firm complained to an appliance technical conference of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers in 1958: "The poor consumer is really the fall guy! Year after year this consumer copes with appliances that cost more and more and, in many cases, give less and less satisfactory service. . . . The rumor that appliances are being built for only a limited life—to serve the great god, obsolescence—does the industry harm." A part of the breakdown pattern apparently was the loading of the appliances with gadgets that often immobilized the whole machine when they failed. Another aspect of the high breakdown rates was the growing use of plastic parts that snapped or warped. Often the plastics were not intended for the usage to which they were put. And then there were charges that appliance makers were cutting down on the gauge of steel, the size and number of bolts, and the quality of interior finishes where corrosion protection is important. In addition, there was specific indication that evidence of quality obsolescence was not unconnected with the drive to increase replacement sales as the industry fought off glut. An appliance buyer commented on the glutting of the market for appliances in 1956 and wondered if the makers would try to get out of this mess by deliberately producing for "a short life in order to keep it turning over." An electrical manufacturing company official, obviously aware of the same temptation, warned the following month in the same journal (Retailing Daily), "If we are to create obsolescence . . . and find ourselves making products that last too long, we must rely on something besides mechanical deficiencies to create a replacement market." Possibly some manufacturers were not too careful about finding "something besides mechanical deficiencies" to move goods. As the appliance industry began pulling out of its severe recession in 1958, a business writer for The New York Times reported: <sup>2</sup> "Spokesmen for stores say the recovery may be due to obsolescence or breakdown of appliances, combined with a spurt of confidence in the general economy. Manufacturers add that an increase in residential building recently also is a factor." Was something more than reasonable wear and tear involved in creating this "obsolescence or breakdown"? Perhaps not, at least in many cases. But let us look at reports on the trends in quality for some specific products that are supposed to help make a house a home. THE FAMILY WASHER. This, as we have indicated, leads the list of the home appliances most likely to cause trouble soon after purchase. Monte Florman, chief of the appliance-testing division at Consumers Union, said: "These are the biggest offenders in my experience and also on the basis of the relatively larger volume of mail that Consumers Union receives from dissatisfied users." He said they should be planned for heavy use, but often are not. A substantial percentage of the new machines fail in some way during the months the Consumers Union test them. He feels there is no question that home washers could be made more durable, but that it might involve leaving off some of the gloss and gadgetry to maintain the present price level. Many complaints by consumers seem to center on the malfunctioning of plastic parts of the washers. A Wall Street Journal report on consumer dissatisfaction with modern home products reported a number of complaints about grief caused by plastic parts. The chief of a market-research firm told me that some of the embarrassingly early and conspicuous breakdowns of appliances were due to errors in estimating the product's death date; they broke down before the warranty period was up. On the other hand, some of the breaking down undoubtedly resulted from simple corner-cutting or haste to get out a new model, with the companies that were driving for increased sales showing less concern about durability of their product than the public might assume it deserved. When the Philco Corporation bought a washer-producing company, it inherited a tub full of trouble in the form of rusted bearings in the inherited company's washing machine (Power-Surge). It seems that a plastic device in the base of the tub of many of these washers would not withstand the heat of wash water. The device cracked and let water seep down into the bearings. Philco finally felt obliged to offer to pay owners their full purchase price if the owners would turn in their Power-Surge on a current model. Some Hotpoint models made in 1955, 1956, and 1957 proved so troublesome that sales for its home-laundry appliances slipped for a while. Citing Hotpoint's tribulations, a business writer for The New York Herald Tribune made this interesting comment:<sup>3</sup> "Distributors were getting six or seven repair calls a year on these Hotpoints, compared with a national average of two or three repair calls." Note that national average! In order to get back in the good graces of its buying public Hotpoint announced a \$10,000,000 repair and replacement program. Soon, however, Sales Management was reporting that Hotpoint had stopped publicizing the program. It surmised that too many people were applying for replacement and sending costs "right through the roof. Hotpoint service departments tell us they are flooded with demands for new machines." The moral of all this, the journal admonished its marketing readers, is "Don't jump into a replacement or repair program. Carefully evaluate the cost, the customer response. One-tenth of your products may be defective, but nine-tenths of your customers might like new models at your expense." One company that had been very slow to change its models was Maytag. Consumers Union reported a few months ago that the basic form of the Maytag washer had not changed in many years. Perhaps it was no coincidence that Consumers Union tests regularly showed the Maytag washer as being of consistently high over-all quality. And when I asked my local repairman—who has been at the bedside of our fouryear-old washer three times this year—to name a really well-built washer, Maytag was the one that occurred most emphatically to him. THE FAMILY REFRIGERATOR. Here, too, gimmickery has seemed to fascinate many producers more than durability. The 1958 appliance technical conference of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers was scolded about the "flood of flimsy gadgets and accessories [mostly plastic] that plague the user." An example cited was the snapping of the plastic handles of crisper drawers. Plastics have appealed to producers not only because they are usually cheaper than metal but also because their built-in colors help promote selling on the basis of style and impulse. It should be noted, of course, that plastics can vary considerably in ruggedness. They can be heavy or thin. Plastic dials and knobs can have a metal sleeve to take the screw, or they can be just plastic. The latter are the more likely to pull off in your hand. Also plastics can be tough or fragile. Appliance Manufacturer <sup>4</sup> pondered the "oddity" that the manufacturers were frequently not using the most durable plastics available. It talked about "parts and accessories in refrigerators that looked fine in the showroom, but discolored or cracked under normal home use . . . [yet] there were plastics available which would have cut costs—maybe not quite as dramatically—and performed adequately in the application." It chose to blame this "oddity" on the industry's headlong, single-minded rush to cut cost. THE TELEVISION SET. A few years ago a guided-missile expert named Fred Stevens working for Northrup Aircraft, Inc., said there was no technological reason now why television sets could not be built that would run for eight years without a single repair call. This could be done, he said, if television makers used techniques employed in building missiles. Such a statement simply revealed that Mr. Stevens, with his head buried in defense work, was badly behind the times. As Consumer Reports pointed out, he "hasn't heard of the emphasis among manufacturers of consumer goods on built-in obsolescence." At Consumers Union a majority of the 1958 test samples of portable television sets bought developed failures within a few weeks of being purchased, while being tested, and had to be repaired. Consumers Union reported it had also been encountering an increasing number of set failures in twenty-one-inch table models. Karl H. Nagel, head of Consumers Union television testing division, told me that despite all the miraculous claims made in television advertising, a television set made in 1952 offered a "nicer picture" than sets made in 1959. He said: "There has been no major advance in terms of the quality of the received picture since the early 1950's." And he felt that sets made in 1947 were better constructed than those being offered for sale a decade later. In 1947, television sets were able to reproduce all the picture components contained in the "signal" sent out by a broadcasting station. In 1956, not a single one of the sets tested could reproduce the transmitted picture! Mr. Nagel pointed out that skimping had been taking place particularly in tubes, both in number and quality. A television set made in 1947 had more than thirty tubes. By the late fifties, some sets had only half as many because the makers had been designing multiplefunction tubes. When such a multiple-function tube goes bad in one part, you must throw the whole thing out. Furthermore, he said, "Tubes just don't last as long." Most of them today don't have the life that earlier tubes had, so that they can't take the continuous use the earlier tubes could take. They are built "too close to operative limits." A number of other competent witnesses have also remarked on the declining quality of modern television sets. Testers at Consumers' Research, for example, found that the 1957 television receivers were in general not as good as the 1956 models in quality and performance. And, in 1957, a spokesman for the National Appliance and Radio-TV Dealers Association lamented that the quality in television sets had become so poor that dealers couldn't make a "decent profit" if they tried to make good on all complaints. He said: "It is not enough that 80 per cent of the TV sets sold function normally. We all know that one rotten apple can spoil the whole barrel." Don Baines, a columnist for Home Furnishings Daily, noted uneasily in the late fifties that many appliance manufacturers were rushing to get into the field of servicing their equipment. He asked: "Why all the rush to get into the servicing angle? Is it because the appliance won't stay in A-l working order too many days after it is installed in the home?" He added that a suspicious person might begin to wonder "just how good the appliances are." And he concluded: "I'm beginning to suspect that the manufacturers know something consumers don't know and frankly I'm worried. Is that blasted little TV set of mine due to conk out again?" Some companies, it should be noted, show a greater dedication to the ideal of quality than others. Zenith is one company that has gone slowly in embracing innovations and cost-cutting short cuts. And it has fought to build and maintain a "quality" image. In 1959, Consumers Union listed seventeen television sets in the twenty-one-inch category and found only one that deserved to be check-rated. It was a Zenith. SMALL APPLIANCES AND OTHER HOUSEWARES. Trade reports commented throughout the late fifties on an upsurge of early breakdowns of some types of household electric wares. In many brands returns were running up to half of all items sold. And, of course, many people who had bought "lemons" or won them as trading-stamp premiums didn't bother or weren't able to return them. Retailing Daily reported that those returned by indignant customers demanding replacement were usually replaced. The defective ones were repaired and then "resold during storewide clearances or at special sales for 'demonstration and floor models.' " The most troublesome electric housewares, it said, were toasters, irons, and percolators. All three use thermostats, which often failed. In 1957, the same journal (which had changed its name to Home Furnishings Daily) reported that manufacturers were "watering" their products in dozens of different ways to cheapen them. It mentioned reduction of the thickness of plating, substitution of cheaper materials, and reduction in the size of products. It concluded that in some cases the "high end of the line"—or the highest-priced models offered by a manufacturer—were "no better quality-wise than the low end was a few years ago." Consumers Union expressed its disgust with the quality of toasters being offered the public. It pointed out in 1956 that although pop-up, self-timing toasters had been on the market for several decades, only three out of a sample of twenty-two tested were high in quality. Many of the test samples were defective, and some were downright hazardous. At about the same time, Retailing Daily noted that "switches on rotisseries have been turning bad lately." In 1960, Home Furnishings Daily reported that breakdowns on electric housewares were setting an all-time record. Significantly, however, there was now a reduction in the breakdowns that came under the warranty guarantees. Manufacturers had been straining mightily to relieve themselves of responsibility for breakdowns, which they found "very expensive." They evidently did this by (1) making sure the products would outlast the warranties and (2) cutting back the warranties. Many dealers in the San Francisco area lamented that they often could not return merchandise to manufacturers when the item proved defective after a few weeks' use. If cost cutting was behind much of the deterioration in the quality of appliances, how much more would it cost to make more rugged appliances? There was testimony that it would not cost much. In 1958, the director of product engineering at Whirlpool Corporation told appliance engineers meeting in Chicago, "If we would look closely at our products, it would be apparent that improvements can be made at little or no expense." An official of the Electrical Testing Laboratories in New York offered the opinion that many improvements could be made in electrical appliances without undue cost which aren't made. He expressed belief that the industry feels products should be made with only the "required utility" to keep pace with competitors. Laundromat washing machines usually are more rugged than machines sold to the home user, and last many hours longer without breaking down. Their cost of manufacture is comparable to that of the home machines because they come without the jukebox effects and gimmicks felt to be desirable for the home market. So much for the quality of appliances. Let us now examine the obsolescence in quality observable in several categories of home furnishings. The philosophy guiding many manufacturers was described to me by Louis Cheskin of the Color Research Institute. It was his conviction that the public was largely responsible for encouraging the philosophy. He put it this way: "Why make the handles on cups so that they won't break off? Who wants to pay 10 per cent more for dishes so that the dishes will last a lifetime? Most housewives want or welcome an excuse to buy a new set of dishes every year or so. Who wants furniture to last forever? The large American middle classes do not. They want furniture to be in style, not outdated. . . . Furniture, clothes, dishes can all be made to last longer at very little additional cost. But neither the maker nor the consumer is interested in this." The makers of home furnishings might be cheered by such a rationale as Mr. Cheskin offered, but they felt that American consumers still had a long way to go in shedding old-fashioned ideas about durability. Many felt that—unfortunately for them—most North Americans still tended to think of homes as symbols of permanence. Thus prospective customers seemed to feel vaguely guilty if they weren't assured that the carpet or chair they were buying would last a lifetime. A trade journal noted this lack of reasonableness when it contrasted the attitude of the typical mattress buyer with that of the typical automobile buyer. The motorcar buyer, it said, cheerfully pays \$4,500 for a motorcar that he expects to get only two or three years' use out of, and yet the same man "practically demands a gold-plated guarantee that the new luxury mattress [costing only two hundred dollars] will be good to his dying day." Such consumer attitudes as these, it said, "have been bedeviling the entire home furnishings industry." Here, then, are some comments and facts concerning the levels of quality that have become widespread in the past few years for specific home furnishings. FLOOR COVERINGS. During a panel discussion in Atlanta between housewives and rug merchants, one housewife asked a question which trade-press reports called "the bombshell question." She began by pointing out that sixteen years before she had bought a rug for eightyfive dollars, had given it hard use every day, and it "has not lost any of its color." Further, it showed no worn spots and no worn nap. Her "bombshell" question was this: "Do any of the carpet companies make any such quality as that now?" It was unanswered. The trend in rug quality was summed up by Mildred E. Brady, editorial director of Consumers Union, in these words: "There is no doubt whatever that until recently very good rugs have lasted from generation to generation. Today, ten years is the commercially promised life for a good wool rug." A multitude of the rugs being sold were far from being "good" by even the lowered standards prevailing. Carpet mills received so many complaints from customers about poor-wearing carpeting in the late fifties that they tightened up their complaint procedures to protect themselves. Very quietly the rugmakers began putting a two-year ceiling on the period that they would listen to grievances. Retailing Daily reported that the retail rug dealers were uneasy about this twoyear ceiling the manufacturers had imposed even though it was generous by appliance or automotive standards. They felt that the manufacturers "would have to begin to educate consumers to the idea that carpeting of today will not wear as long as the floor coverings that their parents had." The journal continued: "As one furniture dealer states it: Today's consumer expects carpet to last as long or longer than her mother's because she is paying three times as much for it. She knows her mother's carpeting lasted between ten and fifteen years. This was said to be not an unreasonable expectation but also one which the consumer had to be educated away from. The buying public does not accept readily the idea of obsolescence in carpets and rugs." The same journal quoted the owner of an interior-decorating shop in Birmingham, Alabama, who voiced considerable distaste for products that would last twenty years in view of all the easy credit available. Speaking of floor coverings, he asked: "Why should it last forever, or even ten years for that matter?" He urged manufacturers to forget about how long a product would last and to concentrate on getting out goodquality fashion merchandise. His main interest, presumably, was on the word "fashion." A part of the trouble with modern carpeting was that the manufacturers had downgraded quality and fought off quality standards. Another problem was the introduction of tufted carpets, which could be made much faster and cheaper than woven carpets. The makers of woven rugs reduced the quality of their rugs in order to compete more effectively with the tufted rugs. Another reason for the deterioration was that much of the carpeting was being bought by big housing developers who tended to install the cheapest floor covering they could in order to increase their profit margins. Still another problem was that the long-wearing wool from wild sheep—which helped make grandma's rugs so durable—was becoming difficult to procure. Meanwhile, customers were being lured by promises of miraculously long-wearing rugs in sales messages that stressed the nylon content of the new offerings. Such promises were in large part illusory. This was demonstrated when the du Pont Company reduced the price of nylon to rug manufacturers. An industry poll was taken to find out whether this lowering of nylon costs would be reflected in either lower prices for rugs or in better quality in rugs. The majority opinion was that there would be no change whatever! Retailing Daily explained why in these words: "It was frequently pointed out that there is so much misrepresentation on nylon blends in the retail field that many customers buying them actually think they are getting all-nylon carpets. Under these circumstances, obviously there is no merchandising advantage in increasing the blend. . . . To get a significant improvement in performance beyond the standard 10% blend, one must get to fifty percent or more." And Consumer Reports commented on the "standard 10% blend" by saying, "The rug industry is frank to say that the percentage of nylon is too small to amount to any improvement in the quality of the rug. It is there as a sales pitch hook and, of course, an excuse for a higher price." The widespread deterioration in rug quality could not be attributed to any growth in desperation to eke out a few pennies' profit. In 19S9, when complaints about deterioration in quality of rugs were running high, U.S. News & World Report published a table showing how sixtynine groups of stocks had fared in Wall Street during the general climb in stock prices of the preceding year. Stock prices do not necessarily reflect earnings, but still it is noteworthy that the stocks of the rugmakers led the entire pack with a rise of 154 per cent. In second place among the sixty-nine profit makers, incidentally, was "Radio, TV manufacturing." Its rise in value was 116 per cent. FURNITURE, INDOOR. Throughout most of the fifties, charges that the quality of American-made furniture was degenerating were aired in the trade. Returns in upholstered furniture rose sharply. In the midfifties, a trade wrangle developed because furniture makers refused to make even a one-year guarantee on the wearing quality or permanency of color of upholstery fabrics. The head of one upholstering company said that major troubles were with fabric shrinking, stretching, and fading. In 1958, a Chicago dealer charged that defects were increasing at such a rate that most of the stock arriving was in need of some repairs. The most resounding blast at the furniture industry was aired in a letter to Retailing Daily <sup>5</sup> signed by "A tired complaint adjuster" who said that "for obvious reasons" he did not dare to sign his name out of fear that his store would be blackmailed by the furniture manufacturers. He began: "If there is any industry on earth that has reason to hide its head in shame it is the furniture manufacturers group who have literally 'gotten away with murder' . . . in hiding the defects of their products. . . ." He charged that makers were indifferent about inspection. "I can show you half a dozen makers of upholstered pieces who won't even bother to reject a sofa if the material is cut too short and pops loose after a few weeks of wear." He said he was recently "horrified" while visiting one of the Midwest's leading makers of medium-grade living-room furniture to notice how many frames made of knotty wood were being used. "No wonder the epidemic of broken-back sofas that have to be returned," he said. "Have manufacturers no conscience any more?" Even the National Retail Dry Goods Association blasted manufacturers in 1957 for their "faulty manufacturing." The , chief of one manufacturing firm conceded that the association's charge of sloppy procedures was well founded. And an officer of the National Association of Furniture Manufacturers warned at a trade convention that if the furniture makers didn't "give heed to the quality problem the public is going to be convinced that modern upholstered furniture is inferior to that of twenty-five years ago." Apparently it was not only the public that might be convinced. A partner in the Crown Upholstering Company lamented: "I have been in the furniture-making business for almost thirty years and I can honestly say the fabric situation has never been worse." All this is not to indicate that durable furniture has disappeared from the American landscape. When the United States Air Force Academy was furnishing its buildings, it specified that equipment should be designed to last for fifty years with a minimum of upkeep. The designer, Walter Dorwin Teague, designed and selected furnishings accordingly. He advised: "That means that we try not only to give durability to the furniture and equipment, but to give durability of style as well." FURNITURE, OUTDOOR. A sharp downtrend in the quality of aluminum summer furniture produced many angry outbursts and defenses in the trade press during the late fifties. One store owner complained: "Standards have gone to the winds." Specific grievances of dealers centered on the trend to use more and more insubstantial material in the chairs. Dealers alleged that: Manufacturers increasingly were using a gauge of aluminum only one half as thick as the .065 material they had used a few years earlier. The breadth of the tubing itself was being narrowed as much as a quarter inch. Webbing was thinner and contained fewer strands. Some webbing had as few as nine strands; and one merchant said such webbing would quickly give way when people weighing more than 140 pounds sat on it. Stainless-steel bolts were giving way to aluminum rivets. DRAPERY FABRICS. In the summer of 1959, Home Furnishings Daily reported: "Claims of an all-time low in quality of drapery fabrics on the market today underlie growing discontent among local dealers and cut-order jobbers. Sources are deeply concerned over what was reported to be a staggering amount of poor fabrics coming from converters and mills." It said complaints seemed to focus most on misprinted print goods, misweaves in plain goods, and problems with synthetics, which some dubbed "test tube" fabrics. Meanwhile, Better Business Bureaus were receiving a flood of complaints about new fabric combinations which were said to dissolve into their separate parts in the first dry cleaning. Many manufacturers of hard and soft goods of the American home still were striving to increase the durability of their products. But in general it would appear that durability was knowingly being nibbled away. The ideal of a "lifetime" product, which once was the shining goal of makers of a wide range of home products, was reduced for most to a memory. When we asked Mrs. Brady of Consumers Union for a list of the products still designed to last a lifetime, she responded: "I can think of only one—the piano." Finally, let us note the efforts being made to create the other controversial kind of obsolescence—obsolescence of desirability—in the home. Here the obsolescence creators have come up with some of the most interesting and nonrational results of all.