# CHAPTER 11 ## Fashion Lines for the Kitchen "If we could get people trading appliances the way they do automobiles—we'd have it made."—An appliance dealer at a Raleigh, North Carolina, conference which heard a clamor for more style changes. THE SUCCESS OF MOTORCAR MAKERS IN PUTTING MORE CARS ON THE road by using the strategy of styling attracted the envious interest of people trying to sell all sorts of goods for the home. That pioneer of automobile fancification, General Motors' Harley Earl, turned marketing statesman in the mid-fifties by inviting other industries to share in the automakers' wonderful formula for everlasting prosperity. "The bringing about of 'dynamic obsolescence' in other industries," he stated, "represents one of the greatest challenges to industrial designers." His challenge was quickly accepted. Business Week reported that "other industries—notably electrical appliances—are bringing themselves up-to-date on the styling concept of Detroit. General Electric Company representatives spent considerable time at Ford this summer and fall inquiring into the Ford technique of organizing and operating a styling department and merchandising the stylist's products." <sup>1</sup> Another thing that created envy in the appliance industry was the way the rival motorcar manufacturers managed—despite all the talk about secrecy—to stress the same new features each year, whether they be tail fins or eight headlights. Was this the result of clairvoyance, massive inter-shop spying, or quiet exchange of views at industry-wide meetings? Some sort of exchange certainly seemed to be involved. Home Furnishings Daily reported a widespread yearning in the homefurnishing field for more co-ordination in springing innovations on the public. "There are some who believe the industry's product improvements have been dissipated because they are too widespread," it reported. No one firm had all the new features, and rival advertising was pulling the public in many different directions. It added: "They compare the appliance business in this case . . . to the car business, where the big improvements are usually general in any given year, and not limited to only one firm." So it was that what industrial designers called the "Detroit Influence" began spilling over into many lines of marketing. The head of an institute of appliance manufacturers admonished his members, "We have got to develop dissatisfied customers." News began leaking out that appliance makers were attempting to systematize the creation of obsolescence of desirability. The business journal Forbes commented in 1956: "Keeping-up-with-the-Jones rivalry will be exploited by home appliance makers in an upcoming campaign to convince Americans they should replace refrigerators, ranges, and washing machines every year or so. . . . Front-running Frigidaire has already kicked off its sales campaign with a slogan: Planned Product Obsolescence." Frigidaire, it should be noted, is a division of General Motors. Newspapers began carrying reports that soon the housewives of America would be renewing their kitchens every two or three years with sparkling-new appliances. When financial columnist Sylvia Porter heard reports that Frigidaire was embarking on a campaign of obsolescence creation, she called the head of Frigidaire to ask about rumors that Frigidaire would have an entirely new trade-in formula. The Frigidaire chief confirmed the rumor and, she reported, explained: "We have committed ourselves to a program of Planned Product Obsolescence." The replacement revolution was on. A number of months later, during the 1958 recession, Home Furnishings Daily carried this headline: "Planned Obsolescence Creates Sharp Rift in Appliance Industry." It said no other area of the major-appliance business was commanding so much disagreement as that of the program of planned obsolescence "under which the industry has been working." The main grievance causing the "rift" was the widespread feeling that the industry was still not doing enough to create obsolescence. And the next year the same journal carried this headline: <sup>2</sup> "Obsolescence to Key Westinghouse Drive." Dealers, it explained, were being urged to point out to prospects "how obsolete 1949 appliances are." In 1960, Consumer Reports quoted a Westinghouse official on the need of a "new look" every year in order to assist sales. Complete redesign each year, he said, would be too costly. "But changes only in decorative trim will satisfy the dealer, please the customer, and effectively 'obsolete' the previous year's model." The home builders and home furnishers, too, were eager to nibble at the tempting apple of obsolescence creation. When I spoke before a meeting of a national association in the construction field, a home builder from central Texas who preceded me shook his fist at the several hundred builders in the room and told them to get out there and create more obsolescence. One of the nation's largest mass builders, John Long of the Phoenix area, began offering new models every six months. And builders across the land began trade-in plans to encourage owners of "used" homes to switch to their new homes. Business Week reported: "The home building industry is finally taking a cue from the auto industry. . . . Like the auto makers the home builders are trying to foster 'planned obsolescence' by putting more emphasis on styling, etc." People who couldn't afford an all-new home were urged at least to spruce up by buying new fixtures for their "used homes." Home builders began talking excitedly about the House of Tomorrow, which will come in sections, and all or part of the house can be traded in for a new model. The kitchen of tomorrow is to be bought as a unit, with annual model changes available for the discontented. Appliance companies were reported considering building entire prefabricated walls and even rooms with their appliances built in. The whole wall could be traded in. Business Week reported that homeowners would be encouraged to trade in a room just as they now trade in their car on a new model. And it added that there would be "national brand advertising to see that they do." As for home furnishings aside from appliances, here are a few of the specific home furnishings where plans for obsolescence creation were going forward: CHINA AND GLASS. Retailing Daily reported: "Take a hint from the auto manufacturers: play up newness; make the public conscious of their old glass and china. Let them know it is stylistically obsolete." <sup>3</sup> FURNITURE. Home Furnishings Daily, quoting the counsel of Louis Cheskin of the Color Research Institute: "The manufacturers' next step is to promote psychological obsolescence . . . promote one specific design—possibly limited to one or two pieces of furniture every year . . . [this] should be promoted in conjunction with a brand image as a symbol of up-to-dateness for that particular year. Every five years a completely new grouping should be promoted. . . . In other words, a minor change every year, a major one every five years." <sup>4</sup> BEDS. United States Steel, a major producer of bedsprings, in 1960 prepared a massive campaign to change American ideas about the right size for a bed. It hoped to swing North Americans away from the longstandard fifty-four-inch double bed to oversized and twin beds. United States Steel was reported prepared to spend a million dollars to put consumers and retailers into a mood to yearn for larger beds. Its campaign was called "Space for Sleeping." In this drive it had the cooperation of bedding manufacturers, who also would benefit by any outmoding of the standard bed since there would be an increased demand for larger mattresses, frames, sheets, and all the other fixings. SEWING MACHINES. A letter written by the public-relations consultant of a major sewing-machine company revealed the president's plans for launching new models. It said: "The regular introduction of a new line ought to lead, he feels, to the obsolescence psychology so important to autos, refrigerators, etc." FLOOR COVERINGS. The assistant general sales manager of Armstrong Cork Company was reported as stating: "[his] company has developed a program of planned obsolescence designed to bring a change in product acceptance every five years." BATHROOM SCALES. One major manufacturer of scales was reported to be embarked on a plan to come up with new designs that would make obsolete the scales that are already in 60 per cent of American homes. The specific styling techniques that were perfected to out-mode the home products already owned by Americans were interesting for their ingenuity and bore more than a little resemblance to the techniques used by the automobile designers. For one thing, they sought to modify the profile or silhouette of many of their products, just as automobile designers had squashed down their product during the fifties. The automobile designers had stumbled upon the streamlined, teardrop shape as a symbol of modernity. This shape, which came from the discoveries of aircraft designers, had less but some plausible functional relevance in automobile design. But the relevance of the teardrop look became completely unclear when applied to such things as refrigerators, stoves, meat-grinder handles, electric irons, orange juicers, and radios. Wind resistance seems a strange preoccupation for the designers of such products. By the late fifties the teardrop had run its course. Very shortly after refrigerator makers began talking about the imperative need for planned obsolescence to cope with mounting inventories, refrigerators abruptly received a new shape. Suddenly they no longer seemed designed for flight with rounded corners and oval contours. The new refrigerators were boxes again, with sharply squared corners. With impressive unanimity the major refrigerator makers discovered the square look. I have before me pictures of seven major brands in 1959. All seven have the severely straight lines of a rectangular slab with sharp, square corners. By the spring of 1960, a trade journal was reporting that appliance makers were starting to push two-door refrigerators in "their efforts to break up the growing log jam of refrigerator inventory," The log jam amounted to nearly 800,000 unsold units on hand. The television manufacturers sought to modify the profile of their product by a different approach. In 1957, when sales turned sluggish, the cry went up for a drastic change that would outmode existing sets or would persuade people to buy a second set. The industry responded by unveiling the new Slim Look. Sets abruptly became—or seemed to become—shallower. To achieve the slim profile, the makers used a squat 110-degree picture tube instead of the regular 90-degree tube. Companies competed to see which could get out the slimmest set. By 1958, Sylvania was promoting in large advertisements its "Sylouette," which it claimed had a "cabinet only ten inches deep." Technically that was correct. But the tube mask bulged three inches out in front of the cabinet, and the tube guard bulged three inches out to the rear of the cabinet, to give the set itself a total thickness of sixteen inches. The functional excuse for this race to a new slim profile was that it would permit the set to fit into a bookcase. This, however, hardly seemed to be a crying need, since most television-set owners did not own bookcases. Karl Nagel, chief of television testing for Consumers Union, said the Slim Look was "only to create obsolescence." When I asked an engineering executive of one of the largest television-set manufacturers about the trend to slim sets, he shrugged and said, "Just style." Mr. Nagel pointed out that the slim set with its squat 110-degree tube did not produce as good a picture as many 90-degree tubes, since certain types of 110-degree tubes developed considerable optical distortion. Furthermore, all the components of the chassis had to be specially mounted for slim sets, so that they became much harder for a serviceman to get at. Another tack taken in producing obsolescence was in the use of colors. The chairman of the Color Standardization Committee of the Institute of Appliance Manufacturers helped lead the way in this by pointing out in 1956 that color could be the "greatest technique for creating obsolescence in the major appliance industry." <sup>5</sup> He suggested that the appliance industry get behind a program of color changes, and that the members "quit having a guilty complex" about the idea of finding an orderly and economic method for satisfying consumer desires. He added, "That is to say, if color will help sell goods, let's use color and use it as an efficient sales tool." For a few years appliance showrooms became a riot of pastel colors. The white refrigerator left in a home began looking like a relic of a bygone era. The stylists' fascination with pastels exhausted itself before the fifties ended, and the trend in color went right back to white, with some venturing into fancification with tracery effects. Left in the backwash of the change were several hundred thousand homeowners who had believed pastel to be the wave of the future. The marketers also made heavy use of gadgets and trim to create a new look. Stoves and washing machines were emblazoned with control panels suggesting they were prepared to take off for outer space. I counted thirty-five buttons and dials on one Hotpoint gas stove. Others had almost as many. Consumers Union found instances, upon dismantling stoves, where certain of the dials had no connection underneath the cover. They were dummies. The complex panels also served another purpose. They flattered the housewife's ego. Only she, it was implied in the promotions, was capable of mastering such a magnificent scientific instrument. This motivation was pointed up in Product Engineering in a discussion of the guilt feeling many homemakers had nowadays because homemaking was being made too easy for them with all the easy-does-it automatic appliances. The report explained that this "guilt feeling has been overcome in designing automatic appliances by putting great emphasis on complex-looking dash-panel assemblies to house the controls. Through such design techniques we compensate for the latent 'guilt feeling' of the user by giving her controls and pushbuttons she alone can use creatively." Or take two other innovations that were hailed as steps forward but might just as properly be characterized perhaps as planned obsolescence by running up and down stairs. In the early days of television all sets had transformers. Around 1951, sets were unveiled without transformers, and this "advance" was proclaimed as making the sets better, more modern, and more fashionable. Then in 1959, several major companies began proudly unveiling new sets that had transformers again. These new sets were said to be safer and better performing than the old-fashioned transformerless sets! The other example is the turn-around shelf in refrigerators. General Electric introduced such a feature as a great boon to the housewife. Then in December, 1958, a trade journal carried this complaint made by an appliance dealer: "We were just getting a tremendous public acceptance on the GE turn-around shelves when GE dropped them. We're getting tired of building up a demand for new gadgets only to have the manufacturer drop them for another gimmick." Mass home builders, too, were experimenting with the possibilities of creating obsolescence of desirability through the development of styling trends. During the late fifties, lattice windows and other smallpaned windows were being introduced in mass-produced homes in many parts of the nation. In the West and parts of the Midwest, a Cinderella house was being promoted. It had latticed windows, steeply pitched roof, scalloped eaves. James Mills, who serves as a consultant on marketing strategies for builders throughout the nation, told me that builders are not unaware that small windows and steep roofs, if widely accepted, can create obsolescence in existing houses. The trend to small windows might, for example, outmode every home in the nation with a picture window. As for the steep roof, many builders hope that, too, is a trend. A number of builders hoped or anticipated that the exterior profile of homes would shift away from the horizontal look exemplified by the ranch house of the fifties to more upright lines, just as the motorcar was moving toward verticality. David Muss, who had built nearly a quarterbillion dollars' worth of homes, announced firmly in 1960: "The twostory house is coming back." In the appliance field a good deal of uneasiness was developing about the growing reliance upon planned obsolescence of desirability. Some within the trade castigated "phony obsolescence" and "warmedover face-lifted phonies." Still, as E. B. Weiss of Advertising Age pointed out, the resistance to bringing out a new model annually in both the appliance and automobile field was but "a tiny trend." He felt that despite all the lip service "in the end, competitive necessity calls the tune." Still, he hoped some progress could be made against some of the "chicanery," "fluff," and "nonsense" during the sixties. We now say farewell for the moment to planned obsolescence both of desirability and of quality. The best brief summary of the cost of all this built-in obsolescence to the public is offered by Dexter W. Masters, director of Consumers Union, who states: "When design is tied to sales rather than to product function, as it is increasingly, and when marketing strategy is based on frequent style changes, there are certain almost inevitable results: a tendency to the use of inferior materials; short cuts in the time necessary for sound product development; and a neglect of quality and adequate inspection. The effect of such built-in obsolescence is a disguised price increase to the consumer in the form of shorter product life and, often, heavier repair bills." The repair bills Americans were encountering—as they reflected an effort to keep the nation's output of goods and services mounting— deserve a separate brief inspection. ## CHAPTER 12 ## The Repairman's Paradise "When a \$300 fully-automatic washer with whistles and bells on it won't run properly, it's not as effective as the medieval practice of beating clothes on rocks."—GEORGE YOUNG, president of the Cincinnati Better Business Bureau.<sup>1</sup> AMERICANS WHO STILL BOTHERED TO KEEP BOOKS ON THEIR SPENDING were finding that a greater portion of their income each year was going to repair their cars, appliances, furniture, and other possessions. In hundreds of American cities, people had become so harassed by the problems of coping with a variety of repairmen that for an annual fee— and 10 per cent of all the bills—they were channeling their calls for help through an intermediary or clearinghouse. As automation wiped out hundreds of thousands of jobs in goodsproducing industries, the slack was being taken up to a large extent by new openings in the service industries. One of the great and growing service industries was product repair. By 1960, the nation had twice as many repairmen—or about two million—as it did before World War II. And companies building replacement parts frequently were enjoying a greater volume of business than the makers of the products. Sylvania's director of research predicted in 1960 that within three years Americans would be spending two and a half times as much a year for television service, parts, and installation as they would be paying for new television sets. An official of Kelvinator estimated that Americans were paying sixteen billion dollars a year for service on all products—and would be paying nearly twice that by 1975. In 1960, a spokesman for Kelvinator, announcing his company's determination to concentrate on making basic improvements as they could be developed and to avoid making an annual overhaul, observed that such a course would enable Kelvinator to slash in half its rate of service calls on automatic washers during their first year of operation. The large makers of motorcars, appliances, and other products moved in to share in this exploding field by setting up servicing organizations—and thus expanding their total volume of business. The servicing organization affiliated with a major television manufacturer, as an example, began handling nearly half of all calls for servicing ailing color television sets. The head of this group pointed out to a convention of dealers in Chicago that the more money people can be persuaded to pay for a new television set, the more freely they will be willing to pay for servicing without haggling. One reason that charges for service on a color set can be higher than on a black-and-white set, he explained, "is [that] the customer has paid more for his set and, therefore, is adjusted to pay more for servicing that set." He concluded by saying, "The future of the servicing industry is extremely bright and profitable." There were charges that some manufacturers were encouraging their dealers to sell the products themselves at cost if necessary in order to make their real profit out of their servicing operation. A car dealer complained to a Senate subcommittee that an official of the company producing the cars he sold had criticized him for not finding more things wrong with the cars brought into his garage. He wasn't doing enough to promote the sale of parts. Many repairmen, whether company affiliated or independent, were developing a zest for repairing and replacing parts that became a phenomenon of the times. The president of a national electronic servicing association observed (possibly in a jovial mood) a few years ago: "What we'd evidently like to see is a TV set that works perfectly for the first thirty days but breaks down regularly every thirty days thereafter" (after the warranty is up). Another amiable comment worth noting on the attitude of many repairmen was that offered by the chairman of a national association of dealers. In the late fifties he said: <sup>2</sup> "Unfortunately we have forgotten how to charge for service." He then told how an optometrist he had heard of worked. After the optometrist had fitted a customer with glasses, he would tell the customer that the charge was ten dollars. If the customer didn't blink, he followed with, "For the frames, and ten dollars for the lenses." He added, "We should learn from this how to inform our customers of service prices." (Later the same year, Time magazine carried a report that in Detroit twenty out of twenty-two repairmen spot checked had proved to be overcharging for work.) Automatic washers and dishwashers were requiring an average of two service calls during the first year of operation. Television sets were requiring 1.4 calls the first year, and electric driers and refrigerators were quite likely to require at least one call the first year. On some "epidemic items"—brand models rushed into production with little testing—breakdown rates ran much higher. Behind much of the product failure was lack of quality control—or quality deliberately controlled to a short-life level. And behind much of the high cost of product maintenance were buck-happy repairmen. In many communities, however—and my own included—the repairmen are mostly competent, conscientious, and dedicated. Beyond all these factors of debasement of quality and banditry by repairmen there were several objective factors about modern appliances that helped make them expensive to maintain and that helped increase the business volume of servicing agencies or replacement-parts manufacturers, and, in some cases, the manufacturers hoping to sell new replacement units. For example: There were more things to go wrong. Those added luxury features that so delight copy writers were adding to the prone-ness of products to break down. The rush to extras on washing machines in the form of cycle controls, additive injectors, increased the number of things that can develop ailments. The Wall Street Journal noted: "Parts and accessory dealers naturally are pleased with the added extras put on new cars." They should be. I have two neighbors who bought station wagons in 1956. One bought a model with power steering, power brakes, automatic shifting, power windows. The other—a curmudgeon type who doesn't think that shifting gears and raising windows by hand are too much of a strain—bought a car without any of the extras. His years of ownership of the car have been relatively trouble free. (And by spurning the extras he saved several hundred dollars at the outset.) The other neighbor who bought the car with all the extras moans that he got a "lemon." His car, he states, has been laid up at the garage seven times, usually because of malfunctioning of the optional equipment. Replacement parts were costing more. The gismoed motorcar was a good case in point. A creased fender that in earlier years could be straightened for a few dollars was now, with "integral paneling" and high-styled sculpturing, likely to cost \$100 to correct. The wrap-around windshield was likely to cost three to five times as much to replace as the unbent windshields that motorcars had before the fifties. Ailing parts were increasingly inaccessible. In their preoccupation with gadgetry and production short cuts—and perhaps obsolescence creation—manufacturers often gave little thought to the problem of repairing their products (or deliberately made them hard to repair). Sales Management commented that "products are not designed for service." It told of a steam iron that could be repaired only by breaking it apart and drilling out the screws. Some toasters were so riveted together that a repairman had to spend nearly an hour just getting to the working part. And many complex appliances had to be largely dismantled in order to replace a fifteen-cent light or a ten-cent spring. Product analysts at Consumers Union told me that air-conditioning units in automobiles were often cluttering up the engine compartment so badly that it took an hour or two to remove a rear spark plug. Built-in appliances—which were being hailed as the wave of the future—had to be disengaged from the wall before repair work could begin. Many of these built-ins were simply standard units without coasters and could be repaired only from the rear. Repairing had come a long way from the day when Henry Ford I built his cars so that any owner could handle all repairs with the help of a simple set of tools that Mr. Ford provided. A Ford dealer in the late fifties complained to a Senate subcommittee that he often had to buy up to three hundred dollars' worth of special tools every time a new model came out. A television repairman who arrived at my house with a vast kit of equipment told my wife he couldn't even carry all he needed these days because of all the changes in component design, which he felt were often pointless. Necessary parts were often hard to obtain. An acquaintance told me she had to get along for nine years with a plastic control knob missing from her gas range because she couldn't buy a replacement. Finally, out of embarrassment, she got rid of the stove even though it still worked satisfactorily. The plastic knob had snapped off soon after the stove was purchased. A man on Long Island related angrily that his \$2,000 pump became useless within two years because a two-dollar part that had broken was no longer obtainable. Some companies have gone to great lengths to keep supplies of replacement parts. Maytag boasts that it can replace any part on any washer it has made in the past thirty-three years. But only a few companies could make the same claim, or probably would care to. When I have questioned them, they have usually responded that they maintain replacement parts "as long as a demand for them exists." The demand, however, was likely to mean a profitable demand. Another problem was that the wave of mergers, especially in the appliance field, had left many products orphaned. The company absorbing your brand usually has no more than nominal sympathy for your troubles with the product that was made before they took control of the company. Still another problem was the bewildering variety of models that each major company produced each year. In the jungle of similar-but-different models it was often extremely difficult for even the most conscientious repairman to stock knobs or timers for every variant. Manufacturers often failed to provide information that would facilitate repairs. Recently, The Boston Herald editorially protested that appliance manufacturers were getting so "cozy" with service manuals that customers seeking them got the impression they were "censored as if they contained obscene material." The Electric Appliance Service News likewise expressed indignation on behalf of servicemen, or at least independent servicemen. It said, "Our mail is loaded with gripes daily from servicemen throughout the country lamenting their inability to obtain service manuals from certain manufacturers." Often this coziness has sprung from the desire of the manufacturer to keep the repair business to itself and out of the hands of independents. The News charged that "some manufacturers do not make service manuals available to all independent repairmen and therefore it is almost impossible to make repairs easily and properly—and at a time-saving expense." Another problem was that the manufacturers often hid the model number near the bottom of the refrigerator or in the pit beneath the burners in a gas stove. The manufacturers of many products have never even bothered to agree—in all their trade meetings—where the model number should be placed. And no replacement of parts can be made until the model number is located. The trend was to encourage customers to replace parts rather than to bother repairing them. If the manufacturers could not persuade people to throw away the whole product and buy a new one, then the next best thing was to persuade them to throw away parts. The high cost of repair work was also a factor here. Business Week reported that "garages, service stations and dealers now have the attitude that it is much cheaper to replace a defective carburetor, say, with a new or rebuilt one than to fix it." A television announcer extolling the wonders of the sponsor's cigarette lighter stated that if the lighter became defective it could be fixed in a jiffy just by replacing the entire lighter mechanism. On the other hand, it should be noted that one of the very few companies left in North America that offer an absolutely unconditional lifetime guarantee on their products for both parts and labor is the ZIPPO lighter manufacturer. The increasing difficulties of the housewife in keeping her multitude of products in good working order were perhaps best summed up by the late Bernard De Voto when he said: "If a 50-cent belt in the vacuum cleaner wears out, the agency will not replace it in less than six weeks and not then until a series of young men have tried to sell her a new machine, alleging that hers is antiquated."