# Progress Through Planned Chaos "We get our best prices on sales days. With the sales spirit in the air the customer usually assumes your prices are real low. . . .I make this mass sales hysteria work to my advantage."—An appliance dealer in Astoria, New York.<sup>1</sup> THE DICTIONARY ON MY DESK DEFINES RAZZLE-DAZZLE AS "A STATE or event of confusion, bewilderment, bustling." Marketers concerned with developing strategies for expanding sales in the face of the specter of satiation were finding that a state of "confusion, bewilderment, bustling" was often the ideal one in which to operate. They were not just negligent in not giving consumers information needed for making prudent purchasing decisions. Frequently they engaged in deliberate obfuscation of values. Most Americans above the really poor like to splurge and can splurge most easily if they can assure themselves that somehow they are getting a bargain. And some could vent their latent sadism by taking advantage of the dire circumstances forcing the merchant to make a sacrifice. The merchants accordingly placed themselves in the posture of desperation. The "bargains" they offered were in many cases the kind that would enable the customers to turn in their old power cruiser on a new bigger one complete with sundeck and ship-to-shore telephone. In such situations it was essential that the customer not have any easy way of knowing how much real value was promised by the price tag. Two informed comments suggest the state of affairs that has developed in the modern American market place: "We have reached the point where price lists are no longer prices; they are simply advertising devices."—An official of the Federal Trade Commission. "For a widening range of goods only a sucker pays list prices."— Consumer Reports. Value had become the hidden ball, and sometimes the seemingly irrelevant factor. The product analysts at Consumers Union who judged the performance of twenty-two automatic electric toasters a few years ago found that the best buy at that time for over-all quality was a \$14.50 toaster. On the other hand, a toaster priced at \$39.50 ranked twelfth among the "acceptable" toasters. And of the three toasters rated as "unacceptable," all three cost considerably more than the \$14.50 "Best Buy." (In a subsequent test toaster qualities seemed more in line with price differentials.) Colston Warne, Amherst economist and president of Consumers Union, has concluded that there is slight if any correlation between the price and quality of much of the branded goods offered on the market. He pointed out that "one may, for example, buy inferior margarine at any price between 22 cents and 44 cents a pound; one can buy the highest grade on the other hand for either 23 cents, 27 cents, or 40 cents." The cost of manufacturing a product had less and less relation to the price that marketers might decide for strategic reasons to set on the product. Much of the obfuscation of value was created behind the screen of the trade-in lure. The high trade-in had proved to be enormously effective in luring prospects who already owned the product being offered. In many lines, however, offering to accept trade-ins raised a problem. There was little demand for used refrigerators, washing machines, electric razors. In some lines the goods accepted in trade were widely regarded as nuisances that had to be endured. Yet the pretense had to be maintained that the trade-in was valuable. An anonymous salesman who discussed selling strategies in a Home Furnishings Daily series told how to cope with the prospect who springs a trade-in on you unexpectedly. He wrote: "In case someone walks in practically wearing a badge proclaiming 'I have a trade-in' naturally I boost my prices to accommodate him. [However] If a customer should hit me between the eyes with his 1947 Frostcool just when I've got a deal clinched I have two choices. First is to allow no more than \$10 or \$15 for the old box, then try to add it back in as service and delivery charges. Second is to tell him pointblank that the old box is worthless and that I am doing him a favor taking it away." The strategy of upping the price to cover the trade-in allowance— called "the packed price"—was, of course, widely used in automobile merchandising until a federal law required the posting of a "suggested" price at the factory, which made packing more difficult. However, price packing was still widely used in the appliance field. An example of the chaos that could be achieved by the trade-in device occurred in the electric-razor field. One firm was offering a fivedollar trade-in allowance for "anything that shaves." And a trade journal reported that many outlets offering to take the trade-ins on the various brands of razors they were selling "will easily oblige without a physical trade-in." The trade-in, in short, had become a price-juggling device. And one New York discounter ran advertisements offering Remington electric shavers that carried a list price of \$29.50 for \$10.97 if the customer had a trade-in, or for \$15.47 if he didn't have a trade-in. By 1959, several of the major shaver makers were quietly withdrawing their trade-in offer. Sunbeam, which led the withdrawals, explained that the trade-ins had become a nuisance to dealers and distributors. A young New York City housewife, Jean Banks, described to me her bewilderment regarding values in supermarkets as she pushes her little cart through miles of aisles. She explained: "If my grandma wanted to know anything about what she was buying, she would ask her grocer. I've never seen my grocer. I think he lives in Scarsdale. Grandma paid the same price whenever she bought a particular product. I have to be a mathematician to figure out if it would be cheaper to buy two packages for the price of one; to buy one package at the full price but use my 25¢-off coupon; to buy three packages and get my purchase price for two of them refunded by sending in three boxtops; to buy two for 29¢ or three for 44¢; or to buy one package at the full price and use the boxtop entry blank to enter a contest where I may win my height in silver dollars. It's all very complex." The editor of Progressive Grocer confided to his grocer readers that "goods we want to push are priced 'two for,' 'three for,' or 'ten for.'" And he added: "Some women even think that's the only way the store will sell the item." One soap manufacturer proclaimed a "½ price sale" for a three-bar package. It turned out, if the buyer read the small type, that he was really being offered two of the bars at full price and the third bar at the half price. Housewives across the nation were becoming so overloaded with dinnerware that came in detergent boxes—and displacing needed detergent—that they were running out of shelf space. A Ford dealer in Westchester County, New York, was offering free mink stoles with each automobile sold. Perhaps the most astounding offer, however, was that of an appliance store in Lafayette, Louisiana. To each person willing to buy certain of its deluxe electric ranges at the regular suggested retail price, it promised to furnish three rooms of the customer's home. It would give away free a living-room set, a bedroom set, and a dinette set! With this and other lures the store sold \$42,000 "worth" of major appliances in four days. In the late fifties reports circulated that in central Ohio morticians were offering green stamps to clients; but there is no evidence that such offers are being made today. The game of printing price tags and price lists consumed a great deal of the marketers' creative thinking. So much "pre-ticketing" was being done that the Federal Trade Commission expressed concern. In pre-ticketing you print price tags with blue-sky prices and then slash them with a heavy black pencil to emphasize your desperate state. A new bargain price is entered. In 1958, Printers' Ink carried this headline: "FICTITIOUS PRICE ADVERTISING IS LIKE SIN—EVERYONE'S AGAINST IT, BUT ALMOST EVERYONE ENGAGES IN IT OCCASIONALLY." The ads were likely to use such phrases as "regularly— "usually——," or "made to sell for——." Watches were an example of products that seldom sold for their supposedly regular price. A blanket distributor provided tags on which the merchant could print whatever list price struck his fancy, but the blankets were to sell for \$8.95. The Federal Trade Commission issued a complaint against Howard Stores Corporation, a nationwide clothing chain, for using such advertisements as "\$49.55, usually \$70." It said, "Howard never sold any of the advertised merchandise at the purported regular price." A survey of appliance prices that covered nine famous name-brand items showed that none of these items were being sold at the list price in any of thirty stores checked in eight cities. When the Federal Trade Commission singled out a furniture store in Washington, D.C., for advertising to consumers that they could "save \$80" from regular furniture prices, the store offered an interesting and belligerent defense. The store contended that the term "regular" as used in the trade didn't really mean the regular price charged but meant the price the furniture could be sold for if the "regular" markup was applied. It proceeded to blast the meddling Federal Trade Commission for being so "overprotective" of consumers that it would ultimately produce a "race of idiot consumers" who would be at the mercy of sharp sellers if they ever stepped foot outside the protected shores of the United States. Another selling strategy that had become so prevalent that the "overprotective" Federal Trade Commission was disturbed was the practice of proclaiming "bargains on a string." A seemingly fantastic bargain is advertised to lure prospects when there is no intent of actually selling such a product. The bargain offered has disappeared by the time prospects begin beating on the door. Or the ten-cubic-foot refrigerator offered for \$119 to attract prospects turns out to be a discolored box made by a firm that disappeared in a merger some years back. But the store does just happen to have some really excellent bargains just marked down from a fanciful regular price. In the wilderness of tire marketing, obfuscation of value was additionally produced by the strategy of planned chaos of nomenclature. The industry refused to set any standards to control what tires could properly be labeled "first line," "second line," or "third line." And the names the tire marketers dreamed up for their various "lines" of tires often offered the tire buyer no clue to the quality he was buying. Here, for example, were three tires offered by Firestone in 1958: Firestone Super Champion, Firestone Deluxe Champion, Firestone Deluxe Super Champion. Which would you say was the first-line tire? Number three? You are wrong. That was the second-line tire. The first-line tire was number two. One basic measurement of the quality of a tire is the number of miles its tread will last. Analysts at Consumers Union found that there was only a general likelihood that first-line tires would give more mileage than second-line tires. In 1959, one of the four tires found to give the most miles per dollar was B. F. Goodrich's second-line rayon tube-type tire. And among thirteen first-line nylon tires of one size tested, the amount of miles that could be expected ranged from 28,600 down to 18,400. A second basic measurement of tire quality is carcass strength, a safeguard against blowouts. Consumer Bulletin reported in 1958 that Motor Vehicle Research, Inc., found in testing three hundred tires that "the cheapest lines of the makes tested were found to have better carcass strength than so-called 100-level or first-line tires. In one make, the first-line tire was the poorest of all tested while its third-line tire was the best of all tested in strength of carcass." In some fields where prices had only slight relation to quality or cost of production, the prices were set on the basis of psychological considerations. Many marketers in the Alice-in-Wonderland economy of modern-day America found they could raise their total number of sales by raising the prices they charged. Marketing strategist Louis Cheskin warned producers that "many a product fails because . . . the price was too low." <sup>2</sup> It doesn't have a "quality" image that a higher price tag can give. A Western manufacturer of cosmetics who acknowledged marking up some of his products 900 per cent was quoted as explaining: "A cheap line wouldn't do well. Women wouldn't be caught dead telling their friends they bought cheap cosmetics." The cost of the lipstick sold in a fashionable store often is only a penny or two more than the lipstick sold in a five-and-ten-cent store; yet the fashionable store may charge \$1 or \$2 more for it. In one case a company offered two brands of lipstick. One cost the buyer twice as much as the other. Both lipsticks used the same formula. A cosmetics company expanding overseas is finding that it can sell nail enamel to natives of the Congo. Many of the native women can afford—at the prices charged—to buy only enough enamel to cover one fingernail. But that seems to give them pleasure. Perhaps they will hound their husbands to work harder so that they, the wives, can cover more of their nails with enamel. Still another company was hailed in a marketing journal because it had succeeded in raising the price level of all cosmetics. For example, it boldly began selling nail polish at a price 500 per cent higher than its competitors. This, one gathered, was real marketing statesmanship. In general, the trend was toward competing in such factors as image building, styling, packaging, preferred shelf position, and premiums rather than on price. According to one estimate, half of all small electrical housewares manufactured in the United States were being bought as premiums by the trading-stamp companies. All these promotional approaches, of course, raised the price of food sold in supermarkets. They also gave the big company—as in the automotive field—an edge over the challenging newcomer who didn't have the resources to hammer home an image. As economist Colston Warne has pointed out, "One of the important functions of advertising is the creation of a haven from price competition." Possibly some of this general disdain for price competition that has developed simply reflects the prevailing mood of a people in an era of abundance and abandon. Some marketing experts argued that as a society attains more and more abundance price as a decisive factor tends to retreat into the background. Pierre Martineau, research and marketing director of The Chicago Tribune, reports that a survey made for one national chain suggested that only a third of the women shoppers studied were economy-minded, while almost as large a group saw the shopping expedition as "fundamentally social." <sup>3</sup> They were looking for a friendly, congenial environment. Many were newcomers in the areas studied; and the stores and their personnel were becoming substitutes for the friends they had left behind. Whatever the reasons, startling similarities in the prices charged by supposedly relentless rivals began appearing. This would suggest that prices were chaotic only when the marketers desired them to be. Consider the evidence of groupthink in the tire market, which appeared a few pages ago to be so chaotic. The tire makers could not agree on minimum standards for a "first-line" tire; yet in their list prices they showed astounding unanimity of thought. Consumer Reports noted in July, 1959, that despite extreme variations in tread wear found in first-, second-, and third-line tires "the Big Four manufacturers' suggested list prices for these lines were phenomenally similar. On first-line nylon tubeless 6.70-15 blackwall tires the list price for each of these brands was \$37.06. In the 7.50-14 nylon tubeless versions the list price of \$38.81 for these Big Four brands also did not vary by even so much as a penny." The Report of the Senate Subcommittee on Antitrust and Monopoly of the Judiciary Committee (85th Congress) on administered prices in the motorcar industry noted a similar extraordinary coincidence. It observed that "differences in price for comparable models of the major producers have been all but obliterated." It found a "striking uniformity" of prices among the three major producers. In some cases it related, there was actual identity in price to the last dollar; in the majority of cases, the companies were within a few dollars of each other. This was particularly true of General Motors and Ford; in the case of Chrysler, a traditional margin of about \$20 usually prevailed over the prices of its competitors, it said. The president of General Motors announced in the mid-fifties that "price cutting should not be a factor in competition." His views prevailed. When the 1957-58 recession developed, and the motorcar market was glutted, the major motorcar makers chose cutting production to cutting prices. And this was the general pattern set by American marketers. Historically, recessions have corrected the inflationary prices that have developed in times of rising prosperity. But in the 1957-58 recession the marketers refused to let prices follow the normal downward adjustment to lessened demand. And after this recession had ended and businessmen were congratulating themselves for holding prices firm, Sales Management asked its marketing readers: "Did you prolong the recession? That's a nervy question, isn't it? But seriously, now that most of the panic is over, do you feel that you did the right things . . . ? Did you cut prices below a sensible level? Did you try to sell your product or simply undersell competitors? Did you emphasize price above product? Or did you justify your fair price to your customers? Did you cut advertising to save money?" Quite possibly, in an era of abundance, cutting production rather than prices is a justifiable response to lessened demand. It at least reduces the drain on resources. But the head of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago commented that the new ability of industry to increase prices in the face of falling demand meant that industrial leaders were embracing "a new, a novel and a frightening theory of consumer demand." There was widespread acceptance among marketers, at least until the sixties began, that creeping inflation—or ever-higher prices—had become a permanent part of the American way of life. And consumers had learned to agree. Inflation was accepted as "normal" as long as the nation had full employment and an ever-increasing man-hour productivity rate, with labor and stockholders splitting the benefits of the man-hour gain rather than passing them on to the general consuming public in the form of lower prices. And this general resignation to price upcreep became in itself a significant sales goad to keep customers coming. The public was told— apparently correctly—that nothing would ever again be as cheap tomorrow as it was today. So hurry, hurry, hurry. A housing developer on Long Island warned prospects to hurry because his houses were being raised \$1,000 in price a month hence. And the appliance salesman-author who did a series on sales techniques confided how he worries an undecided prospect by disclosing that "prices are going up on these goods." As a convincer he pulls from the drawer a handful of undated manufacturers' bulletins announcing imminent price rises. He has saved them over the years for just this use. There was, by late 1960, the possibility that overabundance of goods—plus the pressure of foreign price competition—would ultimately force a halt to reliance upon creeping inflation. But this possibility remained to be tested. As the sixties were about to begin, Sales Management advised its readers that for better or worse they should assume that they would "have to increase the price of their product one or more times a year during the next decade." (The italics are mine.) And it warned: "You will probably want to consider frequent introduction of new models with new price tags so that you can argue that the higher price is buying superior features." ## CHAPTER 14 ## Selling on the Never-Never "INSTANT MONEY-CASH LOANS WITHIN 20 SECONDS"—An advertisement on behalf of Georgia's Citizens & Southern National Bank system. AS THE WANTS AND NEEDS OF MOST AMERICANS BECAME LESS AND less insistent owing to the general upsurging of material abundance, the mass sellers achieved new break-throughs in devising techniques to make the buying of products "easy." Spectacular gains were made in perfecting ways to help—and induce—Americans to buy more and more against future earnings. Admen began referring to the strategy of selling on credit as one of the great "creative" forces in the American economy. An official of the National Retail Merchants Association asserted that credit was becoming "a way of life in this country." When the American Bankers Association met in Chicago during the late fifties, a principal speaker was Charles H. Brower, head of the Batten, Barton, Durstine & Osborn advertising agency. Sales were then lagging. He stated: "If we are to break the present economic log jam, you installment-credit bankers and we in advertising must do it by working together." He urged the bankers to get into the swing of advanced merchandising techniques in order to make borrowing from them both moral and fun. The lending man, he said, should "get up from his desk, and smile and shake hands with the prospective borrower, no matter how poor a credit risk he appeared to be." Loan-company officials at a conference were admonished by a psychological consultant to use "positive" rather than "negative" appeals. They were told that the average American still had oldfashioned puritanical ideas about money and going into debt. This prospective borrower must be assured that what he is doing in seeking a loan is not shameful but is rather a forward-looking step. The borrower must feel "I am on my way up. I am taking out an advance payment on my invested earning power next year." Under the new pressures, credit changed from being a simple financial aid to being an active sales tool. More and more retailers were discovering that it was no longer enough merely to have a credit plan available for consumers. It was also considered imperative to promote the use of credit. An appliance center in Albuquerque, New Mexico, began requesting that credit applicants list the names and addresses of three friends or relatives. These references named soon received a letter from the store stating: "Dear Friend: Yesterday we had the great pleasure of opening an installment account for——. When they were here in the store we asked them for the names and addresses of any of their relatives whom they thought worthy of inviting to our store. May we at this time, etc., etc., etc. . . . No obligation, nothing to buy. Our coffeepot is always hot, etc. . . . Sincerely,—— The possibility of buying on the never-never—as the British so quaintly call going into debt to buy—makes people into better prospects. The selling task is eased. Less persuasion is required. An official of the Institute for Motivational Research has explained that people generally are afraid of making a purchasing decision of major importance. The possibility of buying on credit, however, seems to postpone the necessary decision. "It removes the air of finality inherent in a cash transaction. In a sense the credit buyer makes up his mind to buy while he is still paying for the item." To the seller, another major appeal of selling on credit is that customers tend to buy more when they discover they don't have to put up the money immediately, and they are less apt to look hard at the price tag or haggle for a lower price. It should not be overlooked, furthermore, that many retailers were discovering to their pleasant astonishment that they could often make more money on the interest charges in financing a purchase than on the sale of the item itself. For all these reasons the public began being assaulted with a massive barrage of gay invitations to go into debt. The growing dependence of the economy on credit buying became painfully evident for example in 1959, when the nation was starting off on a new buying binge, after the recession. The Wall Street Journal cited these three among many comments from across the country. A department-store credit manager in Fort Worth, commenting on his store's recent sales gain, said, "Every dollar of the increase came from credit sales." A banker in Elwood, Indiana, said his bank had experienced an "astronomical" increase in consumer loans in the past two months. And an executive of the J. C. Penney chain of variety stores commented that never have people "been so conditioned to buy what interests them on credit." During the fifties, consumer indebtedness rose three times as fast as personal income. The average American family by 1960 was taking on about \$750 of installment debt alone each year—and paying it off at the rate of \$650 a year. Millions of Americans were embracing never-never buying with zest. The chairman of General Foods cited this new zest of consumers to buy on credit in talking of the "creative" possibilities in modern merchandising. He explained: "Today's consumer insists on having whatever he or she wants at once, whether it be a house, an automobile, an electric refrigerator, a power mower, a suit of clothes, an Easter bonnet, or a vacation trip, and paying for it out of income yet to be earned." His emphasis was on the words "at once." The president of a bank in Rutland, Vermont, commented less enthusiastically. "The young people here are the same as everywhere else. They have to have a house and a car right away." He added that in recent years the whole idea of indebtedness had changed. Author William Attwood in surveying American attitudes reported encountering a truck driver near San Diego who lamented: "The more money I make, the more payments I seem to take on. There's no letup." <sup>1</sup> Whatever the hazards to the consumer, a great many Americans were finding that the fastest way to build a fortune was to deal not in products but in money itself. Mildred Brady of Consumers Union remarked to me that "the most profitable product sold today is money." The truth of this could be observed by standing at the main intersection of just about any American small or middle-sized city. The majority of neon signs to be seen are likely to be pulsing or blinking messages such as "LOANS" or "CREDIT." And the changing tenor of the invitations to seek loans could be seen in New York's subway trains. They carried posters showing "Mr. Consumer" as "king" being eagerly offered a cigar by a moneylender of the Beneficial Finance System. The lender gaily welcomes the "king" with the remark: "CASH? Just say the word. Get your budget in good shape with a Beneficial bill clean-up loan\_\_\_We like to say Yes!" A good many debt-ridden Americans were being attracted by the idea that they could somehow "clean up" all their debts by taking on one new master-type debt. Once-lofty banks were joining in the scramble to ease the public into indebtedness. They complained that the retailers who were happily and profitably selling money were intruding on their territory. They tried to outbid the other lenders with coaxing messages on billboards and over the airways. Hundreds adopted the idea of issuing credit cards that permit a person to go into any branch or into just about any store in town, flash the card, and say, "Bill the bank." In Dallas, Texas, some of the banks have been opening branches right on the floor of appliance stores. And in some cases these bankers-on-the-spot have been rebating to the store owner about a third of the interest charges they collect from financing appliance sales. Meanwhile, millions of Americans began stuffing their billfolds with other kinds of credit cards that enabled them to buy baseball tickets, perfume, old master paintings, men's suits, bedrooms, and meals. Analysts at the Institute for Motivational Research had little difficulty figuring the secret of the appeal of credit cards. They explained: "Credit cards are symbols of status. They are also magic, since they serve as money when one temporarily has no money. They thus become symbols of power and inexhaustible potency." And these magic symbols of potency were not hard to come by. The Diners' Club regularly had men handing out application cards to passers-by on both floors of Grand Central Station in New York. In the early days of the Diners' Club, co-operating restaurants could justify the extra 7 per cent service charge they had to pay the club on the ground that it brought new business. But when in many cities most of the major competing restaurants joined up with either the Diners' or other dining credit clubs, membership then became a necessary expense to keep from losing business. It didn't take the restaurants belonging to credit clubs long to decide who should bear the burden of the 7 per cent assessment. A great many passed the charge on to the customers in the form of higher prices for food and drink. Still, restaurateurs felt the credit cards were good for business. Restaurant Management surveyed the credit-card situation and concluded credit-card customers were much more likely to be big spenders. In large restaurants "the average check that is charged through a major credit-card company will be from 20 to 25 per cent higher" than the check paid by the cash customer. It noted that some restaurant owners were fearful that the increased prices on the menu might be disastrous to the industry, but it counseled such timid operators to be of good heart: "We sincerely doubt that the customer will even notice— particularly the credit-card customer." Several of the nation's larger variety-store chains began giving trial runs to "charge-it" plates. Many department stores came up with revolving credit schemes. And automobile credit rose 800 per cent during the decade ending in 1957. When a motorcar merchant advertised "100% financing plus easy terms," it usually meant a small loan would be arranged on top of the maximum installment loan. The profits to be made in financing motorcar purchases became so inviting that many car dealers fought as hard to get the financing as they did to clinch the sale of the car itself. A St. Louis dealer pointed out in Automotive News that selling the financing and insurance could bring as much as \$146 extra profit on each sale. In home buying, more and more millions of cash-short prospects were being persuaded to take a second mortgage or to "buy" their home on a "contract" basis. Under the common contract, the would-be homeowner pays a very high interest—7 to 13 per cent a year—and doesn't really take possession of the home until the contract is paid off. He is allowed to live in it just as if he were renting it. In some parts of Michigan, I found most of the new homes were being sold on "contract." Meanwhile, two novel types of mortgage were being pioneered to lure the hard-pressed and the imprudent. One was the "open-end mortgage," which becomes a sort of revolving charge account. As you pay off some money, you can keep going back for more with little red tape—and if you're not wary, you keep yourself deeply in debt for life. The other tantalizing new deal in mortgaging was the "package mortgage," which has become immensely popular with both sellers and buyers. Under this "package," the mortgage covers not only the cost of the home but also many of the extras, such as laundry and kitchen equipment. Builders in St. Louis reported that the "package" helped them double their sales. And a Fort Wayne, Indiana, builder told me that a third of his home buyers were buying their appliances in the "package." Appliances were included in the twenty-year mortgages. Some were even buying intercom systems for their homes with speaker attachments in the breezeway and ordering that the cost of them all go into the "package." Builders found that offering the package mortgage not only eased the financing but helped promote sales. Women were more easily sold on a house if it already contained many sparkling appliances. And few computed the cost. Buying a refrigerator as a part of a package mortgage with the cost of the refrigerator being paid over a thirty-year period almost doubles the cost of a \$400 refrigerator. Rug manufacturers tried to get wall-to-wall rugs into homes under a package mortgage. The Federal Housing Administration finally balked at this. One reason for the balking was the obvious one that few rugs made today can be expected to last the life of a thirty-year or even a fifteenyear mortgage. Investigating home-buying habits in the Midwest, I found that most home buyers do not compute the burden they are undertaking when a home is offered to them on a long-term mortgage. In Toledo, Ohio, a salesman and his wife proudly showed me their customized pre-fab ranch house which they said they had just bought for \$19,500. Did they have a mortgage? Yes, it was a thirty-year kind for \$17,000. How much was their interest rate? The husband said, "Gosh, I don't know . . . 4½ per cent, I think." His wife thought it was 6 per cent. Their difference in guesses could make a difference of nearly \$6,000 in the total cost. Actually, it turned out, they were paying 5½ per cent interest. The one thing they did know was that their monthly payment was \$96.53. We quickly multiplied that figure by the 360 months they had committed themselves to pay it, and added on the \$2,500 cash down payment. The result was a figure that plainly dismayed them: \$37,250.80. That was the real price of their home, not \$19,500. As the sixties began, the American practice of buying possessions on the never-never began spreading on a large-scale basis to several other parts of the world. Conservative British banks entered the installment-lending business as goods became more plentiful in that country. Joseph Wechsberg reported that in Yugoslavia na otplatu (buying on installment) was becoming the new passion. He related: "Everybody I know in Belgrade is falling hopelessly and enthusiastically into debt. They can plunge to one third of their income and the monthly payments are automatically deducted from their pay check." <sup>2</sup> (This automatic deduction might ultimately have to become the only feasible solution to the problem of collection in the United States.) Radio Moscow chided the Yugoslavs for becoming slaves to a "degenerate capitalistic habit." But this just proved that sometimes the propagandists in Moscow don't know what Soviet planners are up to. Within a few weeks after Radio Moscow sneered at Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union began offering her citizens products not in short supply such as cameras and radios on an installment-plan basis. How far Americans could continue running up debts against future income without inviting disaster during an economic turndown was not clear. The typical American family was several thousand dollars in debt, counting both short-term and long-term commitments. On the other hand, marketers claimed, Americans had a wider margin of income left after the real necessities of life were provided than ever before—though the definition of necessities was continually being upgraded by the managers of the Labor Department's Cost-of-Living Index. Thus the argument depended somewhat on whose definition of "necessity of life" you were using. The Federal Reserve System's Board of Governors observed that "relatively little is known about the safety margins in the finances of consumers who borrow on an . . . installment basis." It added that the evidence suggested the margin of safety was getting narrower. A survey by insurance companies revealed that the average American family was about three months from bankruptcy. That was its cushion against disaster after two decades of unparalleled prosperity. For millions of families—especially for many living in suburban subdivisions—the brink of disaster was much closer. They were so pressed in meeting their host of monthly installment charges that they were stopping smoking temporarily or putting their wives to work or seeking debt-consolidation loans, or all three. A number of members of the National Retail Merchants Association began voicing apprehension about the mounting level of installment debts. The controller of a Midwestern firm said he was now watching collections more carefully than sales. And the controller of a Pittsfield, Massachusetts, store said: "One really bad year in business and this whole credit setup will fall like a card house." In early 1960, bankers in many areas of America were reporting a notable increase in requests for loans on motorcars that were not up to their usual standards for risks. And the bankers were also uneasy because the amount of money they had tied up in installment loans had risen four times as fast as their deposits during the past decade. By the spring of 1960, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was expressing concern that too many consumers were getting too deep into debt. It noted that half of all American families were being forced to devote a fifth of their income to meeting commitments on regular payments and stated that this was a "very real reason for concern" and that a continuing of the borrowing trend would "result in an unduly heavy burden on the borrowers—particularly in the event of a more serious recession than those experienced in recent years." Other reports noted that the average American family was now forced to set aside 18 per cent of its after-taxes income to pay its consumer debt and monthly mortgage charges, whereas ten years ago the figure was only 11 per cent. Meanwhile, the chief economist of a leading advertising agency was predicting that in the coming decade the proportion of family income going to pay installment debts would keep rising. If debt collection does become a plaguing problem, American creditors might consider the idea of using conspicuously painted debtcollection trucks to call on the homes of the delinquents. The dread of neighborhood gossip would inspire debtors to exert themselves more to make repayment. Such trucks were under consideration by a merchants association in Great Britain. Whatever their ability to repay, American consumers were spending an ever-larger share of their income in meeting interest charges. The bewitching new credit-card plans of banks were usually costing the users 12 to 18 per cent interest. In addition, the banks were often collecting 5 or 6 per cent from the stores for providing the business. And the stores in many cases were raising their prices to the customers in order to cover this expense. Banks with such plans were often disguising their stiff interest charges by advertising that their loans cost 1 per cent or 1½ per cent a month. Any interest charge not translated into true annual cost is meaningless. Yet many stores were specifically forbidding their sales personnel to talk about true annual interest. Many short-term loans were offered the public as 3 per cent. The fine type disclosed that they were 3 per cent a month, so that they were actually 36 per cent loans. In 1960, Senator Paul Douglas began pressing a bill (S.27S5) that would require moneylenders of all kinds to disclose in writing to consumers exactly how much interest the borrower would have to pay on a true annual basis. Sales Management pointed out that the bill might send "buyerson-the-cuff into a tailspin." And an executive of a national merchants' association argued that people expect to pay more when they buy on credit, but that "to give them too much information about financing costs would only befuddle them." As millions of American citizens began adjusting to spending more than they earned, living in the red was glorified as not only fun but patriotic. Sales Credit News printed a parable about the wise and foolish lovers. The foolish lovers—in its version—decided they still couldn't afford to get married, so they both set out on a systematic program of saving until they could unite and establish a home without going into debt. They were foolish, the journal explained, because they were postponing and thus missing a portion of the pleasure of living life together. And, further, they ''deprived the national economy of two or more years of family consumption." The wise lovers, in contrast, were not deterred from uniting in matrimony merely because they had no savings. They got married immediately, took their honeymoon on credit, bought a car on credit, bought a home on credit, and furnished it on credit. These heroes of the consuming battle line, the journal said, "stimulated production, created employment, increased purchasing power, raised the standard of living." The journal didn't say whether they lived happily ever after. Chances are, they didn't. Living close to insolvency with unpaid bills pressing creates marital strains between husbands and wives. This, of course, is a matter of common observation, but it has also been substantiated by a survey made for a group of insurance companies. When investigators for U.S. News & World Report sought to diagnose the mood of America by nationwide interviewing, they asked many people what their biggest worry was. The answers predominantly were "money" or "making ends meet." The report stated: "It's a worry that cuts across all income groups, all occupations, and all ages." A minister in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, reported that "in 75 per cent of the cases where people come to me with marital problems, money enters in." And a doctor in the same city said many of his patients' aches and pains were caused by money problems. "You buy a car on time and stretch the payments over thirty months, and you've got a chronic pain. You really have." A Long Island kidnaper explained his rash act by stating he had lately been harassed as a result of trying to meet installment payments for thousands of dollars' worth of gadgets and accessories he had bought for his little home. Still, as the sixties have begun with something less than jet-powered take-off, most American citizens are not particularly apprehensive that they would fall into really serious trouble because of their debts. They feel that the federal government—whether Democratic or Republican— is emotionally committed to make it safe for them to continue spending. And it has become increasingly probable that if a notable lag in consumption does develop the federal government will be under massive pressure to manipulate interest rates in such a way that saving will be discouraged and spending encouraged. When worried economists urged the curbing of easy credit, merchants and manufacturers protested that it would slow down sales and invite a depression. They quite probably were recalling the admonitions from Washington to buy instead of save during the recession of 1958. One business analyst reported then that "evidence is mounting that people are saving instead of spending, and the Administration doesn't like it." The headline over his analysis read in part: "RISE IN THRIFT SPOTTED AS DISTURBING ADMINISTRATION." William Whyte, Jr., in The Organization Man, cited an unforgettable comment he frequently encountered in the new suburbias when the people talked about the possibility of a depression. He found that they refused to believe it could happen because "They can't dispossess everybody." Meanwhile, at least one marketing consultant was speculating that the great forthcoming crop of new babies—so eagerly awaited by marketers (see Chapter 16)—might well be financed on credit. ## CHAPTER 15 ## Hedonism for the Masses "WHY DENY YOURSELF?"—Headline of an advertisement for John David men's wear. IN THE BROADWAY PLAY, "A RAISIN IN THE SUN," THE SON IMBUED with modern ideas voiced a lament that would delight most marketers. He cried: "I want so many things, it drives me crazy. . . . Money is life!" His old-fashioned mother, sad and perplexed, replied: "You can't be satisfied just to be proud. . . . How different we've become!" The marketers of the United States, in addition to developing specific strategies for moving goods, sought to develop an overall strategy that would make all the others more effective. They sought to generate a love for possessions and a zest for finding momentary pleasures. They sought to encourage Americans to break out of their old-fashioned inhibitions and to learn to live it up. All this, it was hoped, would produce a permissive mood for carefree buying. Americans traditionally have liked to think of themselves as a frugal, hard-working, God-fearing people making sacrifices for the long haul. They have exalted such maxims of Ben Franklin as: "A man may, if he knows not how to save as he gets, keep his nose to the grindstone." Puritanical traits were esteemed necessary to survival by the settlers struggling to convert forest and prairie into a national homeland. By the nineteenth century, however, a flamboyant streak was beginning to emerge clearly in the American character. Emerson observed that Americans, unlike Europeans, exhibited "an uncalculated, headlong expenditure." As more and more Americans found themselves living in metropolitan areas, hedonism as a guiding philosophy of life gained more and more disciples. People sought possessions more than formerly in emulation of, or competition with, their neighbors. Quite possibly, the environment of thickly settled areas brought a lessening of serenity and a feeling of being swallowed up that impelled the people to strive for distinctive emblems and gratification through consumption. The growing availability of manufactured goods undoubtedly had a great deal to do with the rise in hedonism. The upheaval of wars and the uncertainty of life in an atomic era also contributed to the live-for-themoment spirit. During the fifties, however, another force came powerfully into play in the promotion of hedonism. Many marketers, as a calculated strategy, sought to promote a mood of self-indulgence in order to promote sales. The puritanical inhibitions of Americans were seen as blocking consumers from enjoying the wondrously rich, full new way of life that marketers were ready and eager to provide. Advertising agencies in their house organs declared that the puritanism still lurking in many Americans should be a major target. Admen were exhorted to re-educate people's thinking into "healthier channels." Ernest Dichter, head of the Institute for Motivational Research, was in the forefront of marketing consultants who spelled out for sales managers the opportunities provided by the new mood of selfindulgence. He reported to them that "America is experiencing a revolution in self-indulgence." People, he said, were more and more prone to ask, "Why shouldn't I?" They were increasingly willing "to give vent" to their "whims and desires." And he added: "We've learned that one rarely makes one's ultimate goal—so why not enjoy life now?" At other times he seemed a little less certain this mood had become general and pointed out why it should prevail and how it could be made to prevail. Americans had been "caught in a cobweb of tradition and moral concepts which . . . have portrayed life as a sequence of misery, worry, and toil." What was needed, he said, was a more reasonable attitude toward life, with fun and pleasure and happiness no longer considered unethical. "Learning to accept the permanent 'burden' of a good life is one of the most challenging psychological problems of our age." His publication Motivations said that one of the central problems of the day was to give people permission to enjoy their prosperity, to feel moral not immoral in their hedonism. Advertising displays and sales promotion plans should be geared to this theme. Many marketers joined in the game of tearing away the puritanical cobwebs and educating the public away from being old-fud Prudence Pennies. Professor Otis Pease, Stanford University historian, took a comprehensive look at advertising in the late fifties and concluded that advertising was seeking to discredit thrift and was working to whet the acquisitive impulse. Here is one kind of problem they tackled. Furniture makers were annoyed by the persistent old-fashioned habits many parents exhibited when their children married. These parents still thought they were helping the newlyweds by giving them hand-me-downs, pieces of furniture they could spare from their own homes. Some furniture men began urging at trade-association meetings that the furniture industry sponsor an advertising campaign designed to shame both parents and the young couples away from such a practice. The joys of self-indulgence were stressed, consciously or unwittingly, in many sales messages. A New York department store told women in a full-page advertisement: "Even If You Own a Dozen Coats, You Can't Afford to Miss. . . . " A San Francisco store featuring luxurious fixtures and accessories for bathrooms beckoned passers-by with the sign, "PAMPER YOURSELF!" Sales experts began searching for occasions to provide the public with an excuse for splurging. Holidays took on ever greater importance in their planning. A bed merchandiser cried out that he was offering "BIGGEST WASHINGTON'S BIRTHDAY SALE IN OUR HISTORY—ONE DAY ONLY!" A New York department store ran a full-page advertisement showing children's shoes with the headline: "EASTER IS A NEW PAIR OF SHOES." An appliance store in Erie, Pennsylvania, sold \$30,000 worth of goods in a giant three-day St. Patrick's Day sale with prizes. On the second day of the sale, members of a local church held a cake sale in the store. Many who came for cake also bought appliances. By the beginning of the sixties, Mother's Day was computed to produce \$17 worth of purchases for every mother in the land. Father's Day produced \$7 worth of buying per father. And Graduation Day assured \$10 worth of purchasing per graduate. The most cherished splurge day, of course, was Christmas because that was not just a day but a whole season. Spending per family ran into hundreds of dollars. An average teen-age girl could be counted upon to make at least \$55 worth of purchases in anticipation of Christmas each year. The main streets of some Midwestern cities were draped with Christmas decorations by the second week in November. Several weeks before a recent Christmas, the Arthur Murray organization in New York proclaimed: "Hurry: Special pre-Holiday Arthur Murray Offer! GIVE YOURSELF THIS CHRISTMAS GIFT . . . Now!" The Christmas gift ahead-of-time that the reader was invited to give himself—in this notable interpretation of the traditional Christmas spirit—was a dancing lesson. Two advertisements within a few feet of each other in a New York subway car indicated pretty well what was happening to Christmas under the pressures of consumerism. One showed Santa Claus holding on his lap a cutie wearing du Pont nylon stockings. The other showed a different Santa happily smoking Kent cigarettes. On television, on the other hand, a third Santa was expressing his preference for El Producto cigars. To a child it must have all been very confusing. An appliance retailer confided to Consumer Reports: "If you have to hit a guy [customer] with higher prices, do it during the Christmas selling season when he feels good." Merchants were doing such a good job of promoting the giveaway spirit around Christmastime that attorneys for defendants in claims cases maneuvered to try to keep their cases from coming before a jury in the latter half of December. As sales planners searched the calendar for possible splurge days, they found that the calendar revealed poor planning. There were no really good holiday excuses for splurging between Father's Day in June and the Christmas season. A movement began to set aside August 1 as "Friendship Day." On this new holiday each citizen could show— through purchasing gifts—how much he cherished his really good friends. We shouldn't overlook Valentine's Day. It has become one of the big newcomers in the eyes of marketers. It is in fourth place among the holidays producing significant increases in sales. A New York department store filled its many windows with merchandise, and over each it placed the sign: "HOW DO I LOVE THEE? LET ME COUNT THE WAYS." The ways, as enumerated in the window displays, included mink stoles, copper frying pans, ties, and negligees. As Valentine Day, 1960, approached, the publication Sales Sense for druggists called Valentine's Day "a real sweetheart of a day to increase sales" for those stores "alert to cash sentimentality into dollars." Sad days as well as glad days could be the occasion for giving. Billboards in some parts of the United States showed a bouquet of flowers with the admonition not just to send sympathy. Another approach used in promoting hedonism in the United States was to encourage, to a state of chronic itch, the tendency of Americans to love change in their lives. Anything "old," "used," or "permanent," was to be disdained. A marketing expert counseled the home-furnishing industry: "Make people discover for themselves that there's fun and pleasure in changing their decor. Establish a standard based on changeability and not on permanence." All this helped provide a philosophical base for the throwaway spirit, already discussed. Home builders succeeded during the fifties in insinuating a new and odious word into the language of home merchandising. That word was "used." A new house became a "used" house if the buyer decided a month after moving in that he wanted to sell it. Any used house was to be viewed with suspicion if not contempt. It was soiled merchandise. (Your author should confess that in his entire lifetime he has never lived in anything but very used houses.) The executive marketing board of the National Association of Home Builders was admonished by the president of an advertising agency in late 1959 to set up a multimillion-dollar advertising fund to make Americans want to get rid of old homes. He proposed that the association make the average American as dissatisfied with an antiquated house as he would be with a twenty-year-old automobile. John and Mary Drone, the chronically overstrained subdivision dwellers in John Keats's The Crack in the Picture Window, were caught up in the organized scorn of the used house. Keats related: "The Drones never once considered anything but the purchase of a new house. Not for an instant did either entertain the notion of a spacious—and far cheaper—older house. . . . Newness became a criterion surpassing cost and, in some cases, need. Second-hand development houses were sold to the kind of people who buy second-hand automobiles solely out of need." Pierre Martineau, research and marketing director of The Chicago Tribune, observed much the same wariness of the old in his Motivation in Advertising. He reported: "Tradition bores us now. Instead of being an asset, it is virtually a liability to a people looking for the newest—the newest!—always the newest!" A survey made by a magazine for the mechanically inclined revealed that the typical American changed his or her car mainly for the sake of change. He wants a new one. General Motors in 1960 began running double-spread advertisements glorifying the general idea of new-car buying. It proclaimed. "THERE'S NOTHING LIKE A NEW CAR TO ENRICH YOUR FAMILY LIFE." Hedonism was also actively promoted by campaigns to persuade the American people that they deserved to enjoy the pleasures of enriched living instantly and without lifting a finger. "Instant" and "ready" became the magic words in marketing everything from soda pop, whipped cream, and cherry pies, to headache remedies. The noted business philosopher, Charles G. Mortimer, chairman of the board of General Foods, lectured businessmen that one of the great challenges of the day was promoting "creative convenience." He pointed to the "tidal wave of craving for convenience" sweeping the country and stated: "Today, convenience is the success factor of just about every type of product and service that is showing steady growth." He continued, "Just about everything we buy today must be ready to use, ready to wear, ready to plug in, ready to turn on, ready to take home . . . ready to serve. This aspect of our national impatience represents probably the greatest challenge to marketing creativeness that American businessmen have ever faced." Tomorrow, he predicted, even the home would be prepackaged and sold "almost ready for a family to move in and start living!" According to one joke, maids considering the possibility of favoring a family with their services were likely to inquire cautiously: "Do you peel or thaw?" An elderly supermarket operator in Indianapolis shook his head sadly as he pointed out to me all the "convenience" foods he was selling to bridge-playing wives. He muttered: "The husband works all day and then comes home to a dinky little precooked pot pie." He said he would not permit them in his own home. Ready-to-serve meals are likely to cost up to 50 per cent more than home-prepared meals. He told of jesting with one young redheaded wife who was inspecting his bakery-made cherry pies. He asked her why she didn't make one herself. She replied: "I wouldn't know how to begin." This elderly man began showing her by listing the ingredients. When he said "shortening," she asked, "What's that?" He explained and began showing her how to roll out the crust. She wrinkled her pert nose and said, "It sounds terribly messy. I think I'll take this one here." Hundreds of wives, he told me with a shrug, buy his expensive jars of chicken a la king every week when they could make it themselves from leftovers for less than a third the cost. Yet these same wives, he said, see themselves as frugal, thrifty guardians of the family's dollars and keep complaining to their husbands about the terrible time they have making ends meet because of the high cost of food. Recently businessmen have discovered that the United States is embarking on a "new age of elegance." Women's clothing is becoming "casually elegant." Merchandisers of furniture have become obsessed, in their talk, about the public's new craving for elegance. Gold-plated bathroom faucets are soaring in popularity, as are gold-plated toothbrushes. Jewelers have joined in hailing the new era of elegance. And the food marketers have decided that the United States is becoming a nation of elegance-loving epicureans. The sale of luxury foods doubled in four years as North Americans were persuaded to nibble \$3,000,000 worth of caviar a year, and the more brave of them to stomach such delicacies as chocolate-covered ants. A domestic champagne producer, in its advertisements, has begun urging married couples to break out champagne for breakfast. It calls breakfast the "critical time in matrimony." And it proposes that the spouses "face up" to each other with champagne whenever they begin feeling that "the bloom is off the marriage." Still another aspect of the promotion of hedonism, we should note, has been the drive to make Americans more impulsive in their shopping habits. Du Pont found that impulse buying in supermarkets had soared nearly a third in a decade. Supermarkets changed from being simple, stripped-down marts designed to pass on the economies of mass buying to the consumer. Originally they had operated on a slim 12 per cent markup. Now the supermarkets have become shimmering carnivals offering free automobiles as prizes, offering premiums, trading stamps, soft music, and hundreds of packages that have been shrewdly designed, at considerable expense, to present an imagery that will cry out to the passing shopper: "Grab me!" The result of all these changes in the supermarkets is that markups have risen on the average to nearly 20 per cent. The family's apparel items also have become impulse items. Modern Packaging reported that shirt manufacturers felt it was no longer sufficient to wrap a shirt in a transparent, protective film. The package had to be upgraded by creating more invitingly printed transparent packages. Louis Cheskin, director of the Color Research Institute, meanwhile reported to marketers: "The consumer does not judge the product, he judges the package." Men's belts might be a case in point. Traditionally, belts offered for sale simply were hung from a store rack and presented as a utilitarian item. However, marketers were finding that men's belts could be sold to both men and their wives as impulse items if adroitly packaged. Mr. Cheskin pointed to the experience of the makers of Paris belts. Mr. Cheskin was invited to address a conference of the top management of the Paris company on the subject, "Why Should Belts Be Packaged?" He summed up his advice to them in his book, Why People Buy. He said that for the wife in this era of abundance "the mere act of buying a belt for [her] husband . . . is filled with deep psychological implications." Here is the surprising analysis of these implications as they were turned up by his researchers: "Marketing tests and experience have shown that normally a woman will not be attracted by belts hanging from a rack. Hanging belts do not arouse a woman's interest. A hanging belt has no attraction power. It is limp, unstimulating, and undesirable. To the normal, healthy, energetic woman a hanging belt is not a symbol of virility or quality. It cannot possibly be associated with her man. It is not an appropriate symbol. It presents a negative image." On the other hand, "a belt that is encased in a psychologically potent package" has favorable symbolism and "is naturally assigned the role of symbolizing respect, affection, and even great love." The potent vessel chosen to house this love symbol was a chaste white cardboard container with a transparent plastic dome appropriately called "Vista-dome," perhaps because it resembled a vista-dome bus. The success of all these strategies for promoting hedonism was apparent from a number of reports. Printers' Ink reported that a new type of feminine customer in supermarkets was evolving. This customer, it reported, "is constantly looking for something new." An editor in Pittsburgh observed: "The people who are complaining about high prices are the ones coming out of supermarkets loaded with bottles of cocktail cherries, goldfish in plastic bags, frozen foods, TV dinners, phonograph records—all sorts of things you really don't have to have so fancy." Sociologists reported finding that American families, regardless of their income level, tended to wish they had about 25 per cent more than they had. As the sixties opened, the business and financial editor of The New York Herald Tribune summed up for businessmen what prevailed by saying: "If a whole people can be said to wallow in prosperity, Americans will do it in 1960 as, uninhibited, they gluttonously reap the fruits of 183 years of free enterprise." He said that the Luxury Life had become the goal of most Americans. Perhaps the most impressive report on the swing to hedonism was made by the research division of The Chicago Tribune. Its study, entitled The New Consumer, was based on a \$100,000 study of homemakers from three different social layers in the suburbs of Chicago. At all three levels a trend toward hedonism was evident. Mr. Martineau, director of research and marketing for the Tribune, summed up the findings of the investigators as they related to this trend in these words: "There has been a shift from the philosophy of security and saving to a philosophy of spending and immediate satisfaction . . . more selfindulgent spending, a tendency to equate standard of living with possession of material goods. . . . " Consider the change in attitude toward spending money. At the upper-middle-class level, a wife in the town of Golf recalled the simple, frugal pattern of life that her own parents had maintained and then exclaimed: "We're so different. We are absolute spendthrifts. We don't have a dime. We live for today. . . ." Another wife in this same town asserted: "You must spend just a little more than you can afford to progress higher in life." The reports noted that the wives at this level tended to see "conspicuous consumption" as investment, not waste. One wife in Golf, the daughter of a prosperous, self-made lumberman, said: "My father feels it is disgraceful the way we spend money—he feels we should save for a rainy day; but I feel I may not live for the rainy day, so I'm going to enjoy each day to the full now. . . . My parents did not decorate their home every four or five years, as we do." At the somewhat less prosperous suburb of Park Forest, wives showed the same restlessness and pleasure in spending. One wife said that the difference between herself and her parents was that she buys "new furniture and lamps because we get tired of looking at them any longer." Another woman said: "Today, we're always looking to buy something that's a time saver so that we can have more time to relax and enjoy life." Still another woman said that when she and her husband buy draperies, rugs, and furniture they hope the goods "don't last as long as our parents' did." Women in the third community of Home Town, primarily a working-class and lower-white-collar suburb, revealed this same fascination with accumulating material things. The report stated that in Home Town "the gadget . . . becomes the symbol of 'finer living.' "