# CHAPTER 18 ## The Vanishing Resources "We Americans have used more of the world's resources in the past 40 years than all the people of the world had used in the 4,000 years of recorded history up to 1914. . . . Man is becoming aware of the limits of the earth."—FAIRFIELD OSBORN THE AVERAGE AMERICAN FAMILY THROWS AWAY ABOUT 750 METAL cans each year. In the Orient, a family lucky enough to gain possession of a metal can treasures it and puts it to work in some way, if only as a flower pot. When the President's Materials Policy Commission surveyed United States consumption patterns in the early fifties, it concluded that "the United States' appetite for materials is Gargantuan—and so far insatiable." It found that each individual man, woman, and child was using up an average of eighteen tons of materials a year. Other estimates have suggested that the average American requires, for his style of life, ten times as much raw materials—not counting food—as the average citizen of the rest of the free world. Only in America would a housewife hop into a two-ton vehicle and drive downtown to buy the thumbtacks that she forgot to buy on her regular shopping trip. And only in America do people in midwinter warm themselves almost entirely by the wasteful method of burning thousands of gallons of oil to heat up a house rather than by getting much of their warmth by wearing warm clothing. The virgin continent that American settlers fell heir to a mere three centuries ago is being stripped of its material riches at an everaccelerating rate. This wealth has made chronic optimists of the people of the United States. There has been so much wealth that they have come to assume there will always be more where that came from. As an American, Rowland Howard, observed in the last century, "You never miss the water till the well runs dry." Today, however, the weight of the evidence does not support much optimism. Even by the early fifties, the Materials Policy Commission was observing: "The plain fact seems to be that we have skimmed the cream of our resources as we now understand them." Since then the skimming has cut down into the milk still further. Today, Americans are consuming considerably more materials than they produce. The United States must now depend on other lands for most of the "strategic and critical" materials essential to the nation's defense. The warnings and recommendations of the Materials Policy Commission were largely ignored. Historians may say that the most fateful change occurring to the United States during the first six decades of the twentieth century is that during that period the nation changed from being a "have" nation to a "have-not" nation in terms of essential natural resources. On December 9, 1958, The New York Times carried this memorable front-page headline: "DANGEROUS DECLINE FOUND IN U.S. NATURAL RESOURCES." In the four-part analysis that followed, Times writer Richard Rutter left his readers with little ground for optimism. He found "an enormous drain on supplies of vital raw materials" and added, "The survival of the nation is involved. An assured supply of iron ore, petroleum, natural gas, metals, coal, and a host of other materials is essential to the strength of the American economy. Without these, the greatest industrial machine would come to a halt." Later on he stated: "Run down the list of the twenty-six most important materials ranging from antimony to zinc. The 1975 outlook: The United States dependence on foreign sources will range from 100 percent to 25 percent." As the United States became more dependent upon foreign sources for its supplies of vital materials, it of course became more vulnerable to a cutoff in case of war or in case a foreign government chose to hoard its resources or chose—or was induced—to sell its prized resources elsewhere. The United States dependency on foreign sources is bound to grow with each passing decade at a violently increasing rate if the population and the individual consuming habits of its citizens grow as briskly as marketers hope they will. It should not be long before even the most blissfully optimistic American will recognize the truth of Fairfield Osborn's comment in The Limits of the Earth, "It is evident that, year by year, the entire problem of adequacy of natural resources for the maintenance and development of our civilization is becoming more acute." Let us, then, look briefly at the present and future prospects of a few of the main ingredients of the United States standard of living. Metals. The high-grade ores of many metals found in the United States are running out; and United States mills are mostly geared to high-grade ores. The price trend of metals is upward. Steel, of course, is the main sinew of American industrial might—and way of life. Most of the United States steel mills require ore containing at least a 50 per cent concentration of natural iron. Such rich ore is almost exhausted from Minnesota's Mesabi Range, which was long considered to be "inexhaustible." The amount of such rich ore left in known deposits in the United States would not meet American needs for even a decade. And these known deposits are at deeper strip levels or must be got underground. Both make the ore expensive to get. More and more, the United States is being forced to use thinner ores, which require special treatment to get them up to a concentration acceptable in the mills. The United States still has mountains of lowgrade ore (taconite), but such material must be ground down to a powder and then molded into pellets. This process adds several dollars a ton to the cost. These expenses are driving the steelmakers into foreign lands in search of ores suitable for milling directly. They have found—and are vigorously drawing upon—such deposits in South America (principally Venezuela) and Canada (principally Labrador and eastern Quebec) and elsewhere. Already foreign sources are supplying a third of the iron-ore needs of the United States (the percentage of iron ore imported quadrupled within a decade), and the percentage will continue to mount. These foreign sources can meet the needs of even a profligate United States for many decades assuming that the United States is not cut off from them by warfare or the action of local governments or by mounting competition from other industrializing nations. One can reasonably inquire why United States residents should worry about their growing lack of self-sufficiency when they can get resources elsewhere in an increasingly interdependent world. Perhaps we should not worry, if all goes well. But this situation does leave the United States more vulnerable in case of war, revolution, or intensified competition for access to the planet's irreplaceable resources. Of the seven metals most needed in making steel alloys, only two are in adequate supply from domestic sources. The once-rich United States reserves of zinc and lead have become so low that they are rapidly approaching the point of being uneconomic to work. Domestic production of both has recently fallen to all-time lows. United States deposits of bauxite—the base of aluminum—have become of such poor quality that the United States hauls more than three quarters of its supply from overseas. Probably the most ominous depletion of a vital ore is occurring with that lovely, versatile metal crucial to industrialization—copper. The United States has been forced to resort to mining leaner and leaner grades of the ore. Most copper ore mined today contains less than 1 per cent of the metal, and much of the ore used is approaching ½ of 1 per cent. Many mining companies are being forced to process six times as much ore to get a ton of copper as they did at the beginning of the century. Partly as a result copper costs have risen about 600 per cent in three decades. Meanwhile, the United States has changed from being the world's leading exporter of copper to being the world's leading importer of copper. And overseas sources are showing signs of depletion, and will be available in currently acceptable grades for only a few decades at most. Meanwhile, United States marketers have been promoting the use of copper as decorative gas lamps to hang outside homes. And American women each year are throwing away several hundred million brass lipstick holders. Brass is made primarily from copper. This developing exhaustion of copper is likely to confront the many nations now starting to industrialize with a most disagreeable problem. Can they industrialize at all if copper becomes more and more of a rare and precious metal? Substitutes such as aluminum can be used in some situations at a loss in efficiency but in some crucial uses in the power industry adequate or acceptably priced substitutes are proving difficult to find. Conceivably, further progress can be made in mining extremely low-grade ores, but the gains here are likely to be relatively small. Harrison Brown, the eminent Caltech geochemist who has taken a long, hard look at United States reserves for the future, summed up the copper situation in The Challenge of Man's Future in these words: "It is clear that vanishing copper reserves will constitute a formidable barrier to world development." So much for the sinews needed by industry to expand to meet the goals of United States marketers. What about the energy needed—and the lubrication needed—to make the wheels turn and keep the homes warm and bright? In 1956, the president of General Electric proposed as a goal for the electric industry that it increase average home use of electricity by two and a half times in a decade. More recently, a vicepresident of Georgia Power Company proposed that each customer be induced to use 7,000 kilowatt-hours a year by 1969. In 1959, customers were using barely half of that amount. Fossil fuels. For energy the United States is dependent primarily upon the so-called fossil fuels derived from organic materials laid down millions of years ago: oil, coal, and natural gas. United States consumption of oil, the chief source of the nation's energy, has tripled since the end of World War II. With only one seventh of the world's proved reserves of oil, the United States has been consuming considerably more than half of all the world's production. Superficially the United States seems overblessed with oil today. Overeager or overgreedy producers have been probing the planet so intensively that they have glutted the world market. However, the rate of discovery of new fields in the United States has been declining in recent years. Those discovered tend to be at the bottom of deeper and deeper holes. In oil, the United States is clearly approaching depletion. At today's rate of consumption—not tomorrow's—the United States has proved reserves of oil sufficient to meet the nation's needs for thirteen years. There have been several authoritative predictions that United States oil production will "peak out" in the present decade. An official of Ford has asserted that the United States will be "peaking out" on oil within at least twenty years. It is known that deep in the rocks underlying the United States are billions of barrels of oil, but their location makes them presently unattainable at reasonable cost. Other billions, possibly attainable, are assumed to exist. But a study made for Resources for the Future, Inc., by Bruce C. Netschert, counted up the hundreds of billions of barrels of crude oil still conceivably present and noted that there had been a rather sharp decline in the oil discovered per exploratory well and also an increase in average depth. This didn't mean that ways could not be found to recover oil under the United States, but the study commented: "A declining success level in the search for oil may indicate that the limit of oil discoverable with current technology at current costs is being approached." And it added, "There is general agreement in the industry that spectacular innovations in discovery techniques are improbable. . . ." Mr. Rutter concluded from his investigation that the supremacy of the United States as an oil producer was "drawing to a close." In the future, the United States will be drawing more and more upon foreign oil fields, and this is putting the United States deep into the hands of Arabian and Latin-American politicians. The United States will still have access for many decades to liquid fuel that can be extracted from its reserves of shale and its still abundant reserves of coal, but both processes are expensive, especially the latter, and probably will remain so though some gains in producing efficiency undoubtedly will be achieved. The cost of obtaining oil by conventional drilling, at least in the United States, is likely to rise substantially in the coming decade. And it is only when the price of crude oil becomes sufficiently high that the wholesale mining of shale for oil will seem economic. If oil producers seem complacent about the growing inadequacy of proved United States oil reserves, one reason may be that the growing domestic scarcity does not directly threaten them. To them, the important thing is the prospect of ever-greater demand for oil. They can supply it by processing coal or shale or digging ever-deeper holes, all at higher cost, of course. They will have the nation over a barrel. Dr. Brown summed up the long-range world-wide outlook for fossil fuels by observing: "Within a period of time which is very short compared with the total span of history, supplies of fossil fuels will almost certainly be exhausted. This loss will make man completely dependent upon waterpower, atomic energy and solar energy." As I'll show in a few moments, this is not the altogether happy prospect that often is envisioned. Now we come to those crucial resources that have long been considered among the outstanding symbols of United States abundance: food, timber, water. Food. United States granaries are bulging with surplus grain, and per-acre yield of calories is still far lower than Europe's or Asia's. Therefore, food would seem to be no problem for many decades. It should be noted, however, that the exploding population of the United States will greatly increase food requirements, while the same expanding population will swallow up millions of areas of farmland by covering them with homes, shopping centers, and factories. Meanwhile, erosion is continuing. The United States has already lost a third of the rich top-soil—average nine inches—that it had when the Pilgrims landed. Because of such foreseeable pressures, several authorities have suggested that within two decades the farm lobby can relax its pressure on the United States government and stop impelling the government to subsidize the growth of unwanted food. All food then, quite likely, will be wanted. U.S. News & World Report, for example, reported from Washington: "A population increase may also bring about a solution to today's troublesome farm problem. Some officials of the Department of Agriculture are inclined to regard the present surplus as a short-term problem." On the other hand the revolution on the farm due to chemicals and pesticides may assure even an exploding population with adequate food for quite a few decades. Wood. As for timber, each man, woman, and child in the United States consumes nearly a ton of wood products a year in the form of pine-paneled playrooms, chairs, comic books, and so on. The nation's stand of saw timber has shrunk by nearly one half since Teddy Roosevelt's day. The chief of the United States Forest Service has warned that by the end of this century the nation's original stand of timber will have virtually disappeared and the wood industry will then have no choice but to cut only what it can grow. Industry spokesmen profess to be less worried about future supply of wood for lumber and paper. However, some of the major timber companies such as Weyerhaeuser have finally taken action to work out a "perpetual yield" for their timberlands; but in general the United States has at least until very recently been taking down substantially more saw timber than it has been replacing with new growth. One result is that the real price of forest products—corrected for inflation—has doubled since the turn of the century, and wood has become too expensive to use in many situations where it has been traditionally used and where its qualities make it ideal for use. Water. The task of maintaining an adequate water supply for a violently expanding population accustomed to heavy use of water presents an urgent and immediate problem. The water needs of the average American citizen have doubled in this century, partly because of the demand for showers, flush toilets, air conditioners, dishwashers, lawn sprinklers, and swimming pools. The really heavy users of water, however, are industry—it ordinarily takes 60,000 gallons of water to make a ton of paper or steel—and farmers, for irrigation. Farmers use half of all water consumed in the United States. Geographer Gilbert F. White of the University of Chicago asserts that the United States is running out of water and will face serious difficulties within fifteen years. He points out that many communities in western Texas and in Arizona, by their irrigating and sprinkling, are draining their underground water at a rate that far exceeds natural replenishment. Water tables are falling. In some communities water is being withdrawn twenty times as fast as it is being replaced. And in some areas of North Dakota and Long Island, underground water levels have fallen so low that further "mining" of the water is curbed by regulation. Most of the towns in western New York State have a chronic water problem and tens of thousands of residents regularly pay one dollar for a five-gallon jug of cooking and drinking water. Some arid communities such as in Hudspeth County, Texas, have just about given up because of lack of water. Many cities in the West are foreseeing the day when they will have to turn away all industries that are large water consumers. Long Beach, California, recently sought permission to start reclaiming for certain uses purified sewage water which had been flowing into the ocean. A select committee of the United States Senate has warned that many signs point to an "impending water crisis." Perhaps the taps won't literally run dry, but still the United States resident will pay a price. The price was described by Harrison Brown in these terms: "As time goes on we will see an ever-expanding network of aqueducts, dams, reservoirs, sewage-treatment plants, and waterpurifying units. The penalties for the improvements will be greatly increased cost of water and, above all, increased per capita expenditures of energy." United States residents tend to view all assertions about depleting resources with equanimity. As optimists they know—and are constantly reminded—that modern technology is building a golden future for them. The atom will solve all their problems. The chemists will create entirely new and magical resources to replace the vanishing old. And engineers will build machines that can economically mine leaner and leaner seams of copper, and substitutions can be made. Some of this optimism undoubtedly is justified. Aluminum is being used instead of steel in some instances to make electric light poles. Pound for pound, aluminum is a much more expensive metal—largely because so much more energy is required to produce it—but the fact that it is light in weight and doesn't have to be painted still makes it desirable. Aluminum is also starting to be used to make motorcar bumpers and wheels. Again the pound cost is high, but the motorcar makers are anxious to reduce shipping costs by employing lightweight materials. There are abundant reserves of bauxite—from which aluminum is made—overseas. And plastics—which, lest we forget, are based primarily on chemicals derived from petroleum—are proving to be acceptable and feasible substitutes for metals in a number of uses. United States Steel, for example, is now in the business of producing plastic pipe. Quite possibly by paying a price we will come to plastic motorcars and even plastic houses. E. I. du Pont reports that it has a new plastic called Delrin that is tough enough to serve for many uses where metals have traditionally been required, such as machine parts and fittings for appliances. For many uses, however, the plastics now available are clearly inadequate. There is presently slight possibility that they can make adequate substitutes for steel in structural functions. Also their vulnerability to temperature and their frequent tendency to shrink are limiting factors, and their energy cost is often high. The supply of steel also can be stretched, it now appears, from new discoveries about the breaking point of steel. Engineers are finding that steels in some uses and designs can safely take 15 to 20 per cent more stress than was previously assumed to be true. Yes. there will be many substitutions, including combinations of material still undiscovered; and there will be much greater efficiency achieved both in the use of materials and the operation of machines. Still, it is questionable whether these advances will enable the United States to maintain as pleasant an environment for the individual during the last third of the twentieth century as existed during the first two thirds of the century. The cornucopia of United States industry may still pour forth a host of consumer products. And it is quite probable that the United States can, by ingenious use of substitutes and new discoveries, avoid passing any real peril point. But in general there will be more straining, more expensive price tags on many of the amenities of life, more shortages, and more obstacles to personal dignity. The expected rise in the cost of petroleum, as the United States is forced to turn more and more to shale and coal for oil and to oil shipped from abroad, will increase, among other things, the cost of food. Farmers will begin yearning for the good old days before they sold off their horses as dog food and bought gasoline-guzzling tractors. But what about the wonders promised by harnessing the atom to produce cheap, inexhaustible energy? Subsidized atomic power plants have been built. There has been no rush, however, to duplicate them. The reactors are proving to be too expensive to build and operate to excite private investors. Lawrence Halfstad of the Atomic Energy Commission has explained, "Another widely held misconception is that atomic energy will provide cheap power for the next generation. Power from uranium is not going to be cheap soon." As the advent of the Golden Sixties was being widely heralded in late 1959, the sixth annual conference of the Atomic Industrial Forum was held in Washington. The mood of the industrialists attending it was distinctly doleful. The head of Atomics International Division of North American Aviation, Inc., told the meeting, "Achievement of a true commercial atomic industry has been pushed off many years." And the financial weekly Barrons pronounced the whole program for developing commercial nuclear power "a gigantic fizzle." In addition to the cost, another complication dimming the prospect of utilizing atomic energy in the long-term future is that the reactors largely depend upon uranium for fuel, and the United States has in known deposits only a decade's supply of uranium. If uranium becomes a major United States source of energy, the United States will find itself bidding on the world market for uranium within a short period. And many other industrializing nations—with no coal supply of their own— will be willing to pay a higher price than the United States should be willing to pay as long as it has coal available. Some observers see atomic energy based on the hydrogen-bomb reaction of thermonuclear fusion as a possible way out. Hydrogen as a source of steady energy is becoming at least conceivable as a result of break-throughs in research; but here, too, there is considerable doubt that a thermonuclear reactor can ever produce power economically by today's standards. A third complication that will arise if the United States turns primarily to the atom as a source of energy is that the disposal of the mounting radioactive wastes will become a monstrous problem. Many United States coastal cities already are alarmed by offshore dumping of the wastes. Some modern soothsayers have been saying that ultimately the world will get most of its energy by harnessing the sun. Gathering solar energy by giant mirrors, etc., appeals to the artists illustrating wondersto-come, and we may come to it; but probably not happily. Solar energy won't be cheap. Harrison Brown finds that using solar energy to generate mechanical power and electricity will be more expensive than nuclear energy "by a considerable margin." One of the great technological promises for the future is that the United States will find a cheap way to convert the water of its seas to fresh water. Industrial statesmen have painted appealing pictures of arid wastelands being converted into bountiful truck gardens, from Death Valley to the Sahara. While miracles of transformation should not be expected soon because of the cost factor, this is one of the more promising challenges, and we will examine it in more detail in Chapter 24. Another phase of the Golden Future widely predicted is that in a few decades the world's food supply can be assured by taking algae or plankton from the sea. Here the cost problem may well be overcome. But the result will not be an improvement aesthetically on the diet of today. Persons who have sampled plankton say it is no diet for joy. And it is doubtful that algae will ever match as a taste treat the cherry pies Grandma used to make (before pies went on the assembly line). It should be recognized that in a scientific sense very few United States resources will ever become really exhausted, if you are willing to go deep enough or are willing to extract from extremely low-grade ores. A hundred tons of ordinary igneous rock, Harrison Brown points out, contains among other things: about 8 per cent aluminum, about 5 per cent iron, about ½ per cent titanium, about 1/11 per cent manganese, and about 1/100 per cent copper. The factories of the future are likely to be giant chemical plants that will gulp in rocks, sea water, and air and break them down into industrially usable components. But such operations will require fantastic amounts of energy and fantastically complex plants. Unit costs of metals produced would inevitably be considerably higher than their costs today. Another uncomfortable thought that should be pondered is that most of the developments which are supposed to produce a golden era require fantastic amounts of fresh water. Nuclear power plants, plants for drawing oil from shale, and plants for preparing low-grade iron (taconite) for the steel mills are voracious gulpers of water. And if the nation's exploding population is to settle the nation's open arid areas, then air conditioners will be a required amenity of life. And air conditioners are substantial water users. Still more disconcerting, the task of making the United States economy function will become so complex when resources are no longer readily available that the lives of the human participants will have to be more highly organized. Dr. Brown suggests that the complex society of the future will require such an all-pervasive social organization that the state will completely dominate the action of the individual. There is, however, another significant possible source of raw materials which we should not overlook. That is the salvaging of existing materials. Theoretically this can greatly ease the material shortage since there are millions of tons of motorcars, refrigerators, alarm clocks, and metal play wagons cluttering attics and landscape. Much of it, however, is in town dumps or wayside gullies losing weight each year as rust devours it. In the course of pondering the wastefulness of modern Americans, I visited a number of salvage yards from New Orleans to Connecticut. It gives one a macabre feeling to watch workmen gut a 1951 passenger car before it goes into the jaws of a giant crusher. The doomed car is pushed on its side just as a butcher pushes over a chicken. Men with torches deftly remove the front and rear ends and chrome. Then gasoline is poured onto the body, and in a flash the upholstery, floor mats, sky-blue paint, and other nonmetal parts are burned away. A crane then drops the body into the crusher, which within a minute reduces it to a solid metal bale the size of an orange crate. This seemed like both a profitable and patriotic enterprise. But the salvage operators I chatted with were a gloomy bunch. They were being ruined, they said, and were glutted with "junker" motorcars and other steel scrap that seemed to hold little interest to the steel companies. Scrap prices by 1959 had fallen disastrously. Rubino Brothers in Stamford, Connecticut, was reduced to trying to buy cars for \$7 or \$8 and selling the scrap for about \$19. This left the company, on lucky days, with a \$2 profit on each motorcar crushed and shipped. In 1959, the salvaging of unwanted motorcars in the United States had fallen to the lowest point in recent years. Less than half as many motorcars were sold for scrap as were sold new. Motorcars still are being sold for scrap if the motorcar owner lives near an efficient scrapping plant, but hundreds of thousands of cars are simply piling up in junk yards and gullies. What is behind this paradox of low scrap prices in the face of shrinking iron-ore resources in the United States? A spokesman for the Institute of Scrap Iron and Steel, Inc., told me that the recent drop in demand for scrap is due to "technical changes in steelmaking which serve to reduce steel mill use of iron and steel scrap. Under the circumstances, of course, much scrap today is not being collected, a great deal is being lost by being dumped, or through erosion." One technical change occurring is the introduction of a muchdiscussed oxygen steelmaking process that uses much less scrap than former processes did. Tom Campbell, editor of Iron Age, told scrap men about the new development and pointed out still another factor working to shrink steelmen's interest in scrap. He said that several major steel companies now have hundreds of millions of dollars tied up in investments in ore deposits in Quebec and South America and need to get their investment back by using as much ore from those places as possible. He said that such factors as these have created "an absolute desire on the part of steel people to become less dependent on scrap and apparently they have succeeded." He gave to the scrap men this straight-from-the-shoulder advice: "You are now facing some of the most difficult problems that any industry could face. . . . I think that if there are anyboys among you, you had better start looking for another job because the scrap industry is only an industry for men." Any realistic appraisal of the United States' prospects on resources must also take note of the violently accelerated demand upon resources by the other nations of the world. The demand for petroleum, for example, is rising faster in the rest of the free world than it is in the United States. Italy's landscape is starting to show many great, gleaming gasoline stations. In Britain, the number of motorcars on the road has doubled within a decade. And there is the fantastic world population growth. Each year the world as a whole is adding the equivalent of the population of France to its numbers. Further, many nations have desperately ambitious plans to industrialize; and their people have learned from American movies, tourists, and advertisements to desire such things as telephones, refrigerators, television, and motorcars. Joseph Spengler, Duke University economist specializing in world population trends, points out that shortages of materials available to the United States "will be greatly intensified by the progress of population and aggregate consumption in other parts of the world, since these other areas will be drawing increasingly on relatively limited sources of supply, major access to which has heretofore been enjoyed by Americans." As industrialization spreads in Asia, Africa, and other areas where per capita consumption of materials has been extremely low by American standards, demand for raw materials and energy will expand swiftly and produce scarcities that will force rises in price. If the rest of the world—even with its present population—were to achieve the level of material wealth enjoyed by the people of the United States, there would be a sixfold increase in need for materials. Actually there is no longer enough copper, tin, and lead left in the world to permit such a duplication on the basis of today's technology. As pressures mount for access to the available raw materials, nations will tend to protect their own interests by restricting export of materials that they know they will need for their own future development. India, for example, possesses very little in the way of fossil fuels. It obtains most of its inanimate energy by the burning of dung. India, looking to the future, has clamped down on the export of thorium. This element, like uranium, can be used in the production of atomic energy. In the future we are likely to see such actions as India's become common. Brock Chisholm, former director general of the World Health Organization, predicts that within a decade North Americans, who have been using up half of the world's production of irreplaceable natural resources, will be cut off from many resources now used in abundance because many of these resources have been coming to a very large extent "from heavily populated, over-populated countries." He asks: "How much longer will North America be able to have the lion's share of natural resources? Probably not ten years longer, because the other countries are beginning to recognize that from their own point of view the welfare of their own people and the world's welfare, perhaps, they would be wiser to keep their own natural resources even though this means somewhat slower development, to do their own manufacturing and sell finished products." Furthermore, some of the countries that have in effect become colonies of United States corporations may quite possibly buy out or throw out those companies. Venezuela is as good an example as any to consider. It is now the largest supplier of iron ore to the United States and a major supplier of oil. A study of its turbulent past would indicate that the nation has probably not seen its last abrupt change in policy or governing personnel. In early 1960, the moderately leftish government of President Romulo Betancourt had to put down a small rebellion by force. Suppose that ten or twenty years from now an opposition leader on the order of Peron or Trujillo or Castro comes into power in Venezuela with a highly nationalistic and perhaps anti-United States orientation. Suppose also that the rest of the world is then bidding for Venezuela's oil and iron. If such a leader decided to take over the holdings of United States companies and sell most of the nation's iron ore and oil elsewhere, what would the United States do? I put this question to a number of American businessmen. None had a ready answer. All agreed that such a turn of events would present the United States with an extremely sticky problem and that the United States should strive by skillful diplomacy to prevent such a situation from developing. It would seem inevitable that if the world's population and the resources are not soon brought into a more tolerable balance, some of the competition by nations for badly needed resources is likely to generate ugly frictions that could explode into warfare. The widely accepted notion that more population brings prosperity is overdue for examination. It apparently is true that up until quite recently more babies meant more business for industrialized societies. The availability of resources and living space had not been a serious problem. But for the future, businessmen who extol the wondrous prosperity that a larger population—and more consumption per capita— can bring for more than a short term are encouraging the nation to flirt with serious trouble. Sir Charles Darwin contends that in terms of population the United States has become "one of the most dangerously increasing countries in the world." Some, however, argue that while overpopulation is bad in underdeveloped countries, it is needed by highly industrialized societies in order to provide customers to keep the factories busy. Such a viewpoint leaves out of account, at least as far as America is concerned, the factor of diminishing resources. Professor Spengler, for one, has concluded: "Population growth does not guarantee endless prosperity. . . . It solves only temporarily certain problems whilst creating bigger ones. It resembles the dope a sick man takes, only in the end to become a dope addict, and hence sicker than ever." More people and more per capita consumption will tend to force up the prices of resources in short supply and ultimately produce a drop in individual living standards. Some businessmen are beginning to be apprehensive about the widespread faith that prosperity requires more people. The senior vicepresident of the Mellon National Bank and Trust Company in Pittsburgh has observed that "our rising population is creating pressures on natural resources which in a number of respects tend to retard further increases in material well-being." He said that the strain of going deeper and farther for resources and using leaner and leaner veins all adds to unit costs and is creating a "drag on prosperity." And Columbia University economist Roy Blough points out that "undoubtedly one of the offsets to increased productivity will be the increasing difficulty and cost of supplying many kinds of raw material. . . . There can be no doubt that some materials important to our industrial growth are likely to become much more difficult and costly to get; and the country is becoming increasingly dependent for them on other countries just when these countries are industrializing their own economies." When you add the further strain on resources that comes from the proposals of marketers to persuade each citizen in the rapidly growing United States population to increase his consumption, you are compounding the strain. A projection of current population trends suggests that the United States will have as many people within a century as China has today. This trend can—and probably will— change. But let us assume it does come to pass that the United States in a century will have a population of more than 600,000,000 people and that the United States is encountering intensified competition from the rest of the world for resources available outside the United States. If that occurs, what would happen to the high, wide, and handsome mode of living Americans are pursuing today? The nation would be sucked virtually dry of resources economically feasible by today's standards within a very few years. Actually, such a possibility is not likely to confront the nation. Something will have to give—either mode of living or population growth or both—long before a mere century has passed.