CHAPTER 19 # The Commercialization of American Life "How can the public absorb so much shrieking in the marketplace?"—PRINTERS' INK. ALL THE EFFORTS TO KEEP CONSUMPTION RISING—WHEN TAKEN together—amount to an unprecedented saturation of American life with pleas, hints, and other inducements to buy. The sheer dimensions of the current and contemplated selling efforts are becoming a national problem. Commercialization is becoming so all-pervasive that at times it seems to be getting into the air the public breathes. The public is under a fairly constant siege of hard sells, soft sells, funny sells, sly sells. More and more money is being set aside to create a demand for each unit of goods to be moved. Money spent for advertising in the United States has risen considerably faster than total sales have risen. The money spent to sell motorcars is a case in point. The amount spent per car more than doubled on almost every United States make of car during the fifties, and for most makes the amount more than tripled. As United States citizens are coaxed to buy more and more quantities of goods that are not essential to their physical well-being, more and more reliance upon the skills of professional selling experts is required. It takes no persuasion whatever to induce people to buy enough daily food to sustain them, but it does take persuasion to sell them optional goods such as sixty-horsepower motorboats. "Advertising must mass-produce customers just as factories massproduce products in a growing economy," stated the publisher of Printers' Ink. He suggested that outlays for advertising might reach twenty-five billion dollars by 1965. That meant more than doubling the amount being spent to create want and discontent within a few years. An official of General Foods reported that a typical American family is exposed to 1,518 selling messages in the course of an average day. And this does not include the material stuffed into the nation's mailboxes: a total of sixteen billion pieces a year, or four times the amount found in mailboxes a decade earlier. United States taxpayers are charged an extra \$190,000,000 a year to make up the deficit incurred by the post office in delivering this "junk," or third-class, mail. Members of this average family, he stated, are exposed to 117 television and radio commercials a day. Other studies have shown that on television alone programs heard in the average home by one or more members in a day carry nearly an hour of commercials. The growth of messages beamed at the public over the airways is worth special note because airborne messages are hard to ignore and because the public presumably controls the airways in its own interest. On a nighttime television network show it has not been uncommon to find fifteen or more commercials packed into a half-hour segment. Broadcast Advertisers Reports made a survey of the number of nighttime shows packing six or more commercials into a fifteen-minute segment. Such a load of commercials, it agreed, represented "extreme" overcommercialization. During the week monitored, it found 389 instances of such extreme overcommercialization. It said the figure would have been far worse if it had included daytime shows. Officially, members of the National Association of Broadcasters are pledged not to "triple spot" their commercials, or run three in a row, back to back. The Broadcast Advertisers Report survey found 1,287 such triple-spotting "irregularities" by the seventy-one stations monitored. It found 111 instances where four or more commercials were run back to back. Other investigators reported instances in which up to nine commercial messages of some sort were run in a row on television. The increase in commercials has complicated the life of television writers, directors, and performers as they have tried to sustain their moods of gaiety, tragedy, or suspense. In the spring of 1959, Peter Lind Hayes gave up his ABC daytime show because of the "pressure-cooker existence" the network proposed to inaugurate by cutting his hour-long show to a half hour. He explained: "When you figure the number of commercials we have to give, it actually takes an hour to do a half-hour show. Can you imagine half a dozen commercial interruptions in thirty minutes? That is what it would amount to." Garry Moore revealed that he left daytime television "because, frankly, I couldn't cope with the number of commercials we had to accommodate." And, in 1960, he won a singular battle for his nighttime show by successfully demanding that commercial interruptions of his hour-long show be limited to four rather than the then-prevailing seven interruptions. All this growing pressure of commercials has generally been attributed to increasing costs by the media accepting them. Some broadcasters, however, have resisted the trend and have seemed to prosper by being able to offer an advertiser a medium where competition for the listener's eye or ear is less frantic. New York's radio station WQXR is one of several that made such a move. It reduced by seventy-seven the average number of commercials it carried each day. The tastefulness of television and radio commercials likewise has shown signs of deterioration as the pressure to sell has mounted. Selling messages for "intimately personal products" such as feminine-hygiene products and hemorrhoid treatments are beamed into many living rooms. At this writing, more than 140 television stations accept commercials for the hemorrhoid treatment Preparation H. When the National Association of Broadcasters announced it would drop from membership stations carrying the hemorrhoid commercials, several of the offenders—many of them National Association of Broadcasters members—shrugged and went on using the commercials. Three dozen National Association of Broadcasters stations chose to lose their National Association of Broadcasters seal rather than lose the revenue that came from broadcasting the commercials that were banned. After the ban, in fact, the sponsor of the hemorrhoid preparation had little difficulty in booking more than a million dollars' worth of commercials on television. The National Association of Broadcasters also frowned on commercials for "feminine hygiene products," but a number of American stations reportedly went on using them. Officials of the National Association of Broadcasters made a distinction between commercials for "intimately personal" products and those that were just "personal" such as laxatives, deodorants, depilatories, toilet tissues, corn and callus remedies, and corsets. The National Association of Broadcasters' Review Board announced that commercials featuring these latter "personal" products were, while "sensitive," perfectly all right but should be handled with "ingenuity" and taste. Abuse had become so widespread that it issued a "guide." Here are some of the suggestions: Laxative commercials should avoid overdramatizing discomfort, avoid duplicating the "mechanics of elimination," avoid words such as "bloated" and "gassy." And the setting should be elsewhere than the family bathroom. Deodorant commercials should use the word "perspiration" rather than "sweat" and should avoid photographic shots of armpits, at least those of live humans. The public continued to see the armpits of Greek statues. Depilatory commercials also should keep out from under the armpit, and should avoid focusing the camera on "unsightly" body hair. Toilet commercials should avoid using the blunt term "toilet paper," should not have settings "associated with actual use," and preferably should have an air of fantasy about them. Commercials for remedies for athlete's foot, corns, and calluses should avoid the word "itching." Still, television viewers have to sit and watch ladies shaving their legs to "protect their loveliness," watch pictures of toes throbbing for lack of Outgro for their ingrown toenails, and hear that the sponsor's girdle is never "clammy or sticky." Great thrilling songs turn up with commercialized lyrics. That haunting melody from Italy, "Volare," was converted within six months of its introduction into the United States into a Camel cigarette jingle, "Fumare." One of the memorable tunes from South Pacific came pulsing over the airways with the words, "Wash that dandruff right out of your hair." And that sentimental old song, "I want a girl . . . just like the girl . . . that married dear old Dad" has been coming over the radio with the words "I want a girl . . . just like the girl . . . that's in the Rheingold ad." The quiz-show frauds revealed, among other painful things, that in order to sell products sponsors have not hesitated to use or misuse people who are often symbols of respectability. Revlon's sales tripled while it was sponsoring two quiz shows that ultimately became involved in a national scandal. Many television sponsors have insisted that the name of their product be featured on a sign conspicuously displayed as a billboard throughout the program. "I've Got a Secret" and the Lawrence Welk shows have carried such signs. On one daytime variety show sponsored by Nabisco, the master of ceremonies carries a large sign bearing the word "Nabisco" dangling on his forehead throughout much of the proceedings. During at least one day's program of "Keep Talking," the sponsor's billboard not only was conspicuously in evidence but jokes and "ad libs" were slanted to commercial benefit. And when television with much fanfare presented Ernest Hemingway's The Killers, Buick automobiles turned up in a number of the scenes of the show itself and in one sequence in particular the camera seemed to linger on a Buick. The sponsor of the program was Buick. Despite all this increase in commercialization some—but not all— advertising men have wanted still greater control of the total content of the shows they sponsor. One producer, John E. Hasty, who had made shows for both Hollywood and television, was quoted as arguing that television could reach its full potential as an advertising medium only when advertising men produced the shows. "TV viewers cannot be regarded as an audience to be entertained," he said. "They are prospects . . . for what the sponsor has to sell. This fact constitutes the show's reason for being. . . . Thus in a TV production the selling motive stands as the dominant factor." He granted that showmen from Broadway and Hollywood might possess certain important skills that affect scripts, talent, music, and choreography and that they might be generously endowed with skill and imagination. But, he asked, "Does this overbalance a seasoned adman's experience in mass selling?" Many sponsors tend to view their television vehicles as total advertisements. The Institute for Advertising Research has begun offering a new measuring technique called Television Program Analysis which weighs the total value of a program as an ad for the company. And an advertising trade journal in 1960 observed, "From all indications, a better tailoring of program type to advertiser, and commercial to program, is in the making." Taken together, commercials and program in many cases accentuate the values of a high-consumption economy. Marketing consultant Victor Lebow summed up the powerful appeal television has as a selling medium when he pointed out: "It creates a new set of conditions, impelling toward a monopoly of the consumer's attention. For the first time, almost the entire American consuming public has become a captive audience. . . . Television actually sells the generalized idea of consumption." Cases in point to support this theory that television sells "the generalized idea of consumption" might be the squeals and ahs of television audiences on panel shows when prizes such as stoves, refrigerators, rotisseries, and matched luggage are unveiled amid fanfare. One might speculate also on what it does to a people's sense of values—especially to children's—when discussions of significant events are followed on television by announcers who in often louder and more solemn voices announce a great new discovery for a hair bleach. Or, to consider another kind of juxtaposition, a broadcast appeal to aid hungry children in mid-1960 was followed immediately by a dogfood commercial. Television, of course, has not been the only place where the stepped-up effort to exert selling leverage on the public can be noted. Some American newspapers, especially on Thursdays and Sundays, have become so bulky because of many dozens of solid pages of advertising that finding the editorial matter leaves the reader's arms weary from turning pages. The chairman of the McCann-Erickson advertising agency complained about the "advertising traffic jam" in all media and said some Sunday newspapers were "becoming so filled with advertisements that they can grow only so much more and still remain portable." It was not the portability as much as the frequent difficulty of finding any news amid all the ads that bothered the general reader. Some of the news one found in some periodicals, it should be added, upon inspection turned out to be advertisements. I have before me a page from the Montgomery, Alabama, Advertiser that at first glance seems to contain about half editorial matter and half advertising. But the apparent news stories carry such headlines as "WOMEN, DON'T BE OVERWEIGHT, LET DAHL TAKE YOU DOWN A BUTTONHOLE OR TWO." Still further inspection reveals that up in the upper right-hand corner is a small-type notice: "This Page All Advertising." In a Kansas town, florists threatened to withdraw their advertising from the local newspaper if it continued to accept funeral notices that contained the objectionable phrase, "Please don't send flowers." Certain of the magazines, too, showed the impact of commercialism as their publishers sought to create an editorial climate attractive to advertisers. In some cases, articles appeared which while possibly appealing to readers were most certainly gratifying to advertisers and potential advertisers. One of the mass women's magazines with a primarily working-class audience carried an article called "What's the Big Attraction?" in early 1960. Its illustration showed an attractive girl surrounded by six handsome men. The article purported to show the secrets of the Feminine Girl who is irresistible with the Water Cooler Set. Before you were eight hundred words into this revealing article, you were aware that she relied upon "hand lotions," "moisture creams," "cleaning fluid," "scarves," "fresh glove supply," "bath salts," "bath oil," "special foot lotion," "creamy depilatory," "silky -body lotion," "antiperspirant," "cologne," "cosmetics," "shampoos," "astringent-saturated cotton balls," "nail enamels," "make-up shades," and "lipstick." Later on, it also mentioned she is "a great milk drinker" and gets eight hours of sleep a night. Advertising messages have begun appearing in places where heretofore they have been banned, usually on grounds of taste or public policy. Entrepreneurs and public officials are proving to be willing to let down the bars in order to gain extra revenue. For the first time in half a century, thousands of buses in New York have been carrying advertising posters on their exteriors. Many railroad terminals are so crowded with billboards and commercial displays that it is difficult for a traveler to find the announcement of departures. A New York television station has begun beaming its programs into more than four hundred supermarkets and into three hundred self-service laundries. In the stores the housewife finds herself exposed to as many as eight television screens and to about twenty commercials in the course of her average shopping trip. So pervasive have billboards become along many stretches of highway in the United States, that even an outdoor advertising expert publicly lamented that a journey he and his wife took to Florida had been "ruined" because "hundreds" of miles of what would have been beautiful highways had been lined with signboards. Lobbyists for the outdoor advertisers have been charged by a New York state legislator with keeping state legislators in their debt—to forestall restrictive legislation—by giving them free sign space, or space at reduced rates, at election time. An investigator for the Reader's Digest concluded that the new 41,000-mile federal highway system would become "a billboard slum" unless state legislators acted to prevent it. In order to cope with situations that arise when states do outlaw billboards along highways, an enterprising signmaker developed a lightweight sign so gargantuan it can be seen from many hundreds of yards away. A still more ingenious entrepreneur has begun offering admen the chance to plant their messages against clouds and mountaintops. Unexcelled Chemical Corporation has been inviting advertisers to use its giant magic lantern called Skyjector. It is capable of beaming an advertisement one-half-mile wide against a cloud five miles away. And the company expects that within a year it will be able to create its own clouds if there are none handy. Columnist Inez Robb commented: "It opens up the prospect of a horizon-to-horizon gray-flannel world with the sky . . . available to nature lovers only in rainy weather; with America's rocks and rills and wooded hills covered with gigantic exhortations." People who wish to stroll along the few public beaches of Florida's Gold Coast are not able to let their fancies roam too far off the notion of consumption. Every hour or so old biplanes roar along just offshore, hauling hundred-foot-long sky billboards. And on the backs of hundreds of ocean-front benches are tacked small billboards. Advertising men offered to install benches in many downtown areas of Philadelphia— and pay the city in addition \$15 a month for each bench—if they could merely plaster the backs with ads. The offer was rejected. Some paperback book publishers have begun accepting paid advertisements in their books. One book on child care has been carrying more than a dozen full-page advertisements scattered through the book. There has also been a notable upsurge in the introduction of advertisements onto the screens of motion-picture theaters. The number of national advertisers using this medium has doubled in three years. By 1960, more than four thousand drive-in theaters were exhibiting advertisements to their paying customers, along with the entertainment. Advertisers credited much of their new fascination with movie advertising to the ironic fact that cinema's worst competitor, television, has proved to be so effective in reaching the consumer. Furthermore, television has conditioned the public to expect commercials along with its entertainment so that public resentment toward advertising in motion-picture houses purportedly has been melting. The fact that the theatergoers are paying to be entertained—not seduced—seemingly does not loom as an important distinction in their minds! Meanwhile, advertisers using the movie screens have been finding they have an even more captive audience than on television. The theater seats are in rows so that there is less tendency for a person, when commercials come on, to use the break in entertainment to make a dash to the washroom or go for refreshment. The growing difficulty in finding ways to break through what McCann-Erickson's Mr. Harper has called the "advertising -traffic jam in media" and reach the public's eye or ear has inspired him to suggest that the advertising industry might have to help create new media. He asks: "Won't we have to encourage the development of new publishing properties? . . . Isn't it possible in the '60s that we'll require a fourth network? Isn't it possible we'll need to invent an entirely new ad medium?" The growing pressure to move goods by more aggressive promotion can best be seen, perhaps, in the changes taking place in the American pharmaceutical industry. It has traditionally been cautious, courteous, and restrained in bringing its drugs to the attention of the nation's doctors and druggists. All that changed when the producers of bulk chemicals moved into the field and initiated aggressive tactics which the old-line ethical houses felt forced to imitate. As a result, the major drug houses have begun pouring four times as much money into selling as they do into research. In fact, they are spending about \$5,500 on sales and promotion for each doctor in the land. They inundate the doctors with brochures about the new and old drugs. They send a swarm of 27,000 detail men into doctors' offices and drugstores to induce doctors to prescribe their particular brands and to induce druggists to stock them. One such detail man in West Virginia told me there was now a detail man for every twelve prospects, and he said that he personally called on 129 doctors in each two-week period, as did many of his rivals. A little arithmetic and projection produced a stunning thought. If the other detail men were as energetic as he was, then detail men were making many millions of calls on doctors each year. My informant blinked at that thought but didn't contest it. He said he goes and sits in the doctor's office with the patients to wait his turn—because patients resent doctors who seem to let someone into their office out of turn. Very often, he said, he may find another detail man already in the waiting room. In that case he will leave and come back later, because doctors don't like to have too many detail men in their waiting rooms at one time. It discourages the patients. One result of all this selling pressure is that doctors hear so much about brand names that they usually prescribe by brand name rather than by the generic or scientific name, as they were usually taught to do in medical school. Brand-name drugs usually cost the patient a good deal more than a non-brand-name drug filling the same specifications. The average doctor influences the sale of about \$20,000 worth of drugs a year. The growing recklessness of businessmen in many lines as they have sought to keep sales rising is reflected in two extreme examples worth noting. The Hat Council, Inc., employed the services of a public-relations expert famed for the success of his tactics, Russell Birdwell. Soon the Birdwell firm was circulating under its letterhead a startling statement on hat-wearing or rather non-hat-wearing by a psychologist whom the Birdwell firm had discovered in Dallas, Texas. According to this psychologist, "Men who go bareheaded . . . are betraying their feminine instincts." Such a man is announcing to the world that "he doesn't want to be a man." Another sample of the extravagant devices used to catch public attention was the advertising theme used by the maker of a nationally advertised aerosol shaving cream. One advertisement pictured the side view of a smiling, voluptuously proportioned girl with her posterior thrust back conspicuously as she held a giant can of the cream. The headline of the ad read: "IF YOUR CAN'S TOO SMALL TRY MINE FOR SIZE." And another headline over the same sort of photograph had the lady saying: "I HAVE THE BIGGEST CAN . . . AND THE BEST CAN . . . AND IT COSTS THE LEAST. . . . As advertising men have found themselves with more and more billions of dollars at their command, they have moved into a role of considerable power in influencing the behavior of the entire populace. They have become to a very large extent masters of the nation's economic destiny, and perhaps the nation's most influential taste makers. They have become dictators of the content of many if not most radio and television programs, judges with life-and-death power over many periodicals, and at least co-designers of many products being offered to the public. The rationale they have worked out to justify their new power is that advertising is the bulwark of the American way of life. A Cleveland billboard announced: "America is a Better America thanks to advertising!" Admen recently have responded to criticism by becoming quite aggressively defensive about their role. Charles H. Brower, president of Batten, Barton, Durstine & Osborn, acknowledged that perhaps admen had some housecleaning to do but he added: "The house of advertising is a mighty fortress in our economy. . . . Pull down advertising, and a frightening number of things will fall with it." The heroic role of advertising in providing a "bulwark" or fortress for the national way of life became somewhat hard or embarrassing to explain in detail. More than half of all advertising dollars went to promote cigarettes, alcoholic beverages, patent medicines, soap, and cosmetics. Other advertising men preferred to put the contribution to a better America in dollars and cents. They asserted that advertising brought down prices by providing the mass market for mass production. Undoubtedly this argument has a strong historical basis. And it was advanced as recently as 1959 by Mr. Harper, whose agency had just become the largest in the United States. But in the developing Age of Abundance this argument was less convincing when you got down to specifics. Why had the cost of automobiles, all intensively advertised, risen every year for twelve years? Why did brand-name products nationally advertised generally cost more than private brands of identical quality? When the magazine Progressive Grocer sought to explain the growing volume of private brands sold in American stores, it concluded that "the most convincing clue" was the fact that they generally cost the consumer less than the nationally advertised product. And the price differential was growing. It now ranged up to between 10 per cent and 20 per cent. In the field of drugs and cosmetics, the differential was even greater. A comparative study made in New York City showed that nationally advertised brands tended to cost about twice as much as "substantially identical" private brands of the same products. (It should be conceded that many private brands are bought with confidence only because the customers are buying the image of the store's name—which often is intensively advertised.) Many producing companies have begun playing both fields. They promote heavily their own brand—say, a detergent—and quietly furnish the identical product to stores to be sold under the store's private label, at a lower price. By 1960, even some advertising people were conceding that the argument that advertising brought lower prices was starting to pass into the hands of "cynics and disbelievers." Still, there is no disposition in or out of advertising to doubt that advertising does indeed stimulate consumption, especially in the case of products that are innovations or are optional, or unnecessary. In that sense advertising has indeed become the bulwark of the American way of life, and I certainly would not be among those that Mr. Brower feels are trying to "pull down advertising." Much of advertising is still simple announcement of product performance and availability. It is time, however, that the United States economy's growing reliance on advertising be carefully assessed and appraised for its impact on American life. The cost of getting the consumer's attention—or a "share of the consumer mind," to use adman lingo—is getting higher every year simply because of the competitive din. In 1959, Sales Management made the point that for every dollar spent for advertising early in the fifties an additional half dollar should now be added just to offset the greater competition of messages. There were 551 different brands of coffee on the market, 177 brands of salad dressing, and 249 brands of powdered soap. A vice-president of the Batten, Barton, Durstine & Osborn agency complained that "the amount of advertising in existence today is staggering. It must at least have doubled in the last ten years. There is no escape from it; no place to hide any more." His point that consumers have "no place to hide any more" was made not out of compassion for the consumer but rather as the lament of an adman who is finding it harder and harder to get himself heard. Others complain of encountering a "fatigue of believability" among consumers and of a lowering of the customers' "credibility quotient." An editor of a trade journal offered one hopeful thought. He said that "methods of communication are perfecting themselves so fast that it's easier for people to learn now." The selling pressure is being turned up not only at the imagebuilding level of advertising but also at the over-the-counter level of retailing. Spokesmen of the marketing industry have called for the training of at least a million more "well-talented salesmen" by 1970. Otherwise the expanded economy predicted for that year will be "stifled by overproduction." More and more stores are staying open nights and Sundays to keep goods moving in ever-greater volume. A few years ago, custom dictated that only stores dealing with necessities of life open their doors on Sunday. By the sixties, thousands of appliance stores, clothing stores, hardware stores, supermarkets, and automobile dealers were staying open on Sundays. This trend is particularly strong in the West. In California, 80 per cent of the supermarkets are open on Sunday. Many stores in the Los Angeles area are staying open around the clock, seven days a week. It is an eerie sight to arrive at the Los Angeles airport at two o'clock in the morning and drive to a hotel. En route one sees dozens of giant stores bustling with selling activities. Sunday has proved to be an excellent time to move goods because the spirit of the carnival prevails among the customers. Operators of shopping centers affirm that on Sundays the people show less concern about getting good values for their money than on other days. Another reason why night and Sunday shoppers are especially prized is that at those times husband and wife are more likely to shop together, and will buy 30 per cent more than the wife would buy if she were doing the family shopping alone. Merchandising experts are learning many strategies to keep customers coming through the doors—and buying. The general philosophy of the anonymous appliance salesman who wrote the series for Home Furnishings Daily on selling techniques was summed up in this self-justifying remark: "After all, the shopper walked into the store looking to cut my throat. I just got to him first." If a customer seems to be the polite, timid type, the salesman explained, you nail him after the spiel by whipping up a bill of sale "without a word from him." More often than not, this timid type assumes he has somehow committed himself "and digs out a deposit to spare himself embarrassment." If the customer seems resistant, you use the warehouse trick. The item is selling so rapidly, you explain, that there is only one left. So you call the "warehouse" and ask that the last one be held for your prospect. He added: "My wife is quite used to receiving such calls for me." Another trick he recommended was the "burn and switch." The salesman "burns" himself in order to excite the prospect's initial interest by quoting a price at cost. Once the prospect's interest is stirred, "you gently start to switch him to a make he hasn't even thought of buying." You do this by confidentially explaining the shortcomings of the make you had offered at such a bargain. The washer may have a filter that rusts, or it is reputed to tangle clothing. If the customer seems confused about which brand actually offers the best value, the solution is easy. You strongly recommend the brand that has the highest "spiff" or "PM" riding on it. The spiff or PM is the "push money" offered as a reward for each item of the brand that is sold. The salesman-author commented: "I've never seen so much spiff money floating around as today with this tough competitive situation." In many instances the PM or spiff is provided to the clerk by the manufacturer's representative who is striving to increase his volume. The sales manager of one major-appliance producer referred unhappily to the spiff as "the new law of the land." And an industry survey disclosed that spiffs were coming to play an important part in selling lamps. Home Furnishings Daily carried a report from Boston in early 1960 that "spiffs from manufacturers have been a part of the bedding business for so many years that they have become an institution." It cited one salesman as estimating that the average bedding salesman "adds \$50 a month to his salary through spiffs. 'No salesman would ever want the practice discontinued,' he says." And the same journal reported from Detroit that appliance-television dealers in that area expressed "qualified" disapproval of spiffs. It seems that "leading merchants believe if push money is being offered it should be given to the retailer to dispense, preferably in the manner in which he sees fit." That pretty well sums up the morality of one segment of entrepreneurs feeling the full force of consumerism.