CHAPTER 20 # The Changing American Character ". . . whose God is their belly . . ."—PAUL, Philippians 3:19. A FINAL PRICE THAT MUST BE CONSIDERED IN ASSESSING THE implications of the current drift of American society under the impact of an economy based on ever-mounting consumption is the change it may be producing in the character of the people involved. What is the impact on the human spirit of all these pressures to consume? What results are already beginning to appear as a result of all the efforts to make Americans more hedonistic? What is the mere availability of ever-greater material abundance doing to American habit patterns? Business Week made a report on the many subtle and adroit persuasion techniques being developed to encourage Americans to be more zestful consumers and commented: ". . . it looks as though all of our business forces are bent on getting everyone to . . . Borrow. Spend. Buy. Waste. Want." It is unrealistic to assume that all such pressures are not producing changes at a deeper level than mere consumption habits. For example, a person who finds himself induced to spend beyond his income habitually does not wish to feel guilty about his excesses and welcomes a system of morality that condones such habits. Much of the average American's consumption has been channeled into frivolous or playful or whimsical outlets, which also requires rationalizing. United States residents have been spending more on smoking, drinking, and gambling than they have on education. They have been spending more on admission tickets to pastimes than they have on foreign economic aid. They have been spending more on jewelry and watches than they have on either books or basic research.<sup>1</sup> Further, they spend more for greeting cards than they do for medical research. The people of the United States have been thrust into making a more abrupt transformation in their system of values since World War II than in just about any comparable period of time in the nation's history. Some of the changes in values, attitudes, and outlooks might be considered most attractive or encouraging, such as the increase in world-mindedness and the more accepting attitudes toward people superficially unlike themselves. Some of the changes, however, are directly related to the pressures and stimulations that encourage Americans to increase their consumption, and those are what concern us here. Joseph Wood Krutch believes that the transvaluation of moral values required in adjusting to an economy of abundance is as drastic, in fact, as any posed to civilized man since Christianity proclaimed that humility not pride is the source of all virtue.<sup>2</sup> These new pressures are causing ever more people to find their main life satisfactions in their consumption role rather than their productive role. And these pressures are bringing forward such traits as pleasure-mindedness, self-indulgence, materialism, and passivity as conspicuous elements of the American character. It is perhaps no coincidence that the areas of the United States where the spirit of hedonism is most rampant—Los Angeles, Miami, and Las Vegas—are also among the fastest-growing cities in the land. Whether this trend to hedonism represents regress or progress may be arguable. It seems reasonable, however, that Americans should take stock of the changes taking place. Then they can decide whether they like them or not, and act accordingly. If we try to visualize the future course of a society based so largely on an ever-expanding economy as the American model, we must conclude that it will require a more and more voluptuous mode of living until the process is slowed by growing depletion of the resources essential to support the voluptuousness. Another possibility is that resisting citizens may modify the model. Aldous Huxley in his Brave New World of the twenty-sixth century appears to assume that the problem of diminishing resources can somehow be managed. Or perhaps he did not take the resource problem seriously into account, since the drain had not yet become critical when he wrote his book in 1932. In any case, he has Mustapha Mond, the controller of his highly regimented world state of the future, explain: "But industrial civilization is only possible where there is no selfdenial. Self-indulgence up to the very limits imposed by hygiene and economics. Otherwise the wheels stop turning." In the current American model there is abundant evidence that rankand-file Americans are co-operating wholeheartedly in the task of taking up ever-greater consumption as a way of life. Those who thought that preoccupation with possessions—and consumption—might lessen with the easing of the prod-dings of poverty did not take into account the new proddings of the marketing persuaders. Preoccupation with possessions instead has increased. This preoccupation with consumption so assiduously nurtured by the marketers is leaving its marks on the people involved. These marks show up in a variety of ways. They showed up, for example, in the study of "Interurbia" conducted by Fortune magazine, the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency, and consultants from Yale University. The particular interurbia—or massive metropolitan complex—studied was the urban sprawl that stretches almost continuously from Portland, Maine, to Washington, D.C. Because of its concentration of tens of millions of humans, this has been a prime target of marketers for years. The study reported that the typical consumer in this area is developing characteristics that make him a superb consumer. He tends to be restless, conforming, aggressive in his interpersonal relations, and chronically has a "hunger for hard goods," to use one marketing columnist's phrase. He may buy these hard goods—or consumer durables—even when he has no real need for them, perhaps because he has developed an inner need to keep buying things. A perceptive writer on family life, Hannah Lees, has commented, too, on the many modern women who seem preoccupied with getting for themselves such things as wall-to-wall carpeting, completely automated kitchens, fur jackets, and their own convertibles. She noted that many such women—and they are in every income bracket—are "going around with the uneasy feeling that without all those possessions they would just disappear." Some Americans have become so habituated to continuous impulsive consumption through shopping that they are distressed when the process is disrupted. During the 1958 recession, customers suddenly started robbing the supermarkets blind to the tune of a quarter billion dollars' worth of goods a year. In southern California, arrests for supermarket shoplifting soared 50 per cent within a few months. It was found that some mothers were training their children to slip parcels out through the guard rails. One explanation for the great increase apparently was that so many families had been committing so much of their paychecks to installment payments that they were strapped for food when the husband's overtime was cut back. Time magazine, however, in citing the upsurge, suggested that a new morality might be a major factor. It commented on "the easy conscience that assumes a high standard of living to be everybody's right, whether the money is around or not." And some religious leaders have been speculating what is likely to happen to the sense of proportion in living in a people that are encouraged to become quickly dissatisfied with last year's models. There is also the thriftlessness that is being so widely encouraged. A syndicated columnist on family finance admonished readers to step up their spending of any income they had after the "necessities" of life were attended to. This counselor advised readers in early 1959: "If you decide to save, pay off debts, you help slow down business. If you decide to buy cars and appliances enthusiastically, you put a glow on the entire country." The absorption with consumption also unquestionably is having some impact on family solidarity. Frequent purchase of such appliances as dishwashers and clothes driers and prepackaged meals with their "built-in maid service" has two noteworthy effects on family living; at least at the lower-white-collar and working-class level. It tends to keep the family strapped for money. And it tends to disenfranchise the wife by depriving her of many traditional, time-consuming homemaking functions. Both effects—the pinch for money and the growing lack of challenge to women in the home—tend to send the wife out looking for a job. A high-school official of a Chicago suburb told me that in that town of skilled workers and white-collar workers "most of the mothers of our students have jobs. Some students say they see their folks together only on Sundays." A teacher in San Francisco has offered the opinion that parents take less interest in their children's schoolwork. She explained: "It may be because so many mothers are working. Everybody has to have new cars, refrigerators, so they work. Often the children lose out." If the trend toward working mothers continues—and it seems likely—Americans might well consider adopting the Danish system of setting up high-grade facilities for child care manned by professionals. All the preoccupation with consumption—and other forms of materialism—appears to be having an especially heavy impact on the attitudes of the young people of the United States being reared in the new environment. A number of investigators are reporting findings that hardly match our traditional concept of American youths as ambitious, dedicated, self-sufficient, individualistic idealists who hope to build a better world. Two psychologists, James Gillespie of Colby College and Gordon Allport of Harvard University, made a survey of attitudes of college students around the world several years ago. It indicated that American youths were more self-centered and materialistic in their aspirations than were the youths of most of the countries surveyed. The investigators asked eighteen hundred youths in ten countries to visualize their future. One rather conspicuous finding was the preoccupation of American youths with the material aspects of their existence to the exclusion of most other concerns. These young Americans knew pretty specifically the kind of rich, full life they wanted to build. They talked in terms of the hi-fi set they would have, the outdoor barbecue, the game room, where they would take their first vacation, the kind of car they aspired to, and so on. They showed little interest in making a career of public service and little apparent concern for their fellow man. Professor Gillespie commented on the intense "privitism"—or preoccupation with their own small world—that seemed to characterize the American students, who presumably were representative of the nation's leaders of tomorrow. You get the feeling, he said, that a cloud of opprobrium hung over participation in public affairs in the United States. (Possibly this is because in an age of abundance challenging public problems seem less apparent to youthful eyes.) Mexicans, in contrast, were aglow with idealism and showed only casual concern about the material surroundings of their lives. Six times as many Mexicans as American students foresaw that their greatest sources of pride would be in service to their nation. And a majority said that helping others would be one of the goals of their life. In the matter of teaching young children, the difference between the youths of the two nations was interesting because the young students from the United States tended to evaluate experiences on the basis of their "fun" potential. Thus American girls who said they hoped to have jobs working with little children explained in a number of cases that such work would be fun. Mexican girls, in contrast, saw working with small children as an opportunity to help mold future citizens. Students in the various countries were asked, "If you should get a large sum of money five years from now, what would you do with it?" The American students had a different—bigger—idea of what was meant by "a large sum of money" than the others. But more significantly, only 2 per cent of the Americans thought of sharing such a windfall with anyone beyond their immediate family. The impulse to share the windfall with other people in need was higher in virtually every other national group. In this connection, we might note the observation of Rabbi Philip S. Bernstein of Rochester, New York, who states that "materialism, the pursuit of wealth, deadens sensitivity to other human beings." Might such a deadening be a cause of the startlingly callous behavior of race fans at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway when an aluminum tower collapsed May 30, 1960? It occurred shortly before the big race was to begin. Two men in the tangled mass died of broken necks, and seventy persons—many of them screaming—were injured. Some people in the crowd tried to rescue moaning persons from under the collapsed tower. But, the Associated Press reported, "others on the ground and on other near-by towers went on drinking beer and munching fried chicken, concerned mainly with the start of the race." Consider another study of the emerging character of American college students. This more recent study was sponsored by the American Council on Education. The provost of the University of New Hampshire, Edward F. Eddy, Jr., and two assistants made a study of attitudes on twenty American campuses by living with the students long enough to win their confidence. Commenting on today's student, Dr. Eddy said: "He is interested primarily in the maintenance of the status quo—a very comfortable status quo, which makes him the sought-after darling of business and industry." Dr. Eddy, too, commented on the conspicuous "privitism" of the American student, who seems absorbed in achieving "a rich, full life" for himself. (That phrase "rich, full life" could come out of a General Motors advertisement.) Dr. Eddy continued: "His strong interests are centered on the material benefits which he and his family may be able to enjoy. . . . The constant question is first: 'What's in it for me?'" Brains, it might be added, appear to be no defense against the materialism of the age. The president of the National Merit Scholarship Corporation reported on the aspirations of the National Merit Scholarship finalists. He said that "to an astonishingly large extent [they] look forward to the easy, pleasant life in the suburbs with ample income for the material luxuries. Very few speak of a willingness to work for ideals or to pursue knowledge no matter what the cost." So far we have talked mainly about the emerging attitudes and character of students in the United States. The Korean War, on the other hand, provided a testing ground of sorts for American youths of all ranks. For several years after that war, the Army conducted a painful study to try to account for the fact that so many of the American men who became prisoners became collaborators, or showed appalling selfishness, or just curled up and died. A third of all GI's captured engaged in some form of collaboration, and more than a third died in captivity. And most startling, twenty-one of the men captured—for the first time in history—did not choose to return home when first given a chance. In contrast, of the hundreds of Turkish soldiers who were captured, virtually all of them withstood all pressures to induce them to become collaborators. And although half of the Turks were wounded when captured, not a single one of them died in captivity. An Assistant Secretary of the Army has called the Army's findings about the behavior of American prisoners in Korea "distressing." Writer Eugene Kinkead talked with many Army officers involved in the post-mortem. One Army doctor involved in the analysis told Kinkead he could only conclude that "a new softness" had come into the character of many young Americans. He said they seemed to lack the old Yankee resourcefulness of their fathers.<sup>3</sup> An official of the United States Department of Justice is still another who has been forced to ponder the impact of the materialistic culture of the United States upon its youths. He was trying to understand why youthful lawlessness was rising at such a "startling" pace. At the present rate, by 1962, one million American teen-agers will be arrested each year. He was forced to the conclusion that "we seem to have misplaced the sense of values which made this a great nation. Selfindulgence and the principle of pleasure before duty on a vast and growing scale have become a phenomenon of the adult world. These are warning symptoms of the decadence disease which has contributed to the decay of so many civilizations throughout history." Then he asked bluntly: "When children, without discipline and without moral standards implanted in a stable home, are thrust into a culture in which pressures from every direction promote the principle of self-indulgence, what reaction can be expected?" The juvenile delinquent in the United States, he concluded, "is a byproduct of our self-indulgent age." A good many citizens in the United States, it should be emphasized, are beginning to feel vaguely uneasy about the impact of ever-greater consumption on their lives. Investigators for The Chicago Tribune reported—in The New Consumer—finding a good many people ridden with guilt feelings because of all their purchases. One housewife, cited as typical, said: "After I've been shopping, I often feel guilty about having spent too much." Such guilt feelings, however, seem to be more characteristic of women in the older settled areas of Chicago than of those in the new suburbs. Some of the comments by women in Golf, the more prosperous of the suburbs studied, indicate that even in the changing suburbs there is a good deal of uneasiness about the growing materialism. The investigators reported that most of the residents felt they were more adept at the art of making money than their own parents had been. Then the investigators added: "Some of them, however, feel that, all questions of money aside, their parents had something that they admire but lack—the capacity to use their own inner resources. This is a capacity which will be even more strongly lacking among the Golf dweller's children, who may be expected to be extraordinarily thing-minded people." At least some American businessmen, too, have been uneasy about this growing thing-mindedness created to a large extent by the pressure for ever-mounting consumption. Business Week, which certainly is on the side of the sellers, concedes that "many people are upset by what they see as an enormous emphasis on materialism and triviality and as a saturation of American life with the false standards of the market place." In the late fifties, a marketing and economic consultant from Chicago, Theodore Levitt, kicked up a tremendous furor in business circles by urging businessmen to stop fretting about the social implications of what they were doing. His comments appeared in The Harvard Business Review ("The Dangers of Social Responsibility"), Sales Management ("Corrupting Tender Souls"), and Advertising Age. This last offered a presentation by Dr. Levitt entitled: "ARE ADVERTISING AND MARKETING CORRUPTING SOCIETY? IT'S NOT YOUR WORRY, LEVITT TELLS BUSINESS." Dr. Levitt discussed "management's mission in the new society." He said it was quite possible for many businessmen to conclude that they were contributing "to decadence, self-indulgence, materialism, cynicism, irresponsibility, selfishness. . . ." He cited questions being raised by the prospects of achieving ever-higher consumption. What would this do to people's dignity, their culture, their spiritual values? Would their standard of living actually be higher simply because they were persuaded to throw away earlier models faster? And what are the effects of manipulation by persuaders? Dr. Levitt conceded that conceivably marketers could eventually become so successful in "loading people up with redundant goods, creating superficial and vulgar wants, and generating the kind of opulence that turns luxuries into necessities," etc., that perhaps "we will get soft and decadent and finally drift down into a quagmire of decay that was Rome's fate." "But," he quickly added, "let's not go overboard in an orgy of moral self-flagellation. A lot of this viewing with alarm is an irrational Puritan reaction against the good life. . . . It is not at all a settled matter that luxury creates softness and decadence. . . ." Therefore he urged marketers not to get "all excited about the human consequences of so-called successful marketing." Instead, he argued, the marketer should tend to his knitting. Society needs always to be asking itself where it is headed. And someone must think and act on the questions being raised by the prospect of ever-higher consumption; but that "someone" should not be the businessman. He concluded that "cultural, spiritual, social, moral, etc., consequences of his actions are none of his occupational concern." In truth, he said, "the businessman exists for only one purpose, to create and deliver value satisfactions at a profit to himself." He suggested that businessmen leave soul saving, preserving spiritual values, cultivating human dignity, and conserving self-respect to others. Dr. Levitt's elaborate rationalization of nonresponsibility for marketers obviously touched a very raw nerve. Subsequent issues of Advertising Age carried pages filled with angry denunciations and rebuttals by marketers and other readers. An official of the advertising agency, MacManus, John and Adams, wrote: "The immense benefits of business to society are obvious. Dr. Levitt's uncalled-for defense is so weak it is, in effect, damnation, for which the advertising and business world should not soon forgive him." And the promotion art director of Architectural Forum wrote: "The businessman's responsibility, whether moral or material, will always be with him and he cannot be relieved of it—and neither Mr. Levitt's article nor wishing will make it so." Now we approach the final—and most perplexing—phase of this exploration of the pressures toward, and implications of, ever-mounting consumption in the United States. What, if anything, should be done? If a projection of present trends seems to confront United States citizens with an exceedingly unpretty picture for the future, is there any escape from these pressures that would not disrupt the economy? And if some disruption is unavoidable in any correction of current trends, would the disruption be acceptable as an alternative to the present headlong course? This course appears to be taking the people of the United States toward more and more force feeding, more and more manipulation, more and more fast-fading or deteriorating products, more and more self-indulgence, more and more depletion of irreplaceable resources. In view of the sharp acceleration involved in the demand in the United States and abroad for resources and living space, it seems urgent that citizens of the United States begin taking a long view of the drift of their society. When we say that the nation may be feeing a real pinch for such resources as copper, lead, zinc, and oil within two decades, that may sound like a deadline that is still far off. After all, the year 1980 puts us close to the time of George Orwell's fictional Big Brother. But twenty years is no further ahead than Pearl Harbor is behind us. Or consider that far-distant date of A.D. 2000, when the country's present population will have doubled if present trends continue. That is no further ahead than the beginning of the Jazz Age is behind us. Or look a full century into the future when, if present trends continue, the world will be approaching exhaustion of most of its presently known vital raw materials and energy sources and probably will be largely dependent on ordinary rock, sunlight, air, sea water, and perhaps coal to develop its living standards. That is only as far ahead as the outbreak of the United States Civil War is behind us. A century represents less than 2 per cent of man's brief recorded history. All this suggests that the people of the United States and elsewhere begin thinking of the long haul. Otherwise, they and their children face a rigorous, regimented, and teeming future. Is it possible that the people of the United States can still work out for the long run a sane, intelligent, and satisfying way of life while preserving a reasonably thriving economy? There is no absolute assurance that they can. But the possibilities should be explored before it is too late to start. If there are available any simple solutions to this challenge, the author is unaware of them. A number of economic thinkers are increasingly aware that not just the United States economy but the drift of the United States civilization is involved. Some few economists are becoming oriented as much to the needs of the consumer as to the better-understood needs of the producer. An outstanding example of this latter breed of economist is Leland Gordon of Denison University, author of Economics for Consumers, who states: "Economic stability and high-level employment are desirable goals. But the well-being of consumers is a desirable goal, too." Let us then look at some suggested courses for the future that seem to deserve the consideration of the American people. They deal with the twin challenges of developing more enlightened consumption patterns while evolving an economy that can thrive reasonably well without force feeding and, further, can have a reasonable chance of enduring for the long run. PART IV Some Suggested Courses