## CHAPTER 21 # Restoring Pride in Prudence "The unorganized consumer must resist blind conformity to the group and to the commercial persuader. Education is central to his resistance."—LELAND GORDON, Denison University. IN EARLIER YEARS, ECONOMISTS PONDERING THE CONTROLS necessary to keep the seller-buyer relationship in fair balance concluded that ordinary human prudence would protect the buyer from being exploited or overwhelmed. Caveat emptor, they intoned. Letting the buyer beware was thought to be no real problem because the buyer was assumed to hold the whip hand since the money was in his pocket. The consumer was assumed to be sovereign. And marketers and merchandisers still like to flatter the consuming public by referring to it as "king." Today, there is less outright hoodwinking of the old-fashioned variety in the market place. Lately, "fraud" has been the whipping boy of the Federal Trade Commission and of marketers who want to "clean up" practices that have proved embarrassing when exposed. Actually, from the general public's viewpoint, fraud is not the major problem. Outright fraud has become too dangerous for all but fly-by-night operators. It is no longer considered to be even sporting. Ethics in the market place have risen at least in this respect. Further, it should be stressed that many producers and retailers persist in the old-fashioned habit of viewing the consumer with respect and strive to the very best of their ability to serve his best interests. On the other hand, marketers in general have been subjecting the consumer to a barrage of selling strategies that has rarely heretofore been matched in variety, intensity, or ingenuity. Millions of consumers are manipulated, razzle-dazzled, indoctrinated, mood-conditioned, and flimflammed. They are conditioned to be discontented with last year's models, and they are conditioned to accept flimsily built products. The attitude of all too many marketers was revealed in the January 29, 1960, issue of Printers' Ink—"The Weekly Magazine of Advertising and Marketing"—when it earnestly reported efforts being made by marketing researchers to understand how people acquire and retain information and attitudes. It stated: "Perhaps most important of all, [the researchers] are edging toward that ultimate question for advertising: How can the consumer, like Pavlov's dog, be taught the habit of buying a specific brand?" If that truly is the "ultimate question" for advertising, then the industry had better search its soul. And consumers had better take to the barricades. One measure of the difficulty that the lone consumer faces today is the warning made by three psychologists at the University of Michigan. They stated that "the indiscriminate and uncontrolled application of psychological principles is increasing at a fearsome rate" in marketing uses on an unwary public. They suggested that a "trusted scientific group" be set up to keep an eye on all these free-wheeling applicators. Another measure of the challenge confronting the lone consumer is the statement of Colston Warne, president of Consumers Union. He states: "The consumer is asked to choose wisely under circumstances which often baffle even the trained technician. He is faced with product differentiation, brand differentiation, model differentiation, price differentiation. He is offered bonuses of extraneous products for purchasing. He is faced with trading stamps, special discounts, and trade-ins. Products are sold in varying quantities and in containers often deceptive to the eye." The consumer also is faced increasingly with buying products of such complexity in their electronic or chemical composition that an expert assessment is beyond his capacity. He finds himself choosing on a superficial basis such as color of the trim or the brand image that has been etched into his mind by the seller. In the unequal relationship between marketer and buyer, it should be added, the federal government—which is supposed to "promote the general welfare"—has in recent years offered more comfort and aid to the marketer than to the consumer. It has spent billions of dollars to help producers with their problems and has a number of cabinet officers to promote the interests of producers. It has no cabinet officer specifically charged with protecting the interest of the public in its role as a consumer. During the early days of the Eisenhower Administration, the modest product-testing and consumer activities of the Bureau of Home Economics (Department of Agriculture) were sharply curtailed. The Consumers Union protested at the time that compared to the oceans of aid to retailers, wholesalers, manufacturers, importers, exporters, bankers, etc., that was flooding from the Government Printing Office, the publications of the Bureau of Home Economics were a scant trickle indeed. Appropriations for the Food and Drug Administration were not permitted to keep pace with the growth in population and the flood of new products. In the mid-fifties, the Bureau of Standards was ordered to stop publication of Care and Repair of the Home, which had sold more than 175,000 copies at sixty cents a copy. The director explained: "We have no authority to run a consumer advisory service." The story is much the same with other federal agencies purportedly dedicated to the public welfare. Members of the Federal Housing Administration, the Federal Trade Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, and the Federal Power Commission have come predominantly from the industry groups whose regulation was entrusted to them. And for the most part—and at least until very recently—the agencies have shown far more zeal in promoting the producers' welfare and refereeing producer quarrels than in protecting the consumers. Two Federal Communications Commission members were so deeply involved in fraternizing with the industry they were supposed to regulate that they were encouraged to resign. A doctor with the Food and Drug Administration told Senate investigators that when she sought to require the manufacturer of a new drug to warn against drug addiction on the label of the product, a high official of the Food and Drug Administration responded by saying that he did not wish to have his policy of friendliness with industry interfered with. In the face of all these pressures, the lone consumer of ordinary intelligence and impulsiveness is usually no match for the subtle and massive onslaughts aimed at him. Today, the consumer is far from sovereign. To restore the consumer to any real sovereignty, there needs to be a return on a large scale to pride in prudent buying and informative support for that prudence. What—if anything—can be done to restore today's consumercitizen to this sovereignty he has lost? There are a few things that each individual consumer can do—if he or she is so minded—to regain a posture of self-respect in the shopping situation. And in doing so, he may well serve as an example to others. For example: He can demand that he be approached on a rational basis, and protest when he is not. Usually, when Americans find themselves the owners of handsome but malfunctioning products, they complain to their friends rather than to the maker or distributor. A Carnegie Tech professor has expressed amazement that so few complaints go to a company that has marketed an indisputable lemon. A lone consumer may feel helpless in facing up to a giant corporation with plants in 123 cities. Actually, this lone consumer should know that this monolith tends to over-react to criticism to its products. One strong letter, neatly typed, addressed to the president, can create concern in the executive suite (even though the president himself is probably spared from seeing the letter). Two letters of protest will create panic. Three letters of protest will create pandemonium. Kiwanis International took a salutary step a few months ago when it established as one of its twenty criteria for good citizenship whether the member was doing his part in "rebelling against" false and misleading advertising. A promising area for citizens to test their claws as self-respecting consumer-critics is in the area of drugs. As indicated, many doctors by and large have fallen into the habit—as a result of being cultivated by hordes of pharmaceutical detail men and by onslaughts of drug advertising—of using a brand name rather than the scientific name in writing a prescription. Both meet the government specifications as to purity and potency and are substantially identical. Drug firms argue that they individually strive to improve upon the government standards. (Some famous name brands have been found to be substandard.) Whether, however, a possible slight improvement is worth the frequent doubling of cost can be left to the consumer's judgment. A family with heavy medical bills can save \$50 or \$100 a year if it asks its family doctor to use the scientific name in writing prescriptions except where he may have some strong preference among brands. In 1960, several states began urging doctors to use the scientific rather than the brand name in prescribing when state funds were involved, as with welfare patients. As a longer-range goal the consumer-citizens might work for a more rational way for dispensing drugs than by hocus-pocus. It is a travesty of free enterprise when twenty-five companies are issuing essentially the identical drug under twenty-five different brand names at greatly varying prices. Word artists invent the brand names, and often try to make them sound like some other highly successful drug. All this represents not only economic waste but danger. Doctors are complaining that disasters can arise in the jungle of nomenclature that is developing, as a result of a doctor's confusion. In a rational society, I would think, the medical profession would arrange for a simple way to get pure, high-quality drugs to the public at a cost not inflated by rivalbrand promotional activities. The individual consumer can insist that producers who wish to win his patronage start stressing function over fashion. One does not have to be a killjoy—such as the technocrat of the thirties—to see that the emphasis on styling in the United States consumer-goods mart has exceeded the bounds of rationality. It is one thing to have natural swings in style in design and quite another to have designers seeking ways to outmode all the bathroom scales or washing machines in American homes by mapping style changes. Industrial designer Henry Dreyfuss points out that American automobile makers have been so preoccupied with styling in some recent years that they have forgotten that cars are supposed to be comfortable to sit in, convenient to operate, safe to take out on the road, and economical. The prudent segment of the consuming public should favor those brave entrepreneurs who have braced themselves against the tide of styling and have tried to offer to the public products designed for function rather than style by giving special consideration to their offerings. American Motors is one producer that deserves special recognition in this regard because in both its automobiles such as the Rambler and in its Kelvinator appliances it has made a bold effort to swear off the annual style change. It is one of the few companies having heavy durables that have seriously sought to reduce planned obsolescence. Another company deserving the consumer's gratitude because of its considerateness is Polaroid Corporation. A grateful camera owner first pointed out the Polaroid situation to me. She said that although Polaroid has produced a number of significant functional improvements over the years, it has designed virtually all of them so that they will fit on her original camera bought more than a decade ago. I find that this represents a deliberate policy on Polaroid's part. Its new wink-light was made to fit all the old cameras in existence. When Polaroid came up with a film fifteen times as fast as its then-current films—a film so fast it could take pictures indoors without a flash bulb—the company gave to owners of any old cameras desiring to use it free light seals which would enable the owner of an old camera to use the new improved film. Polaroid keeps right on issuing its older models. Its very first camera—the 95—was a brown camera with a conspicuous shutter faceplate. After twelve years, the 95 is still sold. Furthermore, it looks no different from the original camera, although dozens of improvements have quietly been incorporated. The prudent consumer can also make life more difficult for the style-obsolescence marketer—and more pleasant for himself—by buying his new products just before the restyled models are to be introduced for the "new" year. This is when the dealers are under great pressure from the manufacturers to unload remaining models of the current year. Substantial discounts are offered, and many excellent buys become available. If such prudent shopping becomes the general pattern, the manufacturers might very quickly lose much of their fascination with change-for-change sake. The consumer who would be prudent will insist that manufacturers show greater responsibility for the satisfactory performance of their products. In view of the high rate of product breakdown in many lines, he will read the guarantee with particular interest while shopping, before making a purchase. Does it cover both parts and service? And for how long? A washing-machine producer who has enough confidence in his product to offer a five-year, no-strings-attached guarantee covering parts and service should quickly win a vast following of enthusiastic buyers. This would-be prudent buyer might also give sympathetic attention to the wares of the producer who offers to help him be his own repairman, just as Henry Ford I issued his do-it-yourself kits. Many parts of modern appliances—such as timers—are, of course, too complicated for home repair. But the Norge Division of the Borg-Warner Corporation has launched a campaign to help owners of its products to make simple repairs, and is designing its products to simplify such home repair. It might also help in restoring prudence if across the nation husbands and wives spent a few evenings a year in adult classes at local schools that are devoted to conveying an understanding of how to select and maintain various appliances. The consumer who would be prudent in today's economy will buy the basic product rather than the one loaded down with accessories— whether it be a woman's dress, a refrigerator, a washing machine, or an automobile. Finally, the consumer should be honest with himself and inquire whether an ailing product became that way because of his own carelessness. In the task of recapturing sovereignty in the sales mart, the consumer is getting some organized backing, and more might well be encouraged. Concerted efforts to assist the consumer are still on a modest scale when compared with the massiveness of the selling effort—stoked with billions of dollars—on the producers' side. However, this force for the consumer is growing every month as the pressures on the consumer have grown, as if expanding to fill a vacuum in a field of forces. There are now nonprofit associations of consumers such as the Council on Consumer Information, currently headquartered at Colorado State College, Greeley, Colorado. This has only about a thousand members, but the members are almost all college and high-school teachers in a position to teach prudence to young people. The council circulates newsletters and booklets and holds an annual conference. As the sixties were beginning, a number of annual conferences on consumer problems sprang up in the United States. They were sponsored by colleges, state governments, and consumer-testing organizations. It is these consumer-testing organizations that undoubtedly have the greatest impact as countervailing forces. There are two principal ones in the United States. One is Consumers' Research, Inc., of Washington, New Jersey, which publishes monthly the nonprofit Consumer Bulletin, with a circulation of more than 100,000. More famous and influential is the fast-growing, nonprofit Consumers Union with headquarters in an imposing complex of old red-brick buildings at 256 Washington Street in Mount Vernon, New York. It is the largest consumer-testing organization in the world. Consumer Reports, its principal publication, has grown from a circulation of less than 75,000 at the end of World War II to more than 800,000 today. Consumers Union has a staff of more than 150 persons, including a number of engineers, chemists, physicists, and several dozen testing technicians. Its board of directors is composed primarily of scientists and educators. Consumers Union has shoppers in sixty-three cities who buy products to be tested on the regular market and pay the usual retail price. It never accepts free samples from manufacturers. During a stroll through the rooms of Consumers Union's seven testing divisions (appliances, audio, automotive, chemistry, electronics, textiles, and special projects), you may see dozens of cake mixers whirring away, stirring bowls filled with a mixture of oil and sawdust. That makes a relatively heavy load. Or you will see dozens of women receiving home permanents. Each half of a woman's head gets a different preparation for comparative purposes. "Afterward," my guide Morris Kaplan, Consumer Union's technical director, explained, "we give them all a good permanent and rectify any damage done." In another room you may see people soiling dishes with a standardized mixture of tomato paste, spaghetti, spinach, and eggs. After the soiling the dishes are aged for a set period before being placed in dishwashers to see how well the various machines rise to the challenge of removing the food. You see refrigerators being tested in a controlled temperature room that cost \$50,000 to build. And you hear record players being tested in a room so fully soundproof that you can hear a heart beating. Much of the automobile testing is done on a very rough, twisting course near New Haven, Connecticut, and on a sports-car racing track. In the early days of Consumers Union, manufacturers and advertising agencies were distinctly hostile to its testing activities. Today, the hostility has virtually disappeared. Mr. Kaplan states: "Most manufacturers bend over backward to co-operate with us." They know from their dealers that a favorable or unfavorable report from Consumers Union can make their selling task easier or harder. There have been a number of instances in the past few years of manufacturers hastening to change a design when Consumers Union reported the product "Not Acceptable" because of shock hazard or other weakness. Often the manufacturers themselves inform Consumers Union that the objectionable feature has been corrected and ask for a retest. Consumers Union does so at the first opportunity. This testing organization derives its financial support entirely from the sale of its publications. In order not to affect his impartiality, no employee may have any direct connection with any commercial firm. Consumers Union forbids the use of its product ratings in advertising or for any other commercial purpose. In its twenty-four years of existence, no suit has ever been successfully sustained against Consumers Union for publishing its often unflattering findings. One of the major needs of consumers today is guidance on the durability of products. Consumers Union feels this is still an area where advances in testing must be made. For many products, durability is one of the most difficult characteristics to assess. How can you subject a new refrigerator to a "lifetime" test? It can be done on an accelerated basis—including the door slamming—but it is costly and, of course, the refrigerators tested are a dead loss at the end and cannot be resold. Recently, Consumers Union completed an accelerated life test on automobile tires at a cost of \$50,000. As it gains in circulation and thus resources, it can increase its testing for durability. In seeking to assess motorcars for their durability, Consumers Union has mostly used an indirect approach. It conducts an annual survey among thousands of subscribers who are owners of motorcars. Each owner states the make and year of his motorcar and then lists the major repairs that have been necessary during the year. The results show that two of the best cars produced in the years 1954 through 1959 in terms of trouble-free performance were the 1955 Oldsmobile and the 1958 Rambler. Among the most troublesome American motorcars reported for this period were the 1958 Mercury, the 1958 Lincoln, and the 1957 Buick. One aspect of its service that concerns Consumers Union as a shortcoming is that most of the readers of its Consumer Reports are the kind of people who need it least. It has appealed most to those people who were prudent to start with: males of relatively high intelligence in business or the professions. Currently, Consumer Reports is seeking to expand its readership among women—who make most of the family purchasing decisions—and among the lower-income groups who, though they need to stretch their dollars further, tend to be more flamboyant, impulsive, and unthinking in their buying habits than people with higher incomes. They are the ones most likely to be exploited, the most likely to have the expensive patent medicines in their bathroom, and the 36 per cent interest installment debts. Another nonprofit advisory firm of considerable indirect interest to consumers is the Drug and Therapeutic Information, Inc., in New York City. It is staffed by distinguished physicians who became weary of trying to wade through—and make sense out of—the thousands of brochures from drug houses hailing their new brands. These doctors have begun publishing for doctors a newsletter called Medical Letter on Drugs and Therapeutics. It carries no advertising and endeavors to shed light on pharmaceutical claims. The letter already has more than ten thousand doctors on its subscription list. The chief of its advisory board is the director of Clinical Pharmacology at Johns Hopkins Medical School. The anxiety that this Medical Letter created among the drug houses is indicated by the fact that one drug house published a full-page denunciation of the Medical Letter in its magazine for doctors and then refused to publish the Medical Letter's reply—even in paid advertising space. And the medical list house that had been addressing the Medical Letter's mail to doctors suddenly withdrew its list. Belatedly some government groups are being mobilized to assist the bedazzled lone consumer. A pioneering move was made by New York's former Governor Averell Harriman when he set up a Consumer Counsel attached to his office. The counsel, Dr. Persia Campbell, sought to advance and protect consumers' interests on every front and at every level of the state government. She was so successful that the idea of a special counsel or department of consumer protection has spread to California and Massachusetts, and at this writing is being proposed by the governors of Michigan and Minnesota. The California Office of Consumer Counsel has become a permanent part of the state government. In proposing this office to the legislature, Governor Brown said: "We consumers have little defense against highly organized special interests." Meanwhile, there was an overturn of the governorship in Albany. The new Governor Nelson Rockefeller disbanded the temporary office of Consumer Counsel, and remnants of the program went under the state's Department of Commerce. This move, Dr. Campbell told me, "was worse than abolishing the whole program, since it made the consumer interest captive to business policy." In Washington, twenty-four senators headed by Estes Kefauver began promoting a bill to set up in the federal government a Department of Consumers headed by an officer with cabinet rank. It would promote the interests of consumers at all levels and in battles before federal regulatory agencies that are now largely fought out by lobbyists of the various organized commercial groups. This department would provide a more congenial consumer-oriented home for such agencies as the Federal Food and Drug Administration, the Bureau of Standards, and the Bureau of Home Economics. A wide variety of Administration spokesmen have opposed the creation of such a Department of Consumers on the ground that it is not necessary. They say the work is already being done. Norway, incidentally, has such a cabinet post. The minister, a woman, has as much status as the minister of agriculture or commerce. As a member of parliament stated it, one function of the ministry is to encourage Norwegian consumers to return "to their rightful role—that of being appropriate hell-raisers concerning the prices and quality of goods." Meanwhile, so many United States congressmen have been starting to promote measures affecting buyer-seller relations that marketers are apprehensive. One congressman, John Blatnik, has been pressing the United States Public Health Office and the United States Office of Education to offer to children educational materials on the health hazard of cigarette smoking to offset partially all the appeals reaching them in cigarette advertisements. All in all, signs are appearing that the consumer may soon be started on a swing that will eventually return him to a position approaching equality in the buyer-seller relationship. ## CHAPTER 22 ## Restoring Pride in Qualify "I imagine the fabric mills are going to do a lot of squirming before they agree to anything resembling a set of rules about how good their products have to be."—Furniture manufacturer quoted in Retailing Daily. 1 THE MANUFACTURER CITED ABOVE EXPLAINED THAT WHILE THE MILLS had been doing a fine job on "styling," they had not been paying "sufficient attention to durability and quality." It might be added as a postscript that the upholstery-fabric manufacturers succeeded in getting their product excluded from the provisions of the Textile Fabric Products Identification Act, which went into effect in 1960. They registered opposition that in some instances was vehement. This manufacturer's indictment regarding quality could apply equally appropriately to a number of fields producing goods for consumers. Some producers still struggle stubbornly to produce the very highest-quality product possible. Many more, as noted, feel they can build a greater over-all volume if their goods don't last too long. Still others would like to strive for quality, but often feel they do not dare to because their corner-cutting competitors might push them to the wall by using the savings to throw more money into promotional display and advertising that would catch the public's attention. From both the viewpoint of the consumer and the conscientious producer, it seems highly desirable that the United States move toward a return to a passion for quality on the part of each producer of goods. Ideally, he should develop this resolution as a part of his quest for life satisfaction and feel dissatisfied with himself until he achieves this quality. We must concede that anyone with such resolution must expect to face discouragement as long as the market place remains as presently motivated and operated. In the jungle of today's market a host of products appear and disappear each year. In earlier decades product qualities were more widely known. How can a modern consumer looking at an appliance judge factors he cannot see, such as insulation, durability of parts, electrical hazard, and rust resistance of finishes? How can he know—as I discovered in a most exasperating way— that the handles of one brand of streamlined luggage nationally advertised for its ruggedness would come off within a week? In my case this happened with not one but two of the bags. How can the modern consumer choose plywood furniture intelligently—in the absence of a wood-labeling law—when wood labeled "driftwood walnut" or "silver oak" contains neither walnut nor oak? How can the consumer choose carpets intelligently when carpet dealers themselves have lamented that they are so confused by various exaggerated claims for fabrics that they would be grateful to have some honest appraisal of the performance that might be expected. They have admitted—among themselves—that they've often been selling "a blind item." In such confusing situations it would help both the consumer and the conscientious producer if agreed standards—or yardsticks—of quality were available to assist the consumer in making a choice. Today, there would seem to be an urgent need for quality standards— and yet in the consumer field they are almost nonexistent. (Milk and bedsheets are two of the exceptions.) Morris Kaplan, technical director of Consumers Union, says: "There are almost no uniform standards on consumer goods." And a leading authority on standards, Jessie V. Coles, chairman of the Department of Home Economics at the University of California, has stated: "Efforts have been made from time to time to set up national standards for various kinds of consumer goods. . . . Except for those enforced by federal law, relatively few standards are in existence." <sup>2</sup> Miss Coles blames this partly on the fact that consumers have not demanded or understood the need for standards. But also, she said, there was the factor of "resistance of producers." Why do the producers resist? In theory they should be dedicated advocates of quality standards because they insist on using them every day in buying their materials. They buy on the basis of standards or specifications. No motorcar manufacturer, for example, would dream of buying its steel on the basis of a double-page advertising spread in a periodical. It buys steel on the basis of specification numbers established by the Society of Automotive Engineers. (But even the motorcar industry could have done a great deal more than it has to standardize basic components throughout the industry.) Large institutional buyers such as hotels, hospitals, universities, and railroads buy their textile supplies on the basis of established performance criteria. Yet producers have tended to react as if faced with ruin when suggestions have been advanced that comparable quality standards be set up to guide them and their consumer-customers. Consider the frozen-food makers. At their own trade meetings they have heard charges that they "were getting away with murder" in the matter of quality of product. Frozen orange juice has declined in quality since first introduced. A dozen years ago, frozen orange juice tasted very much like freshly squeezed orange juice. But over the years the producers have been squeezing the fruit harder and harder, and getting more and more pectin into the product. Yet Eastern frozen-food producers registered almost unanimous opposition to a proposal for compulsory grading. Or consider the shoe manufacturers. In the past decade, there has been a growth in the use of paper fiber as a substitute for leather in making parts of children's shoes. The paper fiber can be a mean deception because it is likely to reveal itself only when the child wearing such shoes gets his feet wet. Yet when Congressman Charles Porter (D., Ore.) proposed a shoe-labeling act, thousands of people in the shoe industry opposed it. What is behind the hostility of most producers to publicized quality standards for their particular products? For the record, they usually claim that quality standards would be expensive to establish, or bothersome, or somehow interfere with their present flexibility in shifting designs or merchandising appeals. In addition, however, there seem to be at least five other reasons—difficult to discuss in public— why talk of quality standards scares many producers: Many producers are privately convinced that they can sell more products on the basis of gimmicks, special features, impulse, and innovation than on the basis of quality. Thus they are likely to feel that posted standards of quality might bring an intelligence and selectivity to the purchasing counter that would undermine a less rational approach. Producers generally prefer to let the public make its choice on the basis of brand image and, to a less extent, price rather than posted quality. In this way each brand may be presented as possessing uniquely mysterious or magical powers or a unique "personality" that helps establish "differentiation" from competing products. And most assuredly—in the absence of quality standards—each brand can be presented to the public as the acme of quality and trustworthiness. Some brands may be close to the acme of quality, but the likelihood is just as great that they are not. A posting of quality standards makes it more difficult, obviously, for a retailer to sell merchandise that deserves no higher than a mediocre quality rating, unless it is modestly priced. In many cases the quality involved does not warrant the high prices charged. Products sold for their snob appeal often seem overpriced on the basis of any reasonable, objective quality analysis. And occasionally the producer may vary the quality of a particular brand in different geographical areas depending on the severity of his competition. Home economist Jessie V. Coles tells of a case in which a meat packer put his brand image on a lower quality of beef in the downstate Illinois market than on the meat sold in Chicago because he faced less rugged competition downstate. And, finally, the big producers tend to be cool to any kind of grade labeling because such certifying of quality reduces their advantages over the small producer. When competition must be conducted primarily on the basis of the brand image, as it is conducted today, the small producer is at an enormous disadvantage even if his product is as good as the large producer's—or better. Today, just building a better mousetrap is not enough. You have got to launch it. It often costs tens of millions of dollars to launch a new product successfully on a national basis, etch an image of it in the public's mind, and commandeer good exposure space on the nation's store shelves. A former chairman of General Electric's finance committee was quoted as criticizing the high prices that the major companies were charging for their appliances. He charged that General Electric, Westinghouse, and RCA Whirlpool eventually could kill off competitors through the use of advertising unless the competitors merged into larger units.<sup>3</sup> In contrast, if you have some form of grade labeling, the consumer can choose on the basis of assured quality rather than on brand image. This permits the small producer to compete with the large one on the more equal grounds of quality offered per dollar. Mildred Brady of Consumers Union pointed out the opportunities that open up to the small producer when quality standards are posted by citing the recent experience of meat packers on the West Coast. Government grade labeling of meat was started there after World War II. Within a decade the small packers had captured three quarters of the market. Recently, several of the big national meat packers have been campaigning to eliminate this grade labeling of meat. Some very small steps have been made in establishing quality indicators to help guide the bewildered consumer. Congress has now passed laws requiring producers of wool, fur, and some textile products to specify contents on the labels. A mere listing of ingredients, however, is no assurance of high quality. How the ingredients are put together may be just as crucial to quality. Furthermore, a listing of the generic (chemical) names of fibers used in the new "miracle" fabrics is not particularly illuminating to a beleaguered consumer. There are also a number of organizations that issue "seals" indicating that the products carrying the seal meet at least certain minimum specifications. There is the "UL" seal for much of the electrical equipment sold in the United States to indicate that the National Board of Fire Underwriters considers the equipment nonhazardous. And a similar "AGA" label exists for gas appliances. A few general magazines have testing centers and issue seals on products that have been approved after testing or use. These seals sometimes serve a second purpose of helping promote their magazine in the business world; but the seals do offer assurance that the testers found the products meet an acceptable quality. Another possible approach is grade labeling, and this would be extremely helpful to consumers. Ideally, the grade labeling should be done by a universally recognized certifying agency. The grades—say A, B, and C or X, Y, and Z—would be based not on ingredients alone as in usual labeling but rather on an over-all rating of quality. This could be arrived at as a total score based on a number of characteristics most crucial to establishing quality in the performance of that kind of product. Mail-order houses, although they do their own certifying, attempt such a grading. Sears, Roebuck, for example, offers in its catalogue three grades of a certain line of stoves: "Good," "Better," and "Our Best." Further, it itemizes under the picture each of the features that helped establish its grade. In theory an ideal certifying agency is already at hand to certify products for at least a minimum quality seal. That is the American Standards Association, set up forty years ago. It helped establish safety glass for motorcars and protective clothing during World War II. However, it offers little hope of being able to do a labeling or certifying job on any large scale. Its weakness from the consumer's standpoint is that it is made up primarily of industry members and it approves standards only when they have been unanimously accepted by the leading groups involved. No matter how minimal are the standards proposed, almost always there is some manufacturer who holds out and prevents its adoption. Furthermore, the American Standards Association has little power to enforce even those standards for an American Standards Association mark that its members can agree upon. The British have progressed much further than we in setting up and enforcing meaningful standards for consumer products. They have their nonprofit British Standards Institution supported in part by industry contributions, in part by government funds, and in part from the sale of its publications. It might serve as a model for the United States. British Standards Institution standards are hammered out by representatives of industry, government, and the consuming public, represented by an advisory council of consumers. Furthermore, for several dozen types of consumer goods it now authorizes producers of "sound" consumer goods to display the British Standards Institution's "Kitemark" on each article offered for sale. The Kitemark—a heart with an S inside it—now appears on such products as bedding, electric blankets, pressure cookers, bedsprings, and some furniture, if the products come up to British Standards Institution standards. The use of this Kitemark is rigorously policed. And the British Standards Institution is experimenting with the idea of establishing grades of quality within the "sound" products approved for a Kitemark to meet the needs of those who want more than basic quality. Apparently this would be along the line of Sears, Roebuck's "Good," "Better," "Our Best." The British Standards Institution also issues a detailed guide on product quality, The Shopper's Guide, a small publication comparable to the Consumer Reports printed in the United States. An example of the British Standards Institution approach is the test it conducted on "fireside chairs" before it would issue a Kitemark. More than one hundred firms have earned the mark. For fireside chairs, what does the Kitemark offer in the way of assurance? Here is an indication, from a British Standards Institution publication: "In a word it means that the chair is sturdy. That the frame is made of properly dried timber, free of bad knots and splits, and of wormwood. That any veneers are properly applied and exterior surfaces well finished. Springs, fillings, and fabrics are also vetted. Kitemarked chairs have to go through endurance tests without flagging. For example, a 16-stone weight [more than 200 pounds] is thrust 20 times a minute—600 times in all—on back, seat, and arms. Joints must stay rigid, upholstery firm and shapely, springs as resilient as at the beginning." It would be interesting to speculate how some of the flimsy furniture produced and widely sold in the United States would stand up under such a pounding. At a time when United States trade papers were lamenting the decline in quality of many American-made products, an official of the British Standards Institution told me matter-of-factly, "The British are upgrading quality all the time." He added that in Britain companies selling raw materials now often sell their products only to manufacturers who have earned the Kitemark. Canada, too, has gone considerably further than the United States in establishing and enforcing quality standards. It has grade labeling of canned fruits, vegetables, eggs, poultry, and other products. When nationally advertised brands of canned fruits and vegetables produced in the United States are marketed in Canada, they carry grade labels on them. It might also be noted that the standards set by the Canadian Standards Association for acceptable electric light fixtures are so high that some products widely sold in the United States are turned back at the border as inferior. Is it unreasonable for citizens of the United States of America—the world's most productive society—to expect that as an ideal its products be designed from the consumer's point of view rather than the seller's? Is it unreasonable for its citizens to want to be able to choose products on the basis of posted assurances of quality rather than on the basis of a brand image learned by word of mouth or by assurances from television announcers? Industry itself, it should be noted, is showing new interest in quality standards. When laments about the lack of standards in the rug field were reaching the scandalous stage, many of the large companies making "miracle" fiber rugs such as du Pont, Chemstrand, Celanese, Allied Chemical, and American Viscose instituted—or had already instituted—quality-standard programs on an individual basis. This was heartening, but did little to reduce the confusion of the consumer. Their various standards would have to be accepted on faith. The consumer needs uniform and readily comprehensible standards that will be respected and policed. Letters from individual consumers to their congressmen might well hasten the day when an agency—official or unofficial—is somehow established along British Standards Institution lines, competent to establish and enforce quality standards when requested in the United States. Today, congressmen are becoming more aware of the problems of consumers than at any time in recent decades. Sales Management expressed anxiety about this new interest in helping the consumer. It said, "the general attitude of today's law-makers is seriously disturbing to many Washington representatives of big-company marketing executives. . . . The trend is alarming." A few thousand letters to congressmen probably would not produce any laws establishing machinery to set quality standards, but they would quite probably worry industry groups to the point where they would flock to the flag of an unofficial standards-setting agency in order to head off federal action. And while the word "standards" still makes many manufacturers uneasy, there is a distinct trend toward winning good will of consumers by getting to a higher level of quality than has recently prevailed. The editor of Printers' Ink admonished marketers that they probably ought to start giving more attention to product quality "since it is the basis of repeat sales." It was during 1960 that a number of appliance companies announced they were stepping up the "torture testing" of their products. Maytag, which for years had given durability a higher priority than stylishness, began doubling the number of days it subjected prototype washer-driers to constant operation. Under the new schedule the washer-drier was expected to run 250 days—or the equivalent of ten years' use in the average home. Maytag also reduced the number of parts in its automatic washer and increased the warranty on washer transmissions up to five years. Only a few years ago, the warranty had been one year. Motorola began guaranteeing parts on its television and radio sets for a year. Earlier, the warranty period had been the usual ninety days. Hotpoint, which had so much grief with defective laundry equipment in the 1955-57 models, by 1960 had quadrupled its investment in torture testing, and was subjecting its prototypes to a one-thousand-hour run with unusually heavy ten-pound loads. All this was a trend to be encouraged. In these past two chapters we have explored the possibility of restoring a larger element of sanity and mutual respect to the market place. But can the United States with its ever-expanding productivity and output afford the luxury of sanity and mutual respect? Certainly it is worth a try. Sooner or later the nation must learn to live within its means and pace itself for the long run. And the later that fact is learned, the fewer and more unattractive will be the remaining options.