# Respecting the Eternal Balance "The Western wilds, from the Alleghenies to the Pacific, constituted the richest free gift that was ever spread out before civilized man. . . Never again can such an opportunity come to the sons of men."— FREDERICK JACKSON TURNER TWO RIVAL FORMULAS—BOTH SUPPOSEDLY MAGICAL—ARE BEING pointed out as the roads to a prosperous future. Together, they pretty much dominate speculation about the economic future of the United States of America. On the one hand, the leading thinkers of business-Repub-licanconservative coloration argue that "population growth" will provide the golden pathway that will keep the economy humming for years to come by providing ever-more customers. And on the other, many people including the leading thinkers of liberal-Democratic-labor coloration have been insistently calling for faster "economic growth" to keep things humming. More money should be poured into the economy in the form of either private or public spending to double the annual rate of growth. This is seen as the only way to eliminate the danger of widespread unemployment created by the relentless rise in man-hour output in the nation's automated offices and factories. Both of these paths to sustained prosperity might work for a few years. And some form of one of them may be inevitable. But both can be dangerously shortsighted, and should be very carefully explored before they are embraced. Both promise to increase the drain on the nation's already overstrained resources. Both are expedients at best. Both should be assessed in terms of at least the medium-long haul of the nation. All enduring societies—human or animal—have had to achieve a tolerable balance between their population and their supporting environment, including resources. As indicated, a serious imbalance in the resources-population picture has been developing in the United States, while its people gaily step up their consumption. In 1959, a design engineer from Sunland, California, expressed dismay at the waste of resources produced by American motorcar design. He charged in Product Engineering: "I think the current auto design trend indicates a moral decay in America that is most alarming. When such a large share of the national income is squandered on useless glass, fins, overhang, etc., which require excess horsepower and attendant wasted fuels, then it is about time the federal government stepped in and placed a tax on auto body weight and horsepower." Later he added, "If an automobile requires over 100 horsepower, it is too damned big and wasteful." At this writing, about three quarters of all motorcars being made in Detroit are still "too damned big and wasteful" by the engineer's estimate. It seems urgent that someone in authority in the nation begin looking a half century ahead in appraising the nation's available material resources and energy and start channeling the use of both accordingly. Far more can be done than is being done to reclaim scrap, to develop substitutes (especially substitutes that do not require an enormous energy output to produce), to reduce waste in both the mining and use of resources, and in finding outlets for the nation's need for economic activity that are sparing of the resources in short domestic supply. The industry making paper and cardboard products is one of the industrial groups starting to make extensive reuse of waste. According to one industry official, half of all paper products can now be made—and often are made—with reclaimed paper products that have been discarded. More than a fourth of all paper produced in 1959 was made from nine million tons of waste paper reused. The last over-all look at the United States resource position occurred nearly a decade ago. And that one—by President Truman's Materials Resources Commission—was mainly preoccupied with defense requirements. Certain specific aspects of the United States position have recently been examined by an organization called Resources for the Future (Washington, D.C.), financed by the Ford Foundation. In 1960, after a year of delay, President Eisenhower named a Commission on National Goals that is to begin looking five to ten years ahead. It is still too early to report whether it will satisfy itself by calling for "growth," or will seriously seek to face up to the threat posed by shrinking resources and swelling population. Thirteen months were consumed in organizing the commission. Difficulty was encountered in obtaining private financing because, according to one news report, Mr. Eisenhower's aide "was unable to supply a prospectus that satisfied the foundations on what the commission was expected to do." In calling for his five-to-ten-year goals, President Eisenhower said the goals must "inspire every citizen to climb always toward mounting levels of moral, intellectual, and material strength." Perhaps it is only natural that a people who have been so long overblessed with an abundance of materials and energy continue to squander them and think in terms of ever-mounting "strength" until a traumatic event abruptly forces them to realize that conditions now call for a more prudent and ingenious use of muscles and energy. This point was eloquently made in early 1959 in The New Yorker magazine in a description of the philosophy of a cunning old-time Boston boxer identified as Eddie Shevlin. Shevlin's Law was that "you can't learn anything until you're tired." This law was explained to the editors in these terms: "A young fella bursting with energy he thinks is surplus won't bother to learn economy of motion; he won't learn not to make a move without possibilities, and not to take extra steps." Then the informant made this parallel: "Take a country hopped up with what it thinks is surplus productive capacity, or resources. It jumps around, bounding off the ropes when it doesn't have to . . . until the going is hard—a depression say or a war that begins badly. Then it starts to want to learn how to take care of itself." It may well be that a majority of the citizens of the United States will become convinced of the need or wisdom of reducing their wastefulness of resources before a majority of producers preoccupied with sales figures reach the same conviction. In that case, the citizenconsumers might wish to prod the producers by modifying their spending patterns. They might, for example, embrace enthusiastically the new idea being tried in several cities of renting their cars, appliances, and home furnishings—with trouble-free service guaranteed as a part of the deal. This would be somewhat more expensive than buying the products and would remove whatever possibility still existed to feel pride in ownership of a product. But it would strike a solid blow against the whole concept of planned obsolescence. If a producer knew he was making products for a rental market rather than for retail sale, he would instantly become deeply concerned about increasing the product's durability, especially if he was doing the renting or his dealers were. He would become obsessed with the idea of simple design to cut down his servicing costs. And he would seek and use his influence in the trade to promote a design that would still seem appropriate over a period of years. By 1960, many business executives and engineers were feeling uneasy about their role in encouraging or tolerating wasteful practices, including the making of shoddy products. The chairman of one of the nation's largest organizations of advertisers asserted: "The Great American Ailment is manifest on all sides by a deepening shade in our ethics . . . a sloppiness in our services, a mediocrity in our manufacturer, and a growing distrust and even anger in the public mind." Many executives and engineers specifically felt uneasy about their role in promoting planned obsolescence. In fact, this uneasiness became so widespread that other executives urged them not to be hasty in trying to shift away from some form of obsolescence planning. On March 24, 1960, the board chairman of Whirlpool Corporation, Elisha Gray, II, delivered a speech to the engineers of the American Home Laundry Manufacturers' Association technical conference that was most forthright. In it he stated: "An engineer's principal purpose as an engineer is to create obsolescence. Any attempts by various people to toady up to the public by saying they are against planned obsolescence is so much commercial demagogy. To pose as a protector of the public has become a fashionable pastime." He continued that if engineers and other professional people had not created "obsolescence at a tremendous rate," Americans would not be as prosperous, well fed, and long-living as they are. In his talk he appeared to be referring to both planned obsolescence of desirability and planned obsolescence of function (or basic product improvement). He said the first—style change—can be used to dramatize the second. Also he referred to the need of planned obsolescence "to meet the marketing moves of your competitors" and to the chronic need for fresh merchandise to stimulate sales. It is expecting a great deal of a salesman, he said, "to greet each new customer with a high sense of eagerness and excitement about his product if you don't give it a face lift occasionally." He added that advertising men and sales-promotion men need something new and fresh because such "creative people feed upon change." Business writers at about the same time were pointing out that the controversy over planned obsolescence was important because the issue affects the very basis of private capitalism and free enterprise, since the American system is geared so importantly to consumer desires. But still there was widespread uneasiness among businessmen about the philosophy behind much of the planned obsolescence going on. They might not feel guilty enough to forswear using the strategy themselves, but they felt that others should use it sparingly. They began wishing there were a less worrisome way to accomplish the same result in sales. The Harvard Business Review asked several thousand business executives how they felt about planned obsolescence.<sup>1</sup> More than three thousand responded. The editors of the review concluded from the responses that "the subject was very touchy indeed." The survey disclosed a vast amount of uneasiness about the techniques being used nowadays to move goods. In fact, "the majority of American business executives feel that for the long-run benefit of the United States too large a part of our present economy is based on superficial product obsolescence: the ratio was two to one." One third of the executives agreed that their own companies were making "periodic" model or style changes. The head of Westinghouse Electric Corporation was reported feeling that both styling and functionalism were needed to do a good selling job. As for appliances, he explained: "For appliances in which women play a large part in the purchasing decision, if you took the styling element out, sales would dry up." Others were disturbed by even being asked to comment on planned obsolescence. They "seemed to feel obsolescence was such a fundamental part of our economy that it should not be tampered with." The editors concluded that "there is general concern and interest in looking for and considering alternative means for maintaining consumer expenditures." Uneasy feelings had evidently still not pushed the executives to the point where they were certain they would be willing to stop using such techniques if that meant they had to be satisfied with a lower level of sales. In June, 1960, Advertising Age editorially took note of the "increasing attack" on the "obsolescence factor," which it called "one of the great developments of American marketing." (It seemed to be referring, primarily at least, to the annual model change.) At any rate, it said: "We doubt that it will be abandoned, in the automotive field or elsewhere, but it is interesting to see it being questioned more and more frequently." The consuming public had considerable grounds for uneasiness because of its own habit of throwing away functioning products or easily repairable products when new models were desired. Community officials might profitably backstop the citizens by starting salvage campaigns at the town dumps. So much for the waste of the nation's resources. We might look now at the other side of the resources-population balance. To set the mood, we might note the warning of Dr. John Rock, Harvard's professor emeritus of gynecology, that unless the world curbs its proliferation of human beings within the next few decades, "hungry and crowded people will rise in bestial strife." This is perhaps too Malthusian a view to win much contemporary support, but certainly the current population explosion in the United States and abroad does raise disagreeable prospects for the future even of Americans, at least in terms of probable impact on style of life and individual dignity and freedom. While this problem of the population explosion is characteristically seen in the United States as a foreign problem, a few businessmen are showing signs of uneasiness about their own growing reliance upon an exploding population in the United States. One of the regular admancolumnists for Advertising Age, E. B. Weiss, who is something of a maverick, commented a few years ago, when the golden opportunities of population growth were first being discovered: "Ever since I've been regaled with the current multitude of wonderful forecasts of a prosperous future sparked by a remarkable growth of our population I have wondered about the magical powers of a large population automatically to assure eternal prosperity—at successively higher peaks. . . . The most populous regions of this mortal coil tend to be the most poverty-stricken." And as the sixties were about to begin, a writer for The Wall Street Journal conceded: "This increase in the number of Americans . . . holds the prospect' of an expanding economy. But it also may bring new strains on roads, schools, and water supplies, to mention just a few items." If the United States is to attain a tolerable balance for the long run between resources and population, it must stop glorifying a prosperous future based on bouncing babies, which has the effect of encouraging propagation. Curbing a people's procreation habits admittedly is an enormously complex matter. Joseph Wood Krutch offers the opinion that the impulse to multiply as rapidly and as profusely as possible is built into the living organism. Still, with the spectacular advances being made to prolong life, some curbing of the initiation of life seems imperative. Arnold Toynbee's view in this connection seems unassailable. He argues: "To let nature take her extravagant course in the reproduction of the human race may have made sense in an age in which we were also letting her take her course in decimating mankind by the casualties of war, pestilence and famine. Being human, we have at last revolted against that senseless waste. . . . But when once man has begun to interfere with nature, he cannot afford to stop halfway. We cannot, with impunity, cut down the death rate and at the same time allow the birthrate to go on taking nature's course." Japan is one nation that has in recent years taken drastic and spectacular action to strike an equilibrium between its births and deaths. And in this action, according to the Population Reference Bureau, it has been the people themselves who have led the way in implementing the government policy of legalized abortion and birth control. Japanese males do not react favorably to the idea of using contraceptives, so that there is a heavy reliance on abortion whenever a wife finds herself pregnant against the wishes of herself and her husband. In modern-day Japan there are more abortions than births. One man who has exhaustively investigated the Japanese situation finds that abortion there has become simple, inexpensive, and safe. He explained to me: "The doctor scrapes the wife's uterus, gives her a shot of penicillin, sends her home. It costs about five dollars. Largely as a result, the Japanese people have absolutely pulled it off. They have cut their birth rate in half within a decade. In a few more years their population should stabilize." Advances being made in the development of pills that inhibit fertility can make birth control far more easily achievable than by the Japanese method, but the pills are still fairly expensive (ten dollars a month). Even when the cost comes down, however, will the American people be in a mood to start reducing the growing gap between their birth rate and their death rate? Possibly they will, as the discomforts of crowding become more oppressive. At least the moral objections are being softened. A succession of Protestant church bodies—including United Presbyterians, Methodist, Congregational Christian, United and Augustana Lutheran, and Unitarian—have sanctioned birth control. The Roman Catholic Church officially opposes artificial means of birth control by individuals. And Pope John XXIII made a plea for large families as recently as the spring of 1960. But the church does not oppose "population control." And there is some indication that Catholic leaders may not find some kinds of pill-taking as objectionable as the use of physical means of intervention. Some Catholic leaders make a distinction between pills that would prevent ovulation and those that help regulate ovulation. The latter, they indicate, might well be acceptable and would help control the size of the family by making the rhythm more exact. As for Catholic laymen, a survey of wives by the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan indicates that most individual Catholics favor individual family limitation under certain circumstances, and a third of them approve family limitation without any qualification. The National Catholic Family Life Conference meeting in San Antonio in 1960 heard an "alarming" report of some studies showing that Catholic "married couples are using contraceptive birth control in about the same measure as non-Catholics." A Fordham University (Catholic) professor of philosophy, Dr. Dietrich von Hildebrand, agreed in early 1960 that overpopulation might someday force on Roman Catholics a moral duty to limit their families. Further, he stated that the sexual act has values for the family beyond procreation. He still felt—as the Catholic Church does—that any individual interference with procreation should be by the natural or rhythm method of continence during the wife's fertility cycle. (The World Council of Churches sees no moral distinction between artificial contraception and the rhythm method.) Under a rhythm approach the most "safe" period usually is approximately the last week of the menstrual cycle. One shortcoming from the point of view of population control is the possibility of error in computing this period. The menstrual cycle is not regular in at least one out of five women. Perhaps another is that it leaves much of the month "unsafe" for the husband and wife to express physically and unstintingly their love for each other. There is, however, more than technique involved in bringing a population into equilibrium. Inclination of the citizens is perhaps more important. Ireland, which is overwhelmingly Catholic, is outstanding among the nations of the world that have got their birth rate under control. The Irish did it—to combat the grinding poverty that is now only a distant memory—largely by postponing marriage. The United States Congress could by a slight modification of the income-tax laws provide a powerful incentive to most Americans to get their nation's population into equilibrium somewhere short of 250,000,000. It could drop the present provision of allowing a \$600 deduction for each dependent child. In its place it might provide an \$800 deduction for the first child, \$600 for the second, \$400 for the third, and \$200 for any additional children. Even assuming that the people of the United States can achieve a tolerable balance between resources and population, two challenging facts already in existence remain to be contended with. One is the generation of youths born in the postwar baby boom that is about to flood the labor market. These young people are already in the pipelines, to use the businessman's phrase. No amount of population control is going to change the fact that the labor force is expected to rise by 13,500,000 in this present decade. The other challenging fact is the relentless rise every year in manhour productivity, thanks largely to the labor-saving brought by automation. How to cope with these stubborn facts without resorting to profligacy poses the central economic enigma of our decade. Any efforts to come to grips with them will put the nation on largely uncharted trails. Solutions will not be easy. It does appear possible, however, to point to what seem to be the five most likely trails for breaking out of the dilemma that these facts present. As the dilemma deepens in the coming decade, they should be explored and subjected to trial. Trail Number One leads in the direction of cutting down the hours a year that the average person works as the machines become more efficient. This takes us into the controversial area of the four-day week or some variation thereof. Steelworkers in their 1959 contract discussion seriously broached the novel notion of a three-month paid vacation every five years for each worker. It was estimated that this would create 30,000 additional jobs. And their president in 1960 began pressing the idea of a 32-hour week. Other suggestions have centered on reducing the number of teen-agers in the labor market by raising educational requirements. John Kenneth Galbraith, Harvard economist, proposes that the United States remove any necessary connection between a person's income and his productivity. In The Affluent Society he argued: "If unemployment is a disaster for individuals, we have no choice but always to produce at or near the capacity of the labor force" and pour out increasingly unimportant goods. How do you remove the element of personal disaster? He proposed that "unemployment compensation should be increased as unemployment increases—and should be diminished as full employment is approached." This method would assure people of security in times of high unemployment, when they would have scant chance of finding work anyhow; and would prod them into hustling to find a job when unemployment was relatively low. He felt such a system would "enable us to take a more relaxed and rational view of output without subjecting individual members of the society to hardship." Mr. Galbraith's theorizing led him to the possibility of the emergence of a large body of citizens who would be blessed with a great deal of leisure time. He viewed this with more cheerfulness than many of us—perhaps because of our baggage of vestigial puritanism— can still muster. It is questionable whether American citizens are prepared yet to cope even with the semileisure of a four-day week. They hate to be idle even more than most people. Their three-week vacations are generally periods of frenzied activity. When they find themselves favored with a short work week, many get themselves a second job. More than four million of them have joined the ranks of the "moonlighters," or doublejob holders. And then there is another hazard that growing leisure poses. It tends to stimulate the desire to consume. Paul Mazur pointed out that the growth in leisure time produced by the shorter work week "represents a huge increase in the time available for consumption." And Business Week has noted that "the more time people have outside their working day, the more marked is their propensity to consume goods and services of all kinds." This tendency to increase consumption as leisure increases may be exciting to the goods producers but offers little cheer to the conservationists concerned about the nation's shrinking resources. Furthermore, in terms of life satisfaction, acts of consumption are no adequate substitute for acts of individual productivity. What will happen to the dignity of man if he finds that his main contribution is to be as a consumer rather than as a creator? The Massachusetts Institute of Technology mathematician Norbert Wiener, one of the theoretical pioneers of automation, worries that he may have helped create a monster. He has expressed concern about what will become of man's dignity and freedom if we achieve a fully mechanized society where jobless, debased workers roam the streets and even receive their unemployment checks from a machine. All this would seem to indicate that while Trail Number One should undoubtedly be thoroughly explored, and does offer a major opportunity for easing the developing dilemma, it will need to be explored with care. The second major possibility—or Trail Number Two—would involve an attempt to tune down the economy somewhat, even if it means settling for a more modest level of living. This would focus on the challenge of removing the goad of everrising technological efficiency. The relentless pressure coming from the present annual increase in man-hour productivity—and its seemingly constant companion, ever-rising wage costs—may be the American Way, but it is also becoming a wolf nipping everlastingly at the nation's heels. It demands that the nation keep upping its consumption or face the consequences in sharply increased unemployment. Obviously, chasing away this wolf will be a very tricky business. Even assuming it can be accomplished without disaster, what will happen to the restless, expansive American character in the process? But just as obviously an attempt will have to be made sooner or later if the nation is to be saved from exhaustion due to hyperactivity. Somehow, sometime, American citizens will start modifying their value system by placing a lower value on the social usefulness of their machines. When that time comes, they will start viewing more skeptically the fairly constant current steam of exhortations for more growth, more product innovations, more sales. As things stand, these clarion calls are accepted—at least by most businessmen—as mandates. Mr. Mazur exhorts: "Our economic system requires incessant growth." Mr. Mortimer, chairman of the board of General Foods, asserts matter-of-factly that "business must continue to grow or it will slip back swiftly. There is no standing still." And Ray Eppert, president of Burroughs Corporation, told a meeting of the National Association of Manufacturers: "Top management's nightmare is the horrible thought 'What would happen to us if in the next quarter we suddenly saw our revenue, our sales, decrease ten, fifteen, or twenty percent?' In most instances this would not merely decrease profits correspondingly—it would wipe them out. Business must grow or die. . . . Now is the time to install costcutting equipment. . . . Now is the time to research and develop those products we are going to need in future years and to increase our selling impact. The dynamism of the American economy is not built in. It must be continually generated." Bankers have been encouraging this straining for new products and new models by asking businessmen seeking credit what innovations they have up their sleeve. Many bankers are wary of applicants who have only "old" products. Occasionally there have been protests from retailers charged with moving ever-higher mountains of goods. They have begged for relief. An appliance buyer complained: "Beating annual production records in electrical housewares has become a fetish that seems to serve no constructive purpose. . . . Why not accept the fact that the market is saturated on some items?" And a New Jersey automobile dealer protested what he felt was flagrant overproduction of automobiles and proposed that some sort of maximum yearly production figure be set for new cars each year by a committee representing the public, the dealers, and the manufacturers. There is evidence, too, that some producers are learning to turn a profit while operating at substantially less than capacity or below generally accepted break-even points. The chairman of Republic Steel observed during the 1958 recession, "We intend to make money at whatever capacity." And Mr. Romney, the head of American Motors, has observed, happily, that his company has learned how to operate profitably on a break-even point in output of a specific make that is far under that of the Big Three motorcar makers. It is conceivable that the United States may reach a point where it will even consider it advisable to turn down its machinery of desire stimulation somewhat, especially if the sellers keep stoking that machinery with more and more billions of dollars each year to stimulate desire. This is not an unprecedented suggestion. When consumer goods were scarce in Great Britain after World War II, a tax on advertising was being considered in order to keep down desire stimulation. The advertisers, under this pressure, came up with a Voluntary Limitation on Advertising. It was accepted by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. Major advertisers of rationed goods and luxuries agreed to cut back their advertising outlays 15 per cent. They also agreed to "conduct their advertising" so as not to "increase inflationary pressure of demand." The agreement with modifications lasted for two years. And for a much longer period British advertising was curbed by a variety of controls. The use of electricity for advertising, for example, was forbidden altogether. It is also quite conceivable that Americans might ultimately learn to lead stimulating lives at a somewhat lower level of consumption without feeling deprived or oppressed. My elderly friend running the supermarket in Indianapolis offers the opinion that any homemaker can cut family food bills by a quarter without noticeably affecting quality just by exercising prudence and frugality. Consider President Eisenhower's expressed fear that the young people of the United States are growing soft. While he was voicing this fear, school boards in many towns were each spending hundreds of thousands of dollars of taxpayer money to build parking lots capable of accommodating the hundreds of motorcars owned by students who might better walk to school or come by bus. And then there is the question of how much real gain in the United States standard of living is involved when women are persuaded to own five bathing suits instead of one. And how much is involved when people are persuaded to cast aside their new car when it is twenty-seven months old instead of keeping it until it is fifty or one hundred months old? A woman in Berkeley, California, wrote a magazine that she was starting to feel smug about the poor gadget-ridden Americans who were having so much trouble getting their motorcars and appliances serviced. She described herself as a free soul because she had no appliances or television in her home. Samuel Butler in his Erewhon depicted a society of Erewhonians who concluded they were being enslaved by their machines. Politically they divided into two parties, the machinists and the anti-machinists. The leading philosophers of each faction argued the growing role that machines were playing in their lives. The anti-machinists conceded that the machines were benevolent masters and would treat them decently just as the Erewhonians treated their own domesticated horses and dogs decently. Still they argued, "Is it not plain that the machines are gaining ground upon us . . . ? They serve that they may rule." The anti-machinists won the day; and the Erewhonians proceeded to smash every machine and "mechanized appliance" invented in the preceding 271 years. The Erewhonians then returned to an idyllic pastoral way of life in which simplicity, kindly genial manners, and the quest of beauty were cherished above material possessions. Behind their mountains they shunned the bustling materialistic world thereafter, and without regret. It undoubtedly is a little late for Americans to consider putting sledge hammers to their robot machines. But quite possibly in coming decades the rewards these robots can bring may be less highly prized. Such a shift in attitude would help ease the problem of coping with the nation's fabulous production machine. A third possibility—or Trail Number Three—would be to devote more energy and more money to searching for brand-new kinds of innovations for the consumer that would fill a genuine need and represent a real break-through for technology. I'm thinking of innovations on the order of the motorcar, the radio, the refrigerator, the jet airplane. Each upon its appearance has given the United States economy an enormous boost and, directly or indirectly, has created thousands or even millions of new jobs. If United States industry would divert into the quest of such revolutionary innovations a fraction of the billions of dollars now being poured into devising flossier packaging, improving product mix to command greater shelf space, developing patentable imitations of existing products, and creating obsolescence of quality or desirability, then epoch-making breakthroughs might well occur. George Romney of American Motors seemed to allude to this challenge when in mid-1960 he observed, "The attempt annually to create products that are merely camouflaged to seem better is a colossal misdirection of effort away from useful innovation." One example of an innovation that would represent a real and useful break-through if reasonably priced would be the use of ultrasonic devices to clean fabrics and cooking and eating utensils. Another that could be enormously useful in many situations would be the picture telephone. Some of the most obviously needed innovations are in the area of travel because of the present traffic-clotted highways, the widespread deterioration of railroad service, the growing depletion of known United States reserves of oil, and the growing pollution of the urban air with gasoline fumes. Vehicles are needed to cut through the congestion of urban sprawl. The small, safe one- or two-seater helicopter for family use is still a most attractive dream. The motorcar with a gas-turbine engine—and beyond that the electric-powered car—represents a highly desirable goal. A quiet electric car would reduce greatly the drain on both metal and petroleum supplies. It originally failed largely because no adequate power supply could be developed. Now, however, with advanced technology, including the development (and evident early suppression) of the nickel-cadmium battery which costs about \$100 but outlasts the average motorcar, the dream of the electric car seems less remote. Quite possibly, service stations now devoted primarily to pumping gasoline products could become devoted primarily to battery recharging. A car owner on a long trip could simply turn in his depleted battery for recharging and for a fee take in its place a now-charged battery left there by an earlier motorist. If batteries can be made commercially that will power a car for, say, one hundred miles, then the electric runabout will come close to reality. And then there is the levacar, a very attractive dream for mass transportation for short-haul trips to the suburbs or to nearby metropolitan centers. The levacar is much like a train except that a stream of compressed air lifts it a fraction of an inch above the track to reduce friction. The Ford Motor Company has already built experimental levacars. The advantage of the levacar over the train, bus, or motorcar is that it has the potentiality of going like a streak, 200 to 500 miles per hour. And its advantage over the airplane for short-haul trips is that its terminals or stations could be readily accessible inside cities and not out on the edge of the cities. As it is, if you wish to hop from Cleveland to Columbus by airplane, you may waste nearly two hours in getting to and from airports. A fourth possibility—or Trail Number Four—would involve systematically encouraging the already apparent shift from the producing industries to the service industries (excluding those devoted to repair). Producing activities—or those devoted to fabricating such things as appliances, mining such things as iron ore, or growing such things as wheat—have for quite a few years been shrinking as sources of employment as a result of the impact of automation and other mechanized duplication of jobs once done by people. On the other hand, opportunities continue to open up in such service fields as travel, insurance, restaurants, hotel and motel operation, recreation, cultural activities, health-improvement activities, and education for both children and adults. The service fields are particularly promising as areas for attacking the problem of maintaining reasonably full employment at annual incomes fairly close to present levels. (And any solution must meet these requirements in order for it to have any real prospect of success.) For one thing, the service industries generally make only modest use of the nation's natural, irreplaceable resources. And for another, they are capable of far greater reasonable expansion than the producing industries. Even by straining with such strategies as planned obsolescence, it is doubtful that the refrigerator industry can hope to do more than double the average family's consumption of refrigerators in the next several decades. On the other hand, the average family's involvement in travel, cultural, or educational activities can be expanded five, ten, or conceivably even twenty times. Toll television, it might be added, offers the potentiality for an explosion in demand for creative theatrical talent. And now we come to possible Trail Number Five, which seems to deserve treatment in a separate chapter because of its importance, its ramifications, and the national controversy it is already creating.