# Achieving an Enduring Style of Life "Americans are suffering from a surplus of happiness."—Casual comment by a lovely, white-haired lady in Wichita Falls, Texas, whose name but not remark I have forgotten. THE SUPERABUNDANCE IN QUANTITY OF THE GOOD THINGS OF LIFE IN the United States may quite possibly be producing a deterioration in the quality of life—or even the real enjoyment of life—being achieved by most of its citizens. Ardent materialism as a guiding philosophy seemed more appropriate in an earlier day. Early in the last century, the French critic Alexis de Tocqueville observed that "America is a land of wonders, in which everything is in constant motion and every change seems an improvement." John Stuart Mill, observing much the same hustling and aggrandizement, put it in less flattering terms. He said the United States was a land where material progress was such a preoccupation that "the life of the whole of one sex is devoted to dollar-hunting, and the other to breeding dollar-hunters." All this hustle and optimism and dollar-hunting produced a society whose material triumphs became the wonder of the world and whose style of life was picturesque, if not charming. Today, however, with materialism pretty clearly in an overdeveloped stage in the United States, the nature of the challenge the society confronts appears to be changing. The absorption with—and pressure toward—acquisition that once had social value appears to be becoming a hazard of major proportions. Theologian Reinhold Niebuhr put the hazard in these terms: "The productive power of our industry threatens to make our culture subordinate to our economy. . . . More goods and services may lead to a tremendous pressure upon the consumer to adopt more and more luxurious living standards for the sake of keeping the economy healthy." He suggested that such straining to keep up with ever-higher living standards, especially if for the sake of mere novelty, can "become a threat to the serenity of life." A further problem is that the lives of most Americans have become so intermeshed with acts of consumption that they tend to gain their feelings of significance in life from these acts of consumption rather than from their meditations, achievements, inquiries, personal worth, and service to others. It is appropriate to wonder, in fact, if a society can have too much of a good thing and can begin suffering from a surplus of happiness. Consider a few items of evidence. The Radio Advertising Bureau reports—with a note of triumph— that 40 per cent of all American groups going on outings to beaches, parks, and picnic areas now take along a portable radio. The figure would have been even higher, I suspect, if the study had been confined to young people. Many young Americans have been conditioned to need the noise of radio pouring steadily into their ears, whether they are on a train, watching a ball game, or studying. Officials of an Eastern college told me that pandemonium broke out on their campus when the electric power went off one afternoon for two hours. Students complained that they couldn't study without the music of their radios to support them. Many parents complain of their children's constant need for amusement via consumption. The children often spend their free hours moving between movie screen and television screen, with stopovers at the frappé fountain or at the play room where they play with their \$5.95 model kits in which all the parts are stamped out for them. The New Consumer reported that parents in the town of Golf protested to the investigators: "We spend more on the children [than our parents did]. The children can't entertain themselves—they need expensive equipment and toys. Very expensive amusements." The children are not the only Americans who need fairly constant and expensive amusements. One of my informants informed me, from eyewitness experience, that in the gambling center of Las Vegas some of the toilet booths contain slot machines. (Some of the gambling areas, it might be added, have installed special slot machines that are childsized.) Another problem is that the environment for a satisfying style of life is being undermined by all the emphasis on ever-greater productivity and consumption. As a result, the nation faces the hazard of developing a healthy economy within the confines of a psychologically sick and psychologically impoverished society. All the current preoccupation of influential Americans with preserving a healthy economy through growth has drawn an eloquent retort from one of the nation's great editors, Henry Beetle Hough of The Vineyard Gazette, Edgartown, Massachusetts. He took as his text for an editorial a rosy report on the New England economy by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The report spoke of the economic growth destined to come from greater investment, greater automation, higher productivity. Hough commented: "One hears the busy sound of machinery grinding past on the streets, headed for 1970." He granted that the prophecy was reassuring as far as it went, but he added: "Would it not be well to hear from a poet, an artist, a naturalist, a humanist, based on considerations of the broadest and least tangible sort? More investment, greater automation, higher productivity—but will the geese still fly north and south in season, will there be white sand for the surf to roll upon, will trees and wildflowers beckon from beyond the door-yard, will pinkletinks sound their peeping from the marshes in April? Will the world be as livable as we know it today, and will new generations be as free?" Those, indeed, are becoming desperately pertinent questions. It is easy to recall, of course, that a number of past civilizations have collapsed because their elite classes became caught up in a preoccupation with pleasures, possessions, and trivialities. Then, it was not conceivable that there would be enough surplus of goods to permit the hedonism to extend to the masses. Adlai Stevenson, pointing to past societies that had collapsed because of the hedonism of their ruling classes, said: "All these facts of history do not lose their point because the pleasures of today are mass pleasures and no longer enjoyments of an elite. If we become a nation of Bourbons, numbers won't save us." Two massive obstacles appear to stand in the way of any notable change from the current drift of the American style of life. One is the widespread faith of Americans that their technology can solve all their problems. This faith persists even though this technology is pushing them relentlessly toward ever-greater giantism and evergreater productivity based on automation, which requires ever-greater consumption. If Americans are to become masters of their destiny in terms of style of life, they must come to terms with their machines. A first step would be to recognize that the nation's exploding technology is not an unalloyed boon. A number of leading technologists are themselves now recognizing this. Detlev W. Bronk, president of the National Academy of Sciences, now stresses that "the applications of science are creating problems as well as opportunities. . . . One thing that disturbs me is the idea that science can solve everything"—including the rapid disappearance of natural resources. Actually, he said, "what man chooses to do with the discoveries of science and their applications is beyond science." Others have urged that Americans have no illusions about the capacity of technology to solve essentially human problems. One of the great heroes of modern technology, Charles A. Lindbergh, voiced his own disillusionment in one of his few public comments in recent decades when he stated: <sup>1</sup> "I grew up as a disciple of science. I know its fascination. I have felt the godlike power man derives from his machines. . . . Now I have lived to experience the early results of scientific materialism. I have watched men turn into human cogs in the factories they believed would enrich their lives. I have watched pride in workmanship leave and human character decline as efficiency of production lines increased. . . . We still have the possibility, here in America, of building a civilization based on Man, where the importance of an enterprise is judged less by its financial profits than by the kind of community it creates; where the measure of a man is his own character, not his power or his wealth." Americans need not stand by helplessly and let their technology carry them willy-nilly in a direction that raises their apprehension. They can refuse to let technology dominate their lives. They can deliberately decentralize its organized manifestations. They can insist that noneconomic factors as well as economic ones be weighed in setting their society's course. One of the challenges they face is that of working out a tolerable relationship with their machines, a relationship that leaves the possibility for the human spirit to soar. It can be done. But, as Charles Lindbergh points out, the time is short. The second massive obstacle standing in the way of any significant shift in the American style of life is the all-pervading commercialism of the environment in which they live and breathe. Americans consequently are under fairly constant pressure to appraise their life satisfaction on the basis of material possessions. Before this can change, Americans need to develop a discontent with those among the admen who proudly call themselves merchants of discontent. Perhaps the average American will develop a resistance that will force a change, as a result of the mounting barrage of selling messages. It is even possible that the sellers, for the sake of their own self-esteem, will voluntarily seek to become more universally scrupulous, conscientious, discreet, and courteous. Advertising men are more inclined now to self-examination than any other group in the American society. They wince at the image of huckster that has become rather permanently hung on them and they seem willing to go to some lengths to remove it. This may be a happy omen for the future. Advertising in the past three decades has grown into one of the great instruments of social control operating in the United States. It has joined the church, the school, and industry as a major influence on people's lives. David M. Potter, Yale University historian, points out, however, that the traditional institutions have tried to improve man and to develop in him qualities of social value.<sup>2</sup> The church appeals to the spirit and conscience of man and tries to implement the golden rule. The school appeals to the reason of man and offers the hope of a perfected society through wisdom and stimulated ability. And even industry appeals to the ambition of man and offers the reward of fulfillment through one's creation. If advertising is to grow up to its power as an instrument of social control, it must develop ideals of social value for the improvement of man, ideas that go beyond keeping him discontented. In fairness it should be noted that advertising does, by stimulating wants, promote a high-output economy, which in turn generates jobs and investment and raises the level of material consumption, whether that level particularly needs raising or not. But Professor Potter is correct in stating that advertising does little to develop qualities of social value in man himself. In early 1960, billboards were making perhaps the best claim currently possible: "ADVERTISING HELPS YOU ENJOY THE GOOD LIFE." "The Good Life" here presumably means the abundant life. Perhaps we will see a change. Perhaps this infant institution, as it matures, will develop an idealism, a deeper sense of responsibility, and a mission to improve man in ways that will have enduring value. Let us hope that this evolution will come in decades rather than the millenniums which it took the other institutions to develop. Advertising leaders have recently been drawing up manifestoes that have a revolutionary ring. They talk about the need for a new ethical course and for helping the nation achieve a new sense of purpose and dedication to the right and good. The president of the Advertising Council asserted: "A good many people are getting fed up with dishonesty and phoniness and the extreme success worship." The public can encourage the trend of advertisers to grope for a new and higher course by rewarding—by their purchases and comments— those advertisers who make their appeals in a responsible, respectful, and dignified manner, and who show awareness that there can be important nonmaterial values in life. As we have seen, one area where excessive commercialization has in recent years particularly impinged upon the public is television, since the average family keeps its set turned on 38½ hours a week. It offers a good place for the public to demand a change because television stations are presumed by law to be serving the general welfare in their use of the airways. Despite that legal assumption, the United States stands alone among the Western democracies in being bereft of any working philosophy about the use of the public airways in the best interests of the public. (Countries such as Holland and France have been barring television commercials entirely.) Fortunately, a search has begun to try to find ways to reduce the high element of commercialization in television broadcasting—in both the programing and the commercials themselves. We should bear in mind that television—unlike the institution of the newspaper, which has had centuries to develop a tradition of editorial independence—is a new institution that came into being when the pressures of commercialization were most massive. Despite occasional brilliant performances and brave stands by individual broadcasters, television still has much to learn about establishing a philosophy of operation that will be a credit to the nation and that will endure. One minimum objective, it seems to me, would be for the networks to take away from the advertiser all control over program content. Great Britain's commercial television broadcasting company, I.T.A., might serve as a model. It sells the advertiser spots for his messages but does not permit the advertiser to have any control over the program that comes before or after the message. Even Advertising Age editorially supported such divorcement—and was denounced by a great many admen for doing so. A second minimum objective should be to require licensing of television networks, and on terms that require them to strive for a better balance of public-service programing. One of the most preposterous aspects of broadcasting is that individual television stations are licensed, but the networks which now handle the programing for most of the shows that appear over most of the stations are not licensed. C.B.S. and N.B.C. have sought to raise the level of public-service programing but have been largely checkmated by A.B.C., which pours out mass entertainment stuff most of the day and night. Television critic Jack Gould summed up the results in these words: "Three networks soliciting the same aggressive customers are functioning in a jungle of their own devising. Let one network aspire to nobler performance, and there will be others wooing its clients with the temptations of gangster shows and higher ratings." To license networks, legislation would have to be passed that would call for affirmative votes from congressmen who need exposure on television to get elected and who often need contributions from companies that are major television sponsors. However, congressmen have in the past enacted legislation in the public interest over the strenuous opposition of directly affected groups, and the number of bills congressmen have been proposing recently that are being opposed by advertising spokesmen in Washington suggests that many congressmen may be in a mood to take hold of the horns of the bull. A third possibility—and now we are becoming more drastic— would be to establish a counterbalance to the existing networks by setting up a public corporation comparable to Britain's B.B.C., which would broadcast purely in the public interest. John Fischer, editor of Harper's magazine, has advanced an interesting variation. He suggests that the government charge existing broadcasters a rental for their use of the public airways and use the money to endow a public-service broadcasting agency that would seek to improve the quality of broadcasting by buying time on the regular networks to present programs of excellence. One of the best hopes for improving television content and reducing commercialism on the air is "pay-TV," which has proved highly successful in tests in Toronto, and trials are planned for the near future in a number of American cities, including Hartford, Connecticut. In pay-TV the cost of financing the broadcast of programs of high interest is paid by the owners of television sets. They may do this, for example, by dropping coins in a meter attached to their sets. The potential of pay-TV is perhaps best demonstrated by the fact that many advertising and network television officials and motionpicture theater owners have been viewing it with unrelieved horror. The "free"-television people express concern about the great financial burden to the family that would have to spend a dollar in order for all its members to see a great current Broadway play on their set or a first-run movie. Before we become too horrified ourselves at this burden, we might recall that the family listening to the "free," sponsored television programs typically spends about six solid hours a week listening to commercials on television. That comes to more than three hundred hours of listening to commercials a year. If a person were hired to sit through three hundred hours of commercials, what would he charge? The usual rate for human guinea pigs is about \$2 an hour, which means that this person should want at least \$600 a year for the time spent listening to the commercials that the average family hears in a year. One hazard for pay-TV is that if it does become successfully established and draws a great audience, advertisers are likely to try to move in and offer to help the producers underwrite their costs in exchange for selling time. Advertising journals already are speculating that if pay-TV becomes too successful advertisers may have to "break down the gates" to "get their message across to viewers." All this indicates, I think, that the problem of lifting the allpervading smog of commercialism in American life is going to be no easy task. But it must be done if the nation's citizens are to achieve an environment conducive to self-respect, serenity, and individual fulfillment. Sir Herbert Read has suggested that "mankind will perhaps grow tired of its playthings and cast them aside; universal boredom will lead to universal despair, and art will be renewed when life itself has to be renewed." Boredom and despair quite possibly are already starting to produce a cultural renaissance in America. A number of cities are planning cultural centers. We should, however, withhold judgment on the depth of this suspected renaissance until we know more about it. The mass marketers and status promoters have moved into culture in a large way. Thus we have tens of thousands of Americans taking art lessons by correspondence from organizations that often resemble factories. We should perhaps be most heartened by signs of cultural pursuit that individuals undertake spontaneously by themselves and which require them to be more than passive listeners or spectators. Such forms of communication can give dignity and grandeur to man. Thus I think it exciting to come across a group of neighbors in Racine, Wisconsin, who have taken up madrigal singing on Saturday nights. Some families, turning inward, have been forming string quartets and voice quartets. And small neighborhood groups in many parts of the nation have been meeting once a month, often on Saturday nights, to discuss books that they have found to be particularly provocative or enthralling. Serious reading requires an exercise of concentration, private imagination, and applied intelligence that takes it out of the category of spectator recreations. This is perhaps why it has far fewer devotees than television watching. A Gallup Poll has found that most Americans questioned could not recall reading any kind of book in the past year. This finding came at a time when American homes were reported to be almost fully saturated with television sets. Adult Americans still read only one third as many books per year as adult Britons. Only one American adult in about three hundred reads serious books on his own initiative with any regularity. Think of any important, serious book in the past year. You will not find a single copy of it anywhere in most of the counties of the United States, according to an estimate by the American Book Publishers Council. Many million Americans are showing a new interest in expressing themselves through painting, sculpture, and handicraft, without the benefit of do-it-yourself kits. Such Americans might well emulate the Japanese in developing a private world of creativity for themselves. Most Japanese homes have a tokonoma, or honored alcove, for displaying the family's work of art. John Keats reports that no Japanese family is too poor to boast such an alcove, "for that work of art is nearly always handmade. It may be a flower arrangement, an illuminated scroll, a poem, a painting. But whatever the work, it represents in every way the spirit of the family." Such reflective, private pursuits as I have briefly indicated may help Americans gain a new perspective on their possessions in relation to other life satisfactions. More of them may see that cherished values and integrity of the soul have more to do with a well-spent life than selfindulgence. As Reinhold Niebuhr has observed, the dimensions of human existence "which give dignity to man are easily obscured and vulgarized in a culture which places undue emphasis upon living standards." Many Americans with a fine home and fine possessions lead civilized, modest, deeply meaningful lives. But they are not absorbed with their possessions, and they recognize that there is only a modest connection between possessions and life satisfaction, except as possessions are able to corrupt. A sociologist in Endicott, New York, told me that the happiest, most satisfying days of his married life were spent living in a trailer camp outside Atlanta soon after marriage. All the couple's neighbors were as poor as they were. They all shared toilet and washing facilities. And they shared a can of beer, he said, as if it were champagne. After sixteen years, he related, four of this couple's closest permanent friends are people they met in that camp many hundreds of miles away. Actress Siobhan McKenna makes a trip every summer to the bleak Aran Islands of Ireland to live a while with the fishermen and sheep clippers there. They are a joyful, hospitable people who always have a welcome pot of tea ready for a visitor. She says that she makes this annual trip in order to renew her faith in the essential pride and nobility of human beings who still come to grips with the cosmos instead of with artificial problems that people invent for themselves. I find myself often seeking out the older New England villages that have changed relatively little—except for a gas station or two—in recent decades. I, too, feel a freshening of the spirit when I stroll about the tree-shaded village green, peer into the lovely old spired, clean-lined churches, visit the still picturesque stores, chat with the natives, and walk among their two-century-old homes. It often occurs to me as I stroll that the mass merchandisers of the sixties—with all their huffing and puffing to sell their packaged dream communities—have not been able even to approach creating as fine an environment for life as was created in these old villages in what are now the backwaters of the United States. And by environment I mean not only physical but spiritual and political. In my strolls I am reminded, too, that one of the wisest, gayest, most inspiring, and most courageous persons my family has encountered in the past decade is a woman in her seventies who lives alone by the sea in a lonely New England cottage. In her cottage she has no electricity, running water, or telephone. She chops her own wood, which she drags from the sea. This woman earns a very modest income floating sea mosses onto paper by a secret process she devised and selling the results as greeting cards. They are exquisite. Each one is different. Encounters with such memorable individuals suggest to me that most of us might feel better about our lives if we gave a higher priority to striving for: Greater humility and idealism. At least occasional dedication to the problems of people beyond the walls of our home. Deeply cherished personal goals. A judicious attitude toward the values receivable from personal possessions. Strongly held personal standards on what is good and evil. Strongly held personal standards on what constitutes success and failure for ourselves. If adversity must be the prod for us to take a larger interest in such matters, it might still represent a gain. A people as ingenious and enterprising as Americans, however, should be able to solve the new problems posed by their fabulously productive machines without undue adversity and without being forced to make a virtue of wastefulness. The central challenge seems to be this: Americans must learn to live with their abundance without being forced to impoverish their spirit by being damned fools about it.