# A New Style: American Design at Mid-Century 1950 -1959 Opposite top Portfolio magazine was a major professional achievement for Alexey Brodovitch. In this experimental arts publication he was able to combine optimum editorial and design quality. This two-page spread from 1951 presented an article on the painter Jackson Pollock. Scale contrast in the photography plus the understated typography combines to create a layout of great elegance. Opposite bottom Advertising designer Robert Gage worked for Doyle Dane Bernbach, Inc. He produced this ad for the New York rye bread company, Levy's. A whole series of similar ads followed, appearing even as late as 1967. These ads represented the simple, direct, humorous and sometimes controversial approach to print advertising that was common in the 1950s. 'Modern businessmen have come to recognize that design can and should be used to express the character and identity of business organizations. Desian is a function of management, both within an industry and the world outside it. Industry is the institution that reaches further into our civilization than government and therefore has a greater opportunity and responsibility to influence the quality of life.' Herbert Bayer quoted in A Tribute to Herbert Bayer, 1979 ## THE AMERICAN SCENE The American economy continued to boom in the 195os. Despite the police action' in Korea, Americans generally knew peace, prosperity and conformity in this decade. The nation had a certain naivety, a simple and optimistic approach to life which preceded the turbulent changes to come in the i96os. It was the calm before the storm. Improved mass-market technology made television sets affordable for many more people and brought advertising for a vast range of products straight into people's homes. Strikingly different product forms became available. The critic Thomas Hine referred to the 195os as a time when everything from a T-bird to a toaster took on a shape that seemed to lean forward, ready to surge ahead’. It was as if the streamlined Art Deco style of the 193os had been updated for a new audience. Detroit produced cars with exaggerated tail fins and gleaming chrome. But despite the bright and shining optimism, the early 195os were also the era of the McCarthy Communist witch hunts, the beginning of a deep dissent in the land – a conflict between liberalism and xenophobic conservatism. Jack Kerouac's book On The Road (1957) and Allen Ginsberg's poetry gave voice to the underground counterculture of the Beat Generation Music lost its squeaky-clean image and became dissonant and more subversive. Art became more expressive and abstract. The definition of art was even challenged by Claes Oldenberg's soft sculptures and Allan Kaprow's Happenings'. The art of New York finally eclipsed that of Paris – the Americans had arrived on the scene with a vengeance. The 195os was the decade that saw the emergence of the painter Jackson Pollock. His work grew out of a dynamic, improvisational Zeitgeist that characterized both the progressive jazz of the time and the writings of thę Beat Generation. Socially, the beginnings of the civil rights movement happened in 195o as Rosa Parks sparked the bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama. Signs of deep change were on the horizon as Americans basked in the postwar optimism while they cruised around the new suburbs in their gas-guzzling cars with huge fins on each rear fender.