# Chapter 6 Making as Valuation

Abstract In this chapter I set out to cohere the book’s broader argument by exploring how a synthesis of Dewey’s key theories relating to knowing, reality, communication and value might be drawn to together to enrich our understanding of knowledge production in design research. In doing so, I turn first to the work of Dewey scholar Ralph Sleeper who has proposed that Dewey’s approach to knowledge emerges through the linking of the theory of inquiry to his metaphysics via his theory of communication. By grouping these aspects together, it is possible to argue that Dewey sees inquiry—or, more particularly, the identification and resolution of problems—as a transformational act which reconfigures the world. Having set out this ‘Deweyan perspective’ on inquiry, I move on to consider the question of value in research by considering his theories of value and of valuation, i.e., how, from his point of view, we might approach the subject of values (qualitative form in situations) and valuation (how we attach value to things). The chapter closes with a discussion of how design research involving practice can be seen to operate similarly, with the ‘making’ of products, services, and experiences ‘remaking’ our reality and, equally, our understanding of ‘the possible’ and ‘the valuable’.

Keywords Design research · Design epistemology · John Dewey · Design values · Valuation · Knowledge production

By now, we have encountered Dewey’s theories of experience, inquiry, art, communication, democracy, education and ethics. Across this grouping, we have picked up aspects of his metaphysics and begun to point towards his approach to knowledge (i.e., his epistemology). Seeking to draw things together, this penultimate chapter will, to an extent, aim to link up a number of threads that have been set out over the course of the previous chapters. It will also aim to present an interpretation of what the meaning of Dewey’s work, as a whole, can be seen to offer; defining, in grand terms, its possible offering for design research which involves design practice.

To meet these aims, it will be necessary to retrace some of our previous steps— recalling aspects of Dewey’s metaphysics (see Chap. 2), as well as his theories of inquiry (see Chap. 3) and communication (see Chap. 4). I will also return (briefly) to the concepts of meliorism and growth set out in the last chapter (see Chap. 5) and relate these to Dewey’s theories of value and valuation. The former theories (i.e., the metaphysics, his theory of inquiry and theory of communication) will be shown to form a ‘tripartite bedrock’ underpinning his approach to knowledge, while the latter concepts of meliorism, growth and the theories of value and valuation will be positioned as the guiding principles for such an approach.

The underlying argumentative thrust of this chapter builds upon my readings of Dewey scholarship originating mostly from the United States. Here, though a broad range of work is referenced, I ultimately defer to the perspective of Ralph W. Sleeper, who advanced a special thesis on Dewey’s approach to knowledge (Sleeper 1986). As a result, the chapter’s interpretation of Dewey’s work cannot, on its own, be understood as a wholly original contribution. Rather, it must be seen to result from a synthesis and re-presenting of the interpretations of others. The originality of what is presented is to be found in the contextualization of Dewey scholarship—Sleeper’s work—in relation to design of course, but, more specifically, in relation to design research involving practice. Thus, the account that I eventually at arrive below, can be seen to amount to a Deweyan approach to knowledge in the space of design research involving practice.

## Sleeper’s Dewey: Inquiry, Communication and Existence as the Deweyan Approach to Knowledge

Some of the earliest Dewey commentators were Sydney Hook (1939), Richard Bernstein (1966) and John McDermott (1981/1973). All focused on the experiential components in Dewey’s work, considering the various ways in which his concern with experience could be seen as a lead into other concerns, whether inquiry, education, art, politics, society, religion and so on. More recent Dewey scholars—Richard Rorty, Thomas Alexander, Larry Hickman, James Campbell—have each taken a somewhat different tactic. Rorty, while interested in Dewey, referenced his work only tangentially as, over the course of various texts, he proposed new roles for philosophy within contemporary society (see e.g., Rorty 1979, 1982, 1999). Thomas Alexander did not highlight specific theories, but rather elected to focus in on what he argues is a key thematic strand threading throughout the works. Here, we are told that the ‘central guiding thought in [Dewey’s] philosophy’ is to be found in ‘the aesthetic dimension of experience’ (Alexander 1987, p. xiii). Larry Hickman examined Dewey’s philosophy in relation to the theme of technology (Hickman 1990), as well as a perspective he terms ‘post-postmodernism’ (Hickman 2007). On his account, Dewey’s pragmatism is to be seen as a ‘productive’ philosophy; a way of approaching the world with an active orientation that looks beyond the limitations of modernism (e.g., a dualism of body and mind, matter and spirit) at the same time as anticipating and (implicitly) rejecting the more damaging excesses of post-modernism (e.g., the claim that all values/value-systems are arbitrary). Offering a more general overview, James Campbell (1995) directs his focus towards the social and political aspects of Dewey’s work. He believes the whole of his philosophy can be seen to come together through the notion of social reconstruction—the ambition to build a better, fairer society for all.

Latterly, new contributors have entered the fray, notably John R. Shook (2000) and Richard Gale (2010). Shook argues that we can understand Dewey’s philosophy as an empirical theory of knowledge and reality, inspired in large part by George Herbert Mead as well as broader trends within turn-of-the-twentieth-century European psychology (2000, p.  262). Gale on the other hand, proposes a grand framework, wherein Deweyan pragmatism is to be conceived of as a pyramid with growth at the top followed by inquiry, moral democracy, communication and, lastly, education (2010, p. 14).

Looking beyond these contributions, as already mentioned, I believe that it is another scholar, Ralph Sleeper, who ultimately offers designer-researchers the most compelling perspective on Dewey. Sleeper is not so much concerned with unpicking the tangles of his philosophic scheme but, rather, is intent on lining up the works in historical, developmental terms—following the emergence and evolution of the core arguments/positions over time and noting the points at which these arguments overlap and intersect. This particular strategy results in him moving to present a special perspective on Dewey’s approach to knowledge—how it is configured, how it works as a unit.

Like many other Deweyan scholars, Sleeper would agree that, for Dewey, a successful inquiry can be understood as one which results in our coming to ‘know something’. In knowing something, we are in a position to make further decisions in relation to further actions. This may involve initiating a new inquiry or simply exploring ways to apply/reapply the knowledge we have recently acquired. On the face of it, such an account would seem sufficient to most readers of Dewey’s work. We might readily claim that this positioning marks the beginning and end of his approach to knowledge. Sleeper, however, argues that if we trace the historical origin of these positions, and sit them beside concurrent developments across the whole of Dewey’s philosophical project, we will notice that there is more to it than first appears.

This is the point from which Sleeper sets outs his unique proposal that both Dewey’s theory of inquiry (where knowledge/knowing emerges an endpoint) and his metaphysics (where knowing is but one mode of experiencing among an inexhaustible spectrum of possibilities) can be linked via the theory of communication. In this arrangement, the metaphysics is assigned a key role in accounting for how knowledge is both possible and necessary in the world in which we find ourselves. Language and meaning, in turn, are granted a central, bridging role which link human action and understanding to the world in all its complete incompleteness.

As a result of this interlinking Sleeper finds a unique approach to knowledge threading through the entirety of Dewey’s philosophy. Inquiry remains the central feature—it is the way into whole. Through inquiry, we come to answer the questions of daily life emerging in doubtful situations. Over time, progressing from inquiry to inquiry, we come to form an understanding of the world or, to follow Dewey’s metaphysical framing, ‘existence’. In this latter activity, we are said to define (and refine) the ‘the generic traits of existence’, the things that we believe we can expect of experience. Communication—that is, language and meaning—acting as a bridge, are the enablers that allow all this to happen—supporting us as we work to move across and between the two.

In Chap. 4, we discussed the significance of communication for Dewey, focusing in particular, in relation to the content of Experience and Nature. Here, we noted how he understood language as the ‘naturalistic link’ between experience and nature. In performing this task, it was seen to allow the biological to become more than purely biological, making it possible for us to confer meaning on things. From this, we saw how Dewey claims that things which hold meaning—meaningful things—are thereby no longer limited to being what they are in the here and now. Their relationships to people, action and consequences become visible and, in this, their potential is revealed.

It is Sleeper’s claim that Dewey is here offering us an understanding of communication as existential.<sup>1</sup> On this usage, existential may be taken to mean real, meaningfully and generative, in and of itself. As real, meaningful and generative in and of itself, communication becomes an agent of change. It transforms events, situations. We see this latter aspect set out in the opening to “Nature, Communication and Meaning”, the central chapter in Experience and Nature.

When communication occurs, all natural events are subject to reconsideration and revision; they are re-adapted to meet the requirements of conversation, whether it be public discourse or that preliminary discourse termed thinking. (LW 1, p. 132)

Sleeper, for his part, when outlining this transformative aspect of communication, hones in on another particularly striking passage, also drawn from Experience and Nature.

Gestures and cries are not primarily expressive and communicative. They are modes of organic behavior as are locomotion, seizing and crunching. Language, signs and significance, come into existence not by intent and mind but by overflow, by products, in gestures and sound. The story of language is the story of the use made of these occurrences; a use that is eventual, as well as eventful […] they become language only when used within a context of mutual assistance and direction. The latter alone is of prime importance in considering the transformation of organic gestures and cries into names, things with significance, or the origin of language. (LW 1, p. 139)

For those who hold a familiarity with the work of Wittgenstein (see Chaps. 1 and 4) or Austin,<sup>2</sup> the proximity between their philosophies and Sleeper’s contextualization of Dewey’s work will be clear. All put forward the view that words and utterances allow us to do things, whether this means asking someone to pass a brick as we build (by grunting and pointing) or getting married (by saying ‘I do’).<sup>3</sup> Sleeper, acknowledges as much. However, he believes that Dewey goes much further than Wittgenstein, Austin and others. For him, the existential aspect of Dewey’s theory of communication—its inherent claim that communication changes things—has forceful implications for what it means to know something (i.e., the epistemological) and, from this, the nature of what is ‘real’ (i.e., the ontological).

## The Object of Knowledge

The key point of differentiation between Wittgenstein, Austin and Dewey can be drawn out in Dewey’s treatment of what is commonly termed the ‘object of knowledge’. The concept has a long history in philosophy, stretching back at least as far as the ancient Greeks. Put simply, it traditionally refers to the ‘thing’ we come to know through inquiry. The term made regular appearances in Dewey’s writing, particularly in his work on logic. In Studies in Logical Theory, he proposes that ‘the object of knowledge’ can be understood as that ‘which is known, considered as giving truth and reality to the knowing process’. He goes on to say that that which is known may ‘also be distinguished from that which is only erroneously assumed or accepted—from that which we deceive ourselves into believing’ (MW 2, p. 164).

For designer-researchers, along with a set of well-framed conclusions, this might mean arriving at an artifactual outcome that, on some level, represents an appropriate practical response to an inquiry’s research question(s).

In the context of Sleeper’s broader presentation of Dewey’s work, the relationship between the object of knowledge and act of communication is brought to the fore. For him, Dewey’s bundling of things, meanings and consequences within the act of communication—the playing out of social interactions—is seen to affect (or impact upon) what is known through inquiry. The thing we know is seen to undergo change because, now, it is related to other things in new ways and so has a different meaning/potentiality. Sleeper sets this out as follows.

The thing is not merely seen differently as a result of inquiry, nor is the difference merely the effect of causal factors present in the operations of inquiry, which intervene between the non-cognitive object and the object as known. For the object, by being placed in wholly new relationships, becomes a different object. The transaction that takes place in inquiry reconstructs the object by reconstructing its relations. (Sleeper 1986, p. 121)

The implications of this claim are profound. Ultimately, Sleeper is suggesting that, for Dewey, inquiry, in its relation to communication, changes not only our understanding of the things we investigate but also reality itself. This proposition may come across as somewhat startling at first. In seeking to gain a handle on it, it is worth considering/reconsidering the path of Sleeper’s argument.

Ultimately, under it all, Sleeper’s claim rests on the idea that, for Dewey, our knowing (i.e., the object of knowledge itself) is based on language and language, in turn, is based on relating things. At the same time, of course, Dewey also insists that it is our ‘naturalistic link’ between experience and nature. Accordingly, when, on the basis of knowing, we change how things are related in language we also change reality of the world in which we find ourselves.<sup>4</sup> The doings and undergoings of experience comes to affect existence. As Sleeper puts it: ‘Knowing is thus an activity of “doing and making.”’; and additionally, ‘every doing is a redoing, and making a remaking’ (1986, p. 124). Here, the theories of inquiry, communication and the metaphysics come together to present as a Deweyan approach to knowledge which is existentially-bound.

This may seem quite complex but as a brief ‘classical’ example, we might consider the study of black holes. When originally proposed, black hole theory effectively constituted a hypothetical rearranging of our conceptual bundling of space, time, gravity and light in communication/language supported by inquiry. When, through further inquiry, it was firmly established that black holes were existent entities they became an ‘object of knowledge’, i.e., a known thing with certain features defined in language. As an object of knowledge, things (i.e., space, time, gravity, light) were related in a new way and in their rearrangement they were remade. Here, in short, language is allowing us to move from an understanding in experience (i.e., coming to know about black holes) to a new, reframed understanding of existence which, itself, reframes existence (i.e., we now knowingly live in a universe which includes black holes, whereas we didn’t before).

Of course, for design research involving practice the knowledge-transformsreality angle carries a further very important implication which stretches beyond the bounds of the above example. Namely, artifacts-as-contributions would here be positioned as things-which-change-reality by virtue of their meaningful reconstruction of the relations between other things. For example, if we return briefly to Tom Jenkins’s exploration of IoT in the context of co-housing (see In Focus Box 3.1), we see that through his artifacts he is proposing a novel application for a novel technology (i.e., IoT) in a particular context (i.e., co-housing). Whereas before there were no such artifacts and, equally, no such coming together of this technology in this context, now there is. Through meaningful making and the linguistic/textual communication of the outcomes, artefactual and theoretical, inquiry has literally reshaped things. Reality has been transformed.

These are just two examples. If we were to accept Sleeper’s claim, then we would have to accept that new objects of knowledge transform existence each and every day as people undertake inquiry, whether grounded in formal research or just a common sense working out of something or other. Thus, every day, through our doing or redoing, the world is remade over and over again ad infinitum. As will likely be apparent from the Jenkins example, for design research involving practice, this presents as an especially appropriate way of seeing knowledge production. The doing and redoing of each situational transformation, of each new artifactual outcome or set of outcomes sees designer-researchers very literally remake the world. All associated relations are reconstructed off the back of the novelty these set forth.

So how is all of this to be summarized? Put simply, knowledge, now conceived of as being grounded in the active process of knowing, is to be seen as transformative of reality. It literally gives rise to ‘changes in what previously existed’. All of this is underwritten by the process of communication—that is, language and meaning and how these impact on action. Joining it up, then, we have an approach to knowledge centered around things, meaning and transformation. This is how Dewey extends beyond Wittgenstein and others and this is why he deserves our attention.

In due course, we will move to consider how an adoption/appropriation of Sleeper’s thesis might support, as well as usefully complicate, the methodological space of design research involving practice. However, before doing so, it is important that we also consider another two complementary aspects of Dewey’s work— his theories of value and of valuation. Broadly, the theory of value covers the form values take in experience (i.e., their presence in situations), while the theory of valuation tackles the issues surrounding the way in which we come to ascribe and hold values. Both of these theories usefully add to the approach to knowledge just described and will further help us to appreciate what Dewey can offer design research involving practice.

## Dewey’s Theories of Value and Valuation: The Basis of Philosophic Criticism

The question of values—of how they are experienced, defined, appraised, judged and realized—appears and reappears throughout Dewey’s mature works. As we have seen in Chap. 2, the theme is approached directly in Experience and Nature, where, in broad terms, he seeks to explores the relationship between values and philosophy. Another key text is A Common Faith, briefly referred to in Chap. 4, where he speaks of the possibility of humanity collectively defining and pursuing shared goals based on shared ideals. It appears again in the Ethics, where, as we have seen in the last chapter, he argues that, morally, action should to be judged on the basis of the good it derives for the greatest number (see Chap. 5). Beyond these examples, there is also the Theory of Valuation, which, as the title suggests, sees him focus in on the subject of valuation.

If, in any of the above titles, Dewey offers a general theory of values, in terms of what they are and how they are experienced, it is perhaps best articulated in Experience and Nature. As noted, we have already touched upon this in Chap. 2’s discussion of experience. It will be recalled that, here, in primary experience (i.e., non-reflective experience) Dewey believed values were best understood as being simply ‘values’, that is ‘things immediately having certain intrinsic qualities’ (LW 1, p. 297); these might include ‘[p]oignancy, humor, zest, tragedy, beauty, prosperity and bafflement’ (p. 295), to reference his examples. As far as he is concerned, such things simply are what they are. They cannot be discussed or considered in isolation, only in relation to ‘their generative conditions and the consequences to which they give rise’ (p. 297).

It will also be recalled that while some philosophers might associate values purely with human subjectivity, Dewey could not accept such a view. For him, values are to be understood as real, bound to a situation as much to any one individual’s ‘isolated’ perception. They are ‘indications of the possibilities of existences’ which are ‘generated by existences’ and ‘sustained by events’. Further, they are to be ‘used as well as enjoyed’ and can inspire us to act to ‘procure and buttress their causal conditions’ (p. 311).

As we will see below, at the end of Experience and Nature, Dewey comes to suggests that it is the responsibility of philosophy to determine how desirable qualities can be rendered ‘more enduring and extensive’ (LW 1, p. 302). As such a framing implies, his interest lay in defining approaches or ways of working which would allow humanity to manifest and sustain those types of experiences judged to be worthwhile—literally valuable.

The latter summary can be seen to cover values in isolation but alongside values there is also valuation. This refers to how values are appraised and judged. Approaching this subject in the Theory of Valuation, Dewey attempts to define and clarify the means by which value is attached to experience. His starting point, here, can be found in the proposal that

all deliberate, all planned human conduct, personal and collective, seems to be influenced, if not controlled, by estimates of value or worth of ends to attained. (LW 13, p. 192)

Unsurprisingly, Dewey goes on to argue that valuations are not formed in a vacuum, they are not meaningless abstractions but, rather, form in relation to the context in which we operate. As far as he is concerned, this amounts to our noting a negative and, from this, imagining a move towards something more positive (LW 13, p. 202). Thus, as in inquiry proper, i.e., trying to resolve an indeterminate situation, values can be understood to emerge as ends in the context of experiencing ‘need, deficit and conflict’. This relates to the notion of ‘adjustment of environing conditions’ discussed Chap. 2, which, as was noted, can be understood it terms of design, i.e., the art of seeking to strike appropriate balances between varied states through intelligent practice.

In regard to valuation, Dewey proposes that, through the type of imaginative deliberation described in the last chapter (see Chap. 5), various ‘alternative desires are weighed up’. He refers to these as ‘ends-in-view’—possible responses to the need, deficit or conflict we have encountered. In relation to design research involving practice, this form of deliberation was linked to the explicitly designerly processes of ideation, of developing user stories and scenarios, roadmapping, prototyping and so on. As was noted, these allow us to foresee and consider the possible consequences of particular actions. Like the possible ‘problem-solutions’ of inquiry (see Chap. 3), these are judged on the basis of how well they might ‘fit’ or respond to the issue at hand.

Ends-in-view are appraised or valued as good or bad on the ground of their serviceability in the direction of behavior dealing with states of affairs found to be objectionable […] They are appraised as fit or unfit, proper or improper, right or wrong, on the ground of their requiredness in accomplishing this end. (LW 13, p. 233, italics in original)

We gradually come to a decision about the best possible end-in-view, the one which will deliver the most good. This becomes an ‘object held in view’. it is ‘intellectual or methodological’, functioning as a guide to action (ibid, p. 234) and allowing us to move forward through successive phases of activity, directing ‘further observations and experiments’ (ibid, p. 232). This equates to an imagined transformation of a situation or an imagined artifactual outcome. Once achieved, however, the end becomes an ‘end as consequence’, it is now ‘existential’ (ibid, p. 234). Here, the situation transformed and the artifact realized.

For Dewey, an achieved end—i.e., the situation transformed or artifact realized—is seen as an ‘organization of activities’. Like the artist or maker who is, incrementally building up their final piece, the inquirer seeking out a value also moves forward step by step, working towards their end-in-view. On the one hand, this progression is based on ‘instatement of unified ongoing action’, but it is also ‘an enactment of a new state of affairs’ (ibid, p. 234, italics in original).

Based on this presentation, we can also understand the process of valuation, like inquiry which enables it, as transformational. As we collectively deliberate and move towards our end-in-view we will gain a greater understanding of the situation and of the thing we are appraising. Equally, if we are successful in bringing about our end, the world will be different. On the one hand our desire will be met, on the other we will have a sense of its worth. In design research involving practice, we will know how much better (if at all) we have made things.

Dewey does not believe in the finality of ends. Means and ends are only to be distinguished on the basis of where they occur in time and how they are related. ‘Every condition’, he writes, ‘that has to be brought into existence to serve as means is, in that connection, an object of desire and an end-in-view’. The end that we eventually reach is ‘a means to future ends as well as a test of valuations previously made’ (ibid, p. 229). Thus, there is no end in itself as far as he is concerned. Values may be consummatory but like any affair of nature, they are also beginnings, leading us on to somewhere else, to do something else. The good or bad situation will lead to another good or bad situation. The good or bad artifact will lead to another good or bad artifact.

The reason all of this matters to Dewey is because it points to the possibility of uniting our means of finding out what is good (or right, or just) with our means of finding out about the world and its possibilities, i.e., conducting an inquiry. As was made clear in the last chapter, design research involving practice might readily do this at an ethical level. The suggestion here is that things might go further still. Intriguingly, in his own reflections, Dewey suggested that such a synthesis could allow for a coming together of our immediate experience of valuing with the facts of science—in other words, an integration of what is commonly understood as the subjective with the objective. Tracing this out, he concludes The Theory of Valuation by stating

at the present time the widest gap in knowledge is that which exists been humanistic and non-humanistic subjects. The breach will disappear, the gap will be filled, […] when the conclusions of impersonal nonhumanistic science are employed in guiding the course of human behavior, that, namely, which is influenced by emotion and desire in the framing of means and ends; for desire, having ends-in-view, and hence involving valuations, is the characteristic that marks off human from nonhuman behavior. On the other side, the science that is put to distinctly human use is that in which warranted ideas about the nonhuman world are integrated with emotion as human traits. In this integration not only is science itself a value (since it is the expression and fulfillment of a special human desire and interest) but it is the supreme means of the valid determination of all valuations in all aspects of human and social life. (LW 13, p. 250, italic in the original)

While the emphasis on science may jar, the above lines are ultimately pointing to the idea that formal research can be understood in terms of its value—of the good it offers. We are being encouraged to explore ways of integrating research findings (about the ‘nonhuman’ world) as we go about deciding on courses of action, identifying means and ends. It is also being suggested that research, if appropriately undertaken and offering sound conclusions, allows us to determine value, both individually and collectively. At its core, this is a proposal ‘reconstruct’ the divisions we place been knowledge and its role in our lives. As will be discussed below, I believe that this general sentiment underpins design research involving practice, acting as its driver. On this view, it becomes an approach which aims to produce knowledge at the same time as aiming to make things better.

Dewey’s pitch brings us back to Experience and Nature, and Dewey’s ultimate position on the role and meaning of philosophy. At end of the book, Dewey sets forth an equally aspirational and related values-based understanding of the discipline. Here, he claims

philosophy is inherently criticism, having its distinctive position among various modes of criticism in its generality; a criticism of criticisms, as it were. (LW 1, p. 298)

Criticism is here understood as ‘discriminating judgement, careful appraisal’. This may sound focused and complex however Dewey believes that criticism can be very subtle, occurring whenever we do not accept or perceive value in outright terms but rather ask questions and estimate the ‘probable future’ of this or that thing. (LW 1, p. 299). This takes us back to the subject of valuation. Again, we would be asking how good something is and whether it is likely to bring good in the future. Philosophy as criticism—the criticism of criticism—thus becomes a means by which humanity may regulate ‘the further appreciation of goods and bads’. It can here support the ‘direct selection, appropriation, identification, and […] rejection, elimination, destruction’ of beliefs (i.e., knowings), ways of acting (i.e., conduct), and modes of considered thought (i.e., contemplation) (LW 1, p. 302).

Through this presentation, Dewey is positioning philosophy as the mechanism that allows us to question and negotiate value across a broad plane drawing all the disciplines together, whether science, the humanities or the arts. In this role, he believes it can act as a ‘generalized medium of intercommunication’ supporting the ‘all-round translation from one separated region of experience into another’. It thus becomes a ‘messenger, a liaison officer’; ultimately, a language of transfer, representing human value in universal terms (LW 1, p. 306).

Of course, on the latter point, Dewey’s focus lies with philosophy but, as with all the aspects of valuation highlighted above, I see design in here and more precisely design research involving practice.

Having examined Sleeper’s presentation of Dewey’s approach to knowledge as well as covered Dewey’s theories of value and valuation, we may next ask what do these perspectives allow us to say in relation to design and design research involving practice?

## Designing in Design Research: A Transformational Act of Value Creation

In seeking to collect together the threads of the proceeding sections, I would like to propose that designing in design research can be understood as

a transformational act—a (generally) melioristic process which, if successfully concluded, holds the potential to shift our reality, re-orientate our values and may, possibly, lead to growth, both individual and collective.

To start to tackle this, I believe that it is best to first focus in on the aspects of transform and value in relation to design research involving practice. I hold up the areas of transform and value because, essentially, the above proposition amounts to a Deweyan view of inquiry as transformational and generative of values.

Thus, in taking this approach, we have two immediate questions to tackle. Namely, is design research involving practice transformational and does it help us frame and define values?

Starting with the first question, I believe that, in straightforward terms, it is reasonable to propose that design practice itself is inherently transformational. Indeed, standard academic definitions of design often suggest as much. An obvious example is found in the form of Herbert Simon’s oft-cited quote. ‘Everyone designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones’ (Simon 1996/1969, p. 111).<sup>5</sup> The emphasis here of course is on change<sup>6</sup>; design is change for the better.

Another similar example comes from Marc Steen, as he explores the tension dividing design, in particular human centered design, and conventional research. While conventional researchers are interested in ‘studying or describing current or past situations’, designers, he writes, are typically concerned with ‘exploring or visuali[z]ing alternative or future situations’—they are more interested in ‘what could be’ versus ‘what is’ (Steen 2011, p. 48, italics in original).

There are still more examples. For Nigel Cross, mapping out the distinctions that may be drawn between the sciences, humanities and design, design is positioned as a process focused on artificiality, making things. In terms of the methods used, designers are said to model, form patterns, and synthesize ideas. Rather than showing the concern with ‘truth’ as in science, or ‘justice’ as is found in the humanities, designers are concerned with ‘appropriateness’, making things that work (Cross 2007, p.  18). Designing is, he claims, not about identifying something which is already there but rather it is about active construction the part of the designer, the result of their ‘own efforts’ (Cross 2007, p. 24).

Considering the role of design in a research context, Koskinen and colleagues go so far as to suggest that design research involving practice—or to use their terminology constructive design research—can be understood to function as the science of the imagination (2011, p. 42). In other words, it is positioned as a field which aims to prospect the future against the concerns and interests of the present. In outlining this position, the authors write that constructive design researchers ‘imagine new realities and build them to see whether they work’. They claim that, here, the main criterion of success is whether or not the outcome is ‘imaginative in design terms (p. 42).

As has been highlighted in other sections, this proposition finds clear expression in the well-known critical design work of Antony Dunne, Fiona Raby and others noted above. Critical designers aim to give form to alternative scenarios, other presents and futures that might be if current circumstances were different. Proposals have sketched out new forms of energy production, ways of managing healthcare needs and even new political systems (see e.g., Dunne and Raby 2013). These designs, typically presented to the public in museum and gallery contexts, can arguably be understood to frame and set forth new ontological pathways. Their appearance grounds vague possibilities in tangible form. The horizons of what could be are transformed and, as such, reality itself, the world, is transformed.

Much work in the HCI community follows a path not dissimilar to the critical design agenda. Recent projects from Simon Fraser University’s Everyday Design Studio, for example, have explored the concept of ‘counterfactual’ artifacts (i.e., non-commercial digital products) to sense out the possibilities of technology and its meanings in daily life, as well as explore conceptual questions (see e.g., Wakkary et al. 2017; and A Practice Case 2.0). Indeed, writing with others, Ronald Wakkary, co-founder of Everyday, has proposed that it may be possible to ‘do philosophy through the making of design research. This is said to offer a means of ‘looking beyond human-centeredness’ and, ultimately, open up the possibility of exploring technological mediation in broader terms (see Hauser et al. 2018).

The theorist and academic Stuart Walker has long advocated for a comparable approach in academic design in general through his concept of ‘propositional designs’. These are objects are objects which do not exist but could. It is his belief that academic design research has ‘the capacity and freedom to critique current approaches, examine their insufficiencies, and explore new possibilities’ in ways not available in everyday design practice. Indeed, given the urgency of our presentday crises and challenges, he argues that it has ‘an obligation to do so’ (Walker 2010, p. 98).

The focus here is on devising design approaches which take ‘full advantage of the opportunities made possible by technological advance’ at the same time as attending to ‘the social, environmental, and economic requirements of sustainability but also to more substantive questions of personal meaning and fulfilment’ (ibid, p. 102). To explore how this might be possible, Walker conceptualizes and proposes design outcomes that ‘illustrate the potential of an alternative direction’ (p. 94).

In one case, a novel mobile phone concept was developed in response to the challenge of product sustainability and concerns relating to the over-use of such devices. The phone was not presented as a single, already-functioning unit but rather as a series of modular parts, which had to be assembled in order to work. From a sustainability point of view, the modular format delivered a distinct advantage. Individual elements can be upgraded and adapted as required, expanding the product’s potential lifespan and, ultimately, resulting in reduced environmental damage in the longer term. From the perspective of over-use, the design disrupts the user’s unthinking, habitual patterns of behavior. If they want to make a call or send a text, they have to consciously choose to do so, as well as invest time in assembling the phone to make it a functional product.

Such an approach offers a sense of how design research involving practice can open up new horizons of potentiality, enacting a new reality by virtue of an approach to making that is essentially remaking the possible.

So, it would seem that design involving practice can be positioned as transformational. There remains the question of value.

To a degree, we have already seen how this might work in the discussions of the last section. Equally, notions of value and valuation are, of course, threaded throughout the above discourse. We can see it in Simon’s notion of a ‘preferred’ situation. Steen’s ‘what could be’ implies better than ‘what it is’. Equally, the critical design of Dunne and Raby and others, along with Walker’s propositional design both demand that we examine the moral background against which current structures operate. We are being invited to question our present value commitments and, in turn, open up to the possibilities of other, alternative horizons.

Beyond these examples, returning to the context of the last chapter, we can see the process of valuation drawn into high relief in participatory design and collaborative design. As was highlighted above, such practices see individuals and groups come together to explore possible future scenarios in terms of the goods they will likely deliver for the greatest number (e.g., Bjögvinsson et al. 2012; Sanders and Stappers 2008). Ultimately, it can be argued that these efforts are founded upon a commitment to deliberate the worth of, define the meaning of, and, finally, realize, particular values (e.g., Manzini 2015).

Taking the broad view, we might go so far as to describe design as an inherently value-orientated activity. Indeed, focusing in on ‘design reasoning’ as compared with classical scientific reasoning, Kees Dorst (2011) explicitly suggests as much. On his account, design reasoning aims not at ‘results’ but rather at values as goals to be achieved. Designers are said to be driven by a desire to ‘create value for others’; they want to attain a ‘certain “value”’ (ibid, p. 523). Thus, values become endsin-view to use Dewey’s expression.

Pushing further still, it may also be claimed that designer-researchers (i.e., those who incorporate design practice within their projects) can be seen not only to pursue particular values but also to mediate values across a range of other, related and unrelated knowledge domains. This is highlighted by Koskinen and colleagues, who note that ‘constructive’ design researchers often operate in interdisciplinary environments, collaborating with individuals who might be ‘sociologists, anthropologists and computer scientists’ (Koskinen et al. 2011, p. 29). Equally, in discussing the future possibilities for design research in the early 2000s, Richard Buchanan believed that the field held the potential to break down the barriers separating the older disciplines. On his view, the traditional disciplinary barriers had become problematic because they stand in the way of our knowing and understanding the world, and, equally, frustrate our efforts ‘to act knowledgeably and responsibly in practical life’ (Buchanan 2001, p. 6). Against this, design, he wrote, has ‘become the new learning of our time’. It opens up ‘a pathway to the neoteric disciplines<sup>7</sup>’ that must be engendered if traditional specialized knowledge is to lead to ‘productive results for individual and social life’ (Buchanan 2001, p. 7).

Reflecting on all of this, it becomes possible to conceive of design and design research involving practice as live processes<sup>8</sup> which frame, guide and shape change, leading us from the state of what is towards another, more desirable, value-orientated future state. In simple terms, we might say that, in the main, both constitute activities which (generally) aim to bring to good things into the being. Equally, they are likely to draw in other perspectives, beyond the purely ‘designerly’. As Buchanan suggests this latter tendency has the potential to give rise to new disciplines, new ways of bringing ‘knowledge’ together that support humanity’s need for productive practical change in the real world.

With these answers to our two initial questions, we will now move to close by considering the proposition as whole.

## Discussion: Design Research Involving Practice Built on Values

So how can design research involving practice be understood as a transformational act; a (generally) melioristic process, with the capacity to shift our shared reality, re-orientate our values and enable individual and collective growth?

To answer this question, I believe it is worth thinking through what happens when design practice is incorporated within a research project.

Disregarding any special intellectual overlay—whether termed practice-based, practice-led or other—it could be suggested that, in general terms, a certain pattern can be seen emerge; a pattern of design inquiry if you will.

First off, it is likely that we will be aiming towards a particular value, looking to bring a particular good into existence (e.g., Dorst 2011), that we will be motivated by a particular vision (Zimmerman and Forlizzi 2008). To support this process, it equally likely that we will experiment, try to make something and see if it works (e.g., Bang et al. 2012; Koskinen et al. 2011; Brandt and Binder 2007; Binder and Redsröm 2006). It is also very likely that will be required to appraise, judge and, ultimately, draw on findings which overreach any precise disciplinary boundary (e.g., Buchanan 2001). In the end, bringing it all together, we may have an artifact that we are more or less satisfied with—something that has been produced which, so far as it goes, works (e.g., Zimmerman et al. 2010). Even if we do not have an artifact, it is almost a given that things are changed and altered, reshaped (e.g., Krippendorff 2006; Simon 1996/1969). It is also very likely that we will have a clear handle on what the important values are at stake in the context of our inquiry (e.g., Steen 2013). We will understand what is valuable and what is not.

Meliorism becomes necessary here if we are to bother trying at all. Indeed, it is likely that this process of making, changing, altering and reshaping, of involving design practice in research, will have been undertaken with a view to making things better (e.g., Steen 2013). If we consider it for a moment, were it not for the belief that human action can achieve positive change then there would be little or no motivation to make any attempt in the first place.

Alongside this, growth in capability, individual and social, can be seen to occur as we move forwards together. It is a consequence of experimenting, doing and succeeding or failing, trying and retrying and learning, always learning. We get better as we go.

In this pattern, loose and general though it is, we can readily detect an actionorientated epistemology, a transformational ontology, the pursuit of values, the undertaking of valuation and the inherent spanning of disciplinary boundaries, the interdisciplinarity already alluded to by Koskinen et  al. (2011) and Buchanan (2001). These are, of course, the core features of Dewey’s philosophy.

Sitting this pattern next to the Deweyan view of inquiry as transformational and generative of values, we can say quite simply that Dewey fits with design research involving practice. What he offers is a philosophical understanding of designerly knowing and reality, as well as a way of seeing the pursuit of value that, together, ground its understanding of knowledge. Held in the round, it is a form of valuecreation; where a value-based knowledge emerges, evolves and grows. This, in outline, offers us the beginnings of an epistemological justification for design research involving practice; a justification that may enrich current methodological formulations (e.g., Bang et al. 2012; Brandt and Binder 2007).

Ultimately, to undertake design research involving practice is to recognize the scope of action in the world and the potential for change, positive change, that design practice brings. In coming to know in this way, we construct of a new ‘object of knowledge’ by a making/doing that is literally making/doing. Through this method we can discover where value lies and how to attain it. We can contribute to knowledge on the basis of changing the situation and, consequently changing the ontological baselines upon which we operate. Here, in making-knowing, making becomes remaking as it changes reality. This is what Dewey says and this is what design research involving practice claims to do and, indeed, often does do. The two go together as one.

## A Practical Case 6.0: Exploring Scotland’s Digital Futures

Scotland’s Digital Design Futures project, hosted by the University of Dundee in Scotland, aimed to investigate how emergent blockchain and related data-sharing technologies might have the potential to bolster Scotland’s digital design sector. Setting about their task, the researchers undertook a wide consultation with members of the sector, mapping the current situation in industry and ways in which the technology is already having an impact. From this, the team progressed to explore a number of what they refer to as ‘hypothetical designs’; that is, possibilities that might begin to address some of the opportunities and challenges identified in the consultation (Patrickson, Livesay and Gilman 2019, p. 9).

One such hypothetical design was an ‘intentionally playful’ proposal for a local crypto-currency to support creative initiatives in the city of Dundee, to be called the ‘Angel’. The proposal emerged through two workshops undertaken at the University of Dundee. In the first workshop, titled ‘Sharing Insights Blockchain’, participants brainstormed around the question of what values they wanted to promote in Dundee. Some of the themes that emerged included: productivity, self-sustaining, networked, time to play, build together and so on (Patrickson 2018, p.  18). In the second workshop, a group of participants, drawn from both the creative sector and academia were asked to consider how a digital ‘token’ might be designed to ‘reward these values’.

In the course of the workshop, concerns were raised in relation to how cryptocurrencies ‘might commodify things beyond price’ as well as support illegal activity (e.g., the drug trade or tax evasion). Accordingly, it was decided that, in application, the token would need to promote cooperation over ‘free-trade’. This found form in three key suggestions. First, drawing inspiration from the Scottish approach to land conservation, it was envisaged that the token might support the sale of micro-shares in ‘cooperative housing and creative spaces’ in the city. Here, by distributing ownership the risk of gentrification would be greatly reduced. Second, it was also suggested that the currency could be issued as a specific reward for providing voluntary support in the creative sector. Third, drawing inspiration from an artists’ pension trust, there was the suggestion an ‘angel investor pack’ might allow groups of digital designers, including graduates, to form cooperatives around a ‘bundle’ of tokens. If these packs were sold on, all of the parties involved in the original sales agreement would benefit through an automatic commission payment (ibid, 19).

Returning to discussion of the last section, I believe that this case begins to demonstrate how design research involving practice might be conceived of as a transformational act; melioristic, value-driven, ontologically-active (i.e., shifting the horizons of being), and carrying the potential for individual/collective growth. In order to unpack this, let us take the various layers step-by-step.

To begin, we can say that this project—or, to use the Deweyan expression, this inquiry—is working with a set of existing things (i.e., the Scottish digital sector, blockchain technology, the concept of crypto-currency) and asking questions of them. This asking of questions leads to a set of answers regarding what is the case. For example, we have a mapping of the digital design sector in Scotland; we have an understanding of how blockchain and data-sharing technologies are currently being deployed in that sector. With this information to hand, further questions can then be asked regarding how these technologies might do more, how they their impact can be enhanced. This is where the melioristic angle comes into play—we see a basic belief that things can be made better through human effort.

These melioristic questions allow the team to frame the workshop series and the workshops, in turn, can be seen to facilitate the exploration of a possible answer, what Dewey would term a ‘desirable end-in-view’; in this case, a local cryptocurrency. Here, we see that another existing thing is being added to the suite of the project’s/inquiry’s other existing things (i.e., the Scottish digital sector, blockchain technology, the concept of crypto-currency). In their coming together we have the possibility of rearrangement and of something novel coming into being. It is within this space that design activity proper begins.

In terms of specific activities, we can see that, within the workshops, participants deliberated over the values their new local crypto-currency might promote. Equally, using imaginative thought, they foresaw the possible consequences of taking a particular direction, i.e., they raised concerns regarding the potential that their cryptocurrency might support negative outcomes such as illegal drug sales or tax evasion.

Here, the workshops become a space of valuation, that is, the participants can be seen to appraise the ways in which their end-in-view holds the potential to be good or bad. Through this appraisal they reshape it—in other words, make it a better ‘fit’ within their value-system—here, by emphasizing cooperation over ‘free trade’. Certain features (i.e., the micro-shares, the rewards, the angel investor pack) are then embedded within the proposal as a result. It is agreed that, with these features embedded, the hypothetical design would be of benefit for the Dundee’s digital design sector.

At this point, the situation is transformed and the artefact is realized, at least so far as it goes. Returning to Deweyan terminology, we can say that the token, in its final, agreed upon form, constitutes an ‘object of knowledge’. It becomes an answer to the question of how blockchain and related data-sharing technologies might help bolster the digital design sector in a particular part of Scotland. Through this object of knowledge, the world becomes different; a rearranging has taken place, things— digital design, blockchain, crypto-currency, local currencies, Dundee—have been related differently. In this, our understandings of the possible has been shifted, even if only subtly.

Though the concept of growth is not explicitly discussed, it will, one might reasonably argue, have taken place throughout. There will have been individual growth on the basis of people coming together in the workshops and jointly exploring the project’s/inquiry’s subject matters. In one-to-one and group interactions there will have been an exchange, new understandings will have been achieved. Collective growth can be seen to occur the basis that, now, Scotland’s digital design sector knows something more of itself both in terms of what it is and what it might be. Design enables this in its bringing together (i.e., of individuals) on the one hand, and bringing into being (i.e., of the object(s) of knowledge) on the other. The transformational act has transformed.

## References

Alexander, T. M. (1987). John Dewey’s theory of art, experience & nature. Albany: The Horizons of Feeling. State University of New York Press.

Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bang, A.  L., Krogh, P., Ludvigsen, M., & Markussen, T. (2012). The Role of Hypothesis in Constructive Design Research. Paper presented at the 4<sup>th</sup> The Art of Research: Making, Reflecting and Understanding. Aalto University School of Arts, Design and Architecture, Helsinki, Finland, 28–29 Nov 2012.

Bernstein, R. J. (1966). John Dewey. New York: Washington Square Press.

Binder, T., & Redström, J. (2006). Exemplary Design Research. Paper presented at the Design Research Society Wonderground Conference, Sociedade de Geografia de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 1–4 Nov 2006.

Bjögvinsson, E., Ehn, P., & Hillgren, P. A. (2012). Design things and design thinking: Contemporary participatory design challenges. Design Issues, 28(3), 101–116.

Brandt, E., & Binder, T. (2007). Experimental design research: Genealogy, intervention, argument. Paper presented at international association of societies of design research conference. Hong Kong, China, 12–15 Sept 2007.

Buchanan, R. (2001). Design research and the new learning. Design Issues, 17(4), 3–23.

Campbell, J. (1995). Understanding John Dewey: Nature and cooperative intelligence. Chicago: Open Court Publishing.

Cross, N. (2007). Designerly ways of knowing. Basel: Birkhäuser.

Dewey J (LW 1–17). J. A. Boydston (Ed.) John Dewey the later works, 1925–1953. Carbondale: University of Southern Illinois Press.

Dewey J (MW 1–15). J. A. Boydston (Ed.) John Dewey the middle works, 1899–1924. Carbondale: University of Southern Illinois Press.

Dorst, K. (2011). The Core of ‘design thinking’ and its application. Design Studies, 32(6), 521–532.

Dunne, A., & Raby, F. (2013). Speculative everything. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Gale, R. (2010). John Dewey’s quest for unity: The journey of a promethean mystic. New York: Prometheus Books.

Hauser, S., Oogjes, D., Wakkary, R., & Verbeek, P. P. (2018). An annotated portfolio on doing postphenomenology through research products. In Proceedings of the 2018 designing interactive systems conference (pp. 459–471). New York: ACM.

Hickman, L. (1990). Philosophical tools for technological culture: Putting pragmatism to work. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Hickman, L. (2007). Pragmatism as post-postmodernism: Lessons from John Dewey. New York: Fordham University Press.

Hook, S. (1939). John Dewey, an intellectual portrait. New York: John Day.

Koskinen, I., Zimmerman, J., Binder, T., Redstrom, J., & Wensveen, S. (2011). Design research through practice: From the lab, field, and showroom. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Krippendorff, K. (2006). The semantic turn: A new foundation for design. Boca Raton FL: Taylor and Francis CRC Press.

Manzini, E. (2015). Design when everyone designs. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

McDermott, J. (1981). [1973] the philosophy of John Dewey. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Patrickson, B., Livesey, J., & Gilman, C. (2019). Scotland’s Digital Design Futures. In: Rodgers, P. (ed.) Design Research for Change. Arts and Humanities Research Council, London.

Patrickson, B. (2018). Digital Design Futures in Scotland. Scottish Graduate School for Arts and Humanities, Glasgow.

Rodgers, P., & Bremner, C. (2013). Design without discipline. Design Issues, 29(3), 4–13.

Rorty, R. (1979). Philosophy and the mirror of nature. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Rorty, R. (1982). The consequences of pragmatism. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Rorty, R. (1999). Philosophy and social Hope. London: Penguin.

Sanders, E.  B. N., & Stappers, P.  J. (2008). Co-creation and the new landscapes of design. Co-Design, 4(1), 5–18.

Shook, J.  R. (2000). Dewey’s empirical theory of knowledge and reality. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press.

Simon, H. (1996). [1969]). The sciences of the artificial (3rd ed.). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Sleeper, R. W. (1986). The necessity of pragmatism: John Dewey’s conception of philosophy. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Steen, M. (2011). Tensions in human-centred design. CoDesign, 7(1), 45–60.

Steen, M. (2013). Co-design as a process of joint inquiry and imagination. Design Issues, 29(2), 16–28.

Wakkary, R., Oogjes, D., Hauser, S., Lin, H., Cao, C., Ma, L., & Duel, T. (2017). Morse things: A design inquiry into the gap between things and us. In Proceedings of the 2017 conference on designing interactive systems (pp. 503–514). New York: ACM.

Walker, S. (2010). Wrapped attention: Designing products for evolving permanence and enduring meaning. Design Issues, 26(4), 94–108.

Zimmerman, J., & Forlizzi, J. (2008). The role of design artifacts in design theory construction. Art, 2(1), 41–45.

Zimmerman, J., Stolterman, E., & Forlizzi, J. (2010). An analysis and critique of research through design: Towards a formalization of a research approach. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM conference on designing interactive systems (DIS ‘10). New York: ACM.