I WISH TO thank the many friends and colleagues whose ideas, suggestions, and criticisms greatly strengthened the research and writing that went into this book. Helpful comments on various parts of the manuscript were offered by Dudley Burton, Peter Euben, John Friedmann, Mary Gibson, Tom Jorling, Rob Kling, Martin Krieger, Frank Laird, Leo Marx, Doug McLean, James O’Connor, John Schaar, Herbert Schiller, Kristin Shrader-Frechette, Merritt Roe Smith, Tim Stroshane, and Sherry Turkle. I am especially grateful for the companionship of my friends Todd LaPorte, Kai Lee, David Noble, Dick Sclove, Charles Weiner, and Joseph Weizenbaum, whose insights into the human dimensions of technology have been a continuing inspiration over the years. The generous encouragement of Stan Draenos, Richard Farson, Andrew Feenberg, Richard Gordon, Greil Marcus, James Miller, Bruce Miroff, and Don Van Vliet has often boosted my spirits when I needed it most. My special thanks also to Mary Kiegelis and Astrid Kuhr for their help in preparing the final manuscript. The early stages of my research were financed by a fellowship from the National Endowment for the Humanities. The book was completed with funds from the Sustained Development Award of the Program on Ethics and Values of the National Science Foundation and the National Endowment for the Humanities, OSS-8018089. Its views are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of the NSF or NEH. I wish to express my warm thanks to these agencies for their strong support. Most of all, I owe a debt of gratitude to my wife, Gail Stuart, whose lively spirit brings joy to my life and work. Earlier versions of several chapters appeared in other publications, as follows: chapter 1, as “Technologies as Forms of Life,” in Epistemology, Methodology, and the Social Sciences, R. S. Cohen and M. W. Wartofsky (eds.) (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1983), 249–263, © 1983 by D. Reidel Publishing Company; chapter 2, as “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” in Daedalus 109, no. 1 (Winter 1980): 121–136; chapter 3, as “Technē and Politeia: The Technical Constitution of Society,” in Philosophy and Technology, Paul T. Durbin and Fredrich Rapp (eds.) (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1983), 97–111, ©1983 by D. Reidel Publishing Company; chapter 4, as “Building the Better Mousetrap: Appropriate Technology as a Social Movement,” in Appropriate Technology and Social Values: A Critical Appraisal, Franklin A. Long and Alexandra Oleson (eds.) (Cambridge: Ballinger, 1980), 27–51, © 1980 by The American Academy of Arts and Sciences; chapter 5, as “Decentralization: Its Meaning in Politics and Material Culture,” in Research in Philosophy and Technology, Paul T. Durbin (ed.) (Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press, 1983), 43–52; chapter 6, as “Mythinformation: Romantic Politics in the Computer Revolution,” in Research in Philosophy and Technology, Paul T. Durbin (ed.) (Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press, 1984), 287–304; chapter 8, as “On Not Hitting the Tar-Baby: Risk Assessment and Conservatism,” in To Breathe Freely: Risk, Consent, and Air, Mary Gibson (ed.) (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Allanheld, 1985); and chapter 10, as “The Whale and the Reactor: A Personal Memoir,” in The Journal of American Culture 3, no. 3 (Fall 1980): 446–455.