TECHNOLOGY: REFORM AND REVOLUTION # BUILDING THE BETTER MOUSETRAP TO OBSERVE ITS CUSTOM of advertising outrageously trendy, exorbitantly expensive Christmas gifts, the 1977 Neiman-Marcus catalogue announced the sale of “His and Her Urban Windmills.” Priced at \$16,000 each, the devices would, according to the department store, enable customers to “enjoy today’s electrical appliances and gadgets without overtaxing public power supplies, family utility bills, or tempers.” The ad assured prospective buyers that the windmills would be nonpolluting, noiseless, and environmentally safe. For the woman living in a city with an average wind speed of twelve miles per hour, the mill “could generate more than enough wattage to brew her morning coffee, Benedict an egg, heat her hair rollers, soothe her psyche with stereo, and give her bronze beauty while she relaxes under the sun lamp.” Other uses cited for the mill’s energy include blending daiquiris and supplying power for junior’s rock band. For anyone who had followed the rise of the appropriate technology movement during the middle 1970s, the ad had an ominous ring. Would the quest for ecologically sound, small-scale, humane technologies turn out to be a mere fad? Corrupted by Madison Avenue, commercialization, and bureaucratic co-optation, movements for social change in late twentiethcentury America have often ended up as fashion trends. In a matter of weeks the radical thrust of a new idea can be absorbed into the glossy, ephemeral surfaces of the postindustrial marketplace. Would appropriate technology meet the same dreary fate? The notion of an “appropriate,” “intermediate,” or “alternative” technology was first proposed in the mid-1960s as a way of addressing the economic, technical, and social problems of Third World countries. British economist E. F. Schumacher and others with similar views tried to develop methods of economic improvement in harmony with the existing conditions of traditional societies. Technical development would take heed of the skill levels of a population, natural resources available indigenously, and pressing social needs defined by the people themselves. Rather than introduce the biggest and best technologies of Western industrialized countries, the idea was to devise a collection of small-scale agricultural and industrial techniques, for example, Schumacher’s one-person egg carton factory, that would solve immediate problems without causing serious cultural disruption. Beginning in the early 1970s the concept of appropriate technology was applied to the problems of advanced industrial societies as well. Social activists argued that pollution, environmental damage, spiraling energy costs, resource depletion, alienation, and other gnawing social ills could be remedied if the right kinds of technology were widely used. “Wisdom demands a new orientation of science and technology towards the organic, the gentle, the non-violent, the elegant and beautiful,” Schumacher argued in Small is Beautiful, one of the most widely read books of social philosophy of the decade.<sup>2</sup> A number of organizations took up the challenge, seeking to overcome the destructive practices of modern civilization. The New Alchemy Institute, Farallones Institute, Intermediate Technology Development Group, countless solar energy companies, and ecologically oriented research institutes in the United States, Canada, and Europe set about exploring a variety of technological alternatives.<sup>3</sup> In California Governor Jerry Brown embraced the idea as a keynote in his program for change and created an Office of Appropriate Technology to promote “AT” in the state. During the presidency of Jimmy Carter a number of agencies of the federal government paid at least some attention to the idea. For a time, Carter’s antipoverty agency, Action, featured “appropriate technology” and “self-sufficiency” slogans in its programs to help the poor. At the urging of Senator Michael Mansfield, federal funds were allotted to found a National Center for Appropriate Technology located in Butte, Montana. Little noticed in all the ferment was a basic conceptual problem. Any notion of “appropriate” technology is meaningless until one answers the question, Appropriate to what? As applied to the Third World, the answer was clear enough; judgments about appropriateness would come from specific cultural and environmental settings. Agricultural production techniques well suited to one country might not be desirable in another; each society would have to determine what means are appropriate to its needs. As applied to Western industrial societies, however, the idea had a much different significance. After all, these were societies whose dominant cultural norms had led them astray. If “appropriate technology” was to have any significance at all, it would have to challenge these norms and suggest new ones. But where would this new understanding be found? And how would it persuade those already committed to orthodox forms of technical and economic practice? ## Political and Intellectual Origins APPROPRIATE TECHNOLOGY does not have a long, coherent tradition in the same way, for example, that contemporary labor movements find their origins in working class struggles of the past. Modern history contains recurring, but widely scattered attempts to find social and technological alternatives to the dominant patterns of industrialism. Ideas and experiments in this vein can be found in the writings of Robert Owen and other nineteenth-century utopians, William Morris, Peter Kropotkin, Gandhi, the Spanish anarchists, the British Guild Socialists, the cooperative movement, Lewis Mumford and the American decentralists, the followers of Rudolf Steiner’s biodynamic agriculture, back-to-the-land movements, and whole generations of tinkers and crackpot inventors.<sup>4</sup> While movements of this kind have sprung up repeatedly during the past two centuries, they have not, by and large, been able to sustain their work or to leave a legacy of accomplishments for the next generation of reformers. The more immediate sources of interest in a radical approach to technology, however, grew from social movements of the 1960s and early 1970s. Many of the same concerns and passions that fueled activism in civil rights, New Left politics, anti-war protests, counterculture, and environmentalism led eventually to a critical reexamination of the foundations of modern industrial society. This was territory that few persons involved in the early stages of 1960s radicalism in the United States were eager to enter. Civil rights and Vietnam War protests in 1962 through 1967 seldom identified either capitalism or technology as the cause of the problems they sought to address. While the workings of the “machine” or “system” were frequently mentioned as deeper maladies underlying social injustice and international aggression, such terms were employed metaphorically and did not point to anything specifically technological. A readiness to focus upon machines, techniques, chemicals, experts, and large-scale sociotechnical systems as sources of evil arose later on as social conflict in the United States and other industrialized nations intensified in the late 1960s. Searching for a common element in the maladies that angered and vexed them, activists began to focus upon modern technology as an increasingly obvious and perhaps too convenient key. Campus demonstrations against U.S. chemical corporations vented students’ rage against the napalm dropped on helpless mothers and children in Vietnam. The lethal hardware of the modern battlefield, presented with shocking clarity each night on network television newscasts, called attention to the war’s technical side. Those who could not bring themselves to study the roots of the Vietnam War in the workings of American foreign policy or the goals of international capitalism were able to focus upon the instruments of destruction and upon the persons who manned and directed the B-52s and helicopter gunboats. Soon the link between destructive herbicides in Southeast Asia and the herbicides, pesticides, and industrial pollutants so recklessly dispensed at home gave new meaning to the word “environment.” For fully a century and a half prior to the Vietnam War, the advance of technology and the horizons of human progress had seemed one and the same. Now it appeared that the most sophisticated products and best practitioners of scientific technology had somehow been enlisted in a war against progress—toward the annihilation of everything decent, humane, and just. This obsession with technology arose at about the same time, 1969 and after, that a general disillusionment with politics had begun to erode the energy and commitment of those active in protest movements. Police and army shoot-ups of marches and political headquarters, the obvious presence of agents provocateur, and the arrest and the trial of activists for alleged crimes led to a general cooling of the New Left fervor.<sup>5</sup> The weariness that many had come to feel in the endless rounds of meetings, rallies, and unsuccessful election campaigns had also taken its toll. It was during this period that many in the United States dropped out of political activity and began a certain kind of sociotechnical tinkering: roof gardens, solar collectors, and windmills became a focus of community action. Politics that had become too dangerous or depressing when faced with a showdown with real power tried to reestablish itself as a quest to reform “the system” through social and technical invention.<sup>6</sup> Evidence of this transition is preserved in the contents of two catalogues of American radicalism published late in the decade: The Movement Toward A New America, assembled by Mitchell Goodman, and The Whole Earth Catalog, edited by Stewart Brand and his colleagues.<sup>7</sup> Goodman’s volume gathered together hundreds of handbills, pamphlets, articles, and news stories that reflect the political activities of the 1960s. Rent strikes, The Black Panthers, Students for a Democratic Society, anti-war demonstrations, activities of radical feminists, and the like are described in the actors’ own words and in the writing of sympathetic observers. He portrayed a spirited, many-faceted, nationwide movement challenging the oppressive hold of an established order. Published in 1970, the book was actually a last gasp. By the time it became possible to arrange a snapshot of all the different themes and actors, the movement had already fallen into decline. The Movement Toward a New America offered itself as a handbook for people just getting under way. We can now appreciate it as a scrapbook for those who were just getting out. Although actually published before the Goodman collection, The Whole Earth Catalog expressed a tendency then gaining momentum rather than withering away. Its vision was that of a groovy spiritual and material culture in which one’s state of being was to be expressed in higher states of consciousness and well-selected tools. Citizenship had at that time, 1968 to 1969, become an onerous burden for some. The Weathermen denounced the United States of America, declaring that they were actually soldiers in the revolutionary armed forces of the Third World.<sup>8</sup> In contrast, Stewart Brand’s book consoled its readers with the idea that they were citizens of the planet earth and its global systems: hippie environmentalist spacemen in the tradition of Buckminster Fuller. Here the obsession with technology, especially good technology, a theme almost totally absent from Goodman’s compendium, made a strong appearance. In its statement of purpose the Catalog announced that “a realm of intimate, personal power is developing power of the individual to conduct his own education, find his own inspiration, shape his own environment, and share his adventure with whoever is interested.” It explains that an item is listed “if it is deemed: (1) useful as a tool; (2) relevant to independent education; (3) high quality or low cost; (4) easily available by mail.”<sup>9</sup> If you were moving back to the country and needed a good sturdy cider press, The Whole Earth Catalog would tell you where to purchase one. Whole categories of small (and sometimes large) producers were brought in touch with a new generation whose life-style and habits of consumption had begun to change. The Whole Earth Catalog assumed that throngs of people would be moving off into small, humanly nurturing, economically selfsustaining communities that fit into a new complex world system destined to save the earth from the destruction of overindustrialization. In this vision choices about the right technologies—both useful old gadgets and ingenious new tools—mattered greatly; choices about politics mattered little. Preferring brief, enthusiastic descriptions of items for sale, The Whole Earth Catalog avoided essays on controversial topics of social, political, or even environmental concern. The catalogue-browsing consciousness of the New Age was not one that wanted to be bothered by well-reasoned arguments. The growing fascination with technology among those involved in movements of the late 1960s was nourished by the writings of well-known European and American intellectuals. Starting from very different points of view, Lewis Mumford, Paul Goodman, Herbert Marcuse, Theodore Roszak, and Jacques Ellul carried the subject of modern technological society and the technical mentality to the foreground of social criticism.<sup>10</sup> Marcuse’s One-Dimensional Man (1964) portrayed both capitalist and socialist societies as components of a vast, repressive technological civilization that was bringing every aspect of humanity under its control. Mumford’s The Myth of the Machine: The Pentagon of Power (1970), pessimistic climax of a lifetime of commentary on material culture, judged the promise of modern technics betrayed by the destructiveness of authoritarian mega-technics and the spiritual hollowness of expertise. Ellul’s The Technological Society (1964) provided its readers with an extreme statement in the same vein, arguing that every aspect of twentieth-century life—economics, politics, symbolic culture, individual psychology, and so forth—had fallen under the domination of la technique. Such books were read and widely talked about by those who found more orthodox modes of social analysis inadequate to express the troubles they saw in the modern world. Either there was something abominable in modern artifice itself, a position strongly argued by Jacques Ellul, or the particular instruments most commonly used in the modern age were simply the wrong ones, wrong in the sense that they generated destruction so vast as to undermine the very benefits of technological productivity. It was the latter belief, however reasonable or unreasonable it may be, that eventually helped spawn the idea that an alternative or appropriate technology was something that one could expect to discover or invent. An uneasiness with conditions of modernity has been a consistent theme in Western literature since the beginning of the industrial revolution. 11 Thomas Carlyle’s “Signs of the Times” (1829), for example, already contains many notions central to mid—twentieth-century criticisms of technological society: awe at man’s domination of nature, unease at the disruption of tradition, disgust with the regimentation of workers, rage at the injustices of the industrial economy, and anxiety at the loss of a moral center in the face of technical advance. “Men are grown mechanical in head and heart, as well as in hand,” Carlyle exclaims. “They have lost faith in individual endeavour, and in natural force, of any kind. Not for internal perfection, but for external combinations and arrangements, for institutions, constitutions—for Mechanism of one sort or other, do they hope and struggle. Their whole efforts, attachments, opinions, turn on mechanism, and are of a mechanical character.”<sup>12</sup> The tendency to obliterate distinctions between technology and other social phenomena, a conceptual expedient characteristic of Ellul, Marcuse, and Roszak, is fully present in Carlyle’s version of the story. In search of a comprehensive account of the malady and a diagnosis of its cause, critics of industrial society typically arrive at conclusions that deny any chance of practical remedy. Specific ills in industrial civilization are said to be rooted very deeply in human aggressiveness, the machine mentality, the essence of the subject/object split, the obsession of the West with la technique, rational thought, the workings of the second law of thermodynamics, or in some similarly intractable source. Thus, over many generations critics of industrialism and modern techniques have been unable to propose cures for the host of difficulties they so vividly describe. Their lament is clear enough. But the eloquence of criticism—and perhaps this is a property of criticism—is matched by a poverty of practice. Since technology is the sphere in which “it works” is paramount, an uneasiness with problem solving seems to undermine the very basis upon which nontechnical thinkers have credentials to talk about technical matters at all. The shortcomings of the critics are obvious. But it is also true that their concerns are among those most urgent in nineteenth- and twentieth-century social thought. Hopes that an “appropriate technology” might be found arose at a time in which these concerns had been renewed, restated for a new generation, and popularized for a mass audience. Surprisingly enough, during the late 1960s and early 1970s the sense of futility and despair so often characteristic of speculative writings on technology was suddenly replaced by an extravagant optimism. Philosophers and political theorists began to ponder the issue of what the technology of an emancipated society should look like. They began to wonder openly, Who might take up the tasks of realizing such a vision? Upon what occasion might their opportunity come? Herbert Marcuse’s An Essay on Liberation (1969), for example, offers an unabashedly utopian response to the dismal situations sketched in One-Dimensional Man (1964). He writes, “Freedom indeed depends largely on technical progress, on the advancement of science. But this fact easily obscures the essential precondition: in order to become vehicles of freedom, science and technology would have to change their present direction and goals; they would have to be reconstructed in accord with a new sensibility the demands of the life instinct. Then one could speak of a technology of liberation, product of a scientific imagination free to project and design the forms of a human universe without exploitation and toil.”<sup>13</sup> Marcuse argues that such steps would be possible “only after the historical break in the continuum of domination” and tries to spell out the conditions of moral decay and economic and political disorder that could undermine and eventually topple the repressive society. Impetus for the change will come from a combination of traditional working class grievances, middle-class rebellion at conditions of surplus repression, and the quest for freedom and social justice among Third World peoples and the minorities of industrialized nations. The essay envisions “not the arrest or reduction of technical progress, but the elimination of those features which perpetuate man’s subjection of the apparatus and the intensification of the struggle for existence.”<sup>14</sup> Pointing to a social reconstruction that includes political judgments about technological design features, Marcuse had begun building a bridge between the central themes of Frankfurt School critical theory and the possibility of an alternative technology. In a move intellectually comparable to Marcuse’s, Theodore Roszak’s Where the Wasteland Ends (1972) sets out to propose an alternative society, the “visionary commonwealth,” that could overcome the destructive tendencies of technocratic civilization. Roszak’s previous work, The Making of the Counterculture (1969), focused upon the pervasive sickness of modern militarism, urbanism, consumerism, bureaucracy, and the technocratic mentality, but ended with a song of praise to shamanism and the call to transcend the subject/object split.<sup>15</sup> It was not much of a program for action. The later book, however, answers its pleas for spiritual enlightenment with speculative proposals for decentralization, deurbanization, the creation of economically self-sufficient communities, and innovation toward a broad range of alternative technical and social forms. Calling attention to the history of theory and practical experiments in communitarianism and anarchist socialism, Roszak imagines “the proper mix of handicraft labor, intermediate technologies, and necessarily heavy industry . . . the revitalization of work as a self-determining, nonexploitative activity . . . a new economics elaborated out of kinship, friendship and co-operation . . . the regionalization and grass roots control of transport and communication . . . non-bureaucratized, user-developed, user-administered services.”<sup>16</sup> He admits that in a world such as ours these lovely plans are likely to sound foolish. “I can think,” he explains, “of forty reasons why none of [these] projects can possibly succeed and forty different tones of wry cynicism in which to express my well-documented doubts. But I also know that it is more humanly beautiful to risk failure seeking for the hidden springs than to resign to the futurelessness of the wasteland.”<sup>17</sup> In retrospect it may seem that these writers were naive, that they underestimated the power of the dominant institutions of the late twentieth century. But, clearly, that is not true. Roszak, Marcuse, Mumford, and others writing along similar lines were perfectly aware of the Pentagon, CIA, transnational business firms, and other megalithic high-technology organizations. It was not naivete their writings expressed, but rather total contempt for these institutions combined with a sense of powerlessness. To avoid the cynicism and gloom toward which their thinking carried them, it was necessary to perform a high-wire act along very slender threads of hope. The appropriate technology movement in industrialized countries set out to walk the same tightrope. Stemming from the decline of radical politics and from an obvious next step in the critique of technological society, its true purpose was not to produce energy from renewable resources, but to generate the hope of social renewal from the winds of despair. ## The Hard and The Soft BUT COULD the study of alternative technologies lead to a fruitful critique of modern society? Why not an alternative economics, for example? Indeed, in Europe and the United States during the late 1960s and 1970s, many young, politically oriented intellectuals turned to Marxian economics as a way to deepen their understanding of social power. The founding of the Union for Radical Political Economics in the United States came at about the same time as the start of The New Alchemy Institute and reflected a similar sense of expansive intellectual horizons. Disciplinary orthodoxies, so long silent on many of the issues that seemed most urgent, were rejected in favor of a fresh approach to the study of material culture. Thus, the radical political economists opened fire on the neo-Keynesian philosophy taught in universities because it accepted the existing relations of production in capitalism. Any science of economics worthy of the name, they argued, would have to address basic questions about social structure and the just distribution of wealth.<sup>18</sup> Similarly, the realm of “technology” was suddenly, surprisingly thrown open to imaginative research and theorizing. The ethical, ecological, political, and even metaphysical dimensions of the technical disciplines suddenly became topics of widespread concern. This was no longer solely the work of intrepid outsiders without suitable credentials. As an interest in appropriate technology spread during the mid-1970s, a number of insiders, inspired technical specialists, began to investigate novel styles of interpretation in science and engineering. As the rosters of such organizations as the Brace Institute, Farallones Institute, Intermediate Technology Development Group, and State of California Office of Appropriate Technology made clear, a good number of those working to open these boundaries had excellent backgrounds in biology, physics, electrical engineering, architecture, and other scientific and technical fields. They presumably knew “the hard stuff” and what the dominant orthodoxy has to say about how one properly follows one’s profession in the “real world.” But recognizing a need to set their knowledge and skills to fundamentally new purposes—purposes outside those normally recognized by the corporations, foundations, government, and universities—many scientifically trained activitists tried to redefine the context in which scientific research and technological innovation could take place. The period’s most colorful record of the attempt to do basic and applied science in a new vein is contained in the Journal of the New Alchemists. Its volumes include reports on aquacultural and agricultural experiments, diagrams of solar and wind devices, tables of data on current research, and other features that reflect the canons of modern scientific methodology. Interspersed with these, however, are poems, philosophical essays, drawings, and highly personal accounts of the experience of the institute’s members. Introducing the article by aquaculturalist Bill McLarney, “Studies of the Ecology of the Characid Fish Brycon Guatemalensis in the Rio Tirimbina, Heredia Province, Costa Rica with Special Reference to its Suitability for Culture as a Food Fish,” the editor comments on McLarney’s research procedures: “Clad in sun hat, fisherman’s vest, shorts, and running shoes he pursued his quarry through the water with Chaplinesque élan. In both his science and his writing his standards of excellence are irreproachable but being around the work actually in process is to be part of an on-going comedy.”<sup>19</sup> Presenting their work in this manner, the New Alchemists risked their credibility within the community of scientists and engineers. The accepted form of “objectivity” in scientific and technical reports (one can also include books and articles in social science) requires that the prose read as if there were no person in the room when the writing took place. While the New Alchemists recognized the standards of experimentation and evidence prevalent in modern research, they rejected notions of objectivity that conceal the social purposes of science. Their aims were explicitly stated on the inside cover of their journal. “We seek solutions that can be used by individuals or small groups who are trying to create a greener, kinder world. It is our belief that ecological and social transformations must take place at the lowest functional levels of society if people are to direct their course toward a saner tomorrow.”<sup>20</sup> According to a story told by The New Alchemy Institute cofounder John Todd, the institute formed when a group of young biologists finally grew tired of attending prestigious international conferences at which calamities for the planet through pollution, overpopulation, and other environmental dangers were blithely predicted by experts whose research commitments seemed to preclude any attention to how such disasters might be averted. The rise of a growing number of research institutes, small firms, government agencies, universities, philanthropic organizations, and independent individuals claiming to do appropriate technology was not a sign that such people shared a common philosophy. In Amory Lovins’ view of the matter, for example, appropriate technology was fully compatible with capitalism, albeit a capitalist system reorganized to provide sufficient investment funds for the “soft energy path.”<sup>21</sup> David Dickson, British writer on science and technology, saw the possibilities from a Marxist perspective, arguing that “alternative technology” represented a new chapter in the history of socialism.<sup>22</sup> Murray Bookchin, veteran political activist of the American left and onetime teacher of appropriate technology of Goddard College, joined others, including Theodore Roszak and Ivan Illich, in an interpretation that claimed the movement as a rebirth of communitarian anarchism.<sup>23</sup> Not to be outdone, the National Academy of Sciences commissioned economist Richard Eckaus to study the topic within the dry and predictable criteria of 1950s social science: economic growth, transfer of technology, maximization of output, political development, and the like.<sup>24</sup> Indeed, as people from different backgrounds and persuasions sought to move from staid orthodoxies toward new understandings, there were numerous attempts to attach the insignia of one’s own club. It soon became clear that what was happening was less the oft proclaimed “paradigm shift” than a grinding of ideological gears. In an honest desire to bring order out of conceptual chaos, a number of proponents argued that “appropriate” or “alternative” or “soft” technology was a uniform program with a logically consistent set of characteristics. They offered long lists of criteria that were supposed to describe a coherent ideal. One such list, prepared by Robin Clarke of Biotechnic Research and Development in England, gave thirty-five criteria for “soft technology.” It was said to “form a coherent system that can only be interpreted as a whole, and loses much of its sense when reduced to fragmented components.” Thus, “soft technologies” were characterized as “ecologically sound, small energy input, low or no pollution rate, reversible materials and energy sources only, functional for all time, craft industry, low specialization, . . . integration with nature, democratic politics, technical boundaries set by nature, local bartering, compatible with local culture, safeguards against misuse, dependent on well-being of other species, innovation regulated by need, steady state economy, labour intensive, . . . decentralist, general efficiency increases with smallness, operating modes understandable to all,” and so forth. In the other list characteristics of “hard technology” were described as “ecologically unsound, large energy input, high pollution rate, non-reversible use of materials and energy sources, functional for limited time only, mass production, high specialization, . . . alienation from nature, consensus politics, technical boundaries set by wealth, world-wide trade, destructive of local culture, technology liable to misuse, highly destructive to other species, innovation regulated by profit and war, growth-oriented economy, capital intensive, . . . centralist, general efficiency increases with size, operating modes too complicated for general comprehension,” and the like. 25 Inevitably, Clarke’s typology and all similar ones were bound to fail. Nothing in Western philosophy—or in all of human experience for that matter—suggests that we can arrange the good and the bad in simple lists. If one pursues an ideal of justice far enough, for example, it may well begin to conflict with one’s own best notion of freedom. By affirming policies compatible with local culture, there is no guarantee that one will promote more democratic politics. Neither the intricacies of theory nor the evidence of historical practice gives us any reason to believe that the ideals of selfsufficiency, community, safety, diversity, efficiency, and the like can be easily gathered under one umbrella. It is not merely that such wishes are not feasible in practice, that certain facts in this world stand as barriers to their realization. More important, the set of criteria upon which this vision of good technology rests is filled with conditions that may not be compatible. Hence, it is not obvious that decentralized technologies are necessarily environmentally sound; the widespread use of wood-burning stoves has produced very high levels of pollution in some localities. It is not clear that labor-intensive systems provide “work undertaken primarily for satisfaction”; some of history’s worst sweatshops were operations of that kind. Anyone who has lived in a small town knows that small communities may be the last to consider “diverse solutions to technical and social problems.” If one had to select a theme song for appropriate technology, it would be wise to avoid rousing victory marches and settle for Charles Ives’ “The Unanswered Question.” ## The New Age Begins DESPITE THE FACT they contain contradictory ideals, lists such as Robin Clarke’s do try to answer the question I noted at the beginning: How can one define “appropriate” technology for an advanced industrial society? During the 1970s definitions of this sort acknowledged many issues of widespread public concern—“limits to growth,” the shortage of fossil fuels, worries about how to solve world population and hunger problems, a growing alienation from government, and suspicion of large public and private bureaucracies. But there was always something strangely incomplete in this collection of issues. The astonishing fact never accounted for was why so many members of the North American and European middle class, arguably those best served by modern technological society, should have become fascinated with “appropriate” technology at all. Among the places where the symbolism and underlying motives of the movement were most clearly visible were the fairs, expositions, and festivals that heralded the coming of the so-called New Age. In much the same way that the great world’s fairs of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries offered an opportunity to witness our civilization’s grandest (and often least realistic) hopes for science and industrial technology, New Age expositions of the sort held in Los Angeles, San Francisco, Vancouver, Boston, and other North American cities revealed a great deal about the deeper motives of appropriate technology proponents. One such fair that I was able to visit and study in person was the New Earth Exposition held in Boston in early May 1978. The theme of the exposition was “Living Lightly on the Earth.” Its advertising promised it would be “a showcase for environmentally creative individuals and business demonstrating viable alternatives in the field of: Energy, Personal Growth, Food, Transportation, Shelters, Gardening, Recycling, Wilderness Skills, Ecology, and Publishing.” On the floor of the huge Commonwealth Pier Exhibition Hall were hundreds of small (and some not so small) organizations showing their wares and passing out literature. I was astonished at the sheer number of groups represented and surprised at how far they had come in developing their goods and services. In the category of wood-burning stoves alone there were no fewer than a dozen entrants. Choosing a wood-burning stove had become as difficult as selecting a new car. In the general run of items and ideas displayed at the expo, those which most clearly fit the category “appropriate technology”—solar collectors, owner-built homes, energy-saving devices, windmills, wood stoves, solar greenhouses, and other kinds of new-fangled and old-fashioned hardware— were, oddly enough, also those which most readily fit the model of ordinary American respectability. Along with their explanations about the environmental benefits to be gained from using these devices, the exhibitors stressed the virtues of sound engineering, thrift, and good business sense. At one and the same time the salesmen appealed to very conservative as well as radical perceptions of what an intelligent person ought to be doing. Other parts of the show catered to the visitors’ tendencies toward escapist consumerism and spiritual self-indulgence. A large cluster of exhibits advertised new toys for the young, professional middle class: jogging shoes, racing bicycles, hot tubs, backpacks, tents, hang gliders, and herbal cosmetics. The traditional American notion that freedom means something like being able “to hit the road whenever I feel like it” was fully represented, with hiking equipment and sleeping bags replacing the automobile as vehicles for realizing this fantasy. Promoters of alternative health care measures were also conspicuously present. An amazingly large number of booths presented the wonders of New Age medicine—acupuncture, Shiatsu massage, macro vitamin therapy, herbal remedies, iridology, and other such practices—a new industry to compete with the medical establishment. Representing an adjacent field of concern, advocates of various spiritual disciplines sought converts from among passersby—yoga, transcendental meditation. Arica, Sufism, T’ai Chi Chuan, pyramid power, and several kinds of spiritual communities. The market was open for anyone buying. Explicitly political causes, however, were pretty much absent from the event. Environmental activists and organizations opposing nuclear energy or trying to save the whales were just about the only groups that bothered to secure the easily obtainable exhibitors’ invitations. Evidently, the New Earth in its New Age did not recognize a need for political organization. Beyond the honest concern to preserve the natural environment, beyond even the wish to rediscover community, personal autonomy, or both, there was an obvious yearning contained in the fair’s symbolism. Underlying the vast majority of exhibits and not too far below the surface of their claims was the simple need to overcome tension, the stresses and strains of modern civilization. People thoroughly enmeshed in the demanding business of keeping our technological society running were beginning to hedge their bets. Through bicycling, transcendental meditation, running, organic food, massage, backpacking, yoga, and a host of ingenious means they would seek the relaxation and peace of mind that everyday life cannot provide. Yes, technologies of a certain kind would be required. But they were not inventions such as solar hot-water heaters. Wanted instead were devices and techniques that might alleviate the pressures that normally befall professionals toiling in banks, insurance companies, and bureaucracies. Rather than attempt to change the structures that vexed them, young Americans growing older were settling for exquisite palliatives. If the 1960s proclaimed, “Let’s see if we can change this society,” the 1970s answered, “Let’s get out of this skyscraper and go jogging!” Contained in the frantic quest for physical vitality and self-realization was a growing distrust of the goods and services available in our society as well as a distrust of the professionals and organizations that provide them. Who needs doctors? Do your own health care. Who needs architects and contractors? Build your own home. Who needs the utilities? Generate your own energy. The desire for “self-sufficiency,” long regarded as a virtue in Western culture, had been clouded by a profound resentment. Cramped by inflation, feeling pressured in unsatisfying jobs, fearful of cancer and heart attacks, bored with the products of the consumer economy, and unwilling to escape to the once glorious idyll of suburban living, a substantial number of those who had “made it” in modern society were, for the moment at least, restless. ## Demonstration Models THE IDEALS of appropriate technology and appetites of New Age consumerism point to a crucial flaw in the dreams of modern materialism. Although society achieves unparalleled wealth, an unmistakable corruption begins to afflict the very objects and institutions of industrial culture. Because the automobiles, appliances, energy systems, prepared foods, cosmetics, and other products and services have been engineered to corrupt specifications, the good life begins to look like a colossal pile of junk. The promise of an artificial paradise in which all human needs will be satisfied gradually dissolves. In this sense an important mission of the appropriate technologists was to renew the war against qualities that William Morris had long ago named “the shoddy.” If a way could be found to reform the obvious inadequacies of material things, it would amount to a reform of society itself. This was, in fact, often proposed as a solution to the problem noted earlier: How would appropriate technology persuade those already committed to orthodox forms of technical and economic practice? The answer: give them a superior product. One of the clearest statements of this point of view was offered in an insightful and amusing book, How Things Don’t Work, by industrial designers Victor Papanek and James Hennessey. With a delight that others reserve for watching old Marx Brothers movies, they report dozens of examples of deplorable screwups in the design and engineering of everyday tools and consumer goods. “Between 1966 and February 1975 the automobile industry recalled 45,700,000 automobiles for inspection or repair,” they observe to indicate how bad things have gotten.<sup>26</sup> Beneath a photograph of two commercial cheese graters they note, “On the left, the inexpensive, efficient, and nearly indestructible one which will work left- or right-handed.” On the right, the “improved model, which is right-handed only and, after some months of use, grinds its own plastic coating into the food.”<sup>27</sup> Citing a wide range of similarly appalling cases, the book locates some of the causes of shoddy industrial design and manufacture. Unwise cost cutting in the name of profit ruins the quality of many goods. Alienated assembly line workers take secret revenge upon the automobiles and other products that pass by them on conveyor belts. The effects of advertising and showcase packaging decrease the demand for previously useful items. Senseless so-called improvements justified by norms of “convenience,” “ease of handling,” and “customer comfort” drive up the cost but degrade the utility of home tools and appliances. As one reads Papanek and Hennessey’s observations, it begins to seem they have successfully taken the criticisms of Mumford, Ellul, Marcuse, and Illich about technological society and transformed them into a set of perverse design criteria for modern invention. They seem only slightly less bizarre when we notice that they include many of the criteria upon which our industrial economy is actually founded. Papanek and Hennessey’s response to these maladies reveals not only their own sense of what is to be done, but also reflects a model of social change implicit in the writings and projects of appropriate technologists of all persuasions. “Massive problems faced by workers and users need innovative remedies,” they explain, and offer a brief survey of frequently proposed nostrums. “There is the capitalist approach (make it bigger), the technocratic one (make it better), the ‘revolutionary’ solution (portray the problem as an example of an exploitative system) and the pre-industrial romantic fallacy (don’t use it; maybe it will go away by itself). We propose a fifth alternative response: Let’s invent a different answer.”<sup>28</sup> Donning the mantle of an old-fashioned tinker/designer/crackpot inventor, Papanek and Hennessey describe an array of clever techniques and devices that they and their colleagues around the world have created. A pedal-driven lawn mower, fold-up bathtub, fold-up bicycle, spillproof scooter, do-it-yourself emergency service vehicle, and other contraptions “fitted to human scale” are depicted in drawings and photographs. Innovations in hardware, they point out, must be matched by innovations in ownership and use. “Few tools in our society are designed for communal (or shared) ownership. If they were designed for sharing, rather than for individual use, we believe they would change structurally, mechanically and in material composition. When reel-type push mowers were still in use, for example, they were more frequently borrowed or shared than today’s electric or gasoline-driven mowers for the simple reason that they were robust, uncomplicated and difficult to break.”<sup>29</sup> Papanek and Hennessey’s guiding maxim—“Let’s invent a different answer”—echoes a familiar apothegm usually attributed to Ralph Waldo Emerson (although it is not certain that he said exactly these words): “If a man can write a better book, preach a better sermon, or make a better mousetrap than his neighbor, though he builds his house in the woods the world will make a path to his door.”<sup>30</sup> This is, of course, the traditional American notion about how inventions change the world. A good idea or improved tool is bound to catch on. In fact, as Emerson evidently wished to say, if one’s scheme is attractive enough, there will be no stopping it. Ingenuity creates its own demand. As scholars Arthur Bestor and Dolores Hayden have observed, nineteenth-century American utopians held much the same conviction about how their experiments might eventually transform society. The utopians believed their technical inventions and social innovations would have a strong appeal to an age undergoing rapid change. Communities such as those at New Harmony and Oneida saw themselves perfecting what Bestor calls “patent office models” of the good life.<sup>31</sup> In the same way that ordinary people would eagerly accept new improvements in farm machinery if a convincing demonstration were given them, so would they be willing to embrace the principles and devices of utopia if a successful working model could be built and maintained somewhere in the world. Insofar as they had a coherent idea of how their labors would change the world, the appropriate technologists usually entertained the better mousetrap theory. A person would build a solar house or put up a windmill, not only because he or she found it personally agreeable, but because the thing was to serve as a beacon to the world, a demonstration model to inspire emulation. If enough folks built for renewable energy, so it was assumed, there would be no need for the nation to construct a system of nuclear power plants. People would, in effect, vote on the shape of the future through their consumer/builder choices. This notion of social change provided the underlying rationale for the amazing emphasis on do-ityourself manuals, catalogues, demonstration sites, information sharing, and “networking” that characterized appropriate technology during its heyday. Once people discovered what was available to them, they would send away for the blueprints and build the better mousetrap themselves. As successful grass-roots efforts spread, those involved in similar projects were expected to stay in touch with each other and begin forming little communities, slowly reshaping society through a growing aggregation of small-scale social and technical transformations. Radical social change would catch on like disposable diapers, Cuisinarts, or some other popular consumer item. 32 The inadequacies of such ideas are obvious. Appropriate technologists were unwilling to face squarely the facts of organized social and political power. Fascinated by dreams of a spontaneous, grass-roots revolution, they avoided any deep-seeking analysis of the institutions that control the direction of technological and economic development. In this happy selfconfidence they did not bother to devise strategies that might have helped them overcome obvious sources of resistance. The same judgment that Marx and Engels passed on the utopians of the nineteenth century apply just as well to the appropriate technologists of the 1970s: they were lovely visionaries, naive about the forces that confronted them.<sup>33</sup> Far and away the most grievous weakness in their vision, however, was the lack of any serious attention to the history of modern technology. Presumably, if the idea of appropriate technology makes sense, one ought to be able to discover points at which developments in a given field took an unfortunate turn, points at which the choices produced an undesirable instrumental regime. One could, for example, survey the range of discoveries, inventions, industries, and large-scale systems that have arisen during the past century and notice which paths in modern technology have been selected. One might then attempt to answer such questions as, Why did developments proceed as they did? Were there any real alternatives? Why weren’t those alternatives selected at the time? How could any such alternatives be reclaimed now? In some of their investigations in agriculture and energy, appropriate technologists began to ask such questions. But by and large most of those active in the field were willing to proceed as if history and existing institutional technical realities simply did not matter. That proved to be a serious shortcoming. It meant that many of their projects were irrelevant to the technical practices they hoped to challenge. ## The New Age Ends THE DEMISE of appropriate technology as a living social movement can be dated almost to the hour and minute. It occurred early in the evening of Tuesday, November 4, 1980, when it became clear that Ronald Reagan had been elected President of the United States. That event signaled the end of a favorable climate of opinion for public discussions of energy policy, energy conservation, and alternative energy technologies that had characterized the presidency of Jimmy Carter. “Let the market work,” was now to be the central premise of government policy. During the era of Reaganomics, most planning of nonmilitary technologies moved back to the private sector, back into the hands of business corporations, and away from public scrutiny. In itself, the coming of a new presidential administration should not have spelled the doom of appropriate technology. Although some of the movement’s research and development projects had been funded by government agencies, its basic thrust did not depend solely upon bureaucratic sponsorship. But in ways the appropriate technologists little understood, the reception given their ideas, including their most radical ideas, was a function of national politics and its shifting fortunes. As long as there were liberals or moderates in key posts in the Department of Energy, Environmental Protection Agency, and other government offices, appropriate technologists saw at least some chance of finding an audience, winning influence, and promoting their better mousetraps. With that audience gone, ideas for solar collectors, windmills, aquaculture ponds, community-owned factories, and the like became orphans overnight. The early 1980s might have been a time to regroup and rededicate. Instead it became a time of retreat. Within a period of months after Ronald Reagan took office, appropriate technology disappeared as a concept featured in conferences, media reports, government surveys, academic programs, and paperback books. It was an idea whose time had come . . . and gone. Indeed, the New Age itself, which many expected to endure for centuries, had lasted a scant four years. This sad fact was duly noted by the nation’s leading countercultural historian, antinuclear activist Harvey Wasserman. In his book America Born and Reborn, Wasserman develops a cyclical theory of history to explain the pattern of national events. One of his cycles, for example, begins with the election of Andrew Jackson, continues with the Transcendental Revolt, moves on to the Civil War, and culminates in the Gilded Age. An acceleration of events in modern history has, according to Wasserman, caused these cycles to become shorter and shorter. Thus, the cycle that begins with Jimmy Carter’s proclamation of a “New Spirit” develops into the “Solar Awakening,” runs into trouble with the Iranian hostage crisis, and finally reaches its denouement during the presidency of Ronald Reagan. The book offers hope, however, forecasting yet another era about to begin, “The Greatest Awakening,” an enduring time of spiritual renewal in which war and injustice will be overcome, ushering in “our next evolutionary leap—into the Computer Age, and into the communal frontiers of the mind and spirit that await our full human potential.”<sup>34</sup> Heaven knows, we need a new epoch. But having watched the mercurial rise and fall of the last New Age, one should be careful not to step out for popcorn. In some form or other, appropriate technology will likely endure. The New Alchemists and Intermediate Technology Development Group are still at work trying to develop tools that are locally useful, environmentally sound, and compatible with the most noble social ideals. Here and there around the world one finds research institutes, nonprofit organizations, and university programs that carry on the tradition. The National Center for Appropriate Technology in Butte, Montana, hampered by shifting political priorities and funding cuts, continues its work but with few demonstrable accomplishments. Unfortunately, California’s Office of Appropriate Technology was abolished as soon as a conservative Republican governor took office. The strongest continuing effort to translate the movement’s ideals into a comprehensive program for social change is put forth by “the Greens,” the progressive, ecologically oriented political parties that sprung up in Europe in the early 1980s.<sup>35</sup> The legacy of appropriate technology cannot be found in the catalogues of inventions and techniques it left behind. If the truth be told, few of them worked very well in practice. “Our windmill’s being repaired today and the solar collector should be operational next week” was a standard explanation visitors heard at the demonstration sites. Seldom was it possible for any of the research groups to move through the various stages of development, debugging, and deployment that any new technology needs. Too often devices were announced as ready and working that actually needed much more time for testing. Those who believed that a new brand name had come on the market—“The next time you go to the store, be sure to ask for appropriate technology.”—were bound to be disappointed. The accomplishments of appropriate technologists, ones that will be interesting to study in future decades, are located in the realm of ideas. For better or worse, they did challenge many of the key premises in the modern technical orthodoxy. They helped broaden the meaning of such categories as “efficiency,” “rationality,” “productivity,” “cost,” and “benefit” and added fresh (if not altogether novel) criteria of judgment—“human scale,” “the interconnectedness of things,” “second law efficiencies,” “sustainability,” and the like—to the range of considerations that engineers, technicians, agriculturalists, planners, and consumers ought to take seriously in making choices. To a certain extent these notions have now become common currency. It is more likely now that decision makers and the public will pause to think about such matters as the ecological soundness of a proposed practice before barging forth. And it is somewhat less likely that some destructively narrow but commonly used categories of technical and economic analysis will continue to cripple our powers of judgment. In that sense the movement succeeded admirably. Appropriate technology arose in a world of bizarre inversions that are still the source of our civilization’s perplexity. While millions of people around the globe go without adequate food, shelter, or work, hundreds of billions are spent each year on increasingly sophisticated, increasingly lethal armaments that are said to “secure the peace.” Irreplaceable resources needed by future generations are mined and quickly used up in the belief that somehow “the market” will produce an inexhaustible supply. Nations ignore or revise downward their standards of environmental quality because pollution controls are thought to be incompatible with a “sound economy.” In situations like these we become used to accepting deplorable conditions as normal. To be realistic, to get things done, and to get on with one’s career almost require that a person become an enemy of a free humanity and a healthy biosphere. The condition we face is much like that described in Bertolt Brecht’s little play, The Exception and the Rule. On Brecht’s stage a handful of characters wander through a pattern of actions that show a moral universe turned on its head. What is good is made to appear evil; justice and injustice trade places. A coolie attempts to do a good deed. He is killed by his employer who sees the coolie’s gesture as a threat from a class enemy. The murderer is placed on trial but acquitted in a judgment that finds his behavior perfectly reasonable under the circumstances. Brecht is never one to let his audience miss the point. At the beginning of the drama his actors exclaim<sup>36</sup>: Inquire if a thing be necessary Especially if it is common We particularly ask you— Not on that account to find it natural Let nothing be called natural Be held unalterable! # DECENTRALIZATION CLARIFIED WHAT IS DECENTRALIZATION? People disenchanted with the size, complexity, power, and frequent destructiveness of modern sociotechnical organizations often propose the idea as a key to social reform: let us take our enormous, overly centralized institutions and break them into smaller, human-sized parts more accessible to our control. As we noted in the previous chapter, the call for decentralization has been a crucial theme among activists seeking an appropriate technology. Similar notions are prominently featured in recent attempts to advance the cause of participatory democracy. Spokesmen of both the far Left and the far Right include plans for decentralization in their lists of desirable political goals, although they have much different institutional targets in mind. Even socialtrend spotters with no investment in radical or conservative agendas delight in announcing that “centralized structures are crumbling” and that “the decentralization of America has transformed politics, business, our very culture.”<sup>1</sup> But the enthusiasm of such suggestions is seldom matched by any coherent definition or concrete proposal. “Decentralization” is one of the foggiest, most often abused concepts in political language. For those who think it a cure for the ills of modern society, a crucial first step is to clarify what the idea means. ## Center of What? UNFORTUNATELY, THE WORD “decentralization” is something of a linguistic train wreck. Its prefix “de-” means an undoing or reversal, while its suffix “-ization” indicates a becoming, a process under way. Pointing in two directions simultaneously, the word seems to pull itself apart. In the middle of this contradictory motion is the adjective “central,” referring to an unspecified center. Taken in a literal sense, therefore, the term means undoing the process of becoming central. The very unwieldiness of the concept reflects the disorientation of those who seek to use it as a formula for change. Which centers are the important ones? The question is too seldom asked. Geometrical centers as such, the centers of circles or parcels of land, are not at issue. The meaning of “center” in question is usually that of a geographical or institutional place in which a particular kind of activity or influence is concentrated. Thus, we say that New York City is an important center of cultural activity and that the center of corporate planning for the Ford Motor Company is its board of directors. In all discussions of centralization and decentralization, one needs to begin by specifying which kind of activity or influence is problematic. Otherwise one begins to drift into vague expressions about things being taken away or brought closer to us with no solid sense of what those things are. Once we know which center or centers we are talking about—centers of coal production in North America, the central budgeting agency in a given city, etc.—there are a number of questions that are helpful to ask about centralization and decentralization. How many centers are there? Where are they located? How much power do they possess? How much cultural diversity and vitality do they exhibit? Looking at the number of centers of social activity, the exact count matters less than judgments about whether or not there are relatively too many, too few, or roughly the right number. In some cases a single center— complete centralization—is the ideal condition and anything more would be a nuisance; almost everyone agrees that there ought to be only one central rule-making body for major league baseball. In many areas of life, however, the more genuine centers, the better; to discover that the number of good symphony orchestras in society is increasing would always be good news. Deciding how many centers are the right number prompts us to think about the nature of the activity or influence at issue. In politics, for example, the spectrum of governments range from dictatorship at one extreme to individualistic anarchism at the other. Most political theories specify the need for governmental centers somewhere between one-person rule and the rule of everyone for himself/herself. Justifying exactly how many centers are best is no easy task; it involves some of the most ancient and difficult controversies in political thought. A second important question has to do with the location of centers. Sometimes this matters with regard to a particular geographical place where an activity is centered, for example, the Vatican, Washington, D.C., or Hollywood. Thus, early in their history several states on the East Coast took care to establish their capitals at inland locations, largely to protect farming interests against commercial, coastal traders. At issue was the relationship between geographical places and political influence. More often, however, the crucial matter is the location of centers within an institutional setting. Robert A. Caro explains of Robert Moses’ reign over public works in New York, “He centralized in his person and in his projects all those forces in the city that in theory have little to do with the decision-making process in the city’s government but in reality have everything to do with it.”<sup>2</sup> As Moses moved, so moved an important center of control. But whether a center exists in geographical or social space, what counts most is one’s position relative to it. Is it near or far away? Is it accessible or inaccessible? The physical center of something may be literally right next door to us and yet completely beyond reach. Another significant issue concerning centers has to do with their power, especially their relative power as compared to other centers of a similar kind. For our purposes here, power can be understood as the ability of persons or social groups to accomplish their goals. Disputes about centralization and decentralization frequently hinge on the issue of who has how much social, economic, or political power and whether or not the exercise of such power is legitimate. Advocates of centralization often point to advantages of efficiency and superior control that may come from placing power in relatively few hands. In contrast, decentralists argue that from a practical and moral point of view, power is best used when it is widely dispersed. A fourth question about centers has to do with their diversity and vitality. Those who stress decentralization as a positive good are often concerned about ensuring the liveliness of modern culture, a condition threatened by the dreary, uniform products that so often emanate from centralized organizations. One reason to prefer a large number and variety of centers for a given activity is that they may be more imaginative and creative than one or just a few centers. This is much different from saying that a large number would have more power. For example, in policy discussions about public funding for the arts there is often a choice of supporting musicians, dance companies, museums, and artists in a few large cities or of using the same money to support the arts and crafts in local communities across the country. It may be, in fact, that geographical centralization of the arts in a few large cities may actually improve the quality of the very best compositions, paintings, films, and other works a society produces. But the decentralist position argues that even greater creativity can be fostered by enabling numerous, small, diverse centers of culture to flourish. I offer these questions about the number, location, power, diversity, and vitality of centers as clarifying themes in place of a definition. Here is an instance, I believe, in which the attempt to provide a fixed definition of a concept will not help very much. “Decentralization” is simply not a term whose meaning is well established in everyday speech. Rather than arbitrarily impose a definition, it seems best for the time being to notice the meanings people wish to express when they employ this word. Once we have done that, we can begin to notice who cares about the idea and why. ## When Centers Matter THE TERMS “centralized,” “decentralized,” “centralization,” and “decentralization” first appeared in the English language in the early and middle nineteenth century, referring at that time to the relative tightness or looseness of political authority.<sup>3</sup> Over many decades the word “decentralized” has become a fairly common descriptive term in political speech. Paul Goodman’s formulation written in the early 1960s captures one basic idea: “Decentralizing is increasing the numbers of centers of decision-making and the number of initiators of policy; increasing the awareness of the whole function in which they are involved; and establishing as much face-to-face association with decision-makers as possible.”<sup>4</sup> Goodman’s formulation echoes the beliefs of generations of direct democrats, libertarians, and anarchists that ordinary people are perfectly capable of making decisions and acting for themselves. As a species of modern political ideology, therefore, decentralism stresses the need for a greater number of centers of genuine social and political policy making. The New England town meeting, Spanish anarchist communes, and political practices of the sans-culottes in the French Revolution are instances of decentralism of this sort; they express a desire to involve citizens in public deliberations through direct democratic roles. In contrast, where suspicion of widespread citizen participation prevails, other political structures are invented. Eighteenth-century American federalists succeeded in establishing a structured balance (some might even call it decentralized) between the state and national governments, but they were horrified at the thought that the common people might initiate policy through face-to-face relationships. The U.S. Constitution reflects this fear: its governmental institutions invest far greater authority in a few remote, central law-making bodies than the Articles of Confederation that preceded it. But centers of decision making are not the only ones that matter in politics, since the making of decisions is not the same as carrying them out. Means of administration, management, regulation, law enforcement, and so forth, constitute another area in which questions about centralization and decentralization arise. What one feels about the where’s and how’s of decision making may have little to do with one’s views on administration. It is possible to insist that a policy issue be settled in a broadly based, grassroots political manner and at the same time demand that the policy chosen be enforced by a single, powerful national agency. Historically speaking, those who have chosen to use the term “decentralization” to represent a positive social goal, rather than as a neutral descriptive term, have been partisans of certain factions within the political Left. Asserting the right of people to exercise decision making and administrative authority directly, their concern has been how to accomplish thoroughgoing reform, even revolution, while avoiding the pitfalls of concentrating power in the state. At the turn of the century the writings of Peter Kropotkin, especially Mutual Aid, a Factor in Evolution and Fields, Factories and Workshops, spelled out a vision of an anarchist social order in which the state has been abolished and all political power is held by small local communes organized in a loosely linked federation.<sup>5</sup> In our own time activist and theorist Murray Bookchin has reformulated classic anarchist notions in a lively series of books, essays, and speeches.<sup>6</sup> Although decentralist ideas have never won widespread following, thinkers in this tradition have helped leaven political thought by imagining a society organized on principles radically different from the ones modern nation states have followed. A particularly clear, systematic model for a decentralized society was proposed in the 1920s by British social theorist G. D. H. Cole and his colleagues in the Guild Socialist movement. “The essence of the Guild Socialist attitude,” Cole explained, “lies in the belief that Society ought to be so organized as to afford the greatest possible opportunity for individual and collective self-expression to all its members, and that this involves and implies the extension of positive self-government through all its parts.”<sup>7</sup> To realize this ideal, the base of authority and political representation was to be located in functionally organized local “guilds” within various industries, for example, coal mining, railroads, and the building trades. Each guild would elect representatives to deliberate on broader national issues connected to the guild’s specific economic function. A wide range of local, democratically elected civic councils would manage public services and cultural affairs. The state was to remain as a nominal presence, with its power drastically fragmented and curtailed. Decentralist writers and social movements of the nineteenth century have vehemently opposed the centralization of state power in capitalist societies. But they have reserved special wrath for any similar form that threatened to take root within socialism. From this point of view, centralism is the indelible stain that soils the hopes of socialist humanism. Thus, Cole noticed the Russian model of state socialism and warned against it. “If the Guilds are to revive craftsmanship and pleasure in work well done; if they are to produce quality as well as quantity, and to be ever keen to devise new methods and utilize every fresh discovery of science without loss of tradition; if they are to breed free men capable of being good citizens both in industry and in every aspect of communal life; if they are to keep alive the motive of free service—they must at all costs shun centralization.” Cole was confident that a gradual, peaceful adoption of the path he suggested would avoid this evil. “Men freed from the double centralized autocracy of capitalist trust and capitalist State,” he argued, “are not likely to make for themselves a new industrial Leviathan.”<sup>8</sup> Many of the issues about political institutions that have fascinated decentralist thinkers appear in a somewhat different light when we consider the material and social structures of modern technology. The ownership, initial source, and conditions of production, distribution, consumption, or use of goods and services can all be described as more-or-less centralized or decentralized. Thus, we can take particular items of value—iron, wood, bananas, refrigerators—and trace their life histories through the various centers that affect their movement from raw material to finished product to eventual waste. Are there many sources for the things we employ or just a few? Are there many producers and distributors or a limited number? How close are we to the sources we rely upon? Who exercises control over them and in what manner? We can also look at the sociotechnical systems that provide services of various kinds—communications, transportation, information handling, waste disposal, medical care, and the like—and notice how the existing structures of such systems embody answers to questions about the number, location, power, and vitality of centers. In material culture, as in politics, the relative importance of centers changes greatly with the specific activity in question and its setting. One way of testing whether or not the concept “decentralization” is meaningful is to employ it in a particular situation and see if it makes sense. If we observe, for example, that the Exxon Corporation controls roughly ten percent of the petroleum market in the United States, does that justify the conclusion that the oil industry is decentralized? Of course not. The fact that the petroleum business contains a number of different producers, each with a fraction of total sales, does not alter the significant fact that most of these producers are huge, extremely powerful, and centrally controlled within themeselves. To say that Exxon, always near the top of the Fortune 500 companies, represents a decentralized way of doing things is patently absurd. If, in contrast, I learned that no Chinese restaurant in Portland, Oregon, had more than ten percent of Chinese food sales, I would probably be prepared to say that it was a decentralized business unless I discovered that all such establishments in that city were owned and managed by the same person. What seems a manifestly bad measure of the relative strength of centers in one context turns out to be a pretty good measure in another. The difficulty in specifying exactly when and how centers matter to us raises some knotty problems for those who suggest decentralizing technology as a variety of social reform. Suppose, for example, that a great number of people began to take seriously the prospect already mentioned several times in this book: that decentralized energy offers the promise of a better future. What could that possibly mean? My arguments and observations so far should indicate why the answer is not a simple one. It might mean that the original sources of energy—coal, wood, solar energy, and so forth—would somehow become more numerous and accessible. It could mean that the kinds of apparatus that carry and transform the energy to make it usable would become more readily available. It could mean that such equipment would be produced, distributed, and marketed by small, local concerns. It might also mean that we would decentralize social policy decision making and administration with respect to energy. Or it might mean some combination of these measures. If most households in the United States began to employ solar energy for space and water heating, in what sense would that be a decentralized system? One can envision a situation in which solar devices were manufactured by General Electric, distributed by Sears, purchased by consumers, and installed by local plumbers; this is, in fact, one of the more probable of the soft energy paths. While it would enable households to produce their own energy on site without being perpetually hooked up to centrally organized sources of supply, it would also replicate other longstanding centralist patterns in society. Whether or not we care about the relative number, location, vitality, and power of centers of activity in technology clearly changes with time. To understand recent interest in such matters as decentralized energy or the alleged decentralizing qualities of microcomputers, one has to examine yesterday’s lack of interest in such things. Over the last century or so in this country, the production and distribution of many different kinds of commodities and services have been placed under the central dominion of very large private, public, and semipublic organizations. Justified as the most efficient and productive way of doing things, the tendency has been to allow corporations, public utilities, public authorities, and government agencies to manage communications, energy, manufacturing, transportation, and other areas of material culture. Very often, of course, the centers of control that we see today arose by crushing or absorbing their competitors. The large chain stores that first appeared in the last half of the nineteenth century succeeded over bitter opposition of smaller retailers. What began as a relatively decentralized automobile industry in America (in the sense that there were many independent producers) was eventually brought under the control of three large firms. The victors became brand names familiar to this day, while the vanquished are remembered as obscure historical footnotes. While each specific area of production and distribution has its own history and distinctive mode of organization, the overall pattern is clear. The social history of modern technology shows a tendency—perhaps better termed a strategy—to reduce the number of centers at which action is initiated and control is exercised. Significantly, the same was not true of the everyday consumption and use of things. In that domain individuals remained the centers of activity. Noting this fact, a number of observers have argued that the automobile is an extremely decentralized form of transportation. That is true as regards the ownership and use of automobiles, although the term “atomistic” is a more accurate way to describe what we observe than “decentralized.” However, if we look at the production, marketing, and servicing of the vehicles as well as the building and maintenance of the roads they run on, it is a much different story. For most of the twentieth century the prospect of unhindered personal consumption and use of goods seemed to make most people happy; in fact, that is what “freedom” began to mean in the eyes of many. It did not matter that General Motors had become so large and powerful, since that meant that the company produced an inexpensive, reliable car for our weekend spin in the country. It did not matter how electricity was made or carried over a vast electric grid as long as you could flick a switch and have the lights go on. It did not matter exactly what Kellogg was putting in the cornflakes as long as the cereal tasted good and seemed to contribute to strong bones and healthy bodies. A primary source of legitimacy for many of the systems that form the heart of the technological society was that consumption was still centered in the individual. Any notion that ordinary people might want to have control over production or have a say in decisions beyond those of the immediate enjoyment of goods and services seemed out of the question. ## Alienation from Centers THE TENDENCY to remove the control over production from centers of everyday life—the home, neighborhood, community, and workplace—has become firmly fixed in both technical hardware and organizational practices of modern society. The designs of all kinds of technologies—electrical power plants, water systems, highways, and vehicles that run on them, the machines and chemicals of agribusiness farming, supermarkets and the products they stock, television, radio, computers, and many others— embody centralization in material form. Artifacts in common use presuppose relatively few centers of production and distribution. In addition, many of our daily activities rely upon systems that we do not make, control, or know how to repair when they break down. It is possible to imagine alternatives to this state of affairs, different ways of structuring the physical and social dimensions of modern material culture. But given the direction that technological “progress” has followed, people find themselves dependent upon a great many large, complex systems whose centers are, for all practical purposes, beyond their power to influence. The renewed interest in issues of centralization and decentralization during the 1960s and 1970s mirrored a growing alienation with the organizational forms of both politics and technology. Groups of the New Left emphasized distinctly political concerns: participatory democracy and worker self-management as crucial steps in political reform. After a time, however, the topic began to attract a broader public, citizens worried about vexing problems in the workings of major technology-based institutions. Environmental pollution, electrical power blackouts, rising petroleum costs, gasoline shortages, the hazards of commonly used drugs and chemicals, and the possibility of nuclear power plant accidents combined to create suspicion about things that had not previously seemed troubling. Reassurances from the public relations campaigns of large, high-tech corporations—AT&T’s slogan that “The System is the Solution” and Monsanto’s vacuous reminder that “Without chemicals, life itself would be impossible”—began to seem less salutary than chilling. After the near meltdown at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant, officials of the nuclear power industry offered the same bizarre consolation that a few years earlier had excused the turmoil of the Watergate scandal, “The system works.” Yes, it certainly does. But many began to ask: Have we placed too much power at the disposal of organizations that are insensitive and unreliable? Alienation from the organized structures of politics and technology reflect some long-standing social habits. A widely held notion in the twentieth century is that political life is little more than getting other people to do things for you. One delegates power and authority to representatives, to bureaucrats, to the President, or other such distant persons to get the business of government out of your way. These are not matters for which ordinary citizens want to be responsible. People watch public events on television, sense that these matters are beyond their reach, and then complain that the “government” is getting too large and powerful. Americans have long flattered themselves by calling this way of doing business “democracy” and “self-government” (of all things). Altogether similar attitudes characterize most of our dealings with organized centers of material production and distribution. Here also we are inclined to say, “Let someone else take care of it.” The prevailing sentiments are those of apathy and dissociation. It is only when things go wrong that we begin to question the underlying organizational structures and then only briefly. A recurring fantasy in industrial society expects relief from this thoroughgoing estrangement in the coming of a new technological system. In 1924, for example, Joseph K. Hart, a professor of education, extolled the liberation electricity would bring. “Centralization,” he wrote, “has claimed everything for a century: the results are apparent on every hand. But the reign of steam approaches its end: a new stage in the industrial revolution comes on. Electric power, breaking away from its servitude to steam, is becoming independent. Electricity is a decentralizing form of power: it runs out over distributing lines and subdivides to all the minutiae of life and need. Working with it, men may feel the thrill of control and freedom once again.”<sup>9</sup> What Hart’s enthusiastic forecast failed to notice, of course, was that this new energy was centrally generated and centrally controlled by utilities, firms destined to have enormous social power. Indeed, the centralism of the age of steam would seem modest compared to corresponding patterns developed in the age of electricity. Dreams of instant liberation from centralized social control have accompanied virtually every important new technological system introduced during the past century and a half. The emancipation proposed by decentralist philosophers as a deliberate goal requiring long, arduous social struggle has been upheld by technological optimists as a condition to be realized simply by adopting a new gadget. This strange mania, as we will see in the next chapter, is alive and well among those who celebrate the advent of the computer revolution. Of course, it is never that easy. Given the deeply entrenched patterns of our society, any significant attempt to decentralize major political and technological institutions would be a drastic undertaking. To decentralize in politics would require that we change many of the rules, public roles, and institutional relationships of government. It would mean that society move to increase the number, accessibility, relative power, vitality, and diversity of local centers of decision making and public administration. That could only happen by overcoming what would surely be powerful resistance to any such policy. It would require something of a revolution. Similarly, to decentralize technology would mean redesigning and replacing much of our existing hardware and reforming the ways our technologies are managed. One can imagine many different forms these changes might take. But in either the technical or political sphere (or both) any significant move to decentralize would amount to retro-fitting our whole society, since centralized institutions have become the norm. In Kropotkin’s or G. D. H. Cole’s time it was still possible to imagine an entire modern social order based upon small-scale, directly democratic, widely dispersed centers of authority. Industrial society had not yet achieved its mature form; it was thinkable that decentralist alternatives might be feasible alternatives on a broad scale. Today, however, ideas of decentralization usually play a much different role, an expression of the faint hope one may still create institutions here and there that allow ordinary folks some small measure of autonomy. No longer primarily a demand for radical social reconstruction, the plea to decentralize often means: If there is any choice in the matter, let us place greater faith in people’s ability to make plans, shape policies, and manage their own public affairs. Rather than force all social transactions into the iron vise of bureaucratic and corporatistic megastructures, let’s create a few organizational forms that are more flexible, more forgiving. The idea of decentralization contains the hope that people may yet overcome paltry, disassociated political roles—taxpayer, consumer, representative sample in the Gallup poll—to constitute themselves as new centers where ideas are hatched and action taken. # MYTHINFORMATION Computer power to the people is essential to the realization of a future in which most citizens are informed about, and interested and involved in, the processes of government. J. C. R. Licklider IN NINETEENTH-CENTURY Europe a recurring ceremonial gesture signaled the progress of popular uprisings. At the point at which it seemed that forces of disruption in the streets were sufficiently powerful to overthrow monarchical authority, a prominent rebel leader would go to the parliament or city hall to “proclaim the republic.” This was an indication to friend and foe alike that a revolution was prepared to take its work seriously, to seize power and begin governing in a way that guaranteed political representation to all the people. Subsequent events, of course, did not always match these grand hopes; on occasion the revolutionaries were thwarted in their ambitions and reactionary governments regained control. Nevertheless, what a glorious moment when the republic was declared! Here, if only briefly, was the promise of a new order—an age of equality, justice, and emancipation of humankind. A somewhat similar gesture has become a standard feature in contemporary writings on computers and society. In countless books, magazine articles, and media specials some intrepid soul steps forth to proclaim “the revolution.” Often it is called simply “the computer revolution”; my brief inspection of a library catalogue revealed three books with exactly that title published since 1962.<sup>1</sup> Other popular variants include the “information revolution,” “microelectronics revolution,” and “network revolution.” But whatever its label, the message is usually the same. The use of computers and advanced communications technologies is producing a sweeping set of transformations in every corner of social life. An informal consensus among computer scientists, social scientists, and journalists affirms the term “revolution” as the concept best suited to describe these events. “We are all very privileged,” a noted computer scientist declares, “to be in this great Information Revolution in which the computer is going to affect us very profoundly, probably more so than the Industrial Revolution.”<sup>2</sup> A well-known sociologist writes, “This revolution in the organization and processing of information and knowledge, in which the computer plays a central role, has as its context the development of what I have called the postindustrial society.”<sup>3</sup> At frequent intervals during the past dozen years, garish cover stories in Time and Newsweek have repeated this story, climaxed by Time’s selection of the computer as its “Man of the Year” for 1982. Of course, the same society now said to be undergoing a computer revolution has long since gotten used to “revolutions” in laundry detergents, underarm deodorants, floor waxes, and other consumer products. Exhausted in Madison Avenue advertising slogans, the image has lost much of its punch. Those who employ it to talk about computers and society, however, appear to be making much more serious claims. They offer a powerful metaphor, one that invites us to compare the kind of disruptions seen in political revolutions to the changes we see happening around computer information systems. Let us take that invitation seriously and see where it leads. ## A Metaphor Explored SUPPOSE THAT we were looking at a revolution in a Third World country, the revolution of the Sandinistas in Nicaragua, for example. We would want to begin by studying the fundamental goals of the revolution. Is this a movement truly committed to social justice? Does it seek to uphold a valid ideal of human freedom? Does it aspire to a system of democratic rule? Answers to those questions would help us decide whether or not this is a revolution worthy of our endorsement. By the same token, we would want to ask about the means the revolutionaries had chosen to pursue their goals. Having succeeded in armed struggle, how will they manage violence and military force once they gain control? A reasonable person would also want to learn something of the structure of institutional authority that the revolution will try to create. Will there be frequent, open elections? What systems of decision making, administration, and law enforcement will be put to work? Coming to terms with its proposed ends and means, a sympathetic observer could then watch the revolution unfold, noticing whether or not it remained true to its professed purposes and how well it succeeded in its reforms. Most dedicated revolutionaries of the modern age have been willing to supply coherent public answers to questions of this sort. It is not unreasonable to expect, therefore, that something like these issues must have engaged those who so eagerly use the metaphor “revolution” to describe and celebrate the advent of computerization. Unfortunately, this is not the case. Books, articles, and media specials aimed at a popular audience are usually content to depict the dazzling magnitude of technical innovations and social effects. Written as if by some universally accepted format, such accounts describe scores of new computer products and processes, announce the enormous dollar value of the growing computer and communications industry, survey the expanding uses of computers in offices, factories, schools, and homes, and offer good news from research and development laboratories about the great promise of the next generation of computing devices. Along with this one reads of the many “impacts” that computerization is going to have on every sphere of life. Professionals in widely separate fields—doctors, lawyers, corporate managers, and scientists comment on the changes computers have brought to their work. Home consumers give testimonials explaining how personal computers are helping educate their children, prepare their income tax forms, and file their recipes. On occasion, this generally happy story will include reports on people left unemployed in occupations under-minded by automation. Almost always, following this formula, there will be an obligatory sentence or two of criticism of the computer culture solicited from a technically qualified spokesman, an attempt to add balance to an otherwise totally sanguine outlook. Unfortunately, the prevalence of such superficial, unreflective descriptions and forecasts about computerization cannot be attributed solely to hasty journalism. Some of the most prestigious journals of the scientific community echo the claim that a revolution is in the works.<sup>4</sup> A well-known computer scientist has announced unabashedly that “revolution, transformation and salvation are all to be carried out.”<sup>5</sup> It is true that more serious approaches to the study of computers and society can be found in scholarly publications. A number of social scientists, computer scientists, and philosophers have begun to explore important issues about how computerization works and what developments, positive and negative, it is likely to bring to society.<sup>6</sup> But such careful, critical studies are by no means the ones most influential in shaping public attitudes about the world of microelectronics. An editor at a New York publishing house stated the norm, “People want to know what’s new with computer technology. They It seems all but impossible for computer enthusiasts to examine critically the ends that might guide the world-shaking developments they anticipate. They employ the metaphor of revolution for one purpose only—to suggest a drastic upheaval, one that people ought to welcome as good news. It never occurs to them to investigate the idea or its meaning any further. One might suppose, for example, that a revolution of this type would involve a significant shift in the locus of power; after all, that is exactly what one expects in revolutions of a political kind. Is something similar going to happen in this instance? One might also ask whether or not this revolution will be strongly committed, as revolutions often are, to a particular set of social ideals. If so, what are the ideals that matter? Where can we see them argued? To mention revolution also brings to mind the relationships of different social classes. Will the computer revolution bring about the victory of one class over another? Will it be the occasion for a realignment of class loyalties? In the busy world of computer science, computer engineering, and computer marketing such questions seldom come up. Those actively engaged in promoting the transformation—hardware and software engineers, managers of microelectronics firms, computer salesmen, and the like—are busy pursuing their own ends: profits, market share, handsome salaries, the intrinsic joy of invention, the intellectual rewards of programming, and the pleasures of owning and using powerful machines. But the sheer dynamism of technical and economic activity in the computer industry evidently leaves its members little time to ponder the historical significance of their own activity. They must struggle to keep current, to be on the crest of the next wave as it breaks. As one member of Data General’s Eagle computer project describes it, the prevailing spirit resembles a game of pinball. “You win one game, you get to play another. You win with this machine, you get to build the next.”<sup>8</sup> The process has its own inertia. Hence, one looks in vain to the movers and shakers in computer fields for the qualities of social and political insight that characterized revolutionaries of the past. Too busy. Cromwell, Jefferson, Robespierre, Lenin, and Mao were able to reflect upon the world historical events in which they played a role. Public pronouncements by the likes of Robert Noyce, Marvin Minsky, Edward Feigenbaum, and Steven Jobs show no similar wisdom about the transformations they so actively help to create. By and large the computer revolution is conspicuously silent about its own ends. ## Good Console, Good Network, Good Computer MY CONCERN for the political meaning of revolution in this setting may seem somewhat misleading, even perverse. A much better point of reference might be the technical “revolutions” and associated social upheavals of the past, the industrial revolution in particular. If the enthusiasts of computerization had readily taken up this comparison, studying earlier historical periods for similarities and differences in patterns of technological innovation, capital formation, employment, social change, and the like, then it would be clear that I had chosen the wrong application of this metaphor. But, in fact, no well-developed comparisons of that kind are to be found in the writings on the computer revolution. A consistently ahistorical viewpoint prevails. What one often finds emphasized, however, is a vision of drastically altered social and political conditions, a future upheld as both desirable and, in all likelihood, inevitable. Politics, in other words, is not a secondary concern for many computer enthusiasts; it is a crucial, albeit thoughtless, part of their message. We are, according to a fairly standard account, moving into an age characterized by the overwhelming dominance of electronic information systems in all areas of human practice. Industrial society, which depended upon material production for its livelihood, is rapidly being supplanted by a society of information services that will enable people to satisfy their economic and social needs. What water- and steam-powered machines were to the industrial age, the computer will be to the era now dawning. Everexpanding technical capacities in computation and communications will make possible a universal, instantaneous access to enormous quantities of valuable information. As these technologies become less and less expensive and more and more convenient, all the people of the world, not just the wealthy, will be able to use the wonderful services that information machines make available. Gradually, existing differences between rich and poor, advantaged and disadvantaged, will begin to evaporate. Widespread access to computers will produce a society more democratic, egalitarian, and richly diverse than any previously known. Because “knowledge is power,” because electronic information will spread knowledge into every corner of world society, political influence will be much more widely shared. With the personal computer serving as the great equalizer, rule by centralized authority and social class dominance will gradually fade away. The marvelous promise of a “global village” will be fulfilled in a worldwide burst of human creativity. A sampling from recent writings on the information society illustrates these grand expectations. The world is entering a new period. The wealth of nations, which depended upon land, labor, and capital during its agricultural and industrial phases—depended upon natural resources, the accumulation of money, and even upon weaponry—will come in the future to depend upon information, knowledge and intelligence.<sup>9</sup> ## \* \*\* The electronic revolution will not do away with work, but it does hold out some promises: Most boring jobs can be done by machines; lengthy commuting can be avoided; we can have enough leisure to follow interesting pursuits outside our work; environmental destruction can be avoided; the opportunities for personal creativity will be unlimited.<sup>10</sup> Long lists of specific services spell out the utopian promise of this new age: interactive television, electronic funds transfer, computer-aided instruction, customized news service, electronic magazines, electronic mail, computer teleconferencing, on-line stock market and weather reports, computerized Yellow Pages, shopping via home computer, and so forth. All of it is supposed to add up to a cultural renaissance. Whatever the limits to growth in other fields, there are no limits near in telecommunications and electronic technology. There are no limits near in the consumption of information, the growth of culture, or the development of the human mind.<sup>11</sup> Computer-based communications can be used to make human lives richer and freer, by enabling persons to have access to vast stores of information, other “human resources,” and opportunities \* \*\* When such systems become widespread, potentially intense communications networks among geographically dispersed persons will become actualized. We will become Network Nation, exchanging vast amounts of information and social and emotional communications with colleagues, friends and “strangers” who share similar interests, who are spread all over the nation. 13 ## \* \* \* A rich diversity of subcultures will be fostered by computer-based communications systems. Social, political, technical changes will produce conditions likely to lead to the formation of groups with their own distinctive sets of values, activities, language and dress.<sup>14</sup> According to this view, the computer revolution will, by its sheer momentum, eliminate many of the ills that have vexed political society since the beginning of time. Inequalities of wealth and privilege will gradually fade away. One writer predicts that computer networks will “offer major opportunities to disadvantaged groups to acquire the skills and social ties they need to become full members of society.”<sup>15</sup> Another looks forward to “a revolutionary network where each node is equal in power to all others.”<sup>16</sup> Information will become the dominant form of wealth. Because it can flow so quickly, so freely through computer networks, it will not, in this interpretation, cause the kinds of stratification associated with traditional forms of property. Obnoxious forms of social organization will also be replaced. “The computer will smash the pyramid,” one bestselling book proclaims. “We created the hierarchical, pyramidal, managerial system because we needed it to keep track of people and things people did; with the computer to keep track, we can restructure our institutions horizontally.”<sup>17</sup> Thus, the proliferation of electronic information will generate a leveling effect to surpass the dreams of history’s great social reformers. The same viewpoint holds that the prospects for participatory democracy have never been brighter. According to one group of social scientists, “The form of democracy found in the ancient Greek city-state, the Israeli kibbutz, and the New England town meeting, which gave every citizen the opportunity to directly participate in the political process, has become impractical in America’s mass society. But this need not be the case. The technological means exist through which millions of people can enter into dialogue with one another and with their representatives, and can form the Computer scientist J. C. R. Licklider of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is one advocate especially hopeful about a revitalization of the democratic process. He looks forward to “an information environment that would give politics greater depth and dimension than it now has.” Home computer consoles and television sets would be linked together in a massive network. “The political process would essentially be a giant teleconference, and a campaign would be a months-long series of communications among candidates, propagandists, commentators, political action groups and voters.” An arrangement of this kind would, in his view, encourage a more open, comprehensive examination of both issues and candidates. “The information revolution,” he exclaims, “is bringing with it a key that may open the door to a new era of involvement and participation. The key is the self-motivating exhilaration that accompanies truly effective interaction with information through a good console through a good network to a good computer.”<sup>19</sup> It is, in short, a democracy of machines. Taken as a whole, beliefs of this kind constitute what I would call mythinformation: the almost religious conviction that a widespread adoption of computers and communications systems along with easy access to electronic information will automatically produce a better world for human living. It is a peculiar form of enthusiasm that characterizes social fashions of the latter decades of the twentieth century. Many people who have grown cynical or discouraged about other aspects of social life are completely enthralled by the supposed redemptive qualities of computers and telecommunications. Writing of the “fifth generation” supercomputers, Japanese author Yoneji Masuda rhapsodically predicts “freedom for each of us to set individual goals of self-realization and then perhaps a worldwide religious renaissance, characterized not by a belief in a supernatural god, but rather by awe and humility in the presence of the collective human spirit and its wisdom, humanity living in a symbolic tranquility with the planet we have found ourselves upon, regulated by a new set of global ethics.”<sup>20</sup> It is not uncommon for the advent of a new technology to provide an occasion for flights of utopian fancy. During the last two centuries the factory system, railroads, telephone, electricity, automobile, airplane, radio, television, and nuclear power have all figured prominently in the belief that a new and glorious age was about to begin. But even within the great tradition of optimistic technophilia, current dreams of a “computer age” stand out as exaggerated and unrealistic. Because they have such a broad appeal, because they overshadow other ways of looking at the matter, these notions deserve closer inspection. ## The Great Equalizer AS IS GENERALLY TRUE of a myth, the story contains elements of truth. What were once industrial societies are being transformed into service economies, a trend that emerges as more material production shifts to developing countries where labor costs are low and business tax breaks lucrative. At the same time that industrialization takes hold in lessdeveloped nations of the world, deindustrialization is gradually altering the economies of North America and Europe. Some of the service industries central to this pattern are ones that depend upon highly sophisticated computer and communications systems. But this does not mean that future employment possibilities will flow largely from the microelectronics industry and information services. A number of studies, including those of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, suggest that the vast majority of new jobs will come in menial service occupations paying relatively low wages.<sup>21</sup> As robots and computer software absorb an increasing share of factory and office tasks, the “information society” will offer plenty of opportunities for janitors, hospital orderlies, and fast-food waiters. The computer romantics are also correct in noting that computerization alters relationships of social power and control, although they misrepresent the direction this development is likely to take. Those who stand to benefit most obviously are large transnational business corporations. While their “global reach” does not arise solely from the application of information technologies, such organizations are uniquely situated to exploit the efficiency, productivity, command, and control the new electronics make available. Other notable beneficiaries of the systematic use of vast amounts of digitized information are public bureaucracies, intelligence agencies, and an ever-expanding military, organizations that would operate less effectively at their present scale were it not for the use of computer power. Ordinary people are, of course, strongly affected by the workings of these organizations and by the rapid spread of new electronic systems in banking, insurance, taxation, factory and office work, home entertainment, and the like. They are also counted upon to be eager buyers of hardware, software, and communications services as computer products reach the consumer market. But where in all of this motion do we see increased democratization? Social equality? The dawn of a cultural renaissance? Current developments in the information age suggest an increase in power by those who already had a great deal of power, an enhanced centralization of control by those already prepared for control, an augmentation of wealth by the already wealthy. Far from demonstrating a revolution in patterns of social and political influence, empirical studies of computers and social change usually show powerful groups adapting computerized methods to retain control.<sup>22</sup> That is not surprising. Those best situated to take advantage of the power of a new technology are often those previously well situated by dint of wealth, social standing, and institutional position. Thus, if there is to be a computer revolution, the best guess is that it will have a distinctly conservative character. Granted, such prominent trends could be altered. It is possible that a society strongly rooted in computer and telecommunications systems could be one in which participatory democracy, decentralized political control, and social equality are fully realized. Progress of that kind would have to occur as the result of that society’s concerted efforts to overcome many difficult obstacles to achieve those ends. Computer enthusiasts, however, seldom propose deliberate action of that kind. Instead, they strongly suggest that the good society will be realized as a side effect, a spin-off from the vast proliferation of computing devices. There is evidently no need to try to shape the institutions of the information age in ways that maximize human freedom while placing limits upon concentrations of power. For those willing to wait passively while the computer revolution takes its course, technological determinism ceases to be mere theory and becomes an ideal: a desire to embrace conditions brought on by technological change without judging them in advance. There is nothing new in this disposition. Computer romanticism is merely the latest version of the nineteenth- and twentieth-century faith we noted earlier, one that has always expected to generate freedom, democracy, and justice through sheer material abundance. Thus there is no need for serious inquiry into the appropriate design of new institutions or the distribution of rewards and burdens. As long as the economy is growing and the machinery in good working order, the rest will take care of itself. In previous versions of this homespun conviction, the abundant (and therefore democratic) society was manifest by a limitless supply of houses, appliances, and consumer goods.<sup>23</sup> Now “access to information” and “access to computers” have moved to the top of the list. The political arguments of computer romantics draw upon a number of key assumptions: (1) people are bereft of information; (2) information is knowledge; (3) knowledge is power; and (4) increasing access to information enhances democracy and equalizes social power. Taken as separate assertions and in combination, these beliefs provide a woefully distorted picture of the role of electronic systems in social life. Is it true that people face serious shortages of information? To read the literature on the computer revolution one would suppose this to be a problem on a par with the energy crisis of the 1970s. The persuasiveness of this notion borrows from our sense that literacy, education, knowledge, well-informed minds, and the widespread availability of tools of inquiry are unquestionable social goods, and that, in contrast, illiteracy, inadequate education, ignorance, and forced restrictions upon knowledge are among history’s worst evils. Thus, it appears superficially plausible that a world rewired to connect human beings to vast data banks and communications systems would be a progressive step. Information shortage would be remedied in much the same way that developing a new fuel supply might solve an energy crisis. Alas, the idea is entirely faulty. It mistakes sheer supply of information with an educated ability to gain knowledge and act effectively based on that knowledge. In many parts of the world that ability is sadly lacking. Even some highly developed societies still contain chronic inequalities in the distribution of good education and basic intellectual skills. The U.S. Army, for instance, must now reject or dismiss a fairly high percentage of the young men and women it recruits because they simply cannot read military manuals. It is no doubt true of these recruits that they have a great deal of information about the world—information from their life experiences, schooling, the mass media, and so forth. What makes them “functionally illiterate” is that they have not learned to translate this information into a mastery of practical skills. If the solution to problems of illiteracy and poor education were a question of information supply alone, then the best policy might be to increase the number of well-stocked libraries, making sure they were built in places where libraries do not presently exist. Of course, that would do little good in itself unless people are sufficiently well educated to use those libraries to broaden their knowledge and understanding. Computer enthusiasts however, are not noted for their calls to increase support of public libraries and schools. It is electronic information carried by networks they uphold as crucial. Here is a case in which an obsession with a particular kind of technology causes one to disregard what are obvious problems and clear remedies. While it is true that systems of computation and communications, intelligently structured and wisely applied, might help a society raise its standards of literacy, education, and general knowledgeability, to look to those instruments first while ignoring how to enlighten and invigorate a human mind is pure foolishness. “As everybody knows, knowledge is power.”<sup>24</sup> this is an attractive idea, but highly misleading. Of course, knowledge employed in particular circumstances can help one act effectively and in that sense enhance one’s power. A citrus farmer’s knowledge of frost conditions enables him/her to take steps to prevent damage to the crop. A candidate’s knowledge of public opinion can be a powerful aid in an election campaign. But surely there is no automatic, positive link between knowledge and power, especially if that means power in a social or political sense. At times knowledge brings merely an enlightened impotence or paralysis. One may know exactly what to do but lack the wherewithal to act. Of the many conditions that affect the phenomenon of power, knowledge is but one and by no means the most important. Thus, in the history of ideas, arguments that expert knowledge ought to play a special role in politics—the philosopher-kings for Plato, the engineers for Veblen—have always been offered as something contrary to prevailing wisdom. To Plato and Veblen it was obvious that knowledge was not power, a situation they hoped to remedy. An equally serious misconception among computer enthusiasts is the belief that democracy is first and foremost a matter of distributing information. As one particularly flamboyant manifesto exclaims: “There is an explosion of information dispersal in the technology and we think this information has to be shared. All great thinkers about democracy said that the key to democracy is access to information. And now we have a chance to get information into people’s hands like never before.”<sup>25</sup> Once again such assertions play on our belief that a democratic public ought to be openminded and well informed. One of the great evils of totalitarian societies is that they dictate what people can know and impose secrecy to restrict freedom. But democracy is not founded solely (or even primarily) upon conditions that affect the availability of information. What distinguishes it from other political forms is a recognition that the people as a whole are capable of self-government and that they have a rightful claim to rule. As a consequence, political society ought to build institutions that allow or even encourage a great latitude of democratic participation. How far a society must go in making political authority and public roles available to ordinary people is a matter of dispute among political theorists. But no serious student of the question would give much credence to the idea that creating a universal gridwork to spread electronic information is, by itself, a democratizing step. What, then, of the idea that “interaction with information through a good console, through a good network to a good computer” will promote a renewed sense of political involvement and participation? Readers who believe that assertion should contact me about some parcels of land my uncle has for sale in Florida. Relatively low levels of citizen participation prevail in some modern democracies, the United States, for example. There are many reasons for this, many ways a society might try to improve things. Perhaps opportunities to serve in public office or influence public policy are too limited; in that case, broaden the opportunities. Or perhaps choices placed before citizens are so pallid that boredom is a valid response; in that instance, improve the quality of those choices. But it is simply not reasonable to assume that enthusiasm for political activity will be stimulated solely by the introduction of sophisticated information machines. The role that television plays in modern politics should suggest why this is so. Public participation in voting has steadily declined as television replaced the face-to-face politics of precincts and neighborhoods. Passive monitoring of electronic news and information allows citizens to feel involved while dampening the desire to take an active part. If people begin to rely upon computerized data bases and telecommunications as a primary means of exercising power, it is conceivable that genuine political knowledge based in first-hand experience would vanish altogether. The vitality of democratic politics depends upon people’s willingness to act together in pursuit of their common ends. It requires that on occasion members of a community appear before each other in person, speak their minds, deliberate on paths of action, and decide what they will do.<sup>26</sup> This is considerably different from the model now upheld as a breakthrough for democracy: logging onto one’s computer, receiving the latest information, and sending back an instantaneous digitized response. A chapter from recent political history illustrates the strength of direct participation in contast to the politics of electronic information. In 1981 and 1982 two groups of activists set about to do what they could to stop the international nuclear arms race. One of the groups, Ground Zero, chose to rely almost solely upon mass communications to convey its message to the public. Its leaders appeared on morning talk shows and evening news programs on all three major television networks. They followed up with a mass mail solicitation using addresses from a computerized data base. At the same time another group, the Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign, began by taking its proposal for a bilateral nuclear freeze to New England town meetings, places where active citizen participation is a long-standing tradition. Winning the endorsement of the idea from a great many town meetings, the Nuclear Freeze group expanded its drive by launching a series of state initiatives. Once again the key was a direct approach to people, this time through thousands of meetings, dinners, and parties held in homes across the country. The effects of the two movements were strikingly different. After its initial publicity, Ground Zero was largely ignored. It had been an ephemeral exercise in media posturing. The Nuclear Freeze campaign, however, continued to gain influence in the form of increasing public support, successful ballot measures, and an ability to apply pressure upon political officials. Eventually, the latter group did begin to use computerized mailings, television appearances, and the like to advance its cause. But it never forgot the original source of its leverage: people working together for shared ends. Of all the computer enthusiasts’ political ideas, there is none more poignant than the faith that the computer is destined to become a potent equalizer in modern society. Support for this belief is found in the fact that small “personal” computers are becoming more and more powerful, less and less expensive, and ever more simple to use. Obnoxious tendencies associated with the enormous, costly, technically inaccessible computers of the recent past are soon to be overcome. As one writer explains, “The great forces of centralization that characterized mainframe and minicomputer design of that period have now been reversed.” This means that “the puny device that sits innocuously on the desktop will, in fact, within a few years, contain enough computing power to become an effective equalizer.”<sup>27</sup> Presumably, ordinary citizens equipped with microcomputers will be able to counter the influence of large, computer-based organizations. Notions of this kind echo beliefs of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century revolutionaries that placing fire arms in the hands of the people was crucial to overthrowing entrenched authority. In the American Revolution, French Revolution, Paris Commune, and Russian Revolution the role of “the people armed” was central to the revolutionary program. As the military defeat of the Paris Commune made clear, however, the fact that the popular forces have guns may not be decisive. In a contest of force against force, the larger, more sophisticated, more ruthless, better equipped competitor often has the upper hand. Hence, the availability of low-cost computing power may move the baseline that defines electronic dimensions of social influence, but it does not necessarily alter the relative balance of power. Using a personal computer makes one no more powerful vis-à-vis, say, the National Security Agency than flying a hang glider establishes a person as a match for the U.S. Air Force. In sum, the political expectations of computer enthusiasts are seldom more than idle fantasy. Beliefs that widespread use of computers will cause hierarchies to crumble, inequality to tumble, participation to flourish, and centralized power to dissolve simply do not withstand close scrutiny. The formula information = knowledge = power = democracy lacks any real substance. At each point the mistake comes in the conviction that computerization will inevitably move society toward the good life. And no one will have to raise a finger. ## Information and Ideology DESPITE ITS SHORTCOMINGS as political theory, mythinformation is noteworthy as an expressive contemporary ideology. I use the term “ideology” here in a sense common in social science: a set of beliefs that expresses the needs and aspirations of a group, class, culture, or subculture. In this instance the needs and aspirations that matter most are those that stem from operational requirements of highly complex systems in an advanced technological society; the groups most directly involved are those who build, maintain, operate, improve, and market these systems. At a time in which almost all major components of our technological society have come to depend upon the application of large and small computers, it is not surprising that computerization has risen to ideological prominence, an expression of grand hopes and ideals. What is the “information” so crucial in this odd belief system, the icon now so greatly cherished? We have seen enough to appreciate that the kind of information upheld is not knowledge in the ordinary sense of the term; nor is it understanding, enlightenment, critical thought, timeless wisdom, or the content of a well-educated mind. If one looks carefully at the writings of computer enthusiasts, one finds that information in a particular form and context is offered as a paradigm to inspire emulation. Enormous quantities of data, manipulated within various kinds of electronic media and used to facilitate the transactions of today’s large, complex organizations is the model we are urged to embrace. In this context the sheer quantity of information presents a formidable challenge. Modern organizations are continually faced with overload, a flood of data that threatens to become unintelligible to them. Computers provide one way to confront that problem; speed conquers quantity. An equally serious challenge is created by the fact that the varieties of information most crucial to modern organizations are highly time specific. Data on stock market prices, airline traffic, weather conditions, international economic indicators, military intelligence, public opinion poll results, and the like are useful for very short periods of time. Systems that gather, organize, analyze, and utilize electronic data in these areas must be closely tuned to the very latest developments. If one is trading on fast-paced international markets, information about prices an hour old or even a few seconds old may have no value. Information is itself a perishable commodity. Thus, what looked so puzzling in another context—the urgent “need” for information in a social world filled with many pressing human needs—now becomes transparent. It is, in the first instance, the need of complex human/machine systems threatened with debilitating uncertainties or even breakdown unless continually replenished with up-to-the-minute electronic information about their internal states and operating environments. Rapid information-processing capabilities of modern computers and communications devices are a perfect match for such needs, a marriage made in technological heaven. But is it sensible to transfer this model, as many evidently wish, to all parts of human life? Must activities, experiences, ideas, and ways of knowing that take a longer time to bear fruit adapt to the speedy processes of digitized information processing? Must education, the arts, politics, sports, home life, and all other forms of social practice be transformed to accommodate it? As one article on the coming of the home computer concludes, “running a household is actually like running a small business. You have to worry about inventory control—of household supplies—and budgeting for school tuition, housekeepers’ salaries, and all the rest.”<sup>28</sup> The writer argues that these complex, rapidly changing operations require a powerful information-processing capacity to keep them functioning smoothly. One begins to wonder how everyday activities such as running a household were even possible before the advent of microelectronics. This is a case in which the computer is a solution frantically in search of a problem. In the last analysis, the almost total silence about the ends of the “computer revolution” is filled by a conviction that information processing is something valuable in its own right. Faced with an information explosion that strains the capacities of traditional institutions, society will renovate its structure to accommodate computerized, automated systems in every area of concern. The efficient management of information is revealed as the telos of modern society, its greatest mission. It is that fact to which mythinformation adds glory and glitter. People must be convinced that the human burdens of an information age—unemployment, de-skilling, the disruption of many social patterns—are worth bearing. Once again, those who push the plow are told they ride a golden chariot. ## Everywhere and Nowhere HAVING CRITICIZED a point of view, it remains for me to suggest what topics a serious study of computers and politics should pursue. The question is, of course, a very large one. If the long-term consequences of computerization are anything like the ones commonly predicted, they will require a rethinking of many fundamental conditions in social and political life. I will mention three areas of concern. As people handle an increasing range of their daily activities through electronic instruments—mail, banking, shopping, entertainment, travel plans, and so forth—it becomes technically feasible to monitor these activities to a degree heretofore inconceivable. The availability of digitized footprints of social transactions affords opportunities that contain a menacing aspect. While there has been a great deal written about this problem, most of it deals with the “threat to privacy,” the possibility that someone might gain access to information that violates the sanctity of one’s personal life. As important as that issue certainly is, it by no means exhausts the potential evils created by electronic data banks and computer matching. The danger extends beyond the private sphere to affect the most basic of public freedoms. Unless steps are taken to prevent it, we may develop systems capable of a perpetual, pervasive, apparently benign surveillance. Confronted with omnipresent, all-seeing data banks, the populace may find passivity and compliance the safest route, avoiding activities that once represented political liberty. As a badge of civic pride a citizen may announce, “I’m not involved in anything a computer would find the least bit interesting.” The evolution of this unhappy state of affairs does not necessarily depend upon the “misuse” of computer systems. The prospect we face is really much more insidious. An age rich in electronic information may achieve wonderful social conveniences at a cost of placing freedom, perhaps inadvertently, in a deep chill. A thoroughly computerized world is also one bound to alter conditions of human sociability. The point of many applications of microelectronics, after all, is to eliminate social layers that were previously needed to get things done. Computerized bank tellers, for example, have largely done away with small, local branch banks, which were not only ways of doing business, but places where people met, talked, and socialized. The so-called electronic cottage industry, similarly, operates very well without the kinds of human interactions that once characterized office work. Despite greater efficiency, productivity, and convenience, innovations of this kind do away with the reasons people formerly had for being together, working together, acting together. Many practical activities once crucial to even a minimal sense of community life are rendered obsolete. One consequence of these developments is to pare away the kinds of face-to-face contact that once provided important buffers between individuals and organized power. To an increasing extent, people will become even more susceptible to the influence of employers, news media, advertisers, and national political leaders. Where will we find new institutions to balance and mediate such power? Perhaps the most significant challenge posed by the linking of computers and telecommunications is the prospect that the basic structures of political order will be recast. Worldwide computer, satellite, and communication networks fulfill, in large part, the modern dream of conquering space and time. These systems make possible instantaneous action at any point on the globe without limits imposed by the specific location of the initiating actor. Human beings and human societies, however, have traditionally found their identities within spatial and temporal limits. They have lived, acted, and found meaning in a particular place at a particular time. Developments in microelectronics tend to dissolve these limits, thereby threatening the integrity of social and political forms that depend on them. Aristotle’s observation that “man is a political animal” meant in its most literal sense that man is a polis animal, a creature naturally suited to live in a particular kind of community within a specific geographical setting, the city-state. Historical experience shows that it is possible for human beings to flourish in political units—kingdoms, empires, nation-states—larger than those the Greeks thought natural. But until recently the crucial conditions created by spatial boundaries of political societies were never in question. That has changed. Methods pioneered by transnational corporations now make it possible for organizations of enormous size to manage their activities effectively across the surface of the planet. Business units that used to depend upon spatial proximity can now be integrated through complex electronic signals. If it seems convenient to shift operations from one area of the world to another far distant, it can be accomplished with a flick of a switch. Close an office in Sunnyvale; open an office in Singapore. In the recent past corporations have had to demonstrate at least some semblance of commitment to geographically based communities; their public relations often stressed the fact that they were “good neighbors.” But in an age in which organizations are located everywhere and nowhere, this commitment easily evaporates. A transnational corporation can play fast and loose with everyone, including the country that is ostensibly its “home.” Towns, cities, regions, and whole nations are forced to swallow their pride and negotiate for favors. In that process, political authority is gradually redefined. Computerization resembles other vast, but largely unconscious experiments in modern social and technological history, experiments of the kind noted in earlier chapters. Following a step-by-step process of instrumental improvements, societies create new institutions, new patterns of behavior, new sensibilities, new contexts for the exercise of power. Calling such changes “revolutionary,” we tacitly acknowledge that these are matters that require reflection, possibly even strong public action to ensure that the outcomes are desirable. But the occasions for reflection, debate, and public choice are extremely rare indeed. The important decisions are left in private hands inspired by narrowly focused economic motives. While many recognize that these decisions have profound consequences for our common life, few seem prepared to own up to that fact. Some observers forecast that “the computer revolution” will eventually be guided by new wonders in artificial intelligence. Its present course is influenced by something much more familiar: the absent mind.