EXCESS AND LIMIT ## THE STATE OF NATURE REVISITED SEEKINGA RELIABLE WAY to judge the works and accomplishments of civilization, each generation finds an obvious point of reference. Nature provides a vivid contrast to human artifice, a source of powerful insights and arguments. Many political theories begin on exactly this note, asserting as an explicit or implicit first premise: this is the natural way; here is the path nature itself sets before us. In the same vein many criticisms of human institutions, including criticisms of technological society, rest on the charge: what we are doing is horribly contrary to nature; we must repair our ways or stand condemned by the most severe of tribunals. Ralph Waldo Emerson’s classic essay “Nature” depicts the situation clearly in the context of a man walking into a forest. “The knapsack of custom falls off his back with the first step he takes into these precincts. Here is sanctity which shames our religions, and reality which discredits our heroes. Here we find Nature to be the circumstance which dwarfs every other circumstance, and judges like a god all men that come to her.”<sup>1</sup> Ideas of this kind become more interesting and problematic when expressed as organized doctrine. No artist, no thinker, no political movement, no society has ever rested content with the simple definition of nature as “the totality of all things.” From the vast array of natural phenomena, people inevitably select particular features for emphasis, endowing them with great esthetic, moral, and political significance. Anyone who examines the range of meanings that have been attributed to “nature” in Western history must be impressed by their number, diversity, and glaring contradictory implications. For some nature brings conflict, for others harmony; for some it exists as the very essence of reason and order, for others it looms as throbbing irrational passion; for some it is a source of warmth, nourishment, and solace, for others it is a set of awesome, threatening forces. In different historical periods the same symbols of nature carry different, sometimes opposite meanings.<sup>2</sup> Thus, the “wilderness” feared as a haunt of demons by medieval Christians has commonly been regarded as a place of beauty and inspiration in the eyes of industrial society. To invoke “nature” or “the natural” in discussions about social life is in effect asserting: “This is real. This is trustworthy. I am not making it up.” Because natural phenomena existed before human intervention, they have a certain reliability, unlike human artifacts and institutions that are all too often filled with deceit. On those grounds the bastard Edmund in King Lear appeals to nature to justify his claims, renouncing those civilized conventions that label him “illegitimate.” Thou, Nature art my goddess, to thy law My services are bound. Wherefore should I Stand in the plague of custom, and permit The curiosity of nations to deprive me . . . Shakespeare’s play offers the spectacle of political society and its categories dissolving when confronted by uncontrolled natural forces. It was this very solvent that philosophers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries employed to discredit existing authority and to prepare the way for the establishment of new regimes. Thus, Thomas Hobbes describes a state of nature so threatening to men, a continuing “war of every one against every one,” that any reasonable person would gladly take shelter in a covenant creating the commonwealth. But what philosophers and social theorists have written about “nature” over the centuries provides adequate grounds for skepticism on the matter. At one point in The Second Treatise of Government John Locke addresses the objection some have voiced that “the state of Nature” he describes never existed. He finesses the point by asserting “that all Men are naturally in that State, and remain so, till by their own Consents they make themselves Members of some Politick Society.”<sup>4</sup> In other words, a state of nature is logically defined as an event within a set of philosophical constructs. As the writings of Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau clearly demonstrate, discussions of “natural law,” “human nature,” and “state of nature” are occasions for the most extravagant theoretical fictions. Nevertheless, because they carry the appearance of reliability, because they offer the promise of universal truth, conceptions of nature have an astonishing power to persuade. During the last half of the twentieth century the age-old conversation about the meaning of nature has been renewed. Terms that matter now are, for example, “environment,” “ecology,” and “ecosystem,” but the familiar quest to find moral guidance in natural phenomena is similar to that seen in earlier periods. At issue now is the present and future path of modern technological society. Are there any lessons from available knowledge of natural processes that are persuasive enough to cause people to alter the course industrial societies have followed in recent times? Does an awareness of significant features of the “environment” or “ecology” generate imperatives to guide our actions? Do present-day understandings of nature shed new light on the question of limits? Let us examine three contemporary perspectives on environmental policy to see what they discover in nature and what enlightened policies they recommend. ## Nature as a Stock of Economic Goods THE USE of the term “environment” in referring to things in nature is itself testimony to the success of a project that characterizes modern industrial civilization: the control and exploitation of the material world. “Environment” means, literally, “something that surrounds.” It suggests that what previous generations had thought of as a target for domination, a frontier “out there” awaiting mastery, is now something that we have moved into and taken over. The “environment” surrounds us in the way a military general is surrounded by countryside he has just conquered. Descartes suggested long ago that we “render ourselves the masters and possessors of nature”<sup>5</sup> and Francis Bacon that we “extend the power and dominion of the human race itself over the universe.”<sup>6</sup> This project has succeeded beyond those thinkers’ wildest dreams. The extent of the conquest occasionally gives pause to even those who believe that this victory is fully justified. For the value of many things, including market goods, often stems from the fact that they have somehow been left unexploited, unsoiled. An important segment of today’s environmental movement in the United States inherits and extends two strands of public policy that have their origin in Progressive Era politics of the turn of the century: conservation of resources and pollution control. In this tradition certain obvious problems such as deforestation, erosion, and the squandering of minerals, fish, “game,” and “scenic” wilderness create challenges for rational husbandry.<sup>7</sup> The unintended, undesirable waste products from industrialization and urbanization present a need for cleanup and preventive measures.<sup>8</sup> But the continuing presence of such problems is no cause to doubt the right of humans to possess and dispose of “natural resources” as they please, no reason to doubt the basic soundness of modern civilization. There is no felt need, for example, to reexamine older theories that define man’s proprietary relationship to natural creation. In Locke’s Second Treatise we are told of a situation in which men confront parts of nature and transform them into personal possessions. “Whatsoever then he removes out of the State that Nature hath provided, and left it in, he hath mixed his Labour with, and thereby makes it his Property.”<sup>9</sup> Significant in Locke’s theory is the fact that property is actually created before the founding of society. It is only when the state of nature proves inadequate for the protection of life and property that people bind together in a contract establishing civil society and government. We have left the state of nature in order to guarantee safe access to nature as a vast reservoir of useful raw materials. In that move nature is designated, once and for all, as a stock of economic goods. Unlike the two other viewpoints we will examine, the economic perspective does not depend on drawing lessons from nature or from the human relationship to nature. Intricate artificial models of “the economy” and of “the market” will now do just fine. Still interesting in this context, however, are those “environmental values” that pose a challenge to the penchant to define every situation according to an orthodox format of costs, benefits, supply, demand, and prices. The value of clean air, clean water, dwindling resources, wilderness, and the like is still something to be reckoned with.<sup>10</sup> What one needs is a way of allocating these goods in a rational manner. The orthodox economic means for achieving rational, efficient outcomes in this context is to make sure that society has properly functioning markets that give everything an appropriate price. Hence, the proposals of economists on environmental matters and public policy measures based upon their proposals are often ways of ensuring that environmental values are somehow expressed in hard dollar prices. To this end, many of the accomplishments of contemporary environmental economics have been attempts to recognize and remedy the shortcomings of the standard neoclassical economic paradigm. Many now appreciate that it will not do to mention “negative externalities” and “market imperfections” and let it go at that. If cost-benefit analysis is to be truly rational, diligence must be exercised in counting previously disregarded environmental costs of production. And care must be taken to see to it that those costs are equitably distributed. Where existing markets fail, public policy may step in with a variety of instruments—effluent taxes, fines, license fees, and so forth. Environmental economists have added other important conceptual and policy innovations, for example, reopening the question of the discount rate and proposing new ways to compare the value of scarce resources and environmental quality to the present generation as compared to future ones.<sup>11</sup> In its own distinctive way, then, the perspective that defines nature as a set of economic goods has made important strides in responding to the recent public outcry about the environment and quality of life. If one were to take its most ardent partisans at their words, one would have to conclude that, in fact, no other point of view has much to contribute at all. “We are going to make little real progress to solving the problem of pollution until we recognize it for what, primarily, it is: an economic problem, which must be understood in economic terms.”<sup>12</sup> Hence, the unmistakable refrain that economists introduce in discussions about environmental values: What’s it worth to you? How much are you prepared to pay for clean air and clean water? How large an investment would you like to make in preserving endangered species? If you think it’s important to spend your money or public monies to save a particular wilderness area, how much are you willing to pay? What’s your upper limit? In a manner that more philosophically oriented partisans of environmentalism often find obnoxious, the economist insists that choices in this realm be understood as “trade-offs.” A decision to save a coastline from offshore oil drilling is a decision to forego the possible economic payoff the oil would bring. To save the snail darter at the expense of canceling a dam construction project means giving up the economic benefits the dam would produce. Such choices are, from the point of view of economics, little more than expressions of consumer preference. Would you prefer to have condos or condors? You may not be able to afford both.<sup>13</sup> Almost impossible to handle for this viewpoint are positions based on higher principles. Those who claim that there are strong moral reasons for saving this or that part of the environment are quickly advised that effective action can be extremely costly. In the words of Lester Thurow, “Environmentalism is not ethical values pitted against economic values. It is thoroughly economic. It is simply a case where a particular segment of the income distribution wants some economic goods and services (a clean environment) that cannot be achieved without collective action.” For those cases in which it is difficult to determine the economic value of these environmental goods and services, Thurow suggests a “gedanken experiment,” a method of “shadow pricing,” to help us out. “Imagine that someone could sell you an invisible, completely comfortable facemask that would guarantee you clear air. How much would you be willing to pay for such a device?” Thus, environmental values that are not already commodities can, through this mental exercise, be seen as if they were commodities. In Thurow’s view “the basic problem in our national debate about pollution controls is that neither side is really willing to sit down and place a value on a clean environment and then do the necessary calculations to see whether it can be had for less than this price.”<sup>14</sup> Hence, the advice of the economist: show me an environmental principle and I’ll show you its price tag. Beyond this, economists typically have little confidence that action based upon ethical commitments will work in any case. Scoffing at the notion that “nature will be protected from man when and only when the public recognizes its moral responsibility toward nature’s gifts,” one economist explains the view of those in his profession: “They generally have little faith in the dependability of good intentions and pledges of virtuous behavior. Instead, economic analysis focuses on the importance of policies that work to make individual self-interest coincide with the public interest. Even when they believe that something significant can be gained by trying to change public attitudes, economists usually doubt the availability of effective means to produce such a change.”<sup>15</sup> In sum, the characteristic role of economists in debates about environmental issues is to call us all back to the “real world” of dollars and cents. It is all well and good, they admit, to proclaim inherent worth of wild rivers, forest areas, marshlands, endangered species, and other such things. But unless one is prepared to back up those values with real economic incentives, all is lost. Economists offer their analyses to aid us in making a choice when two or more prized environmental features are in jeopardy and perhaps not all of them can be protected or preserved. They recognize that mechanisms of public policy may be called upon as an aid in setting the money value of things. But in environmental affairs, as in business, they believe, the ultimate criterion is nothing more than the bottom line. ## Nature as Endangered Ecosystem AN ECONOMIC interpretation of nature is, of course, widely popular. Easily compatible with an urban, industrial, utilitarian, capitalist understanding of human life, this philosophy is upheld by most established institutions in modern America—corporations, governmental agencies, and even many environmental public-interest organizations as well. If different ideas of the value of nature are ever to supplant or seriously modify the prevailing system of beliefs, it will have to be because there are compelling reasons for doing so. Both of the perspectives examined next find such reasons in a view of nature inspired by the science of ecology. While the two are often grouped together as one basic philosophy, it is useful to sort out two very different varieties of argument frequently made by those who embrace ecology as a source of moral guidance. The first of these emphasizes a theme we noted earlier in Emerson’s vision: the idea that nature ultimately judges what humans do. In the late nineteenth century some Americans carried this notion to its ultimate conclusion, arguing that modern society faced a hanging judge, a grand inquisitor in an extremely vindictive mood. Thus, George Perkins Marsh’s Man and Nature sternly proclaimed, “The ravages committed by man subvert the relations and destroy the balance which nature had established between her organic and her inorganic creations, and she avenges herself upon the intruder, by letting loose upon her defaced provinces destructive energies hitherto kept in check by organic forces destined to be his best auxiliaries, but which he has unwisely dispersed and driven from the field of action.”<sup>16</sup> In Marsh’s view it is not the mere conservation of resources that matters, not a more efficient use of things we are going to need later, but the possibility that human meddling might destroy major parts of the biosphere altogether. Twentieth-century experience has made this prospect seem plausible in a number of ways. Biologists have been able to define more precisely the complex relationships between different life forms and environmental conditions. Especially since the mid-1940s, obvious varieties of damage caused by technological applications, for instance the long-term effects of pesticides and herbicides, have been studied with scrupulous scientific care. Along with an accumulation of knowledge of this kind, our century has seen the development of weapons with unprecedented destructive power. What previous generations had feared as human encroachment upon particular natural regions, resources, and species is now overshadowed by the awful dread that we may actually eradicate all (or most) life on the planet.<sup>17</sup> Prophecies about the risk of ecological disaster other than nuclear holocaust carry much of the psychological force of the possible nuclear calamity. Those who portray nature as an endangered ecosystem predict, in effect, that “the Bomb” is not the only way to destroy the biosphere.<sup>18</sup> The point is all too clear. If we are faced with extinction, what sense does it make to worry about nickles and dimes? Economizing on “environmental values” or weighing elaborate “trade-offs” seems foolish if catastrophe is just around the corner. As one spokesman of this point of view proclaims, “My own judgment, based on the evidence now at hand, is that the present course of environmental degradation, at least in industrialized countries, represents a challenge to the essential ecological systems that is so serious that, if continued, it will destroy the capability of the environment to support a reasonably civilized human society.” At another point the same writer concludes, “Unwittingly, we have created for ourselves a new and dangerous world. We would be wise to move through it as though our lives were at stake.”<sup>19</sup> A number of conceivable ecological catastrophes have been described in recent years—destruction of the ozone layer, overheating of the earth through the greenhouse effect, poisoning of the oceans through a gradual buildup of industrial pollutants, and others. The likelihood or unlikelihood of each misfortune has, of course, been hotly debated. Stock in survivalist arguments rises and falls with each new shred of evidence that seems to support or deny the particular horror predicted.<sup>20</sup> Indeed, there is a certain vulnerability in placing the crux of one’s social philosophy and policy position on the probability of eco-catastrophe. What if new data indicate the emergency wasn’t what you said it was? Are you then obligated to apologize and fall silent? It is not my task here (indeed, I simply do not have the knowledge) to evaluate the empirical validity of claims—optimistic or pessimistic—made about various eco-catastrophes. For my purposes, however, it is important to notice how the moral weight of predicted disaster provides an occasion for adopting a particular interpretation of nature—ecological theory—as a framework for understanding and judging the works of modern society. Patterns specified by the models of ecological theorists are widely taken to be “laws” that must be embraced as tenets of social wisdom. From Barry Commoner’s dictum that “Nature knows best” to the detailed prescriptions of Eugene Odum about ecosystem diversity, energy flows, population growth rates, and the like, ecology leaves the realm of pure science to become a philosophy of human conduct.<sup>21</sup> If people would pay attention to such natural “laws” as “preserve ecosystem diversity,” so those of this persuasion believe, they would have sufficient guidance to guarantee humanity’s now precarious chances of survival. At first glance it might appear that this viewpoint is nothing more than a recent version of the “naturalistic fallacy,” finding the “ought” of human conduct in the “is” revealed by science. That conclusion, however, overlooks an important feature of this line of reasoning—its coercive quality. For it is not so much that we find patterns in nature that are admirable to emulate, but that ecology provides the grounds for some of our worst fears. In this way eco-philosophy has a distinctly Hobbesian twist to it. Hobbes, it is worth remembering, did not commit the “naturalistic fallacy.” He simply pointed out what conditions in nature ultimately meant: a never-ending threat of violent death. On that basis he was able to argue why we should obey an absolute political authority. The Leviathan describes no “ought” in nature except that which arises from sheer terror. In a similar way the persuasive power of the notion of an endangered ecosystem, its claim to advise us on actions we ought to pursue, stems in the last analysis from its ability to engage our fears. If our very survival is at stake, more conventional understandings of social life must be put aside; we must rush to find effective ways of dealing with the ecological crisis. In fact, a number of writers on ecology and society employ Hobbesian logic, coming to flagrantly Hobbesian conclusions. William Ophuls’ Ecology and the Politics of Scarcity, for example, finds that all of us face a situation so desperate that only desperate measures will do. Traditional notions of liberty and of economic self-interest must now give way to coercive authority. “If under conditions of ecological scarcity individuals rationally pursue their material self-interest unrestrained by a common authority that upholds the common interest, the eventual result is bound to be common environmental ruin.” According to Ophuls, we have a choice. Either we can establish relatively benign forms of “self coercion” right away or stumble into even more oppressive solutions later on. He recommends the creation of a class of “ecological guardians” to handle the difficult policy decisions necessary to salvage a livable world. “The individualistic basis of society,” he continues, “the concept of inalienable rights, the purely self-defined pursuit of happiness, liberty as maximum freedom of action, and laissez faire itself all become problematic, requiring major modification or perhaps even abandonment if we wish to avert inexorable environmental degradation and eventual extinction as a civilization. Certainly, democracy as we know it cannot conceivably survive.”<sup>22</sup> It should be clear, then, how at least some prominent visions of an endangered ecosystem point to entirely different conclusions than the economic point of view. The market can no longer be relied upon as a guide; it seems to lead us straight to the “tragedy of the commons,” wherein incrementally rational action eventually generates sudden doomsday. Evidently familiar social liberties must be discarded as well; they now appear reckless luxuries too risky to afford. If what the most extreme ecological survivalists say is true, there are few alternatives left other than to dismantle freedom to protect nature from assassination. ## Nature as a Source of Intrinsic Good BOTH THE environmental economist and prophet of eco-catastrophe address what they consider to be urgent environmental issues. But from another vantage point they merely scratch the surface. Many involved in today’s environmental debates claim that what is needed is a radically new aesthetic, ethical, and metaphysical grasp of the human relationship to nature. They argue that unless we achieve this new vision of our situation, we will surely fail to make the fundamental changes—changes in the very foundations of our culture—that true ecological wisdom demands. Drawing upon philosophies of nature and religious ideas of earlier times, such as those of Tao, Zen, St. Francis, St. Benedict, Henry David Thoreau, John Muir, and Alfred North Whitehead among others, a group of contemporary eco-philosophers have sought a renewed reverence for things natural and ways of “following nature” for positive moral instruction.<sup>23</sup> A milestone in the popular history of this way of thinking was the publication of Lynn White’s “The Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis” in Science in 1967.<sup>24</sup> Widely reprinted and widely discussed ever since, the article made an eloquent case for the view that present-day problems of pollution, resource depletion, environmental degradation, and the like reflect our culture’s most fundamental stance toward the material world, a stance deeply rooted in Western metaphysics. Many have disagreed with White’s analysis of the Christian origin of the malady; many have rejected the specifics of his solution—a reaffirmation of the teachings of St. Francis—as a flimsy nostrum. But the article did provide an invitation to a style of inquiry that a great many have taken to heart. By the early 1970s it was possible for the Norwegian philosopher Arne Naess to proclaim that there are essentially two approaches to environmental issues. What he called “shallow environmentalism” tries to remedy the most obvious damage done by urban industrial society. This approach is directed toward reducing pollution and husbanding resources more intelligently than was done in the recent past. Its central goal, in Naess’ view, is the continuing affluence of the industrialized nations. In contrast, he identifies “deep ecology.” It too is concerned with reducing pollution and wasting of resources, but also seeks an orientation in ethics, politics, and culture that rejects the destructiveness of the urban/industrial way of life to pursue a more positive relationship to the biosphere.<sup>25</sup> A number of attempts have been made to satisfy the desire for a vision of “deep ecology,” theories that range from poetic speculation to tightly reasoned arguments in analytical philosophy. Common to this enterprise, however, and absolutely crucial to its central claims is a defense of biological egalitarianism. Anthropocentric beliefs of “man in nature” and “nature for man” are rejected as pure ignorance; human beings stand as merely one species among millions. There is no good reason to suppose that our species has any special right to rule the rest of creation; nothing but sheer hubris supports that prejudice. The Baconian presumption that humans are rightful conquerors and masters of nature and the Lockean argument that humans have legitimate “property” in the wild are both ideas that must be rejected as perverse overestimates of our worldly status. Even the hopeful view advocated by René Dubos and others that man’s best role would be stewardship over natural creation, a role that finds us actually improving the earth by wise cultivation and engineering, is one that many eco-philosophers find distasteful; “stewardship” represents, they claim, anthropocentric dominance smuggled back into the picture under a more attractive label.<sup>26</sup> Needed instead, they insist, is a truly ecological ethic, one that sees human beings as partners with natural entities—animate and inanimate—all of roughly equal standing. The conception of nature usually favored in this context is, again, that of the “ecosystem” developed in field ecology. But unlike those who take this model primarily as a guide to survival, proponents of deep ecology interpret it as a general framework of social norms carrying the imprimatur of science. Generally recognized as spiritual father of this orientation is game manager and ecologist Aldo Leopold. In the 1940s Leopold announced his reasons for abandoning standard notions of resource conservation. “A system of conservation based solely on economic self-interest is hopelessly lopsided. It tends to ignore, and thus eventually to eliminate, many elements in the land-community that lack commercial value, but that are (as far as we know) essential to its healthy functioning.” As an alternative he proposed an “ecological conscience” and “land ethic” that would change “the role of Homo sapiens from conqueror of the land-community to plain member and citizen of it.”<sup>27</sup> Not content with vague musings about harmony or unity with nature, Leopold tried to define ethical imperatives that stem from an acknowledgment that humans are parts of a complex ecological world of interdependent parts. Foremost among the maxims he formulated is one that specifies, “A thing is right when it tends to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the biotic community. It is wrong when it tends otherwise.”<sup>28</sup> Following this lead, a number of philosophers and scientists have tried to translate the terms of field ecology into a coherent moral philosophy. Undaunted by the possibility that naturalistic fallacies might wreck the quest, many have taken such concepts as entropy, homeostasis, and ecological diversity from scientific disciplines and used them to justify ethical prescriptions. This is not to say that such inquiries have been done in an uncritical way. The enormous literature on environmental ethics contains equally enormous disagreements about which reasons are valid and which are not. For every serious-minded thinker who believes to have discovered the much-desired “new ethic,” there is an equally serious-minded person who denies it. Although eco-philosophers are sometimes criticized as true believers, their discussions contain much less ideological uniformity than, for example, economic approaches to environmental issues. From the standpoint of deep ecology the values of modern society are not so much wrong as they are disoriented. We no longer understand which kinds of natural entities ought to be, in principle, removed from the sphere of economic transactions altogether. We fail to see, for example, that the market value of a mountain filled with minerals is not truly comparable to the intrinsic value that mountain has as part of a wilderness region. Even the distinction between “public interest” as opposed to “private interest” as defined by liberal political economy is of little help in acknowledging and preserving the intrinsic value of natural things. Rigorous arguments to the effect that “animals have rights” and “trees have standing” may begin to restore the ability to achieve a balanced judgment.<sup>29</sup> But for a society that has gotten used to all things as potential commodities to be mined, developed, processed, packaged, marketed, used, and discarded, clearly more would be needed to turn things around than just a new set of clever arguments. That is why the ideas of deep ecology, whatever their philosophical merit may be, are basically appeals to the heart. “I believe in wilderness for itself alone,” one leading spokesman of this perspective exclaims. “I believe in the rights of creatures other than man.”<sup>30</sup> Cares of this kind are expressed in practice in many different ways. Some are content to remain within the framework of existing environmental interest groups, the Sierra Club and Friends of the Earth, for example, working to achieve the more idealistic preservationist goals of those organizations. Others find established channels—election campaigns, legislative lobbying, government policy making, and the like—largely irrelevant. Of these, some devote their efforts to investigations in social theory, utopian fiction, or scientific research that try to describe what a society based upon ecologically sound principles would actually be. Others have gone about forming new communities or reforming old ones in ways that manifest their favored version of this hope. But whatever the specific path chosen, advocates of deep ecology tend to believe that nothing less than the strongest commitment will make any difference at all. If we have no feeling for natural creations outside their instrumental value, there can be little hope for sweeping changes in our culture’s basic environmental posture. And if our concerns here are based only in fears for our own survival, then the changes we might make are less likely to be beautiful than hideous. ## Nature as a Social Category THE IDEAS I have outlined by no means encompass all the positions to be found in contemporary environmentalism; they are best understood as points along a broad spectrum of thought. We have seen enough, however, to understand that serious differences in basic orientation exist in a movement often portrayed as a unified, single-minded whole. My point is not to identify any particular position or group or spokesman as having the greater share of wisdom. Indeed, all three tendencies of mind are often present simultaneously, their conflicts unresolved, in the thinking of individuals and groups who call themselves environmentalists or ecologists. In their most purely ideological moments each of the three dispositions finds much to scorn in one or more of the others. Environmental economics, unmodified by any broader sentiments, has little patience with attempts to defend unquantified, unmonetized, aesthetic values in nature. It tends to be suspicious of the motives of persons who find intrinsic value in the wild. “Being comfortable but not rich,” one particularly cynical book complains, “environmentalists may welcome using other people’s money to keep competitors away from the wilderness.”<sup>31</sup> In turn, many committed ecological survivalists and deep ecologists express their contempt for those who have not embraced what they uphold as the true path. Hence, one prominent eco-philosopher has argued that mere reformist environmentalism is a manifestation of the problem, not its cure. “Environmentalism does not question the most basic premise of the present society, notably, that humanity must dominate nature; rather, it seeks to facilitate that notion by developing techniques for diminishing the hazards caused by the reckless despoilation of the environment.”<sup>32</sup> But when the charges and countercharges subside, one often finds different sides in the debate borrowing each other’s currency. It is common to find that an environmental policy study filled with straightforward utilitarian analyses of environmental topics neverthless begins with a rhapsodic preface that sounds as if it could have been written by Aldo Leopold or John Muir. Similarly, those who hold more radical environmental views often bolster their case with economic arguments, taking pains to describe ways in which endangered plant and animal species might have great practical use. Two writers well known for their strong ecological survivalism try to bolster their case with cash register refrains, arguing that “populations of organisms and entire species are heedlessly being exterminated around the world at an increasing rate . . . with no regard whatever for their potential source of food, fiber, drug, or any of a myriad other useful substances, such as spices, oils, industrial chemicals, hides, and so on).”<sup>33</sup> For a society responsive to commercial values, such arguments may make sense. At the same time, however, they create a disingenuous tone in environmental advocacy. It is as if those who had come to worship at the temple had decided to change a little money on the side. “Nature,” Georg Lukacs once observed, “is a societal category.”<sup>34</sup> That judgment overstates the case, but not by very much. It is certainly true that a material reality with its own inherent properties does exist beyond the human power to investigate, interpret, and manipulate that reality. Nothing the human mind or social institutions accomplish can alter the simple presence of “nature” as a raw “totality of things.” Beyond that brute fact, however, there are enormous possibilities for interpreting nature and society as reciprocal realms of meaning. Again and again one finds that metaphors first used to describe the one are later translated to illuminate the other. In our time discussion about ecology and environment tell us a great deal more about the condition of society than about anything in nature as such. The ecological persuasion, in both its survivalist and deep ecology versions, has challenged an idea long prevalent in Western culture, an idea that portrays nature as an object of control and source of wealth. The alternative model now proposed holds that nature be seen as a system, an incalculably intricate, delicately balanced aggregate of interdependent parts and processes. Offering this idea as a true picture of the world, the ecologist may tend to forget that the model is itself a human creation, an abstract representation of certain kinds of phenomena. This creation itself reflects a great deal about today’s man-made world; in some respects, the ecological model presents a mirror image of advanced industrial society. An ecosystem is a utopia of sorts, doing well what artificial structures do poorly. Thus, the ecosystem manages its complexity in ways that guarantee optimal results; unlike human organizations, there are no wrong-headed decisions to foul things up. Ecosystem change has benign homeostasis as its telos; by contrast, change in modern society produces chaotic disruptions that never cease. The self-governing processes of any ecosystem are a wonder to behold; twentieth-century technological societies often appear beyond governance altogether. As we have seen, this ecological utopia has been employed to justify two distinctly different kinds of social advice. One argument offers the counsel of caution born of fear. What we had thought was a mere border skirmish with nature turns out to be something much more serious, a battle whose outcome is likely to be the destruction of both sides. Faced with the prospect of our own extinction, we humans must now come to our senses and find ways to disarm the powerful weapons poised at the heart of the ecosystem. According to some observers, this will require establishing overwhelmingly strong state control. Another school of thought, however, uses essentially the same conception of nature to offer a counsel of love. In its eyes what is significant about ecosystems is simply that they are good. If we learned to comprehend, respect, and cherish this beneficence, we would discover a fully adequate guide for living. From this vantage point it is not merely a detente in our struggle against nature that is needed, but the widespread adoption of harmonious social patterns that the study of ecology appears to sanction. The reflection of social conditions, issues, policies, and utopias in ideas of the natural is something more easily recognized in earlier periods than in our own. “Nature, red in tooth and claw” where only the fittest survive now seems to us a bizarre distortion from the era of nineteenth-century imperialism and robber baron capitalism. But there may come a time in which our own attempts to live according to ecological principles will seem equally misguided. Today, as in the past, ideas about things natural must be examined and criticized not only for ways they help us understand the material world, but for the quality of their social and political counsel. Nature will justify anything. Its text contains opportunities for myriad interpretations. The patterns noticed in natural phenomena and the meanings given them are all matters of choice. We must learn to read contemporary interpretations of the environment and ecology as we read Hobbes, Locke, or Rousseau on “the state of nature,” to see exactly what notion of society is being chosen. When that is done, nature and social forms can be evaluated separately, a practice that an awareness of many past mistakes strongly recommends. It is comforting to assume that nature has somehow been enlisted on our side. But we are not entitled to that assumption. ## RISK ASSESSMENT: A HAZARDOUS PURSUIT THE MOST PREVALENT way our society explores the possibility of limiting technology is through the study of “risk.” Noting how the broader effects of industrial production can damage environmental quality and endanger public health and safety, risk assessment seeks to perfect methods of evaluation that are at once rigorous and morally sound. This approach appears to offer policy makers a way to act upon the best scientific information to protect society from harm. Indeed, if we define “risk” as everything that could conceivably go wrong with the use of science and technology—a definition that many are evidently prepared to accept—then it seems possible that we might arrive at a general understanding of norms to guide the moral aspects of scientific and technical practice. But the promise of risk assessment is difficult to realize. The arena in which discussions of risk take place is highly politicized and contentious. Specific questions such as those dealing with the safety of nuclear power, as well as more general ones having to do with choosing proper methodologies for studying risks at all, involve high stakes. Powerful social and economic interests are invested in attempts to answer the question, How safe is safe enough? Expert witnesses on different sides of such issues are often best identified not by what they know, but rather whom they represent. Indeed, the very introduction of “risk” as a common way of defining policy issues is itself far from a neutral issue. At a time in which modern societies are beginning to respond to a wide range of complaints about possible damage various industrial practices have on the environment and public health, the introduction of self-conscious risk assessment adds a distinctly conservative influence. By the term “conservative” here I mean simply a point of view that tends to favor the status quo. Although many of those who have become involved in risk assessment are not conservative in a political sense, it seems to me that the ultimate consequence of this new approach will be to delay, complicate, and befuddle issues in a way that will sustain an industrial status quo relatively free of socially enforced limits. It is the character of this conservatism that I want to explore here. ## Hazards and Consensus AS COMPARED TO other varieties of moral and political argument, risk assessment seeks a very narrow consensus. It asks us to evaluate circumstances in which there is some chance, perhaps a very remote chance, of harm from activities that are assumed to be socially beneficial in other respects. If one is able to recognize and care about the possibility of such harm, one is eligible to enter the discussion. No other grounds of agreement are necessary. It does not matter what one’s views on other issues may be, what one thinks about arms control, deficit spending, or abortion, for instance. People who have drastically different views on, say, welfare payments for the poor and virtually every other social question may nevertheless find reason to act together on shared dangers to health and safety. In this respect risk assessment does not seek to provide a general evaluation of the conditions of modern life, as did, for example, liberalism, Marxism, or other broad-scale social theories. It sometimes happens, of course, that the question of risk is formulated as a problem to be discussed within the categories of a more comprehensive theory. A Marxist may reformulate the problem as a wrinkle in the analysis of relations of production; a utilitarian may wish to see it as a source of perplexity in the goal to achieve the greatest good for the greatest number. But such discussions are not prominent in claims and counterclaims about specific hazards. We do not look to debates about DDT, PCBs, air pollution, nuclear power, and the like for a comprehensive grasp of the modern condition. The topic here concerns, as one observer has described it, “making industrialism safe for human life.”<sup>1</sup> But although the consensus that risk assessment seeks is a narrow one, it is potentially very strong. The fundamental issue here is fear—fear of injury, disease, death, and the prospect of having to live in deteriorating surroundings. For that reason arguments about impending dangers are often useful in attempts to unite people who have little in common other than shared fears. Contemporary environmentalism and consumerism have taken advantage of this opportunity to marshal support for their causes. On a much different scale the military has won legitimacy for its multibillion dollar weapons projects by engaging the public’s anxieties about ambiguously defined enemies and the peril of nuclear war. As noted in the last chapter, for stark appreciation of arguments predicated on fear, there is no better counsel than the great political psychologist of dread, Thomas Hobbes. It was Hobbes’ fundamental insight that people who can agree on nothing else will neverthless recognize that they share a morbid fear of physical harm from each other. Even the strongest person in the state of nature is vulnerable to attack in an unguarded moment. When people acknowledge the continuing terror that surrounds them, they will be receptive to entering a compact to establish political society and its reasonable system of authority and obligation. As the first and most brilliant modern writer on risk assessment, Hobbes gives us adequate reasons why people’s fears should never be taken lightly. Numerous examples in the history of modern industrial society lend support to the belief that overtly dangerous applications of new technology will not be long tolerated. Head-on collisions of passenger trains in New England in the mid–nineteenth century called attention to scheduling and communications problems for railroads of the time. The trains in question ran on single lines of track, a situation that made simultaneous two-way traffic a tricky matter even with occasional switchovers. Regulations passed by state legislatures enforced a widely appreciated need for remedies.<sup>2</sup> A similar set of events afflicted the early history of jet airline travel. An unforeseen weakness in the aluminum body of the British Comet caused several of the planes to fall from the sky. Study of the wreckage revealed the problem’s source, and the manufacturer redesigned its planes in response. Thus, the early stages of development of new machines, chemicals, techniques, and large-scale systems frequently involve a period of trial and error in which people are killed or injured. A commonly accepted norm is that obvious sources of harm must be eliminated through either private or public action; otherwise the very usefulness of the device will be called into question. And there are examples of technology— thalidomide is an obvious case—ultimately judged not a tool, but a menace. In fact, the public reponse to dangerous effects of modern technological and industrial systems has often been a stimulus for reform when other sources were weak. Upton Sinclair’s The Jungle (1906) aroused widespread protest about unhealthy conditions in the Chicago stockyards. Investigations by public officials led to new laws and remedies. Sinclair, a socialist, wrote dozens of books decrying the evil effects of capitalism in modern society. None of his later writings, however, was as successful in capturing the popular imagination or in stimulating change than his exposé of the meatpacking industry.<sup>3</sup> From Sinclair’s experience and that of other more recent political activists, it is clear that alarms about particular hazards will engage the public’s imagination where more ambitious, general criticisms do not. Hence, the politics of hazards often becomes a strategic complement for or even an alternative to the politics of social justice. The attempt to parlay the principle salus populi suprema lex into a fullblown political movement has become a familiar approach among contemporary activists. By calling attention to a possible danger, one hopes to attract support for a broader program of social criticism and reform. The alleged danger works as a symbol that may enable people to consider other social maladies, for example, the concentration of institutional power. Thus, the first sentence of Ivan Illich’s Medical Nemesis proclaims, “The medical establishment has become a major threat to health.”<sup>4</sup> Illich’s method is to focus on iatrogenic (physician caused) disease as a way to attract the reader’s attention to his primary concern: the destructive social organization of modern medicine. Clearly, in Illich’s view, this mode of organization— monolithic, bureaucratic, expert centered—is pernicious wherever it occurs. The fact that it is also the source of certain identifiable health problems gives a compelling reason to investigate the problem. Illich seizes upon this fact to instruct his audience about the oppressive social structures of modern life, not just in medicine, but throughout a whole range of institutional settings. Similar approaches are used with varying success by environmentalists, consumerists, and muckraking political journalists. Headline news about dangers to health and safety lend an opportunity to discuss what these observers describe as even more fundamental issues, for example, the need to control the enormous power of large business corporations. Articles and editorials frequently published in The Nation, The Progressive, Mother Jones, or In These Times show this persuasive strategy at work. At one level it is perfectly sound. In a society strongly committed to capitalism as a way of life it is difficult to address the social ills of capitalist practices head on. A more subtle tack is to begin discussing urgent issues that do not appear to have any ideological valence at all.<sup>5</sup> In pointing to this strategy I do not wish to dismiss any of the claims made by these political activists or writers. But it is fair to say that this approach, much like the “efficiency” arguments that radicals sometimes make, is another example of a conceptual Trojan horse. If it were effective to tackle social injustice and the concentration of economic power directly, I suppose we would do it more often. ## Risk and Fortitude BUT AS POLITICAL STRATEGIES sometimes do, this way of addressing social issues can backfire. The rise of risk assessment in the 1970s gave adequate notice that a strong backfire had begun. Questions that had previously been talked about in such terms as the “environmental crisis,” “dangerous side effects,” “health hazards,” and the like were gradually redefined as questions of “risk.”<sup>6</sup> The difference is of no small importance. If we declare ourselves to be identifying, studying, and remedying hazards, our orientation to the problem is clear. Two assumptions, in particular, appear beyond serious question. First, we can assume that given adequate evidence, the hazards to health and safety are fairly easily demonstrated. Second, when hazards of this kind are revealed, all reasonable people usually can readily agree on what to do about them. Thus, if we notice that a deep, open pit stands along a path where children walk to school, it seems wise to insist that the responsible party, be it a private person or public agency, either fill the pit or put a fence around it. Similarly, if we have good reason to believe that an industrial polluter is endangering our health or harming the quality of the land, air, or water around us, it seems reasonable to insist that the pollution cease or be strongly curtailed. Straightforward notions of this kind, it seems to me, lie at the base of a good many social movements concerned with environmental issues, consumer protection, and the control of modern technology. In their own ways, of course, such movements are capable of adding elements of complication to policy discussion, for example, notions of complexity from ecological theory. Typically, however, these complications are ones that ultimately reinforce a basic viewpoint that sees “dangers” to human health, other species, and the environment as grave matters that are fairly easy to understand and require urgent remedies. If, on the other hand, we declare that we are interested in assessing risks, complications of a different sort immediately enter in. Our task now becomes that of studying, weighing, comparing, and judging circumstances about which no simple consensus is available. Both of the commonsense assumptions upon which the concern for “hazards” and “dangers” rely are abruptly suspended. Confidence in how much we know and what ought to be done about it vanishes in favor of an excruciatingly detailed inquiry with dozens (if not hundreds) of fascinating dimensions. A new set of challenges presents itself to the scientific and philosophical intellect. Action tends to be postponed indefinitely. As one shifts the conception of an issue from that of hazard/danger/threat to that of “risk,” a number of changes tend to occur in the way one treats that issue. What otherwise might be seen as a fairly obvious link between cause and effect, for example, air pollution and cancer, now becomes something fraught with uncertainty. What is the relative size of that “risk,” the “chance of harm”? And what is the magnitude of the harm when it does take place? What methods are suited to measuring and analyzing these matters in a suitably rigorous way? Because these are questions that involve scientific knowledge and its present limits, the risk assessor is constrained to acknowledge what are often highly uncertain findings of the best available research. For example, one must say in all honesty, “We don’t know the relationship between this chemical and the harm it may possibly cause.” Thus, the norms that regulate the acceptance or rejection of the findings of scientific research become, in effect, moral norms governing judgments about harm and responsibility. A very high premium is placed on not being wrong. Evidence that “the experts disagree” adds further perplexity and a need to be careful before drawing conclusions. The need to distinguish “facts” from “values” takes on paramount importance. Faced with uncertainty about what is known concerning a particular risk, prudence becomes not a matter of acting effectively to remedy a suspected source of injury, but of waiting for better research findings.<sup>7</sup> An illustration of this cast of mind can be seen in a study done for the Environmental Protection Agency to determine whether or not there were indications that residents of the Love Canal area of New York, an abandoned chemical waste disposal site, showed chromosome damage. The report written by Dante Picciano, a geneticist employed by the Biogenics Corporation of Houston, Texas, drew the following conclusions: “It appears that the chemical exposures at Love Canal may be responsible for much of the apparent increase in the observed cytogenetic aberrations and that the residents are at an increased risk of neoplastic disease, of having spontaneous abortions and of having children with birth defects. However, in absence of a contemporary control population, prudence must be exerted in the interpretation of such results.”<sup>8</sup> Although the chemicals themselves may have been disposed of in reckless fashion, scientific studies on the consequences must be done with scrupulous care. Insofar as law and public policy heed the existing state of scientific knowledge about particular risks, the same variety of caution appears in those domains as well. Frequently augmenting these uncertainties about cause and effect are the risk assessor’s calculations on costs and benefits. To seek practical remedies for man-made risks to health, safety, or environmental quality typically requires an expenditure of public or private money. How much is it reasonable to spend in order to reduce a particular risk? Is the cost warranted as compared to the benefit received? Even if one is able to set aside troubling issues about equity and “who pays,” risk/cost/benefit calculations offer, by their very nature, additional reasons for being hesitant about proposing practical remedies at all. Because it’s going to cost us, we must ponder the matter as a budget item. Our budgets, of course, include a wide range of expenditures for things we need, desire, or simply cannot avoid. Informed about how the cost of reducing environmental risks is likely to affect consumer prices, taxes, industrial productivity, and the like, the desire to act decisively with respect to any particular risk has to be weighed against other economic priorities.<sup>9</sup> A willingness to balance relative costs and benefits is inherent in the very adoption of the concept of “risk” to describe one’s situation. In ordinary use the word implies “chance of harm” from the standpoint of one who has weighed that harm against possible gain. What does one do with a risk? Sometimes one decides to take it. What, by comparison, does one do with a hazard? Usually one seeks to avoid it or eliminate it. The use of the concept of “risk” in business dealings, sports, and gambling reveals how closely it is linked to the sense of voluntary undertakings. An investor risks his capital in the hope of making a financial gain. A football team in a close game takes a risk when it decides to run on fourth down and a yard to go. A gambler at a Las Vegas blackjack table risks his or her money on the chance of a big payoff. In contrast to the concepts of “danger,” “hazard,” or “peril,” the notion of “risk” tends to imply that the chance of harm in question is accepted willingly in the expectation of gain. This connotation makes the distinction between voluntary and involuntary risks outlined in some of the recent literature largely misleading. The word carries a certain baggage, a set of ready associations. The most important of these is the simple recognition that all of us take risks of one kind or another rather frequently. Noticing that everyday life is filled with risky situations of various kinds, contemporary risk assessment has focused upon a set of psychological complications that further compound the difficulties offered by scientific uncertainty and the calculations of risk/cost/benefit analysis. Do people accurately assess the risks they actually face? How well are they able to compare and evaluate such risks? And why do they decide to focus upon some risks rather than others? A good deal of interesting and valid psychological research has been devoted to answering such questions. By and large, these studies tend to show that people have a fairly fuzzy comprehension of the relative chance of harm involved in their everday activities.<sup>10</sup> If one adds to such findings the statistical comparisons of injuries and fatalities suffered in different situations in modern life, then the question of why people become worried about certain kinds of risks and not others becomes genuinely puzzling. 11 The rhetorical possibilities of this puzzle are often seized upon by writers who assert that people’s confusion about risks discredits the claims of those who focus upon the chance of harm from some particular source. Why should a person who drives an automobile, a notorious cause of injury and death, be worried about nuclear power or the level of air pollution? Invidious comparisons of this kind are sometimes employed to show that people’s fears about technological hazards are completely irrational. Hence, one leading proponent of this view argues, “it is not surprising that people with psychological and social problems are unsettled by technological advance. The fears range from the dread of elevators in tall buildings to apprehension about ‘radiation’ from smoke detectors. Invariably, these fears are evidence of displacing of inner anxiety that psychiatrists label as phobic.” The same writer explains that normal folk are able to overcome such phobias by reminding themselves of the incalculable good that modern technologies have brought to all of us. “People of sound mind accept the negligible risk and minor inconvenience that often go hand in hand with wondrous material benefits.”<sup>12</sup> Once one has concluded that reports about technological risks are phobia based, the interesting task becomes that of explaining why people have such fears at all. Tackling this intellectual challenge, anthropologist Mary Douglas and political scientist Aaron Wildavsky have developed a style of analysis based on the assumption that complaints about risk are not to be taken at face value. In their view all reports about environmental risks must be carefully interpreted to reveal the underlying social norms and institutional attachments of those making the complaints. Different kinds of institutions respond to risk in very different ways. For example, entrepreneurs accept many kinds of economic risk without question. They embrace the invigorating uncertainties of the market, the institutional context that gives their activities meaning. In contrast, public-interest organizations of the environmental movement, organizations that Douglas and Wildavsky describe as “sects,” show, in their view, obsessive anxiety about technological risks; the discovery of these risks provides a source of personal commitment and social solidarity the “sects” so desperately need. Are there any environmental dangers in the world that all reasonable people, regardless of institutional attachment, ought to take seriously? Douglas and Wildavsky find that question impossible to answer. The fact that “the scientists disagree” requires us to be ever skeptical about any claims about particular risks. Instead, Douglas and Wildavsky offer the consolations of social scientific methodology to help us explain (and feel superior to) the strange behavior of our benighted contemporaries. 13 Entering thickets of scientific uncertainty, wending our way through labyrinths of risk/cost/benefit analysis, balancing skillfully along the fact/value gap, stopping to gaze upon the colorful befuddlement of mass psychology, we finally arrive at an unhappy destination—the realm of invidious comparison and social scorn. This drift in some scholarly writings on risk assessment finds its complement in the public statements and advocacy advertising of corporations in the oil, chemical, and electric power industries. In the late 1970s the debunking of claims about environmental hazards became a major part of corporate ideology. Closely connected to demands for deregulation and the relaxing of government measures to control air pollution, occupational safety and health, and the like, the “risk” theme in the pronouncements of industrial firms assumed major importance. A typical advertisement from Mobil Oil’s “Observations” series illustrates the way in which popularized risk psychology and risk/cost/benefit analysis can work in harmony. “Risky business,” the ad announces. “Lawn mowers . . . vacuum cleaners . . . bathtubs . . . stairs . . . all part of everyday life and all hazardous to your health. The Consumer Product Safety Commission says these household necessities caused almost a million accidents last year, yet most people accept the potential risks because of the proven benefits. . . . Risk, in other words, is part of life. Fool’s goal. Nothing’s safe all the time, yet there are still calls for a ‘riskfree society.’” Although I have read large portions of the recent literature on energy, environment, consumer protection, and the like, I cannot recall having seen even one instance of a demand for a “risk-free” society. The notion appears only as a straw man in advocacy ads like this one. Its text goes on to evoke a string of psychological associations linked to the experience of “risk” in economic enterprise. “Cold feet. What America does need are more companies willing to take business risks, especially on energy, where the risks are high. . . . We’re gamblers. . . . Taking risks: it’s the best way to keep America rolling . . . and growing.”<sup>14</sup> Poker anyone? There is, then, a deep-seated tendency in our culture to appreciate risktaking in economic activity as a badge of courage. Putting one’s money, skill, and reputation on the line in a new venture identifies that person as someone of high moral character. On the other hand, people who have qualms about the occasional side effects of economic wheeling and dealing can easily be portrayed as cowardly and weak-spirited, namby-pambies just not up to the rigors of the marketplace. Public policies that recognize such qualms can be dismissed as signs that the society lacks fortitude or that the citizenry has grown decadent. Thus, in addition to other difficulties that await those who try to introduce “risk” as a topic for serious political discussion, there is a strong willingness in our culture to embrace risktaking as one of the warrior virtues. Those who do not possess this virtue should, it would seem, please not stand in the way of those who do. ## Avoiding “Risk” BY CALLING ATTENTION to these features in contemporary discussions about risk, I do not want to suggest, as some have done, that the whole field of study has somehow been corrupted by the influence of selfish economic interests.<sup>15</sup> Neither am I arguing that all or most conversations on this topic show a deliberate, regressive political intent. Indeed, many participants have entered the debate with the most noble of scientific, philosophical, and social goals. Much of the analytically solid writing now produced on this topic seeks to strengthen intellectual armaments used to defend those parts of society and the environment most likely to experience harm from a variety of technological side effects.<sup>16</sup> And certainly there are many fascinating issues under the rubric of risk assessment that are well worth pursuing. I can only join in wishing that such clearheaded, magnanimous work flourish. But from the point of view I’ve described here, the risk debate is one that certain kinds of social interests can expect to lose by the very act of entering. In our times, under most circumstances in which the matter is likely to come up, deliberations about risk are bound to have a strongly conservative drift. The conservatism to which I refer is one that upholds the status quo of production and consumption in our industrial, market-oriented society, a status quo supported by a long history of economic development in which countless new technological applications were introduced with scant regard to the possibility that they might cause harm. Thus, decades of haphazard use of industrial chemicals provide a background of expectations for today’s deliberations on the safety of such chemicals. Pollution of the air, land, and water are not the exception in much of twentieth-century America, but rather the norm. Because industrial practices acceptable in the past have become yardsticks for thinking about what will be acceptable now and in the future, attempts to achieve a cleaner, healthier environment face an uphill battle. The burden of proof rests upon those who seek to change long-existing patterns. In this context, to define the subject of one’s concerns as a “risk” rather than select some other issue skews the subsequent discussion in a particular direction. This choice makes it relatively easy to defend practices associated with high levels of industrial production; at the same time it makes it much more difficult for those who would like to place moral or political limits upon that production to make much headway. I am not saying that this is a consequence of the way risk assessment is “used,” although conservative uses of this sort of analysis are, as we have seen, easily enough concocted. What is more important to recognize is that in a society like ours discussions centering on risk have an inherent tendency to shape the texture of such inquiries and their outcome as well. The root of this tendency lies, very simply, in the way the concept of “risk” is employed in everyday language. As I have noted, employing this word to talk about any situation declares our willingness to compare expected gain with possible harm. We generally do not define a practice as a risk unless there is an anticipated advantage somehow associated with that practice. In contrast, this disposition to weigh and compare is not invoked by concepts that might be employed as alternatives to “risk”—“danger,” “peril,” “hazard,” and “threat.” Such terms do not presuppose that the source of possible injury is also a source of benefits. From the outset, then, those who might wish to propose limits upon any particular industrial or technological application are placed at a disadvantage by selecting “risk” as the focus of their concerns. As they adopt risk assessment as a legitimate activity, they tacitly accept assumptions they might otherwise wish to deny (or at least puzzle over): that the object or practice that worries them must be judged in light of some good it brings and that they themselves are recipients of at least some portion of this good. Once the basic stance and disposition associated with “risk” have defined the field of discourse, all the complications and invidious comparisons I have described begin to enter in. Standards of scientific certainty are applied to the available data to show how little we know about the relationship of cause and effect as regards particular industrial practices and their broader consequences. Methods of risk/cost/benefit analysis fill out a detailed economic balance sheet useful in deciding how much risk is “acceptable.” Statistical analyses show the comparative probability of various kinds of unfortunate events, for example, being injured in a skiing accident as compared to being injured by a nuclear power plant meltdown. Psychological studies reveal peculiarities in the ways people estimate and compare various kinds of risks. Models from social science instruct us about the relationship of institutional structures to particular objects of fear. A vast, intricately specialized division of intellectual labor spreads itself before us. One path through this mass of issues is to take each one separately, seeking to determine which standards, methods, findings, and models are appropriate to making sound judgments about problems that involve public health, safety, and environmental quality. For example, one might question how reasonable it is to apply the very strict standards of certainty used in scientific research to questions that have a strong social or moral component. Must our judgments on possible harms and the origins of those harms have only a five percent chance of being wrong? Doesn’t the use of that significance level mean that possibly dangerous practices are “innocent until proven guilty”?<sup>17</sup> Similarly, one might reevaluate the role that cost/benefit analysis plays in the assessment of risks, pointing to the strengths and shortcomings of that method. How well are we able to measure the mix of “costs” and “benefits” involved in a given choice? What shall we do when faced with the inadequacy of our measurements? Are criteria of efficiency derived from economic theories sufficient to guide value choices in public policy? In controversies about the status of the intellectual tools used in decision making, such questions are hotly disputed.<sup>18</sup> But for those who see issues of public health, safety, and environmental quality as fairly straightforward matters requiring urgent action, these exercises in methodological refinement are of dubious value. It is sensible to ask, Why get stuck in such perplexities at all? Should we spend our time working to improve techniques of risk analysis and risk assessment? Or should we spend the same time working more directly to find better ways to secure a beautiful, healthy, well-provided world and to eliminate the spread of harmful residues of industrial life? The experience of environmentalists and consumer advocates who enter the risk debate will resemble that of a greenhorn who visits Las Vegas and is enticed into a poker game in which the cards are stacked against him. Such players will be asked to wager things very precious to them with little prospect that the gamble will deliver favorable returns. To learn that the stacked deck comes as happenstance rather than by conscious design provides little solace; neither will it be especially comforting to discover that hard work and ingenuity might improve the odds somewhat. For some, it is simply not the right game to enter. There are some players at the table, however, who stand a much better chance. Proponents of relaxed government regulations on nuclear power, industrial pollution, occupational safety and health, environmental protection, and the like will find risk assessment, insofar as they are able to interest others in it, a very fruitful contest. Hence, Chauncey Starr, engineer and advocate of nuclear power, is well advised to take “risk” as the central theme in his repertoire of argument. But the likes of David Brower, Ralph Nader, and other advocates of consumer and environmental interests would do well to think twice before allowing the concept to play an important role in their positions on public issues. Fortunately, many issues talked about as risks can be legitimately described in other ways. Confronted with any cases of past, present, or obvious future harm, it is possible to discuss that harm directly without pretending that you are playing craps. A toxic waste disposal site placed in your neighborhood need not be defined as a risk; it might appropriately be defined as a problem of toxic waste. Air polluted by automobiles and industrial smokestacks need not be defined as a “risk”; it might still be called by the old-fashioned name, “pollution.” New Englanders who find acid rain falling on them are under no obligation to begin analyzing the “risks of acid rain”; they might retain some Yankee stubborness and confound the experts by talking about “that destructive acid rain” and what’s to be done about it. A treasured natural environment endangered by industrial activity need not be regarded as something at “risk”; one might regard it more positively as an entity that ought to be preserved in its own right. About all these matters there are rich, detailed forms of discourse that can strengthen our judgments and provide structure for public decisions. A range of theoretical perspectives on environmental protection, public health, and social justice can be drawn upon to clarify the choices that matter. My suggestion is that before “risk” is selected as a focus in any area of policy discussion, other available ways of defining the question be thoroughly investigated. For example, are health and safety hazards that blue-collar workers encounter on the job properly seen as a matter of “risk” to be analyzed independently of directly related economic and social conditions? Or is it more accurate to consider ways in which these hazards reflect a more general set of social relationships and inequalities characteristic of the free enterprise system? One’s initial definition of the problem helps shape subsequent inquiries into its features. If one identified the issue of worker health and safety as a question of social justice, there would be less need to do all of the weighing of probabilities, comparing of individual psychological responses, and performing of other delicate tasks that risk assessment involves. It might still be interesting to do research on levels of air pollution in executive offices as compared to those in factories. Of course, one always wants to have the best scientific information on such issues. But, in all likelihood, such studies would reveal little new or surprising. It is common knowledge that our society distributes wealth, income, knowledge, and social opportunities unequally. To establish that it also distributes workplace hazards inequitably merely amplifies the problem. Those concerned with questions of social justice would do well to stick to those questions and not look to risk analysis to shed much light. My point is, then, that a number of important social and political issues are badly misdefined by identifying them as matters of “risk.” Whenever possible, such misdefinitions ought to be resisted along with the methodological quagmires they entail. This is not to say that there are no issues of broad-scale social policy in which the concept of “risk” is legitimately applied. There are some applications of modern science and technology in which the uncertainty that surrounds suspect practices and their possible effects is so great that “risk” is an entirely suitable name for what is problematic. Recent worries about possible mishaps from the use of recombinant DNA techniques in scientific research and industrial applications seem to me a case in which the term was accurately applied. But there is, in our time, a willingness to cluster an astonishingly large range of health, safety, and environmental problems under this one rubric. Thus, Douglas and Wildavsky, among other observers, rush to the conclusion that all environmentalists ever worry about are “risks.” Misconceptions of that sort are ones we ought to avoid. If the conservative voice in risk assessment were one that counseled us to cherish and preserve those parts of our culture, society, and environment that are genuinely worth saving, then I would, as a devoted conservative, view this work with much hope. Unfortunately, the style of conservatism we all too often find here is in the “damn the torpedoes” tradition of economic and technological thinking. Rather than lead us to devise better ways of expressing caution and care, such thinking often justifies a renewed recklessness. Two kinds of issues in particular strike me as territory that ought to be rescued from this tendency. First is the issue of cases of actual harm— cancer, birth defects, other illnesses, deaths, damaged environments, and the like—obviously connected to profit-making industrial practices, yet sometimes treated as if their reality were merely probabilistic. We may visit the hospitals and gravesites, if we need to. We may wander through industrial wastelands and breathe deeply. But let us not pretend our troubles hinge on something like a gentlemanly roll of the dice or that other people’s sickness and death can be deemed “acceptable” from some august, supposedly “neutral” standpoint. That only adds insult to injury. Finally, there are times in which an issue that urgently needs to be addressed is poorly described (or not described at all) by subsuming it under the category of “risk.” During the past decade or so a number of important items on the public agenda have been affected in this manner. Many of the interesting social problems linked to the development of nuclear power, for instance, have nothing to do with risk as such. But to a large extent the debate over risk and safety formed the range of public discussions on nuclear power to the exclusion of everything else. A similar warping of the public’s attention may well happen on another crucial question now before us. A technology recognized as an example of true risk in one context, rDNA research and development, will be badly misconstrued if it is seen as nothing more than a risk question in another emerging context—public policy on genetic engineering. It is one thing to think about the prospect that a lethal bug might escape from the laboratory and quite another to ponder what it means to assume direct control of the evolution of the human species. Possibilities made available by the new biotechnologies are profound ones. But they are not always questions of risk. It may happen, nevertheless, that because “risk” was the focus of discussions of rDNA research and development in the early years, it will continue to shape discussions on this topic for decades to come.<sup>19</sup> I could see, for example, the application of moral rules of the following kind: unless the development of a new genetic configuration can be shown to involve substantial quantifiable “risk,” the development will be sanctioned for speedy implementation. If that happens, all the shortcomings of risk assessment will return to us with a vengeance. # BRANDY, CIGARS, AND HUMAN VALUES Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall, Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne! [Wall holds up his fingers.] Thanks, courteous wall; Jove shield thee well for this! But what see I? . . . O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss! Curs’d be thy stones for deceiving me! Snout in Midsummer Night’s Dream (5.01.176–183) WE HAVE COME to the last resort. The search for reasonable moral limits to guide technological civilization needs a suitable climax. The concept of “nature” has turned out to be too ambiguous, too slippery to offer much guidance and the notion of “risk” too closely associated with unseemly gambling. The hour is late. Someone suggests I play my trump card. I must begin talking about “values.” In fact, the last resort is often a resort in the most literal sense: a place to vacation. The great minds of science, humanities, business, and university administration gather at a lovely retreat, a secluded country inn, a mansion beside a mountain lake, or a conference center by the sea. Fine food, elegant accommodations, cordial hosts, a crackling fire in the fireplace, and a well-organized program set the stage for what everyone knows will be a memorable occasion. If the guests grow tired of the panel discussions or paneled ceilings, they can always take a stroll through the forest or along the beach. What is the topic this time? “Science and Values”? “Values and the Future”? “Technology Assessment and Human Values”? “Values and the Professions”? Does it matter? Often held up as a source of illumination on the most difficult questions and choices, the concept of “values” is better seen as a symptom of deepseated confusion, an inability to think and talk precisely about the most basic questions of human wellbeing and the future of our planet. In a seemingly endless array of books, articles, and scholarly meetings, the hollow discourse about “values” usurps much of the space formerly occupied by much richer, more expressive categories of moral and political language. The longer such talk continues, the more vacuous it becomes, the further removed from any solid ground. “We begin to exchange set phrases,” Nadezhda Mandelstam once observed, “not noticing that all living meaning has gone from them.”<sup>1</sup> Nowadays we are inclined to believe that there have always been “values” with a long history of discussion about them. But properly speaking, that is false. Of course, people have always had cares, commitments, responsibilities, preferences, tastes, religious convictions, personal aspirations, and so forth. But it is only in relatively recent times that anyone began to see all such things as “values” and lump them together within this one amorphous category. The word “value,” used as a noun, is, of course, a very old English term. It derives from the Latin valere, “to be strong, be of value.” Throughout most of the history of its use, as recorded by the Oxford English Dictionary, the term meant “the worth of something,” for example, the worth of an object in material exchange or the status or worthiness of a person in the eyes of others. In fact, the Oxford English Dictionary mentions no other definition for the noun other than variants of this simple meaning. The term “value” enters social and political thought as a significant concept in the writings of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century political economists, most notably Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and later Karl Marx. In this context “value” meant the worth of a thing in an economic sense. Thus, a theory of value first appears as a development in economics. Later in the nineteenth century the idea of value was investigated by German historians and philosophers, Friedrich Nietzsche most prominently, who expanded and altered its meaning drastically. Here the term, usually mentioned in the plural, was understood to signify the sum total of principles, ideals, desires, and so forth that constitute the basic motivational structure of a person or, indeed, an entire culture. Nietzsche wrote ambitiously of the need for Umwertung aller Werte, the revaluation of all values. It was a task appropriate for modern scientific, industrial society which, in his view, had already succumbed to decadent nihilism. An equally expansive but less pessimistic approach to the topic engaged pragmatist philosophers of the early twentieth century who sought a systematic approach to the study of “values,” hoping it would become an important subspecialty within the study of ethics. Ralph Barton Perry proposed a “general theory of value,” one that tried to give a reasonable account of the full range of human interests. Humanists and social scientists soon joined the discussion, many of them concerned with the supposed distinction between “facts” and “values.” In a world of scientific fact, many of them asked, What are the proper boundaries for “value judgments”? To this day the question bothers social scientists who fear that surreptitious “values” may seep into and undermine otherwise pure empirical research. Others argue that “facts” cannot be separated from “values” in any clear, convenient way and that the attempt to maintain this boundary is a source of many errors in social inquiry. All empirical research rests upon value judgments about which facts are the important ones and how they ought to be studied. Values themselves, similarly, are factual matters rooted in empirical conditions of human living. Given this, the supposed distinction between facts and values falls apart. Virtually unnoticed in the sparks and smoke arising from the controversy about “facts and values,” however, is a fundamental shift in the meaning of the term “value” itself. Where once the term had a clear, simple, objective significance, it is now widely used in a psychological sense. Well into the nineteenth century “value” was taken to be an attribute of something. A person wanted, sought, used, or preserved a thing because it had worth or value. This sense of “value of” is, of course, still one of the proper uses of the term in our language. But it has now been joined by the linguistic fashion of using “value” to describe a purely subjective phenomenon, something in our heads as it were. We now say that individuals, groups, and societies “have values” that influence their activities. Values in this sense are something like general dispositions, which exist within us. Hence, we speak of “human values,” “social values,” “the values of the middle class,” “how modern science changes our values,” and so on. The shift in the use of this term from an objective to a subjective meaning is strongly linked to a change in how we view our situation. Raising the question of value is no longer so much an occasion to think about the qualities of things or conditions outside us. Instead, it is an opportunity to look within, to perform an inventory of emotions. Previously people saw themselves pursuing certain kinds of activities because those activities had value. Now we are more apt to conclude that persons have values that lead them to behave in certain ways. This is a significant change. It affects the very basis of our ideas about what is involved in human action. Signs of this condition can be observed in the way those who employ the concept interpret their own and others’ subjectivity. Speaking of “values” we are led to the almost inevitable conclusion that all such things are personal, arbitrary, irrational sentiments. You have your values, I have mine. Values are, we often hear, mere preferences or “gut responses” and do not allow any reasonable comparison. This view appeared as philosophical doctrine in the writings of positivist philosophers earlier this century. A. J. Ayer, for example, argued in Language, Truth and Logic that all statements about value are deficient as compared to statements about scientific fact because they are nothing more than expressions of emotion. In subsequent philosophical debates that idea was roundly criticized by those who wished to defend the place of reason and objectivity in ethics and politics. But despite this effective counterattack in philosophy, the idea still holds sway in many everyday discussions. People talk as if the world were a kind of values supermarket in which everyone has a shopping cart and selects what he or she wants in accordance with internally held sentiments. Rational criticism at the checkout counter is entirely inappropriate. How can one criticize subjective preferences? Another important consequence of this way of talking and thinking is to exclude much of what was formerly contained in traditional moral and political language. That language includes a rich multiplicity of categories, distinctions, arguments, modes of justification, and areas of sensitivity that are simply overlooked in many contemporary conversations. The category of “values” acts like a lawn mower that cuts flat whole fields of meaning and leaves them characterless. Where previously we might have talked about what was good, worthy, virtuous, or desirable, we are now reduced to speculating about “values.” Where formerly it made sense to speak of rights and attempt to justify claims to those rights, one is inclined to moan plaintively about “values.” Where not too long ago one could make a case for the wisdom of a particular action, one must now show how it matches someone’s “values.” Increasingly rare is the ability to make what were once fairly obvious distinctions and arguments. If there are any distinctions between an opinion and a principle, bias and belief, desire and need, one’s individual interest and what one wishes for the community at large, people are less and less able to make them. Perhaps the most important consequence of this state of affairs is a loss of attention paid to shared reasons for action. When values are looked upon as subjective, it makes little sense to raise questions of why or to ask for reasons. For the answer will inevitably be something like, “Because those are my values and that’s why I’m doing what I’m doing.” When basic moral and political ideas are bypassed with such alacrity, any hope for finding a rational basis for common action vanishes. Skill in making or understanding a complex moral argument becomes yet another of the lost arts. Max Horkheimer once described the decline of an objective sense of truth in the modern age as the “Eclipse of Reason.” But what we encounter today is more accurately called an eclipse of reasons. Examples of the condition I am describing afflict many debates about technology and public policy. Here discussions about “values” become part of attempts to achieve a systematic grasp of major issues of the day. The use of a new chemical or machine or technical process places various “options” before us. There are numerous “costs and benefits,” “risks” and “impacts” that need to be taken into account. We can call upon existing scientific disciplines to provide theories and research findings relevant to an analysis of the issue. But what can help us weigh the various possibilities and come to an intelligent choice? The answer suddenly occurs to someone: social values must be understood in the context of “trade-offs.” There will have to be compromise, give and take. Knowledge about people’s values thus becomes an important “input” to the problem-solving, decision-making process. But how is such knowledge to be obtained? The question has a bitter irony. For it involves nothing less than a desire to reinvent what has in fact already been discarded—a willingness to engage traditional ways of knowing and talking about the substance of social and political life. One solution often given is that social science can provide the missing link. Values can be surveyed, listed, measured, weighed, compared, and correlated to pave the way for our decisions. In the form of scientifically known “data” such values can be “plugged in” to help an otherwise directionless process find its way. Another solution frequently attempted is to employ certain “value experts” for their professional knowledge of such things. For this purpose, philosophers and other humanist intellectuals are often called upon to instruct engineers, planners, and decision makers as to what the “good” values are in our culture and how to maximize them. Of course, approaches of this kind are doomed. The kind of knowledge policy deliberations require is not that which can be generated even by the most sophisticated of surveys, inventories, and weightings, provided by attitude research. The expectation that one can consult experts steeped in tradition, humanists able to deliver what others have forgotten, is a serious misunderstanding of what philosophers, historians, and students of literature have to offer. Those who accept such assignments and try to offer what Steven Marcus has called a “value fix” on our problems find themselves in a ludicrous position. Their role becomes much like that of Snout, the buffoon in Shakespeare’s Midsummer Night’s Dream, who holds up his fingers as the chink in the wall for others to look through. Despite its vacuity as a concept (or perhaps because of it), the notion of “values” plays an important role in the bureaucratic and technocratic vocabulary. Its definition in that lexicon is something like “the residual concerns one needs to ponder after the real, practical business of society has been taken care of.” Talking about or studying social issues needs to be done with the utmost caution; some of them may involve questions distressing to corporate or bureaucratic institutions. This is an especially serious problem when one looks to those institutions as one’s source of funding. By invoking the hollow category of “values,” however, one plays it safe. Government agencies fearful of the smallest signs of controversy can sponsor research on values without much fear of legislative criticism. Academic institutions with conservative faculties and administrators can hold conferences on politically troublesome topics if their sponsors shelter them under the mushy label “human values” rather than referring directly to such topics as social justice or the abuses of power. An interdisciplinary organization of college teachers to which I belong, The Society for Religion in Higher Education, found a prudent way to solve a problem of this sort. During the middle 1970s its leaders sought ways to improve the society’s image by giving it a more contemporary slant. They also hoped to make the society eligible for federal matching grants for its fund-raising drive and were advised that the term “religion” might cause trouble in view of the constitutional separation of church and state. The organization chose a convenient policy, changing its name to The Society for Values in Higher Education. After all, who could possibly object to “values” in higher education? What a masterstroke! And what a great tradition it upholds! The “Ten Values” Moses received from God on Mt. Sinai, Jesus of Nazareth’s “Values on the Mount,” St. Augustine’s treatise The City of Values, Tom Paine’s stirring pamphlet The Values of Man. And who will ever forget Karl Marx’s magnum opus, Capital and Social Values. An interesting feature of a conversation about values is that those who engage in it actually believe they are getting down to the most fundamental issues in human experience. In raising the topic they suppose they are moving away from purely rationalistic, technocratic modes of thinking toward something more warm, caring, and humane. An oft-repeated ritual manifests this care and indicates its level of importance. In the quiet of the evening after a delicious banquet, the scholars and administrators at a conference center by the sea gather for their peak experience. Out comes the brandy. Out come the cigars. And out comes the after-dinner speaker, an old trooper, usually a distinguished scientist or engineer, often someone who helped pioneer an advanced weapons system of some sort, to address his colleagues on “technology and human values.” Typically, he observes that in our rush to achieve scientific and technical progress we have overlooked some very important questions. World hunger is still a dreadful problem. The environment is being damaged by human meddling. And nuclear weapons threaten to destroy all life on the planet. Somehow we need to restore our sense of proportion and make wise choices about how our science and technology are used. In talks such as these it is fashionable to make reference to “human” values, perhaps to distinguish them from the values representative of projects in which the speaker has been engaged until now. He was, it appears, too busy earlier in his career to take such issues seriously. At retirement, however, grave questions about “values” loom large. Having risen to the top of one’s field, a person can begin to wonder about the fate of the planet and its suffering masses. What we see in such instances are signs of thorough disorientation. Our institutions and professional careers are such that they simply do not encourage people to examine some of the most urgent human questions. That is why “values” appears as a hasty afterthought late in the day. In many instances the word “embarrassment” would serve just as well: How about “Science, Technology, and Our Embarrassment” as a title? It has a more honest ring. I would not hesitate to recommend it for those planning academic conferences or interdisciplinary programs for the undergraduate curriculum. One obvious cure for the hollowness of “values” talk is to seek out terms that are more concrete, more specific. Whenever we feel the urge to say “human values” or “social values,” perhaps we should immediately substitute a phrase closer to our intended meaning. If we mean “motives,” then let’s talk about them. If we mean “consumer preferences,” then say so. If we mean “the norms of a particular group in society,” then talk about those. If we mean “general moral principles that ought to guide our action,” then explore, define, and defend those principles. What we will find, I believe, is that these more specific topics are an improvement over the vague label, and that once we’ve begun using them, the word “values” can never again substitute meaningfully for more substantial terms and questions. But this superficial cure sidesteps the larger malady. A great many people, including some with considerable social power, seem to have lost the ability to link the specific, concrete conditions of their own work to any reasonable conception of human well-being. The question just never seems to come up. To remedy that would require a fundamental change in orientation for many organizations, vocations, and professions. We encourage people to become competent in a particular professional field, especially those concerned with inquiry into natural phenomena and the manipulation of material reality. At the same time we allow a scandalous incompetence in dealing with the fundamental, recurring questions of human existence: How are we to live together? How can we live gracefully and with justice? Questions of this nature are not, as some teachers like to tell their students, “soft” ones as compared to the “hard” research questions of science. They are as “hard” and as challenging as any that science could hope to tackle. They are, furthermore, eminently practical, involving the combined practice of ethics, politics, and technology. By their very nature, however, such questions exclude expertise. I am one of those mistakenly called upon to perform in the ludicrous role of “value expert,” and I can testify that the discussions and initiatives we need lie in no one’s domain of specialized knowledge. The inquiry we need can only be a shared enterprise, a project of redemption that can and ought to include everyone. Those who enter that conversation should draw upon the best resources available. Our words need the qualities of precision and depth, resources now threatened by the use of vacuous terms and haphazard thinking. A depleted language exacerbates many problems; a lively and concrete vocabulary offers the hope of renewal. We can still ask, How we are living now as compared to how we want to live? But let us not waste our time with “values.” When you knock on that door, however loudly, no one answers. # THE WHALE AND THE REACTOR DIABLO CANYON in central California was not a place you could easily visit when I was growing up near there in the 1950s. Highway 101 turns inland at that point on the coastline and the road to Avila Beach did not extend northwest to that area. Unless one knew a rancher who owned land along that rugged shore, permission to travel to Diablo Canyon was hard to come by. Thus, one of the most beautiful and forbidding points at which the California mountains meet the sea was cut off from public view. Technological progress, of course, has the ability to open up whole worlds previously shielded from our experience; the development of a scientific instrument or technical project makes it possible to see things we have never witnessed before. It was a visit to the construction site of one such technological wonder, a \$5.5 billion nuclear power plant, that gave me the opportunity several years ago to view Diablo Canyon for the first time. During a vacation in San Luis Obispo I decided to go out to the beaches where I spent my summers as a boy. As I drove along, I was attracted by a sign that announced Nuclear Tourist Information Center. I took the turn and soon found myself seated in a Pacific Gas and Electric Company tour bus listening to a young man talk about the power plant and environs in the upbeat voice used by tour guides from Williamsburg to Honolulu. “On a hill to your right you’ll see the local Buddhist Church,” he exclaimed. “I don’t think it looks particularly oriental, do you?” He was referring to the temple that the Japanese citizens of the community had been able to build after fifteen years of hard work and saving following their release from the “relocation camps” of World War II. It was unsettling to hear the scenes of one’s youth reinterpreted from a well-rehearsed, but largely ignorant public relations point of view. As an example of excellence in highway engineering, the winding road to the reactor was fascinating. To handle the weight of the enormous equipment that had to pass over the hills, the roadbed had been laid almost completely level. It had none of the normal angular banking in its turns so that the trucks carrying heavy pieces of the plant would avoid tipping over. I noticed the guide taking special care with his driving, for the wrong momentum on any of the corners might send the bus plummeting into the sagebrush at the bottom of a ravine. As we made the half-hour journey to the site, we were regaled with stories about the economic benefits that the reactor would bring to the community, especially the many new jobs. But just after the guide had explained that virtue of the project he directed our attention to a construction facility at the side of the road, a totally automated cement-making factory which, he noted proudly, was operated by “only one man.” Feelings of anticipation swelled in me as the bus rolled to the top of the last hill separating us from our view of the Diablo Canyon site. As it reached the summit of a small plateau, I looked out over a vista that sent me reeling. Below us, nestled on the shores of a tiny cove, was the gigantic nuclear reactor, still under construction, a huge brown rectangular block and two white domes. In tandem the domes looked slightly obscene, like breasts protruding from some oversized goddess who had been carefully buried in the sand by the scurrying bulldozers. A string of electric cables suspended from high-energy towers ran downhill, awaiting their eventual connection to the power plant. In the waters just off shore lay two large rocks surrounded by a blanket of surf, as elegant in appearance as any that one can find along the Pacific coast. One of them, Diablo or “Devil’s” Rock, loomed as a jagged pinnacle. Next to it, not too far away, was a smaller but even more finely sculptured piece of stone, Lion Rock, which looked very much like a lion at rest or, more accurately, like the Sphinx itself reclining on its haunches, paws outstretched on the surface of the ocean, silently asking its eternal question. At precisely that moment another sight caught my eye. On a line with the reactor and Diablo Rock but much farther out to sea, a California grey whale suddenly swam to the surface, shot a tall stream of vapor from its blow hole into the air, and then disappeared beneath the waves. An overpowering silence descended over me. In “The Virgin and the Dynamo” Henry Adams tells of an epiphany he experienced during his visit to the Great Exposition in Paris in 1900. As he gazed upon the forty-foot dynamo, Adams sensed something more than the power of the mechanical accomplishment: “the dynamo became a symbol of infinity.” He began to feel the machine “as a moral force, much as the early Christians felt the Cross. . . . Before the end, one began to pray to it; inherited instinct taught the natural expression of man before the silent and infinite force.” From these feelings of awe and mystery Adams was able to formulate a “law of acceleration” in human history, one that he believed could explain the increasingly complexity and rate of change in civilization.<sup>1</sup> My own epiphany when confronted with the nuclear dynamo did not suggest anything as grand as a law of historical development. But that moment at Diablo Canyon crystallized a lifetime of experience. I suddenly realized how I had ended up at certain destinations that had long puzzled me. A decade and a half earlier I had left San Luis Obispo to attend college. In the midst of my reading of history, politics, and philosophy I found myself drawn, quite unexpectedly, to questions concerning technology. I began to explore how changes in various technological systems affect the quality of personal and public life; how people make choices in technology as well as those instances in which they report that they have no choice, that things are “out of control”; how modern societies struggle with the question of limits; how social and political theorists have tried to come to terms with the dilemmas science and technology pose. This book is a product of that ongoing fascination. Of course, the arguments, analyses, and observations anyone makes in his research and writing must stand or fall on their own merits. A writer must recognize normal standards of scholarly objectivity, give adequate evidence to back up assertions of fact, and proffer arguments in an unbiased, logical way. Observing such standards one says, in effect, what I offer is reliable; any reasonable person equipped with the same points of evidence and logic ought to arrive at similar conclusions. But as important as these standards are, they leave two fundamental questions unanswered. Where does my own personal interest in these topics come from? Why have I chosen to approach them in the way I have? These are not questions scholars usually ask. A legitimate fear that one’s work will be dismissed if it is afflicted by “subjectivity” leads many people to write with as little personal character or self-reference as possible. The “I” vanishes from the written page altogether. Personal experiences and judgments, even those relevant to the topic at hand are scrupulously avoided. The most intimate variety of self-reference that the prevailing style of scholarly writing allows is contained in the comforting phrase, “Our findings show that . . .” Yes, here are people we can trust. But it seems to me that writers owe their readers something more. To be self-reflective, self-critical about the substance and method of one’s thinking can help resolve puzzles that readers have about a work and its relationship to their own sense of things. I do not favor personal confessionals for their own sake, but, when all is said and done, books have intensely personal origins. Communities are shaped by the shared experiences of the people in them. To talk about these experiences directly may help reveal the ideas and sensibilities we hold in common. There was a time when I thought the origins of my own interest in technology and politics could be found in my undergraduate years. Under the leadership of President Clark Kerr, The University of California had defined itself as a vast research, training, and social service “multiversity.” Kerr had identified the new role of higher education as that of catering to the various organized interests in society who need scientific knowledge and trained personnel if they are to function efficiently. His views on the nature of modern society were outlined in a book, Industrialism and Industrial Man, which described the progress of industrialism as an overwhelming historical juggernaut that refashions the whole world to suit its purposes.<sup>2</sup> But his message took on a new significance in the fall of 1964 when, in the heat of the civil rights movement and the Johnson/Goldwater presidential campaign, the university banned all political advocacy on the Berkeley campus. In that light, Clark Kerr’s eagerness to link the practices of education to the conditions of industrial society, that is, advanced capitalism, seemed completely reprehensible to those students who, like myself, had gone to college to discover the joy of learning, the life of the mind. For those of us involved in the demonstrations and heated debates of the Free Speech Movement, the issues were not only those of civil liberties and civil rights. A great many were also concerned about the character of institutions, such as ours, that seemed to have committed themselves to an authoritarian, technocratic path. My personal misgivings at that time were soon amplified by experiences in the mid-1960s during two summers as a student intern at the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. On my first day at work, my boss, an army colonel, informed me that I was to become, of all things, a “systems analyst.” From there on I received a steady diet of the techniques and accompanying jargon of such things as “planning, programming, and budgeting” and “program evaluation and review technique” that, under the leadership of Robert S. McNamara, were supposed to modernize and improve our nation’s defense. The impressive rationality of it all stood in marked contrast to the senseless, bloody war then escalating rapidly in Southeast Asia. It became clear to me that an important function of the fancy computer models and convoluted technical language was sheer obfuscation. Decisions made on grounds of political expediency were justified as if judgments commanded by the most rigorous scientific analysis. I resolved to go on to graduate school to study the nature and significance of this strange new tendency in modern thought. But as important as the embattled multiversity and Pentagon were in my undergraduate years, they were not, I later came to realize, the origin of my interest in technology and the modern predicament. The chance juxtaposition of the whale and reactor that day at Diablo Canyon opened my eyes to the fact that this fascination had much earlier sources. Here were two tangible symbols of the power of nature and of human artifice: one an enormous creature swimming gracefully in a timeless ecosystem, the other a gigantic piece of apparatus linked by sheer determination to the complicated mechanisms of the technological society. The first offered an image of things as they had always been, the other an image of things as they were rapidly coming to be. I realized that somehow I’d gotten caught in the middle. After long wanderings I’d returned to find the essence of the predicament I had been studying where I’d least expected it—in my own backyard. My hometown, it is important to note, is situated almost exactly halfway between two large urban centers, San Francisco and Los Angeles, about two hundred and fifty miles from each. During the decade and a half that followed World War II the bucolic environment of San Luis Obispo was shaken again and again by technological and social transformations that seemed to emanate from one city or the other, or both. In a few short years the town witnessed the coming of freeways, supermarkets, jet airplanes, television, guided missiles (which I could watch from my front yard as they were shot from Vandenberg Air Force Base), computers, prefabricated houses in large tracts, wonder drugs, food additives, plastics, and a great many other innovations. The shape of the home and the activities of the family were refashioned to accommodate the arrival of all kinds of electronic gadgets. My parents still tell the story of buying a television set in 1953 in order to lure their two children back home, since my brother and I had gone off to watch Buck Rogers and the Cisco Kid on television at the neighbors’ house across the street. I have vivid memories of the day I was playing in the huge field back of our house and was surprised to see a bulldozer begin pushing its way up the hill, the first piece of earth-moving equipment that eventually carved a four-lane freeway through the center of town. It was, in the most literal sense, the machine in the garden. Many of the developments of those years were unquestionably beneficial. The Salk vaccine, for example, ended the horrible fear of what was then called “polio season,” during which people had to be careful about going to the movies and other public places for fear of catching poliomyelitis. But many other innovations—changes in the texture of the natural and social landscape—were of dubious value and adopted with astonishing recklessness. It was this tendency of our California community to accept radical transformations of its way of life, to accept sweeping changes generated from far-away sources with little discussion, deliberation, or thought to the consequences that I now see as something truly astonishing. We were technological somnambulists wandering through an extended dream. Much of this sleepwalking was, in retrospect, a product of pure innocence and ignorance. For instance, when I was a boy, my parents and I used to engage in a wonderful ritual of buying shoes. One of the things I liked best about it was that as you were being fitted, you walked over to a little machine, stepped onto a platform, and stared into an eyepiece that enabled you to take a long look right through the Buster Brown shoes and into your feet. It was a fluoroscope, a commercial X-ray machine, and we all thought it was just marvelous. Of course, you do not see the shoe store flouroscope anymore, and not because it’s gone out of fashion. Children like me were being exposed to potentially hazardous amounts of radiation that might well have caused damage to the growth of bones in our feet. The machines operated at too high an intensity, were uncontrolled in the length of X-ray exposure, and actually provided little information that would assist in the fitting of shoes. I remember that I would sometimes gaze at the bones in my feet for minutes on end. Of course, everything and everyone around me in those days tended to inspire a fast belief in the religion of progress. Modern was always thought to be superior to “old fashioned.” The pattern, however, was certainly not one of tailoring technology to suit human needs. Instead, the practice was that of renovating human needs to match what modern science and engineering happened to make available. If there were problems encountered in following this path, they could be taken up later. But during this time the slogan was, in effect, “We don’t know where we’re going, but we’re on our way.” In this light, another item that became exciting during the 1950s was ordinary soap. “Aren’t you glad you use Dial Soap? Don’t you wish everybody did?” the advertisement asked cheerfully. “It’s the soap with hexachlorophene.” Hexachlorophene is an antibacterial agent also added at the time to a cleanser called pHisoHex, which was thought to be especially good for the heartache of acne pimples. Hexachlorophene was used in these products as a matter of course for many years, but not any longer. In France in the early 1970s many infant deaths were linked to powders with high levels of hexachlorophene in them. At about the same time laboratory studies in the United States revealed that monkeys bathed in pHisoHex for five minutes daily over a period of time developed brain abnormalities. In September of 1972 the Food and Drug Administration required that hexachlorophene be available in prescription products only. During the post–World War II era, in a sense all of us became unwitting subjects for a vast series of biological and social experiments, the results of which became apparent very slowly. Food additives—preservatives, coloring agents, and the like were added to the food we eat. Atmospheric nuclear bomb testing raised the level of radiation we encounter in a lifetime. Pesticides, herbicides, chemical fertilizers, and industrial pollutants were spread into the environment with abandon and now are present in our food and water supply. It should have been no surprise that the bad news about such substances as DDT, PCB’s, PBB’s, and saccharin has dismayed people. “Everything causes cancer, so why bother.” As a proclamation of defiance, many are prepared to say they don’t care what the best scientific studies show about the possible carcinogenic properties of some artificial sweeteners: they want those sweeteners in their Coke and coffee anyway. They have gotten used to having the benefits of technological conveniences without expecting to pay the costs. Of course, if anyone had bothered to notice, it should have been obvious that a price for “progress” was being paid all along. It was often a very subtle price, a barely recognizable price, but a real one nevertheless. In an earlier chapter I described it as a distinctive process, an alteration in forms of life. An entity well established in a particular sphere of practice, thoroughly useful, rich in its complex relationships within a given environment but not rigorously planned or rationally arranged, encounters a highly productive technology with a rationalized complexity of its own. More often than not the entity less well developed in an instrumental sense —the one less efficient, less productive—must yield. Its previous structure may make sense within the broader spectrum of life’s activities but fail utterly under criteria used to judge the best available performance in a narrowly defined area of production. The structure of the entity—whether it be an implement, a commonly used product, a way of speaking, a way of thinking, a mode of activity, a pattern of work, a long-standing social institution, or custom—is interrupted and restructured to suit the requirements of the new arrangement of which it is to become a part. Or it is simply replaced by different apparatus and a different form of life. What is cut out in this process of increasing technical refinement, what is lopped off, inadvertently damaged, or permanently excluded may never reach anyone’s awareness. Even if decision makers become aware of what is happening, their best calculations of cost/risk/benefit may indicate the price is well worth it. An urban renewal high rise is better than an old, decaying section of the city; prepackaged frozen foods are preferable to those prepared by traditional methods; computerized education is an advance over the old-fashioned methods of teaching and learning; the seven or eight hours Americans spend watching television each night are an improvement over whatever they did previously. Such qualitative transformations of the human world present a range of issues that are among the most interesting and most urgent of our times. Will our impressive scientific and technical powers produce a world genuinely superior to that which came before? Or will we be stuck with an accumulation of harebrained, slipshod renovations that destroy far more than they improve? Questions of this kind are central to the most penetrating critiques of our technopolitan culture. But such issues are usually the very last ones to enter the minds of the businessmen, technical professionals, politicians, and others directly responsible for guiding the process of change. Increasingly, they place their faith in a range of techniques that promises practical results and quick profits while disregarding everything else. They know how to ask, Where’s the bottom line? But they increasingly disregard a question each generation neglects at its peril, Where’s the top line? What is the best of which our society is capable? Reflecting on it now, I can identify many early experiences that eventually led me to conclude that when it comes right down to it, no one’s minding the store. I remember that at a fairly young age I began wondering why it was that so many of the things presented as improvements were actually inferior to the things they replaced. In a wide variety of developments I watched from about 1950 onward, the claims made about modernization could not conceal the fact that pleasant, useful, and often beautiful qualities were simply missing from the new products. Attractive wooden buildings that showed the character of the human imagination and the carpenter’s hand were replaced by flimsy stucco tract homes and apartment buildings. Land that was among the most fertile in the United States was paved over for highways, shopping centers, and motels. Even the roads, which in their primitive two-lane versions had paid some respect to the contours of the hills and placement of older houses and farms, with the coming of high-speed four-lane freeways began to slice directly through whatever stood in their paths: groves of ancient oak trees, whole neighborhoods, landmarks a hundred years old. “That’s progress,” people would say; or “You can’t stop progress.” They certainly did believe these changes were for the better, but they also believed that somehow the process was beyond their control. They were mere spectators, consumers of change. One innovation typical of the ways in which new technical/rational processes affected the qualities of things could be noticed in the food. In a dairy community such as San Luis Obispo milk was delivered to each household’s front door in glass bottles with cream floating on the top. Dairies in the area were especially proud of the creaminess of the milk they produced. Occasionally the newspaper would carry a story about a local cow that had broken the world’s butter fat record. All of this, of course, was before the coming of the numerous refinements that have permanently changed the appearance, texture, and taste of milk products. In the practice dairy companies now follow, milk from the farm is taken to large processing centers that break the substance down into its basic components. Then, as the specific product requires, the various elements are resynthesized to make whole milk, nonfat milk, 2% low-fat milk, cheese, cottage cheese, ice cream, yogurt, etc. This is, I am sure, an extremely rational, efficient, and healthful way of doing things. But somehow the taste, texture, appearance, and complex combination of all those qualities shows something lacking in the products that undergo the process. Perhaps the most remarkable of all is the variety of ice cream which, through the miracles of modern chemistry, refuses to melt; it just sits there, gets warmer, and holds its shape. Transformations such as those in the economic and technical organization of the dairy business were sometimes accompanied by advertising campaigns that were, in retrospect, as much a way of winning public support as they were to sell products. During an evening in the mid-1950s I sat on the floor in the middle of the living room watching television. All of a sudden there appeared on the screen a new commercial: vivid, slick, and impressive. It was a musical cartoon featuring, of all things, a black-andwhite spotted cow with a broad smile on its face and wheels instead of hoofs. A catchy tune played in the background as it rolled over hill and glen on little railroad tracks whistling like a locomotive rather than mooing like a cow. The point of it all was to introduce the television audience to a powerful new force in the California economy: Foremost Dairies. Foremost, it turned out, had recently bought out a whole collection of local dairy concerns and was bringing us the new forms of mass production, mass distribution, cardboard throw-away containers, and that most peculiar of social fetishes, “convenience.” I remember being completely thrilled by the whistling cow and proud to see that progressive company come to our town. And it was shortly thereafter that for reasons nobody seemed very clear about, milk products and dairying as a way of life changed for good. In our society’s enthusiasm to rationalize, standardize, and modernize, it has often thoughtlessly discarded qualities that it might, on more careful reflection, have wanted to preserve. Our institutions have engaged in a continuing process of reverse adaptation, in which things are reshaped to suit the technical means available. From almost every important sign it appears that this process still moves ahead relentlessly and without limit. Just as Henry Adams recognized a law of acceleration as he confronted the dynamo, my experience at Diablo Canyon suggested an obvious pattern of events. If there is a distinctive path that modern technological change has followed, it is that technology goes where it has never been. Technological development proceeds steadily from what it has already transformed and used up toward that which is still untouched. Thus, as one drives from Los Angeles to San Luis Obispo and on to San Francisco, one senses a certain inevitability in the way the landscape is going to change. People from Los Angeles and the Bay Area, from Boston and Newark, will go searching for greener pastures, for places to develop, places to retire. More and more of the countryside will be torn up, paved over, and “improved.” Few people are capable of acknowledging an obvious fact: Americans now value countryside according to the extent to which it has not been despoiled by reckless economic and technological exploitation. Having ruined the natural and human ecology of the places they came from, they move on to begin the process anew. Of course, this process is not confined to geographical places. The gene pool itself is the obvious next target for innovation and development. Everyone’s hometown, I suppose, contains a monument or two to this remarkable progression. Mine just happens to be San Luis Obispo, one of the settlements founded by Father Junipero Serra during the late eighteenth century as he worked to secure coastal California for the Church and the Spanish Crown. In point of fact, Mission San Luis Obispo was the place of an interesting technical breakthrough that greatly enhanced Serra’s accomplishments. Originally, the roofs of mission buildings were made of dry tule thatch. These, however, were easily torched by local Indians who fought the coming of the white man’s religion, military troops, regimented labor, and other features of civilization. In 1790, after repeated Indian attacks and disastrous fires, the missionaries at San Luis Obispo discovered a way to eliminate the problem of flaming arrows, building roofs with locally produced tiles similar to ones they remembered from Spain. That was the beginning of the end of native American resistance in California. To be more accurate, it was a step toward the eventual extinction of those people. At present, the Vatican is studying Father Serra’s qualifications to see if he will become the first North American priest to achieve sainthood. \* \* \* Although I had known some of the details of the planning and construction of the Diablo Canyon reactor, I was truly shocked to see it actually sitting near the beach that sunny day in December. As the grey whale surfaced, it seemed for all the world to be asking, Where have you been? The answer was, of course, that I’d been in far-away places studying the moral and political dilemmas that modern technology involves, never imagining that one of the most pathetic examples was right in my hometown. My experience with the reactor itself, seeing it at a particular time and place, said infinitely more than all of the analyses and findings of all the detailed studies I had been reading ever could. About that power plant, of course, the standard criticisms of nuclear power certainly hold. It does pose the dangers of catastrophic nuclear accident similar to the one at Three Mile Island. Certainly it will produce routine releases of low-level radiation and thermal pollution of the surrounding ocean water. No one has developed a coherent plan for storing the long-lived radioactive wastes that this plant and others like it will generate. Already ten times more costly than originally estimated, its \$5.5 billion price tag does not include the tens of millions of dollars it will cost to decommission the thing when its working life has ended. From the point of view of civil liberties and political freedom, Diablo Canyon is a prime example of an inherently political technology. Its workings require authoritarian management and extremely tight security. It is one of those structures, increasingly common in modern society, whose hazards and vulnerability require them to be well policed. What that means, of course, is that insofar as we have to live with nuclear power, we ourselves become increasingly well policed. Sophisticated arguments pro and con on issues of this kind have involved some of the best minds in America. I take these analyses and quantitative demonstrations very seriously. How can one do otherwise? After all, one of the reasons Diablo Canyon was chosen as a site for a nuclear power plant was that studies showed it to be one of the few places on the California coast free from the danger of earthquakes. Even some environmentalist organizations approved the site as an exemplary choice for that reason. Unfortunately, later geological findings proved the conclusion erroneous; there is actually an active earthquake fault located just offshore. Researchers have now turned to a fascinating new question, How large will the earthquakes be?<sup>3</sup> But beyond the sophisticated studies of scientists and policy analysts concerned with these issues lies another consideration, which, if we ever become incapable of recognizing it, will indicate that our society has lost its bearings, that it is prepared to feed everything into the shredder. To put the matter bluntly, in that place, on that beach, against those rocks, mountains, sands, and seas, the power plant at Diablo Canyon is simply a hideous mistake. It is out of place, out of proportion, out of reason. It stands as a permanent insult to its natural and cultural surroundings. The thing should never have been put there, regardless of what the most elegant cost/benefit, risk/benefit calculations may have shown. Its presence is a tribute to those who cherish power and profit over everything in nature and our common humanity. To write any such conclusion in our time is, I realize, virtual heresy. My colleagues in the science, technology, and society assessment business often counsel me to be more careful, to reword my point of view to say, “We must now consider the possibility that in proceeding along this path we risk losing something of inestimable value that we may later begin to miss.” But the plant and its inherent destructiveness are already much more than “possibilities.” They are already in place. More and more the whole language used to talk about technology and social policy—the language of “risks,” “impacts,” and “trade-offs”—smacks of betrayal. The excruciating subtleties of measurement and modeling mask embarrassing shortcomings in human judgment. We have become careful with numbers, callous with everything else. Our methodological rigor is becoming spiritual rigor mortis. At this writing construction of the first of two nuclear reactors at Diablo Canyon is finished. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has granted a full power license and the plant has begun generating electricity for the first time. Discovery of the nearby earthquake fault along with embarrassing disclosures of structural flaws and shoddy workmanship forced a thorough, enormously costly rebuilding of the plant during the last several years of the project. Some of the plant’s engineers and workers still insist that the structure is unsound and complain that they have been harassed on the job for talking to the press about these troubles. To recoup the spiraling costs of the installation, the Pacific Gas and Electric Company has already applied to the Public Utilities Commission for the first of what is bound to be a series of steep rate increases. During public protests of the early 1980s, several thousand demonstrators were arrested at the gates of Diablo Canyon. With the completion of the plant and its licensing by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the protests have dwindled. A number of citizens’ action groups have vowed to exhaust every legal alternative in opposing the reactor’s operation through the courts. Always sensitive to public fears and pressures, Pacific Gas and Electric has renamed its visitors’ bureau near Avila Beach the Energy Information Center, cleverly deleting all reference to the word “nuclear.” George Orwell’s Newspeak could have done no better. While the conservative-minded residents of San Luis Obispo and surrounding communities are reluctant to protest or file suit, a great many of them feel they have been swindled and endangered by the coming of this ghastly new neighbor. In every sense short of a meltdown, Diablo Canyon is already a disaster. Two years after my epiphany I was invited back to my hometown to give a lecture on technology and the environment. During the talk I argued that while Diablo Canyon was not a very good place for a reactor, it would still be a wonderful spot for a public park. Rather than start up the plant, I suggested, the community ought to take it over, dedicating it as a monument to the nuclear age. For generations thereafter parents could take their children to the place, have leisurely picnics on the beach, and think back to the time when we finally came to our senses. Of course, my modest proposal was not taken seriously; too much money had already been spent, too much institutional momentum built up, too many careers invested, too many sermons preached from the pulpits of progress to allow any course of action that sensible. At present our society seems to prefer monuments of a different kind—monuments to gigantism, war, and the overstepping of natural and cultural boundaries. Such are the accomplishments we support with our dollars and our votes. How long will it be until we are ready for anything better? ## BEYOND TECHNO-NARCISSISM: SELF AND OTHER IN THE DIGITAL PUBLIC REALM THE CREATION OF the Internet as a widely available means of communication in the early 1990s and its rapid development in decades since have inspired waves of enthusiasm about the creation of new public spaces, digital domains that many observers believed would expand and enhance citizen participation in political discussions and civic activities. Beyond the impressive transformations that networked communications brought to the world’s economic, social, and cultural institutions, it was conceivable that a marvelous revitalization in democratic politics would take shape as people found their way onto the Internet and began using its powers to express their ideas, needs, demands, and practical proposals. While many names were invented for these glorious possibilities— cyberspace, information society, infobahn, network society, and others—by the end of the second decade of the twenty-first century a widely shared label was simply “social media.” It pointed to the activities of billions of people on prominent digital platforms around the globe—Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, YouTube, and others. Thus, it seemed that the wonderful dream of a public realm revitalized by the gift of digital technology might well come true. ## Democracy Reborn? AMONG WRITINGS THAT explored the economic, cultural, and political possibilities of the Internet, perhaps the most systematic and forwardlooking is The Wealth of Networks by social scientist and philosopher Yochai Benkler.<sup>1</sup> The book describes a fundamental shift within the information economy of modern society as a whole. Benkler notes that during most of the past 150 years information systems were structured by the “industrial model,” in which production was capital intensive, heavily centralized, market oriented, and rooted in notions of private property. A stultifying consequence of this model, he argues, was to limit personal freedom and drastically curtail possibilities for social cooperation as workers entered the marketplace.<sup>2</sup> Often overlooked but always side-byside with this model was an older, even deeper set of historical practices that relied on a quite different set of human relationships: “Education, arts and sciences, political debate, and theological disputation have always been much more importantly infused with nonmarket motivations and actors than, say, the automobile industry.”<sup>3</sup> Given an opportunity to do so, people have often employed methods that rely on individual initiative, social collaboration, sharing, and communal creativity. What happened in the 1980s and 1990s, Benkler observes, is that the capital requirements of an information economy shifted. “The declining price of computation, communication, and storage [has] . . . placed the material means of information and cultural production in the hands of a significant fraction of the world’s population.”<sup>4</sup> Thus, as the costs of digital technology steadily decline, opportunities for a multitude of cooperative activities can rapidly expand, beyond the strictures of private property. Crucial in Benkler’s view are the ways in which large numbers of people from different locations and from different walks of life have seized on the opportunities presented by the Internet to devise new ways of working together and new modes of self-expression and community life. Among the new tools for effective, large-scale cooperation are file sharing; peer production (e.g., Wikipedia); new vehicles for news and commentary; new business models; new relationships between musicians, artists, and their audiences—the list goes on and on. Benkler draws upon a wide range of examples to clarify the social benefits of this new economy. But perhaps most important in his view are the ways in which an emergent “networked public sphere” offers opportunities for the revitalization of the basic practices of liberal democracy. He writes, “In the networked information environment, everyone is free to observe, report, question, and debate, not only in principle, but in actual capability. . . . We are witnessing a fundamental change in how individuals can interact with their democracy and experience their roles as citizens.”<sup>5</sup> He argues that citizens are no longer put in the position of passively watching the news. No longer are they dependent on professional journalists or the judgments of media managers. Beyond the lures of consumerism and mass media entertainment lies a revitalized public realm, an Internet-centered democracy open to everyone. It is important to note that as Benkler describes these developments, he explicitly refuses to endorse any form of technological utopianism or technological determinism. Not at all a prerequisite somehow embodied within the hardware or software of digital networks, the beneficial qualities of the network spring forth as an unanticipated gift to citizens everywhere. He concludes, “There is no inevitable historical force that drives the technological-economic moment toward an open, diverse, liberal equilibrium.”<sup>6</sup> The outcome might have been otherwise. In fact, Benkler notes, even now there are recurring attempts to put the genie back in the bottle, to move the new information economy back into the old industrial model—centralized, proprietary, bureaucratized, permission-based forms of organization on which the large media firms rely. His misgivings on this score echo the analyses of media scholars Robert McChesney and Tim Wu, who have shown how earlier media technologies—radio and television, for example—were praised in their early stages for the open, communitarian, democratic possibilities they offered society, and how they eventually yielded to the domination of large, centralized, money-seeking, corporate organization and control.<sup>7</sup> Given the demise of citizen-centered creativity within these earlier episodes in the history of electronic media, hopes for different outcomes in the evolution of computer networks fall under an ominous shadow. Indeed, during the years that followed the publication of The Wealth of Networks, the patterns of monopoly control and oligarchical power that afflicted earlier forms of electronic communication began to characterize the platforms of digital networking as well. Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and Amazon have achieved unparalleled dominance, handily eluding the infrequent, feeble, fumbling government attempts to regulate their expansion and conditions of operation. While the open, cooperative, artistic, cultural, and civic activities Benkler extols can still be detected in secluded corridors of the Internet, they are relatively insignificant within the vast, deeply rooted institutions that now govern most of what happens in people’s daily experience of computing power. Beyond the obvious dangers to democracy presented by dominant monopolies in communication and political oligarchy, one finds new Internet-centered maladies that threaten to undermine the most basic institutions and practices of governance. Within the settings provided by social media platforms, there has arisen a growing collection of ingenious malefactors deploying well-orchestrated campaigns of targeted messaging and “computational propaganda” on news feeds to infect and subvert what had earlier been celebrated as revitalized processes of democratic participation. By deploying surreptitious “troll farms” with large staffs of message makers along with extensive aggregations of computerized “bots” able to mimic human communications, bad actors can tune the content of politically relevant messages on the Internet from distant locations to influence national elections and policy debates. This power stems from the collection and manipulation of the personal data of millions of individual users of Internet platforms, persons who regularly, often unthinkingly, sign away the right to protect the data kept on the views, preferences, and activities they express online. Using such personal data, companies such as Cambridge Analytica were evidently able to target specific blocs of voters, tipping the balance of the 2016 presidential election in Donald Trump’s favor.<sup>8</sup> Pointing to vulnerabilities and attacks on Facebook and elsewhere that now characterize the infosphere, computer security professional Bruce Schneier warned the U.S. Congress that “the internet era of fun and games is over, because the internet is now dangerous.”<sup>9</sup> A fundamental peril is that the integrity of political institutions and processes may, in the long term, be undermined, and the populace may eventually lose confidence in their validity. Given what is widely understood to be the corrupt, illegitimate outcome of the U.S. 2016 election, it is clear that this is already happening and likely to continue. Looking forward, one must ask, Will it be the votes of autonomous citizens that decide the most crucial political outcomes? Or will the forces of cyberwarfare—trolls, bots, insidious algorithms, and rapidly spreading forms of political malware—ultimately determine the future of political society? The Most Important Thing on Earth? THE TECHNOLOGY-RELATED TROUBLES for democracy discussed so far—monopoly, corporate control, oligarchy, computational propaganda, and the loss of integrity of democratic institutions—are located primarily in the domain of large, power-holding institutions and must somehow be addressed there. Indeed, provisions of the General Data Protection Regulation of the European Union, in effect since May 2018, offer citizens somewhat improved control over their personal data.<sup>10</sup> In contrast, within the neoliberal, free market of the U.S., the citizenry must be content with vague promises from media giants like Facebook and Google that publicspirited corporations will tweak their precious algorithms in attempts to identify and eliminate sources of data malfeasance. Beyond this space of troubles, serious threats to democracy also reside at the level of people’s personal involvements with today’s communications technologies and devices. We can begin to understand this danger by exploring the question, Who are we on the Internet? More precisely, who am I, who are you? Indeed, who is anybody on the Internet? To explore these questions, it is useful to recall one of the most audacious, wonderfully bizarre experiments on electronic media and human experience ever concocted. It took place in the early 1990s, at a time when a new regime of communications—cable television—was first being introduced into American homes. Within this new media universe, American TV viewers were no longer limited to a handful of local stations but had access to a great many (and eventually hundreds) of channels available on cable and satellite systems. As a way to explore this phenomenon, Bill McKibben—renowned writer and activist on environmental issues—made arrangements with several dozen families in Fairfax, Virginia, who had been newly wired with cable TV. He provided equipment to each family to videotape all the programs on one designated channel during a single twenty-four-hour period. McKibben collected the videotapes from all the ninety-three recorded channels captured by the cooperating families. He then returned to his home in upstate New York, where he spent several months watching all the shows—literally every moment of cable TV—from just one day of programing. McKibben did not employ a sophisticated research protocol from media studies, discourse analysis, or science and technology studies. He paid no attention to the theories and concepts of social construction, actor networks, flexible interpretation, or research symmetry that commonly engage scholars in science and technology studies. His question was simple; in fact, it was the very same one that typical viewers ask as they turn on their television sets: What’s on? What is on the TV screen?<sup>11</sup> At the completion of his project of total immersion, he was able to report a key finding, something fundamental and crucial that was almost completely absent from the new and celebrated infosphere: a direct experience with nature. He writes: I assumed unconsciously that the information that poured from the TV into my quite similar suburban world was all the information there was. . . . But there’s another real world. A realer world, maybe—certainly an older one. This world is full of information, information that grows inevitably in you the more time you spend there, the stiller you are. . . . That’s the one great hopeful possibility; this other world broadcasts round the clock, and in stereo and sensurround and smellavision. Its signal grows steadily fainter, and the noise of the modern world makes it ever harder to hear. But it’s still there.<sup>12</sup> McKibben returns to the question of what’s on from a different angle, asking if it is possible to identify an underlying premise in the content of all television in the 1980s and 1990s, regardless of explicit topic or overall content. And he decides that, yes, it certainly is possible! Much came across the cable in my endless day, of course—the insights, such as they are, make up the content of my study. But the most important message is one that really occurred to me somewhat later: If you filter out all the messages that television sends you, if you boil the sap down into syrup—there’s an underlying premise: You are the most important thing on earth. You sitting there on the sofa, clutching the remote, are the heaviest object in the known universe. Around you must everything orbit. This Bud’s for you (McKibben, 1992, 2006).<sup>13</sup> McKibben goes on to specify how this premise plays itself out in numerous domains of American life—patterns of consumption, the widely reported flight from community involvement, and hyperindividualist preferences expressed in all corners of social life. Eventually he comes to the then (early 2000s) fairly novel field of people’s experience on the Internet and finds that the magnified “You” is taking root there as well. “You can spend a lifetime on the Web with people Just Like You, which is a kind of solipsism not that far removed from the hyperindividualism I’ve been describing.”<sup>14</sup> ## From TV to Internet TODAY IT IS increasingly clear that the obsessive solipsism McKibben identified has been scrupulously reproduced and magnified on the Internet in its mature form. Emphasized yet again is the centrality of the “Me”— self-satisfaction, self-identity, self-absorption—sought in people’s engagement with various forms of social media. There is, however, a crucial difference between the variety of hyperindividualism characteristic of TV and that now common on the Internet. During the golden age of television the emphasis on “Me” was largely passive and receptive. People were situated as receivers of information that sought to impress them with a sense of self-importance as viewers, as consumers of products, and as potential voters. The crucial role for TV viewers was to absorb the messages, a mode of being that left them easily manipulated by advertising and propaganda. To a considerable extent, the possibilities offered by the Internet, especially within prominent venues of social media, are far more active. The Internet offers opportunities for broadcasting one’s own marvelous personhood and for seeking spaces in which the amplification of the “Me” finally becomes a readily available project, one potentially accessible to anyone active online. It is a world in which a person seeks to obtain “likes,” “friends,” “followers,” “retweets,” and so on. Measures of success and income are tabulated by the number of affirmations that show up on social media–counting registers: How many Facebook friends and likes have I attracted today? Have my tweets been retweeted by hundreds or thousands of others? Is my influence growing or shrinking? Social scientists who study the inner workings of social media platforms report that the very essence of platforms involves a distinctive kind of addiction. The algorithms that monitor people’s activities and interactions on the Internet are able to track and remember the “revealed preferences” of their users. A revealed preference is one discovered by observing the actual choices people make as compared to those they explicitly list as their desires and commitments.<sup>15</sup> Hence, I may tell you (and fully believe) that my favorite meal is a good salad made with organic vegetables. However, if you were to leave a carton of chocolate ice cream on the table, you might observe me grabbing a spoon and devouring the whole thing. “That’s his revealed preference,” you would conclude, “not what he claims are his true desires.” During the past fifteen years or so, the major digital platforms have grown skillful at recording, tracking, and analyzing the revealed preferences of hundreds of millions of users. As you make choices on the Internet, algorithms are able to place in front of you more choices that are like ones you’ve made before. On YouTube, for example, if you go looking for a particular genre of hip-hop music, your first choice will be followed—often automatically, without any further input from you—by a whole collection of songs relatively similar in kind, an array that can easily “autoplay” for hours. Having calculated your revealed preferences, Internet algorithms are able to generate more and more of what you signaled you liked earlier. The more time you spend on your device, the more likely it is that you’ll see advertisements for products that appeal to you. The algorithm will notice and record the searches you do, the websites you visit, and the articles you read and will start feeding you similar materials. All of this fits perfectly with the business models of Facebook, Google, and other firms hosting advertisements and commercial promotions. What they offer is something earlier electronic media could not; namely, the ability to put sellers of goods in close touch with buyers who are most likely to be interested in what is being sold.<sup>16</sup> In important respects, such practices mirror the methods of operant conditioning explored in the research of mid-twentieth-century behavioral psychologist B. F. Skinner. The addictive features of social media are closely related to another crucial fact about their presence in people’s lives: that Internet applications are usually completely “free.” As in the exhortation of the drug pusher “Hey, give it a try. The first bag of heroin is on the house!”—the appeal of many Internet platforms is that users pay nothing for the use of their beguiling services. Facebook is free. Gmail and many of the other applications on Google cost nothing. Something for nothing! What a deal! But the unfortunate price people end up paying is to yield unthinkingly to various kinds of encoded manipulation (especially political manipulation), varieties of misinformation, computational propaganda, and political malware engineered by Cambridge Analytica and similar organizations. Following the electoral meltdown of 2016 in the U.S. and the waves of racism, xenophobia, Islamophobia, and antiscience, antienvironmentalist, and authoritarian politics it unleashed, research on the technical and social dimensions of the Internet has taken an astonishing turn. Leaving aside the optimism of earlier times that “the more connected people are, the better society will be,” scholars have begun tracking the dark side of the Internet. A systematic study at MIT followed the choices of some three million Twitter users over a ten-year period and found that among 126,000 contested news stories, people much preferred (and were more likely to share) falsehoods over well-verified, reliable information. “Fake news and false rumors reach more people, penetrate deeper into the social network, and spread much faster than accurate stories,” the report concludes.<sup>17</sup> In a similar vein, Internet guru and former Google “design ethicist” Tristan Harris now openly laments social maladies on the Internet, such as the tendency for people to favor sheer outrage over well-founded information and to express highly negative emotions in their social media postings. 18 ## A Plague of Narcissism IT SEEMS PLAUSIBLE that many of the distressing social and political ills that have recently surfaced on the Internet have their roots in an obsessive narcissism similar to the one McKibben noticed in the world of television. In this case, the narcissism manifests as a sense of personal identity that continually seeks to affirm and even to broadcast a selfabsorbed, highly troubled “Me.” Earlier dreams of the Internet envisioned it as a meeting ground in which citizens engaged in vibrant, fruitful conversation, debating key issues in truth-seeking ways, striving to affirm the common good, and working together to improve public policies. This vision has now been largely supplanted by an Internet culture that elicits excesses of self-absorbed individualism busily seeking affirmation in the friends, likes, followers, and other data that platforms collect as clickbait to support a person’s sense of importance. Closely associated with this epidemic of narcissistic selfhood is a tendency in contemporary political societies to elevate demagogues, particularly those with flagrantly self-admiring personalities, to positions of leadership. The rise of Trump and of other flamboyantly authoritarian figures in ostensibly democratic societies points to ways in which narcissism has become infectious, to the detriment of even the most basic notions of good governance. Postelection analyses suggest Trump’s popularity is due to anxiety about loss of status among a substantial portion of the American populace—the fear that one’s social standing is now endangered as threatening “others” move up.<sup>19</sup> To a considerable extent, such anxieties have their roots in an underlying racism, since people of color are often perceived as a menace to white people’s security. In his narcissistic demeanor and rhetoric, Trump plays upon such feelings in masterful ways. Early in his term as president Trump was strongly favored by roughly 40 percent of the U.S. populace. His supporters were people who did not necessarily favor his policies but who were attracted by his strongly self-centered, increasingly authoritarian mode of presentation, one often punctuated by explicit appeals to racial resentment.<sup>20</sup> It is no coincidence that the Trump phenomenon and the kinds of selfobsession prominent on social media have been strongly validated within a right-wing ideology heavily promoted in the U.S. in recent decades— libertarianism. With an emphasis on “liberty” of unencumbered individuals, this vision of society demands the removal of most forms of state power and authority beyond those of basic national defense. Celebrated in the novels of Ayn Rand and codified in the economic theories of Friedrich Hayek, Milton Friedman, James Buchanan, and members of the Mont Pelerin Society, the libertarian worldview upholds the bold, creative activities of entrepreneurs within the so-called free market as the path to utopia.<sup>21</sup> Rejecting social obligations to others and any commitment to the common good, libertarians seek the realization of exquisite selfhood achieved through the accumulation of personal wealth. Completely explicit in its ego-centeredness, this school of thought offers an air of legitimacy to the manias of narcissistic leadership and authoritarian domination. To a considerable extent, libertarianism has emerged as the de facto worldview of a generation of twenty-first-century billionaire oligarchs. Increasingly free from the kinds of government intervention they despise, wealthy power brokers such as Robert Mercer and Charles and David Koch have been able to amass enormous power within communications systems as well as national politics.<sup>22</sup> In my view the cultivation of personal selfhood and self-absorbed communication on the Internet is completely compatible with the rise of narcissistic, ultimately antidemocratic forms of political activity. Far from offering a new, vital democratic alternative to rigid social hierarchy and centralized government, today’s culture of the Internet and social media could become a seedbed for concentrated, ultimately authoritarian power. This predicament stands at the heart of many of the social and civic maladies that have recently surfaced on the Internet and in political societies around the globe. ## Private and Public Realms WHO ARE WE on the Internet? A revealing source of insight into this question, one highly relevant to the currently frustrated hopes of realizing democracy on the Internet, can be found in the writings of political theorist and historian Hannah Arendt. Especially in her books The Human Condition and On Revolution, Arendt seeks to explain what constitutes genuine involvement in politics.<sup>23</sup> Crucial to Arendt’s theory is the distinction between the private realm and the public realm. Affairs in the private realm are those that involve intimate relationships with family and friends, and activities that are highly personal, self-defined, and self-determined. Within the spaces of private life a person can carefully establish and maintain a solid, stable, carefully nurtured definition of who he or she is. In contrast, the public realm is a space where a person encounters the plurality of others and confronts questions that pertain to political society as a whole. Arendt argues that the public realm is necessarily a “space of appearances” in which one’s identity is revealed not by a personally determined and carefully protected sense of self but rather by speech and action—what one says and does in public gatherings. That is to say, in a genuine public realm one’s identity is recognized and continually evaluated by others. Hence, a person will likely have a well-defined sense of self within their own thoughts, within their family, and within their circle of intimate friends. But this is not the self that appears or is realized within the public realm. As Arendt observes in her chapter “Action,” “the ‘who,’ which appears so clearly and mistakably to others, remains hidden from the person himself, like the daimōn in Greek religion which accompanies each man throughout his life, always looking over his shoulder from behind and thus visible only to those he encounters.”<sup>24</sup> Arendt argues that a person’s involvements in the public sphere are what can truly be called “action,” and, going even further, she contends that one’s continuing experience in that realm is the singular, unique experience properly called “freedom.” From the theoretical standpoint Arendt offers, it is clear that the all-toocommon attempts by people in online political communication to define, protect, cling to, and incessantly broadcast their personal identities stands at the root of the various discourse pathologies commonly encountered on the Internet today—“trolling,” “flaming,” “bullying,” and the like. People carry treasured images and ideas of their private identities and expect that those identities will be robust in the public realm as well. The ultimate good to be achieved within networks of social media is, in B. F. Skinner’s model, a steady flow of “reinforcement.” Conceits of this kind, Arendt insists, are woefully misguided. A person is neither entitled to nor empowered to define who he or she is within the activities of public life. It is one’s fellow citizens, those who listen, observe, interact, and ultimately judge one’s words and deeds, who determine one’s lasting reputation as a public being. In the fullness of time some persons will be remembered and praised as worthy contributors to the good of political society. The very best of these may eventually achieve lasting fame or even glory, as Machiavelli named this reputational aura, within the community as well as in historical memory, a kind of immortality for those who truly distinguish themselves in their words and deeds. Others are scorned as ignorant, ill-tempered, greedy, untrustworthy, and even destructive within deliberations and initiatives formulated in the public realm. As Arendt explains, what is essential to the public realm is the plurality of persons and the needs of and challenges to political society as a whole. Regardless of how cleverly and insistently a person may seek to project a private definition of selfhood into the public, the projection is very likely to fail because the perceptions and judgments of others will ultimately determine who one is within the public realm—a trusted advocate for the common good or, perhaps, a self-seeking scoundrel. Arendt’s argument implies that, by and large, most modern nation-states have failed to create suitable institutional spaces for the activities that characterize the public realm. In her view, this condition does not arise by oversight or accident but is instead a product of the deliberate machinations of political parties and those who rise to power in times of social upheaval. Arendt’s book On Revolution concludes with a chapter titled “The Revolution and Its Lost Treasure.” She notices that within upheavals of modern revolutions, people involved at the level of everyday mobilization often took it upon themselves to form institutions, small-scale forums of participation—workers’ councils, citizens’ councils, town meetings, and the like. For example, in the 1917 Russian Revolution, the original “soviets” were local councils of workers. Within the spontaneously formed revolutionary councils, people came together to debate ends and means, to articulate strategies, and, as Arendt insists, to experience freedom in the presence of other citizens. She argues that people’s ardent desire to discuss political ideas in a public forum and to experience political choices and their consequences in direct, tangible ways is a primary motivation that has erupted regularly in the course of modern revolutions. Alas, in the fullness of time, these spontaneous, directly democratic forums were destroyed by revolutionary leaders who placed their faith in the formation of the modern state, the workings of central governments, and the dynamics of large, national political parties. In the American Revolution, for example, the constitutional founders could have included within the Constitution a creative role for the town meetings that had sprung up spontaneously during the revolutionary period. It might have been possible to build political society with these gathering places at the base linked to higher levels of political activity in a kind of ascending pyramid. Instead, what the leaders of the American Revolution did in a carefully crafted strategy was to organize a large governmental structure of elected representatives from local and regional districts and abruptly eliminate any role for town meetings or equivalent citizen forums. Thus, the ultimate treasure of the revolution—the immediate, lived experience of public life— was lost. While town meetings are still held each year in various parts of New England, they mainly handle matters of local policy, taxation, and spending and are not linked in any way to national issues or priorities. The general lack of town meetings and similar citizen councils as a feature of national government is evident each day as people go on the Internet and tune in to what they believe to be forums for public deliberation and debate. They may not notice what is missing from this pseudopublic realm and how that yawning absence helps generate wave after wave of toxic discourse along with distressing patterns of oligarchical rule, incipient authoritarianism, and governance by phonies and confidence men. ## Hope for Repair AN OBVIOUS BUT EXCESSIVELY difficult solution might be to somehow link the now-abstract, narcissistic digital realm to the lived experience of face-to-face, in-person, democratic public assemblies. Indeed, scholar-activists like Doug Schuler have attempted to promote “civic networks” and the arts of “civic intelligence.” But as yet there are no feasible models for doing anything of that kind. Instead, what is slowly emerging is an awareness of the widespread social and personal pathologies now visible on the Internet as well as a number of strategies for addressing them. Recently “tech humanists” in Silicon Valley, mainly employees or former employees of computer industry corporations, have taken it upon themselves to study and cure the kinds of addiction that are part and parcel of the algorithms and business models at firms such as Facebook. The web page of the Center for Humane Technology asserts that our society is being “hijacked” by technology. It argues that “what began as a race to monetize our attention is now eroding the pillars of our society: mental health, democracy, social relationships, and our children.” Their report goes beyond the happy talk of “a world of connections” to specify ways in which digital platforms have become an increasingly toxic presence in everyday life: Using language that balances benefits and risks while carefully distributing responsibility for possible harms, the Center for Humane Technology offers the following analysis: Phones, apps, and the web are so indispensable to our daily lives—a testament to the benefits they give us—that we’ve become a captive audience. With two billion people plugged into these devices, technology companies have inadvertently enabled a direct channel to manipulate entire societies with unprecedented precision. Technology platforms make it easier than ever for bad actors to cause havoc: Pushing lies directly to specific zip codes, races, or religions. Finding people who are already prone to conspiracies or racism, and automatically reaching similar users with “Lookalike” targeting. Delivering messages timed to prey on us when we are most emotionally vulnerable (e.g., Facebook found depressed teens buy more makeup). Creating millions of fake accounts and bots impersonating real people with real-sounding names and photos, fooling millions with the false impression of consensus. Meanwhile, the platform companies profit from growth in users and activity.<sup>26</sup> The use of such terms as “inadvertently” and “bad actors” signals that the center wants to avoid appearing critical of Silicon Valley enterprises as a whole. Its underlying message is that the technologies are basically just fine, merely subject to occasional lapses, unintended consequences, and the schemes of evildoers. Even though its own analysis points to the fact that Facebook and other firms have deliberately engineered their products to be addictive, the center’s web page faults them not for any malign intent but only for blindly seeking profit. The proposals of the tech humanists emphasize a need for “humane design,” a collection of technological fixes that selectively eliminate harmful features of digital technology. Thus, the Center for Humane Technology suggests that Apple, Samsung, and Microsoft “can redesign their devices and core interfaces to protect our minds from constant distractions, minimize screen time, protect our time in relationships. . . .”<sup>27</sup> One project of this kind is Tristan Harris’s Time Well Spent, a nonprofit organization that seeks to alter the software of Internet platforms so that their users are encouraged to go beyond the trivial habits that social media support and to draw upon more deeply resonant “values,” especially the time they spend in meaningful relationships with other people. Warming to this challenge, in early 2018 Mark Zuckerberg, CEO of Facebook, took steps to appropriate the Time Well Spent project as an attractive option within Facebook’s elaborate settings. From a commercial standpoint, however, the experiment proved problematic, since it led to a decrease of 50 million hours in users’ time per day on Facebook, a potentially serious hit to the firm’s advertising revenues.<sup>28</sup> Remedies of this sort resonate with another Silicon Valley fashion of recent years—the sponsorship of “wellness” programs for corporate personnel. Often expressed in special sessions offering yoga and meditation during the workday or at special retreats, training in these skills is seen as a boost to one’s personal health and an important contribution to a firm’s capacity for innovation. It comes as no surprise that, once again, the basic purpose of the wellness industry is to discover and enhance the exquisite “Me” from which all else is believed to flow. The idea now is to go more deeply within oneself to find one’s true ground of being.<sup>29</sup> As a modest political expression of their quest, tech humanists advocate joining with others to “apply political pressure” on lawmakers to advance creative reforms. The Center for Humane Technology explains, “Governments can pressure technology companies toward humane business models by including the negative externalities of attention extraction on their balance sheets, and creating better protection for consumers.”<sup>30</sup> But protection of what kind? Presumably a better shielded autonomy for one’s beloved sense of self. A more useful step would be to seek forms of politically humane technology by exploring ways to build links between Internet communications and forums for face-to-face citizen debate, cooperation, and policy making. If, as Arendt argues, “the lost treasure of the revolution” involves small, local democratic groups able to affect larger national political outcomes, then the obvious challenge is to start building and invigorating these bodies again. Salvation of a now-fading democracy is readily at hand, I would argue, if only that path were to be chosen. The fact that most leaders of modern revolutions have consciously, deliberately rejected institutions of direct democracy is no reason to replicate their failings within today’s public realms, ones that might (even now) connect online and face-to-face political life in the years to come. Alas, even in proposed remedies for today’s flagrant abuses of online power it is still the concerns of consumerism and techno-narcissism that are emphasized above all. From the perspective of Hannah Arendt there is as yet in today’s discussions and practices of online “politics” little or no understanding that moving into the public realm entails relinquishing “the private self, the cherished self of our hopes and dreams” and becoming a person who makes himself or herself “known in word and deed.” This means, in effect, that genuine political participation involves the advent of a second self, one whose character is ultimately determined by the perceptions and judgments of one’s fellow citizens and of historical memory, not of oneself alone. While possibilities of this kind may seem abstract and inaccessible, a closer look reveals some basic down-to-earth choices. In important ways the pathway to a lively citizenship begins with the simple choice to “show up!”—to attend public meetings, to join public groups, to march in demonstrations, to speak up in civic gatherings, and to become active in groups that seek to address and improve the institutions and practices of community life. In every city, town, or village of the nation, opportunities of this kind are readily available and are well worth exploring.<sup>31</sup> Arendt believed that to enter the public realm is a potentially marvelous step. For it reveals a person in entirely new settings and in a surprising new light, offering fruitful courses of action for the community as a whole. And yes, of necessity, to engage in action in the public realm involves risk, including the risk of highly uncertain, perhaps even perilous, outcomes both for oneself and for the others one encounters. Fortunately, experiences of this kind may well generate something otherwise completely unattainable— genuine political freedom.