IN JUNE 2016 the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) announced that it would close its Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant in 2025. Although the firm had previously planned to extend the facility’s operating license for another thirty years, news of the 2011 disaster in Fukushima, Japan—the massive earthquake, tsunami, and meltdowns of four nuclear reactors—finally swept away what little public support for atomic power remained in California at the time. Now planning has begun for decommissioning Diablo Canyon, a process that could last several decades at an estimated cost of \$4.8 billion. Enthusiasm for domestic nuclear energy emerged during the early 1950s as an expression of widespread hope that “atoms for peace” might skillfully harness the destructive force of bombs like those dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki as well as even more powerful weapons produced during the Cold War. Many scientists, public officials, and concerned citizens sought ways to steer this marvelous new technology toward more humane purposes. In 1954 businessman Lewis Strauss, an early member of the Atomic Energy Commission, brashly predicted that atomic power would soon produce electricity “too cheap to meter.” Visions of that kind inspired a generation of engineers, government bureaucrats, and utility company executives to begin building dozens of nuclear power stations around the nation. An especially ambitious realization of the dream was an enormous facility with two pressurized water reactors built in the hills of central coastal California, not far from the town of San Luis Obispo, just around the corner from the funky little sun-and-fun tourist haven of Avila Beach. As construction began in 1968, the plant was widely heralded as a marvel of American technological prowess and far-sighted business strategy. Careful to avoid visual blight along the beautiful shoreline, PG&E chose the chaparral-covered hills of Diablo Canyon as the plant’s location, a site nicely shielded from the view of beachgoers as well as automobiles driving along Highway 101, yet close enough to the ocean to provide plenty of water to cool both reactor units. Alas, the plant was ill-fated from the beginning. Built to withstand earthquakes of a size predictable for that section of the coast, the structure had to be thoroughly redesigned and rebuilt following the discovery of a previously unknown seismic fault several miles out to sea. The costly upgrade increased its ability to withstand earthquakes from those of 6.75 magnitude to those of 7.5 magnitude. But as the plant neared completion in the early 1980s, another calamity occurred: an inadvertent, longunrecognized reversal of blueprints guided construction of the second reactor’s support system in wonderfully precise but grossly inadequate dimensions until the technicians noticed the blunder and were forced to start over. Many years later, yet another threatening geologic menace, the Shoreline Fault, was discovered, prompting further inquiries into the plant’s ultimate safety. Despite (or perhaps because of) these recurring difficulties, during its heyday Diablo Canyon was renowned as perhaps the most scrupulously engineered and skillfully tended nuclear facility in the world. Missteps in its early construction required meticulous but expensive levels of engineering and technical management that inspired some observers to designate the plant “gold plated.” In its maturity, proponents argued, Diablo Canyon would finally realize the safe, reliable, economically viable future for nuclear power that its early advocates envisioned. As of summer 2018 the United States still had sixty commercially operational nuclear power plants with ninety-eight reactor units generating about 20 percent of the nation’s electric energy. A renewed push during Barack Obama’s administration to build a new generation of power plants succeeded in promoting several new proposals for nuclear power plant construction, some of which actually broke ground. But faced with the colossal costs involved in financing their assembly, two new plants in South Carolina were eventually canceled, while two reactors under construction in Georgia were plagued by steadily rising mountains of debt. To this day some observers argue that electricity from nuclear energy remains a viable, perhaps even urgently needed option for the long term as the world seeks to reduce its reliance on fossil fuels. Among the proponents of this path is James Hansen, a leading voice in the scientific community who warns about the dangers of climate change caused by the burning of coal, petroleum, and natural gas. Seldom noted in arguments of that kind, however, are the enormous quantities of fossil fuels expended during the full life span of nuclear power plants. Fossil fuels are used for the mining, transport, and refinement of uranium into usable fuel; the preparation of reactor sites; the energy-intensive manufacturing of the enormous pieces of equipment and protective housing needed in plants’ construction; the preparations for “temporary” on-site storage of nuclear wastes; and the decades-long decommissioning of obsolete facilities, as well as the as yet unfinished tasks of building, operating, and protecting storage facilities for nuclear wastes in their centuries-long burial places. It turns out that nuclear energy has a substantial carbon footprint. Taking into account energy returned on energy invested as well as the sheer dollar costs of energy solutions, electricity “too cheap to meter” now seems a mere pipe dream. The best prospects for nuclear technology’s future lie in the dynamics of authoritarian political regimes, where calculations of total electricity output seem to justify the enormous economic, environmental, and social costs of nuclear construction and operation. At present, for example, China is building or preparing to build a dozen new plants, regarded as a much-needed contribution to the country’s growing economy. Beginning in the late 1970s, the Diablo Canyon plant became the focus of continuing opposition by local and national environmental groups, most notably by the Abalone Alliance organized in San Luis Obispo. Worries about background radiation, the ecological disruption of coastal wildlife from the dumping of warm water, the danger of nuclear accidents and possible meltdown, the handling of on-site radioactive waste, and numerous other concerns led to recurring demonstrations and even occasional blockades of roads leading to the plant. Compounding PG&E’s difficulties, another crisis has emerged as the result of widespread wildfires that now afflict California. As I write this, some thirty billion dollars in claims have been filed, citing the firm’s equipment as the possible source of a series of conflagrations that have swept across the state, including a firestorm that completely destroyed the town of Paradise in a few hours. In recent years, a number of organizations (including ones previously at loggerheads) have finally joined forces in an effort to close the Diablo Canyon plant once and for all. Working with environmental groups eager to build networks of wind and solar power, listening carefully to the expressed needs of labor unions and local political officials, fully aware of projections that point to diminishing demand for centrally generated, grid-distributed electricity in California, PG&E eventually relinquished any plans to give the plant a second run. Now the future of energy in the state depends on renewables. Thus, a colorful, heavily conflicted chapter in the history of technology arrives at a reasonably agreeable conclusion. Langdon Winner May 2019