CHAPTER 1. Technologies as Forms of Life 1. Tom Wolfe, The Right Stuff (New York: Bantam Books, 1980), 270. 2. The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 8 vols., Paul Edwards (editor-in-chief) (New York: Macmillan: 1967). 3. Bibliography of the Philosophy of Technology, Carl Mitcham and Robert Mackey (eds.) (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973). 4. There are, of course, exceptions to this general attitude. See Stephen H. Unger, Controlling Technology: Ethics and the Responsible Engineer (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1982). 5. An excellent corrective to the general thoughtlessness about “making” and “use” is to be found in Carl Mitcham, “Types of Technology,” in Research in Philosophy and Technology, Paul Durbin (ed.) (Greenwich, Conn. JAI Press, 1978), 229–294. 6. J. L. Austin, Philosophical Papers (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1961), 123–152. 7. See William Kolender et al., “Petitioner v. Edward Lawson,” Supreme Court Reporter 103: 1855–1867, 1983. Edward Lawson had been arrested approximately fifteen times on his long walks and refused to provide identification when stopped by the police. Lawson cited his rights guaranteed by the Fourth and Fifth Amendments of the U.S. Constitution. The Court found the California vagrancy statute requiring “credible and reliable” identification to be unconstitutionally vague. See also Jim Mann, “State Vagrancy Law Voided as Overly Vague,” Los Angeles Times, May 3, 1983, 1, 19. 8. Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, ed. 3, translated by G. E. M. Anscombe, with English and German indexes (New York: Macmillan, 1958), 11e. 9. Hanna Pitkin, Wittgenstein and Justice: On the Significance of Ludwig Wittgenstein for Social and Political Thought (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972), 293. 10. For a thorough discussion of this idea, see Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958); and Hannah Arendt, Willing, vol II of The Life of the Mind (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978). 11. Philosophical Investigations, 226e. 12. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, “The German Ideology,” in Collected Works, vol. 5 (New York: International Publishers, 1976), 31. 13. Karl Marx, Grundrisse, translated with a foreword by Martin Nicolaus (Harmondsworth, England: Penguin Books, 1973), 325. 14. An interesting discussion of Marx in this respect is Kostas Axelos’ Alienation, Praxis and Technē in the Thought of Karl Marx, translated by Ronald Bruzina (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1976). 15. Karl Marx, Capital, vol. 1, translated by Ben Fowkes, with an introduction by Ernest Mandel (Harmondsworth, England: Penguin Books, 1976), chap. 15. 16. Philosophical Investigations, 49e. 11. William H. Friedland and Amy Barton, “Tomato Technology,” Society 13:6, 1. Lewis Mumford, “Authoritarian and Democratic Technics,” Technology and Culture 5:1–8, 1964. 2. Denis Hayes, Rays of Hope: The Transition to a Post-Petroleum World (New York: W. W. Norton, 1977), 71, 159. 3. David Lillienthal, T.V.A.: Democracy on the March (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1944), 72– 83. 4. Daniel J. Boorstin, The Republic of Technology (New York: Harper and Row, 1978), 7. 5. Langdon Winner, Autonomous Technology: Technics-Out-of-Control as a Theme in Political Thought (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1977). 6. The meaning of “technology” I employ in this essay does not encompass some of the broader definitions of that concept found in contemporary literature, for example, the notion of “technique” in the writings of Jacques Ellul. My purposes here are more limited. For a discussion of the difficulties that arise in attempts to define “technology,” see Autonomous Technology, 8–12. 7. Robert A. Caro, The Power Broker: Robert Moses and the Fall of New York (New York: Random House, 1974), 318, 481, 514, 546, 951–958, 952. 8. Robert Ozanne, A Century of Labor-Management Relations at McCormick and International Harvester (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1967), 20. 9. The early history of the tomato harvester is told in Wayne D. Rasmussen, “Advances in American Agriculture: The Mechanical Tomato Harvester as a Case Study,” Technology and Culture 9:531–543, 1968. 10. Andrew Schmitz and David Seckler, “Mechanized Agriculture and Social Welfare: The Case of the Tomato Harvester,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 52:569–577, 1970. September/October 1976. See also William H. Friedland, Social Sleepwalkers: Scientific and Technological Research in California Agriculture, University of California, Davis, Department of Applied Behavioral Sciences, Research Monograph No. 13, 1974. 12. University of California Clip Sheet 54:36, May 1, 1979. 13. “Tomato Technology.” 14. A history and critical analysis of agricultural research in the land-grant colleges is given in James Hightower, Hard Tomatoes, Hard Times (Cambridge: Schenkman, 1978). 15. David F. Noble, Forces of Production: A Social History of Machine Tool Automation (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1984). 16. Friedrich Engels, “On Authority,” in The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. 2, Robert Tucker (ed.) (New York: W. W. Norton, 1978), 731. 17. Ibid. 18. Ibid., 732, 731. 19. Karl Marx, Capital, vol. 1, ed. 3, translated by Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling (New York: Modern Library, 1906), 530. 20. Jerry Mander, Four Arguments for the Elimination of Television (New York: William Morrow, 1978), 44. 21. See, for example, Robert Argue, Barbara Emanuel, and Stephen Graham, The Sun Builders: A People’s Guide to Solar, Wind and Wood Energy in Canada (Toronto: Renewable Energy in Canada, 1978). “We think decentralization is an implicit component of renewable energy; this implies the decentralization of energy systems, communities and of power. Renewable energy doesn’t require mammoth generation sources of disruptive transmission corridors. Our cities and towns, which have been dependent on centralized energy supplies, may be able to achieve some degree of autonomy, thereby controlling and administering their own energy needs.” (16) 22. Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business (Cambridge: Belknap, 1977), 244. 23. Ibid. 24. Ibid., 500. 25. Leonard Silk and David Vogel, Ethics and Profits: The Crisis of Confidence in American Business (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1976), 191. 26. Russell W. Ayres, “Policing Plutonium: The Civil Liberties Fallout,” Harvard Civil Rights— Civil Liberties Law Review 10 (1975): 443, 413–414, 374. ## CHAPTER 3. Technē and Politeia 1. Plato, Laws, 7.803b, translated by A. E. Taylor, in The Collected Dialogues of Plato, Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns (eds.) (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1961), 1374. 2. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract, translated and introduced by Maurice Cranston (New York: Penguin Books, 1968), 84. 3. Alexander Hamilton, “Federalist No. 9,” in The Federalist Papers, with an introduction by Clinton Rossiter (New York: Mentor Books, 1961), 72–73. 4. Thomas Jefferson, “Notes on Virginia,” in The Life and Selected Writings of Thomas Jefferson, Adrienne Koch and William Peden (eds.) (New York: Modern Library, 1944), 28–281. 5. Quoted in Gordon S. Wood, The Creation of the American Republic, 1776–1787 (New York: W. W. Norton, 1972), 114. 6. See John Kasson, Civilizing the Machine: Technology and Republican Values in America, 1776– 1900 (New York: Grossman, 1976). 7. See Albert O. Hirschman, The Passions and the Interests: Political Arguments for Capitalism Before Its Triumph (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977). 8. Denison Olmsted, “On the Democratic Tendencies of Science,” Barnard’s Journal of Education, vol. 1, 1855–1856, reprinted in Changing Attitudes Toward American Technology, Thomas Parke Hughes (ed.) (New York: Harper and Row, 1975), 148. 9. Karl Polanyi, The Great Transformation (Boston: Beacon Press, 1957), 33. 10. “Beta” (Edward W. Byrn), “The Progress of Invention During the Past Fifty Years,” Scientific American, vol. 75, July 25, 1896, reprinted in Hughes (see note 8), 158–159. 11. For a discussion of the wide-ranging influence of the idea of efficiency in American thought, see Samuel Haber, Efficiency and Uplift: Scientific Management in the Progressive Era, 1890–1920 (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1964); and Samuel P. Hays, Conservation and the Gospel of Efficiency: The Progressive Conservation Movement, 1890–1920 (New York: Atheneum, 1959). 12. See William L. Kahrl, Water and Power: The Conflict Over Los Angeles’ Water Supply in the Owens Valley (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982). 13. An analysis of the efficacy of various kinds of government regulation is contained in The Politics of Regulation, James Q. Wilson (ed.) (New York: Basic Books, 1980). 14. A representative selection of the ambitious energy studies done during the 1970s would include the following: A Time to Choose, The Energy Policy Project of the Ford Foundation (Cambridge: Ballinger, 1974); Nuclear Power: Issues and Choices, Report of the Nuclear Energy Policy Study Group (Cambridge: Ballinger, 1977); Energy in America’s Future: The Choices Before Us, National Energy Studies Project (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979); Energy: The Next Twenty Years, Report of the Study Group Sponsored by the Ford Foundation and Administered by Resources for the Future, Hans Landsberg et al. (Cambridge: Ballinger, 1979); Energy in Transition, 1985–2010, National Research Council Committee on Nuclear and Alternative Energy Systems (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1980). 15. Nuclear Power: Issues and Choices, 44, 41. 16. Amory B. Lovins, “Technology Is the Answer! (But What Was the Question?): Energy as a Case Study of Inappropriate Technology,” discussion paper for the Symposium on Social Values and Technological Change in an International Context, Racine, Wis., June 1978, 1. 17. Amory B. Lovins, Soft Energy Paths: Toward a Durable Peace (Cambridge: Ballinger, 1977), 6–7. 18. Paul Goodman, People or Personnel and Like a Conquered Province (New York: Vintage Press, 1968), 4. 19. See, for example, J. L. Smith, “Photovoltaics,” Science 212:1472–1478, 1981. ## CHAPTER 4. Building the Better Mousetrap 1. The best general introduction to appropriate technology in this context is Nicholas Jéquier, Appropriate Technology: Problems and Promises (Paris: Development Center of the OECD, 1976), especially Jéquier’s essay, “The Major Policy Issues.” A survey of activities in developing nations is given in Ken Darrow and Rick Pam, Appropriate Technology Sourcebook, 2 vols. (Stanford, Calif.: Volunteers in Asia, 1976 and 1981). 2. E. F. Schumacher, Small is Beautiful: Economics as if People Mattered (New York: Harper and Row, 1973), 31. 3. A survey of appropriate technology research and development in the United States can be found in Appropriate Technology—A Directory of Activities and Projects, Integrative Design Associates (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1977). 4. See, for example, Robert Owen, A New View of Society and a Report to the Country of Lanark, with an introduction by V. A. C. Gatrell (ed.) (New York: Penguin Books, 1970); Peter Kropotkin, Fields, Factories and Workshops (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1899); Ralph Borsodi, Flight from the City (New York: Harper and Row, 1933); Peter van Dresser, A Landscape for Humans (Albuquerque: Biotechnic Press, 1972); and Murray Bookchin, The Spanish Anarchists: The Heroic Years 1868– 1936 (New York: Free Life Editions, 1977). 5. An extremely insightful treatment of this period is contained in Jo Durden-Smith, Who Killed George Jackson? (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1976). 6. Perhaps the best expression of his tendency is to be found in Karl Hess, Dear America (New York: Morrow, 1975), chaps. 8–10 and Hess’s Community Technology (New York: Harper & Row, 1979). 7. The Movement Toward a New America: The Beginnings of a Long Revolution, assembled by Mitchell Goodman (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1970); and The Whole Earth Catalog, Steward Brand (ed.) and colleagues (Menlo Park, Calif.: Nowels, 1968). 8. See Weatherman, Harold Jacobs (ed.) (New York: Ramparts Press, 1970), for expressions of this view. 9. The Whole Earth Catalog, 1. 10. Lewis Mumford, The Myth of the Machine: The Pentagon of Power (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1970); Paul Goodman, The New Reformation: Notes of a Neolithic Conversative (New York: Random House, 1970); Herbert Marcuse, One-Dimensional Man: Studies in the Ideology of Advanced Industrial Society (Boston: Beacon Press, 1964); Theodore Roszak, The Making of a Counter Culture; Reflections on Technocratic Society and Its Youthful Opposition (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1969); and Jacques Ellul, The Technological Society, translated by John Wilkinson (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1964). 11. For an exposition of the central notions in this tradition, see Langdon Winner, Autonomous Technology: Technics-out-of-Control as a Theme in Political Thought (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1977). 12. Thomas Carlyle, “Signs of the Times,” in Selected Works, Reminiscences and Letters, Julian Symons (ed.) (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1957), 25. 13. Herbert Marcuse, An Essay on Liberation (Boston: Beacon Press, 1969), 19. 14. Ibid., 90. 15. The Making of a Counter Culture, chap. 6. 16. Theodore Roszak, Where The Wasteland Ends: Politics and Transcendence in Postindustrial Society (Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1973), 396. 17. Ibid., 394. 18. See any issue of The Review of Radical Political Economics for the directions some American economists have taken here. 19. The Journal of the New Alchemists 1 (1973): 50. 20. Ibid., see inside front cover. 21. Amory B. Lovins, Soft Energy Paths: Toward a Durable Peace (Cambridge: Ballinger, 1977). See also Lovins’ “A Neo-Capitalist Manifesto: Free Enterprise Can Finance Our Energy Future,” Politicks and Other Human Interests 1(2):15–18, 1978. 22. David Dickson, The Politics of Alternative Technology (New York: Universe Books, 1975). 23. Murray Bookchin, Post-Scarcity Anarchism (Berkeley: Ramparts Press, 1971). Bookchin has since published his magnum opus, The Ecology of Freedom: The Emergence and Dissolution of Hierarchy (Palo Alto: Cheshire Books, 1982). 24. Richard Eckaus, Appropriate Technology for Developing Countries (Washington, D.C., National Academy of Sciences, 1977). Unsympathetic to the idea of appropriate technology from the outset, the book’s title is something of a hoax. 25. Quoted in The Politics of Alternative Technology, 102, 103–104. 26. Victor Papanek and James Hennessey, How Things Don’t Work (New York: Pantheon Books, 1977), 49. 27. Ibid., 119. 28. Ibid., xiii. 29. Ibid., 27. 30. The saying, attributed to an address Emerson gave, appears in Borrowings: A Collection of Beautiful Thoughts Selected from Great Authors, compiled by Sarah S. B. Yule and Mary S. Keene (New York: Dodge, 1889). 31. Arthur Eugene Bestor, Jr., Backwoods Utopias: The Sectarian and Owenite Phases of Communitarian Socialism in America, 1663–1829 (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1950). See also Dolores Hayden, Seven American Utopias: The Architecture of Communitarian Socialism (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1976). 32. This emphasis is readily apparent in Rainbook: Resources for Appropriate Technology (New York: Schocken Books, 1977). 33. Typical of the attacks on appropriate technology from the left is Alexander Cockburn and James Ridgeway’s “The Myth of Appropriate Technology,” Politicks and Other Human Interests 1(4): 1977. “Technology,” they argue, “whether alternative or intermediate, or even just big, can only exist as a reflection of the existing political and economic system. Appropriate technology, per se, won’t change anything. A politics that may include some aspects of smaller technology may lead to change—but the politics must come first.” (28) 34. Harvey Wasserman, American Born and Reborn (New York: Collier Books, 1983), 303–304. 35. For a lively defense of the Greens, see Fritjof Capra and Charlene Spretnak, Green Politics (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1984). 36. Bertolt Brecht, “The Exception and the Rule,” in The Jewish Wife and Other Short Plays, English versions by Eric Bentley (New York: Grove Press, 1965), 111. CHAPTER 5. Decentralization Clarified 1. John Naisbitt, Megatrends: Ten New Directions Transforming Our Lives (New York: Warner Books, 1984), 103. 2. Robert A. Caro, The Power Broker: Robert Moses and the Fall of New York (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1974), 753. 3. See the Oxford English Dictionary for early uses of these terms in print. 4. Paul Goodman, Drawing the Line, Taylor Stoehr (ed.) (New York: New Life, 1978), 185. Goodman’s thoughts on decentralism are argued in detail in People or Personnel and Like a Conquered Province (New York: Vintage Press, 1968). 5. Peter Kropotkin, Mutual Aid, a Factor of Evolution (London: William Heinemann, 1902); and Fields, Factories and Workshops (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1899). 6. Murray Bookchin, Post-Scarcity Anarchism (Palo Alto: Ramparts Press, 1970); The Spanish Anarchists: The Heroic Years, 1868–1936 (New York: Free Life Editions, 1977); Toward an Ecological Society (Montreal: Black Rose Books, 1981); and The Ecology of Freedom: The Emergence and Dissolution of Hierarchy (Palo Alto: Cheshire Books, 1982). 7. G. D. H. Cole, Guild Socialism Re-Stated (London: Leonard Parsons, 1920), 13. 8. Ibid., 61. 9. Joseph K. Hart, “Power and Culture,” reprinted in Changing Attitudes Toward American Technology, Thomas Parke Hughes (ed.) (New York: Harper and Row, 1975), 250, originally published in The Survey, Graphic Number 51, 625–628, March 1, 1924. ## CHAPTER 6. Mythinformation 1. See, for example, Edward Berkeley, The Computer Revolution (New York: Doubleday, 1962); Edward Tomeski, The Computer Revolution: The Executive and the New Information Technology (New York: Macmillan, 1970); and Nigel Hawkes, The Computer Revolution (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1972). See also Aaron Sloman, The Computer Revolution in Philosophy (Hassocks, England: Harvester Press, 1978); Zenon Pylyshyn, Perspectives on the Computer Revolution (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1970); Paul Stoneman, Technological Diffusion and the Computer Revolution (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976); and Ernest Braun and Stuart MacDonald, Revolution in Miniature: The History and Impact of Semiconductor Electronics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978). 2. Michael L. Dertouzos in an interview on “The Today Show,” National Broadcasting Company, August 8, 1983. 3. Daniel Bell, “The Social Framework of the Information Society,” in The Computer Age: A Twenty Year View, Michael L. Dertouzos and Joel Moses (eds.) (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1980), 163. 4. See, for example, Philip H. Abelson, “The Revolution in Computers and Electronics,” Science 215:751–753, 1982. 5. Edward A. Feigenbaum and Pamela McCorduck, The Fifth Generation: Artificial Intelligence and Japan’s Computer Challenge to the World (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1983), 8. 6. Among the important works of this kind are David Burnham, The Rise of the Computer State (New York: Random House, 1983); James N. Danziger et al., Computers and Politics: High Technology in American Local Governments (New York: Columbia University Press, 1982); Abbe Moshowitz, The Conquest of Will: Information Processing in Human Affairs (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1976); James Rule et al., The Politics of Privacy (New York: New American Library, 1980); and Joseph Weizenbaum, Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to Calculation (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1976). 7. Quoted in Jacques Vallee, The Network Revolution: Confessions of a Computer Scientist (Berkeley: And/Or Press, 1982), 10. 8. Tracy Kidder, Soul of a New Machine (New York: Avon Books, 1982), 228. 9. The Fifth Generation, 14. 10. James Martin, Telematic Society: A Challenge for Tomorrow (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1981), 172. 11. Ibid., 4. 12. Starr Roxanne Hiltz and Murray Turoff, The Network Nation: Human Communication via Computer (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1978), 489. 13. Ibid., xxix. 14. Ibid., 484. 15. Ibid., xxix. 16. The Network Revolution, 198. 17. John Naisbitt, Megatrends: Ten New Directions Transforming Our Lives (New York: Warner Books, 1984), 282. 18. Amitai Etzioni, Kenneth Laudon, and Sara Lipson, “Participating Technology: The Minerva Communications Tree,” Journal of Communications, 25:64, Spring 1975. 19. J. C. R. Licklider, “Computers and Government,” in Dertouzos and Moses (eds.), The Computer Age, 114, 126. 20. Quoted in The Fifth Generation, 240. 21. Occupational Outlook Handbook, 1982–1983, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Bulletin No. 2200, Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. See also Gene I. Maeroff, “The Real Job Boom Is Likely to be Low-Tech,” New York Times, September 4, 1983, 16E. 22. See, for example, James Danziger et al., Computers and Politics. 23. For a study of the utopia of consumer products in American democracy, see Jeffrey L. Meikle, Twentieth Century Limited: Industrial Design in America, 1925–1939 (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1979). For other utopian dreams see Joseph J. Corn, The Winged Gospel: America’s Romance with Aviation, 1900–1950 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983); Joseph J. Corn and Brian Horrigan, Yesterday’s Tomorrows: Past Visions of America’s Future (New York: Summit Books, 1984); and Erik Barnow, The Tube of Plenty (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975). 24. The Fifth Generation, 8. 25. “The Philosophy of US,” from the official program of The US Festival held in San Bernardino, California, September 4–7, 1982. The outdoor rock festival, sponsored by Steven Wozniak, coinventor of the original Apple Computer, attracted an estimated half million people. Wozniak regaled the crowd with large-screen video presentations of his message, proclaiming a new age of community and democracy generated by the use of personal computers. 26. “Power corresponds to the human ability not just to act but to act in concert. Power is never the property of an individual; it belongs to a group and remains in existence only so long as the group keeps together.” Hannah Arendt, On Violence (New York: Harcourt Brace & World, 1969), 44. 27. John Markoff, “A View of the Future: Micros Won’t Matter,” Info-World, October 31, 1983, 69. 28. Donald H. Dunn, “The Many Uses of the Personal Computer,” Business Week, June 23, 1980, 125–126. 1. Ralph Waldo Emerson, “Nature,” in The Selected Writings of Ralph Waldo Emerson, Brooks Atkinson (ed.) (New York: Modern Library, 1940). 2. General introductions to changing conceptions of nature in Western culture include Clarence J. Glacken, Traces on the Rhodian Shore (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967); John Passmore, Man’s Responsibility for Nature (London: Gerald Duckworth, 1974); and R. G. Collingwood, The Idea of Nature (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1954). Discussions of the idea in American history include Perry Miller, Errand Into the Wilderness (Cambridge: Belknap, 1956); Hans Huth, Nature and the American: Three Centuries of Changing Attitudes (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1957); Roderick Nash, Wilderness and the American Mind, revised edition (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973); and Carroll Pursell (ed.), From Conservation to Ecology: The Development of Environmental Concern (New York: T. Y. Crowell, 1973). 3. Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan or the Matter, Forme and Power of a Commonwealth Ecclesiasticall and Civil, Michael Oakeshott (ed.), with an introduction by Richard S. Peters (New York: Collier Books, 1962), 103. 4. John Locke, “The Second Treatise of Government,” in Two Treatises of Government, with an introduction and notes by Peter Laslett (New York: Mentor Books, 1965), 318. 5. Rene Descartes, “Discourse on Method,” in The Philosophical Works of Descartes, vol. I, translated by E. S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1931), 119. 6. Francis Bacon, “Novum Organum,” in Selected Writings, Hugh G. Dick (ed.) (New York: Modern Library, 1955), 539. 7. An excellent discussion of the Progressive Era conservation movement is Samuel Hays, Conservation and the Gospel of Efficiency (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1959). 8. A study of American concerns about urban and industrial pollution in the nineteenth century is Martin Melosi (ed.), Pollution and Reform in American Cities, 1870–1930 (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1980). 9. “The Second Treatise of Government,” 329. 10. General discussions of environmental economics include A. M. Freeman, R. H. Haveman, and A. V. Kneese, The Economics of Environmental Policy (New York: John Wiley, 1973); William J. Baumol and Wallace E. Oates, The Theory of Environmental Policy (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1975); and Frederick Anderson et al., Environmental Improvement Through Economic Incentives (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1977). 11. For an economic analysis that attempts to improve ways of counting environmental costs, see J. V. Krutilla and A. C. Fisher, The Economics of Natural Environments (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974). See also the general discussion in Joseph M. Petulla, American 12. Larry E. Ruff, “The Economic Common Sense of Pollution,” in Edwin Mansfield (ed.), Microeconomics: Selected Readings (New York: W. W. Norton, 1975), 498. 13. Typical of economic thinking about “trade-offs” in environmental policy is William F. Baxter, People or Penguins (New York: Columbia University Press, 1974). A lively critique of cost/benefit analysis as applied to environmental decision making is presented in Mark Sagoff, “Economic Theory and Environmental Law,” Michigan Law Review 79: 1393–1419, 1981. 14. Lester C. Thurow, The Zero-Sum Society: Distribution and the Possibilities for Economic Change (New York: Basic Books, 1980; Penguin Books, 1981), 105, 108. 15. William J. Baumol and Wallace E. Oates, Economics, Environmental Policy and the Quality of Life (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1979), 282. 16. George Perkins Marsh, Man and Nature or Physical Geography as Modified by Human Action (New York: C. Scribner, 1864), 43. 17. A poignant treatment of this theme is Jonathan Schell, The Fate of the Earth (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1982). “Nature, once a harsh and feared master, now lies in subjection, and needs protection against man’s powers. Yet because man, no matter what intellectual and technical heights he may scale, remains embedded in nature, the balance has shifted against him too, and the threat he poses to the earth is a threat to him as well.” (110) 18. Some prominent works in the literature on ecological disaster are Donella H. Meadows et al., The Limits to Growth (New York: Universe Books, 1972); Barry Commoner, The Closing Circle: Nature, Man and Technology (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1971); Leslie L. Roos, Jr. (ed.), The Politics of Ecosuicide (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971); Joseph Eigner, “Unshielding the Sun: Environmental Effects,” Environment, 17(3): 15–18, 1975; and Robert Heilbroner, An Inquiry into the Human Prospect (New York: W. W. Norton, 1974). 19. The Closing Circle, 217–218, 229. 20. A sense of weariness about predictions of environmental hazards is expressed in Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky, Risk and Culture (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982). 21. The Closing Circle, 41; E. P. Odum, Ecosystem Structure and Function (Eugene: Oregon State University Press, 1972). 22. William Ophuls, Ecology and the Politics of Scarcity (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1977), 151–152, 163. 23. A judicious introduction to this way of thinking is provided in two articles by Holmes Rolston III, “Is There an Ecological Ethic?” Ethics 85:93–109, 1975; and “Can and Ought We to Follow Nature?” Environmental Ethics, 1(2): 7–30, 1979. 24. Lynn White, Jr., “The Historical Roots of Our Ecologic Crisis,” Science 155:1203–1207, 1967. 25. Arne Naess, “The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range Ecology Movements,” Inquiry 16:95– 100, 1973. See also Bill Devall and George Sessions, Deep Ecology (Layton, Utah: Gibbs M. Smith, 1984); and Deep Ecology, Michael Tobias, (ed.) (San Diego: Avant, 1984). 26. René Dubos, A God Within (New York: Scribner’s, 1972). See also Dubos’ “A Theology of Earth,” in Ian G. Barbour (ed.) Western Man and Environmental Ethics (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1973) and “Guest Editorial: Nature Does Not Always Know Best,” in G. Tyler Miller, Living in the Environment (San Francisco: Wadsworth, 1975). 27. Aldo Leopold, A Sand County Almanac (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1949), 204. 28. Ibid., 224–225. 29. For arguments in this vein see Peter Singer, Animal Liberation (New York: New York Review, 1975); and Christopher Stone, Should Trees Have Standing? Toward Legal Rights for Natural Objects (New York: Avon, 1975). 30. David Brower, quoted in John McPhee, Encounters with the Archdruid (New York: Ballantine, 1972), 65. 31. Risk and Culture, 158. 32. Murray Bookchin, The Ecology of Freedom: The Emergence and Dissolution of Hierarchy (Palo Alto: Cheshire Books, 1982), 22. 33. Anne and Paul Ehrlich, “The Population Bomb Revisited,” Life After ’80: Environmental Choices We Can Live With in Kathleen Courrier (ed.) (Andover, Mass.: Brick House, 1980), 69. 34. Georg Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness, translated by Rodney Livingstone (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1968), 234. ## CHAPTER 8. Risk Assessment: A Hazardous Pursuit 1. Samuel S. Epstein, Lester O. Brown, and Carl Pope, Hazardous Waste in America (San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1982), 6. 2. Stephen Salsbury, The State, the Investor, and the Railroad: Boston & Albany, 1825–1867 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967), 182–187. 3. Upton Sinclair, The Jungle (New York: Doubleday, 1906). See also Leon A. Harris, Upton Sinclair, American Rebel (New York: Crowell, 1975). 4. Ivan Illich, Medical Nemesis: The Expropriation of Health (New York: Pantheon Books, 1976), 3. “Increasing and irreparable damage,” Illich writes, “accompanies present industrial expansion in all sectors. In medicine this damage appears as iatrogenesis. Iatrogenesis is clinical when pain, sickness, and death result from medical care; it is social when health policies reinforce an industrial organization that generates ill-health.” (270–271) 5. See, for example, Mark Green and Robert Massie, Jr. (eds.), The Big Business Reader (New York: Pilgrim Press, 1980), especially Edward Greer, “And Filthy Flows the Calumet,” 169–179; Michael H. Brown, “Love Canal and the Poisoning of America,” 189–207; and Mark Dowie, “The Dumping of Hazardous Products on Foreign Markets,” 430–443. 6. Two important writings that helped place the concept of “risk” at the center of discussions about technology, environment, and society are Chauncey Starr, “Social Benefit Versus Technological Risk,” Science 165:1232–1238, 1969; and William Lowrance, Of Acceptable Risk (Los Altos: William Kaufmann, 1976). 7. Steven D. Jellinek laments this state of affairs in “On the Inevitability of Being Wrong,” Technology Review 82(8):8–9, 1980. 8. Dante Picciano, “Pilot Cytogenetic Study of Love Canal, New York,” prepared by the Biogenics Corporation for the Environmental Protection Agency, May 14, 1980; quoted in Hazardous Waste in America, 113–114. 9. See Edmund A. C. Crouch and Richard Wilson, Risk/Benefit Analysis (Cambridge: Ballinger, 1982). 10. See Baruch Fischoff et al., Acceptable Risk (Cambridge: Cambridge Unviersity Press, 1981). 11. Chauncey Starr, Richard Rudman, and Chris Whipple, “Philosophical Basis for Risk Analysis,” Annual Review of Energy 1:629–662, 1976. 12. Samuel C. Florman, “Technophobia in Modern Times,” Science ’82, 3:14, 1982. 13. Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky, Risk and Culture: The Selection of Technical and Environmental Dangers (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982). See my review, “Pollution as Delusion,” New York Times Book Review, August 8, 1982, 8, 18. 14. From “Observations,” an advertisement of the Mobil Oil Corporation, Parade Magazine, December 12, 1982, 29. 15. David Noble argues this position forcefully in “The Chemistry of Risk: Synthesizing the Corporate Ideology of the 1980s,” Seven Days 3(7):23–26, 34, 1979. A similar view is offered by Mark Green and Norman Waitzman, “Cost, Benefit and Class,” Working Papers for a New Society, 7(3): 39–51, 1980. 16. Intentions of this sort are evident in the research on risk assessment of The Center for Technology, Environment, and Development at Clark University. See Patric Derr, Robert Goble, Roger E. Kasperson, and Robert W. Kates, “Worker/Public Protection: The Double Standard,” Environment 23(7):6–15, 31–36, 1981; Julie Graham and Don Shakow, “Risk and Reward: Hazard Pay for Workers,” Environment 23(8):14–20, 44–45, 1981. 17. Talbot Page discusses issues of this kind seeking a balance between “false positives and false negatives” in judgments about risks in “A Generic View of Toxic Chemicals and Similar Risks,” Ecology Law Quarterly 7:207–244, 1978. 18. Among the helpful criticisms of cost/benefit analysis are Mark Sagoff, “Economic Theory and Environmental Law,” Michigan Law Review, 79:1393–1419, 1981; and Steve H. Hanke, “On the Feasibility of Benefit-Cost Analysis,” Public Policy 29:147–157, 1981. 19. Sheldon Krimsky, Genetic Alchemy (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1982). ## CHAPTER 9. Brandy, Cigars, and Human Values 1. Nadezhda Mandelstam, Hope Abandoned: A Memoir, translated from the Russian by Max Hayward (London: Collins and Harvill Press, 1974), 10. ## CHAPTER 10. The Whale and the Reactor 1. Henry Adams, The Education of Henry Adams (New York: Modern Library, 1931), 380. 2. Clark Kerr et al., Industrialism and Industrial Man (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1960). See also Clark Kerr, The Uses of the University (New York: Harper and Row, 1963). 3. For a chronology of events in the planning, construction, and licensing of the Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant, see Carl Neiburger “Diablo from Groundbreaking to Start-up,” San Luis Obispo County Telegram Tribune, August 11, 1984, B7–B9. ## CHAPTER 11. Beyond Techno-narcissism 1. Yochai Benkler, The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets (New Haven:Yale University Press, 2006). 2. Ibid., 6. 3. Ibid., 4. 4. Ibid., 3. 5. Ibid., 272. 6. Ibid., 379. 7. Robert W. McChesney and John Nichols, People Get Ready: The Fight against a Jobless Economy and Citizenless Democracy (New York: Bold Type Books, 2016); Tim Wu, The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires (New York: Alfred Knopf, 2010). 8. Stephanie Kirchgaessner, “Cambridge Analytica Used Data from Facebook and Politico to Help Trump,” Guardian, October 26, 2017, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/oct/26/cambridge-analytica-used-data-fromfacebook-and-politico-to-help-trump. 9. Austin Powell, “Bruce Schneier: ‘The internet era of fun and games is over,’” Daily Dot, November 16, 2016, https://www.dailydot.com/layer8/bruce-schneier-internet-of-things. 10. “General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),” Intersoft Consulting, 2018, https://gdprinfo.eu/. 11. Bill McKibben, The Age of Missing Information (1992; repr., New York: Random House, 2006), 60, iBooks. In The Age of Missing Information McKibben describes his experience, noting that he had not previously spent much time watching television at all. This is not surprising, because he had long since fashioned a life of scholarly, philosophical, and political engagement with questions that have to do with humanity’s relationship to nature and the need to preserve natural habitats and species now threatened by the hazards of modern industrial development. In fact, by the time he embarked on his cable TV project, McKibben had already won fame as the first nonscientist to rally public attention to the threat posed by global warming and climate change. Thus, with more or less pristine eyes, he took note of the features and thematic patterns he observed. 12. Ibid., 879–884. 13. Ibid., 793–794. 14. Ibid., 905–906. 15. Christopher P. Chambers and Frederico Echenique, Revealed Preference Theory (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2016). 16. Tristan Harris, “How Technology Hijacks People’s Minds—from a Magician and Google’s Design Ethicist,” May 19, 2016, http://www.tristanharris.com/2016/05/how-technology-hijackspeoples-minds%e2%80%8a-%e2%80%8afrom-a-magician-and-googles-design-ethicist. 17. Robinson Meyer, “The Grim Conclusions of the Largest-Ever Study of Fake News,” Guardian, March 8, 2018, https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/03/largest-study-ever-fakenews-mit-twitter/555104. 18. Ezra Klein, “How Technology Is Designed to Bring Out the Worst in Us,” Vox, February 19, 2018, https://www.vox.com/technology/2018/2/19/17020310/tristan-harris-facebook-twitter-humanetech-time. 19. Niraj Chokshi, “Trump Voters Driven by Fear of Losing Status, Not Economic Anxiety, Study Finds,” New York Times, April 24, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/24/us/politics/trumpeconomic-anxiety.html. 20. Alan I. Abramowitz, The Great Alignment: Race, Party Transformation, and the Rise of Donald Trump (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2018). 21. Nancy MacLean, Democracy in Chains: The Deep History of the Radical Right’s Stealth Plan for America (New York: Random House, 2017). 22. Sean Illing, “Cambridge Analytica, the Shady Data Firm That Might Be a Key to Trump-Russia Link, Explained,” Vox, April 4, 2018, https://www.vox.com/policy-andpolitics/2017/10/16/15657512/cambridge-analytica-facebook-alexander-nix-christopher-wylie. 23. Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958); Hannah Arendt, On Revolution (New York: Viking Press, 1963). 24. Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 179–180. 25. Center for Humane Technology, “What We Feel as Addiction Is Part of Something Much Bigger,” https://web.archive.org/web/20180309070035/http://humanetech.com/1215-problemsolution (archived March 9, 2018). 26. Ibid. 27. Ibid. 28. Jessica Guynn, “Mark Zuckerberg: People Are Spending 50 Million Fewer Hours on Facebook a Day,” USA Today, January 31, 2018, https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2018/01/31/markzuckerberg-people-spending-50-million-fewer-hours-facebook-reduced-time-people-spend-50- million/1081082001. 29. Elizabeth Inglese, “What Wellness Looks Like in Silicon Valley,” mind-bodygreen, December 1, 2017, https://www.mindbodygreen.com/articles/what-wellness-looks-like-in-silicon-valley. 30. Center for Humane Technology, “What We Feel as Addiction.” 31. McChesney and Nichols, People Get Ready.