## PREFACE Any revolution occurs within a particular cultural ecosystem that delimits possible change. Ideological formations in the system act as constraints on any extrahistorical agendas the revolution's agents might have. Yet the rhetoric of "revolution" assumes that the ecosystem is malleable. The frames of reference are largely inherited, although the ones that prevail in the new conditions may not be those that were dominant under the old order. In this book I examine this dynamic by focusing on the quest of Petersburg intellectuals to establish a quintessential revolutionary culture during the fateful years of war and revolution, 1913-1931. I ask the question how the Soviet 1920s became the Stalinist 1930s. I have tried to rethink what happened in the 1910s, 1920s, and 1930s outside the somewhat tired and Russo-centric frame of "continuity or change?" Indeed, a foundational premise of this book is that these categories are inadequate to the complexity of the subject. I argue against the assumption that in cultural history there was some sort of big bang in 1917. I also argue against the mysticism of "decade" and resist the notion that the 1920s represent a single entity that is either absolutely unlike, or some sort of precursor to, that other entity that is the 1930s. Instead, I focus on an entire series of shifts in the cultural models that occurred in the period covered, shifts involving both continuity and change. This book, then, is a case study in the ecology of revolution. It argues that the evolution of "Stalinist" culture did not proceed in a series of radical breaks or in an unswerving line. Rather, it draws an analogy with what is called "punctuated evolution," and points out that while cultural history in the 1920s and 1930s was marked by a series of cataclysms (purges, cultural revolutions, and so on), the more formative moments tended to be not these dramatic times but the intervening years of adaptation and consolidation as the surviving flora and fauna responded to the new conditions; some came to dominate, others not, and others again generated mutations. Moreover, in the evolution of Soviet culture though the Party or the regime might be the apparent agent (cause) of the cataclysms, they are themselves not extrasystemic figures but part of that ecosystem; consequently, even as they act they are also acted upon. So often the Party was acting out models suggested in intellectuals' works. The Party and the intelligentsia were never completely separate groups, nor was either of them ever homogenous (this was true of the Party even in the darkest years of Stalinism). Thus in this book I seek to avoid representing events in a tale that culminates in Stalinism as a culture formulated and instituted either by him personally, or by his regime generally. What historians have personalized as Stalinism was largely in evidence well before he had the power to dictate policy. Though Stalinist culture might seem to represent an abomination of the intellectuals' aspirations, it was nevertheless not the product of an act of parthenogenesis on the part of the Party leaders, nor was it merely the case that their ideas were ventriloquated through the intellectuals. To assume that the Party made Stalinist culture and that the intellectuals did not is to participate in the same kind of either/or mentality that was characteristic of official Soviet thinking. The relationship between the two groups was much more dialogic than such accounts assume, despite the fact that they were so unequal in power terms. Consequently, in analyzing cultural evolution, a blow-by-blow account of "And then the Party ruled. . ." does not necessarily yield the most rewarding or profound narrative. An additional problem is that the Party did not always rule consistently. For example, the 1930s under Stalin saw several shifts of the basic cultural model, despite the fact that the leadership remained fairly stable. Arguably, these shifts reflect not merely successive whims on Stalin's part but broad cultural changes. My intention is not to deny all the horrors and excesses of the Stalin regime. Nor is it to deny that, in the 1930s and 1940s especially, the Party leadership's overweening role in cultural politics was tremendously consequential in determining the shape of Soviet culture. But the story of its repressiveness has been told many times before. This book seeks not to contradict that account, nor to rival it (we already have some fine studies), but rather to explore other aspects of the dynamic in the interests of pointing to the vicissitudes and paradoxes of cultural evolution and adding a level of complexity to the existing paradigms of Western historiography. Although many intellectuals resisted the Bolshevik regime and many were persecuted by it or succumbed to its pressures and became mere "hacks still others were challenged by it and saw the overthrow of the old order as an opportunity to press for their own agendas. The single most powerful reason many non-Party intellectuals were able to find some common ground with the Party I explain in terms of a fundamental loathing for the role of the marketplace in culture, a loathing to be found among highbrows and avantgardists alike. Hence, in many instances, intellectuals could not be characterized as merely "resisting" the regime or "collaborating" with it but were, rather, maneuvering within the spectrum of possibilities available in the name of their own revolutionary ideals. Another point of common ground frequently found between intellectual groups and the Party is what might be called"evolutionary impatience." So often revolution was, in the understanding of a given group, a form of voluntarist evolution. In this book I do not assume that revolutions are all-powerful. Consequently, I begin in 1913, the last year before the Great War, which saw the culmination of late Imperial culture, a nodal point where one can observe traffic patterns between Russian and Soviet culture, and also between European and Russian culture. In so doing, I show that many of the "revolutionary" programs represent trends to be found across a spectrum of Western countries. To analyze these patterns comprehensively would be a mammoth task, and so I have selected a single but crucial focus for my study: the city—the phenomenon—ofPetersburg/Leningrad. Most accounts of Soviet culture in the 1920s have been about individual figures or groups, but the picture they present of its evolution has been, de facto, Moscow-centric. In the interests of obtaining a more complex account, I take the other direction and focus on Petersburg, a focus with obvious limitations, but also certain advantages. Revolutions renegotiate center and periphery; they renegotiate hierarchies. Petersburg, as the capital, had been the center of Russia. It lost that status in 1918, and by the time the city was renamed Leningrad, in 1924, it was fast becoming ever more peripheral. Cultural evolution is not unilinear, however, and those elements that are marginal at one time may become dominant in another. Hence a cultural history of Petersburg in the revolutionary years can serve as a prism for looking at this process. As Moscow became the center of an authoritarian culture, Petersburg changed its function from seat of power to that of significant other. The various alternatives to "Moscow" culture, representing all points on the Soviet Union's political and aesthetic spectra, have tended to come out of, to be published in, or to identify with, "Petersburg," a tendency that is apparent in the period covered by this book. In other words, there was always a dialogic relationship between Moscow culture and that of Petersburg/Leningrad. xii This book covers not only Petersburg culture tout court but also follows, with a particular focus on events in that city, this developing dialogue in the Soviet period. The dialogue, however, is not merely between intellectuals located in the two cities; it is also between old and "new" models of national identity. Ever since the city's foundation in 1703, contending accounts of "Petersburg" have played a crucial role in thinking through this identity. A revolution is supremely an iconoclastic act, but it entails more than a rupture; in its attempt to forge a new and more authentic beginning, it must locate some prior ground for this authenticity. More often than not, the struggle for the future has worked itself out as a conflict between contending versions of the past. In modern Russia, Petersburg has been the text in which intellectuals have sought to read the past as an index to the future. The city has functioned in their imaginations as more than a mere city: it has been a mythopoeic space. Thus my subject is not just the urban complex Petersburg/Leningrad. As intellectuals and revolutionaries worked out their common task of creating a new, revolutionary culture, questions of time, space, language, and authority became crucial in giving it shape. Petersburg was in many respects the frame of their endeavor.