# INTRODUCTION: THE ECOLOGY OF REVOLUTION This book tells the story of the Great Experiment, of that generation of intellectuals who in the 1920s sought to create a truly revolutionary culture. Many saw their dreams evaporate in repression, obtuseness, and even outright quackery so that their enthusiasm was rarely passed on to their children or grandchildren. Often their progeny became dissidents or, in the 1970s and 1980s, sought to emigrate. David Remnick in Lenin's Tomb discusses the family of Masha Lipman as an example of this common generational pattern. Masha was a dissident, but one of her grandfathers had been a member of RAPM (the Russian Association of Proletarian Musicians, the most militant revolutionary group of the late 1920s in that field), and his wife had been a disciple of Vs. Meyerhold and acted in his theater. As Masha describes the grandparents: They and their friends developed a revolutionary style even in the way they lived at home... . They had no dishes, no real furniture. They decided it was all too bourgeois.... Birthday parties, weddings and New Year's [Christmas] trees were also gotten rid of. Bourgeois.... They thought that traditional Russian felt boots, valenki, were also bourgeois, so the children walked through the slush and the snow in thin leather shoes, crying of the cold. They just mocked all traditions of the old order. So they had my mother call them by their first names and they ate their meals off of butcher paper.1 This rigidly ascetic code with its system of taboos extending to the most banal aspects of life, resulting even in needless cruelty to one's own children, is reminiscent of a religious sect. The avant-garde artist Pavel Filonov, along with other Russian intellectuals of this time, participated so fully in such Manichaean scenarios that during NEP (the New Economic Policy; the period during the mid-1920s when small-scale private enterprise was permitted) he would not let one of the petty capitalists spawned by the age (a nepman) so much as cross the threshold of his apartment.2 But if so many Russian intellectuals were taken by a religious-like belief system that in its more extreme expressions resembled a sect, arguably its idols were not Marx or Lenin so much as they were some version of culture. Much of intellectual life was driven by a version of a thirst for the sacred with a concomitant revulsion against the profane, a contest of values that can be seen in an early paradigm, the story of Christ's throwing the moneychangers out of the temple. In the modern, post-Enlightenment period, a wide range of intellectuals in the West as well as in Russia have essentially reacted against strictly secularizing tendencies and reinvested religious fervor in their version of culture as a sacred value threatened not just by the moneychangers (its commercialization) but by a more comprehensive category that might be called "the profane." This category includes market forces but essentially represents the mundane, worldly aspects of everyday life, such as seeking comfort, profit, personal advantage, and so on. Some intellectuals contended that culture should play the leading role in a religious revival, but a revival conceived outside the parameters of conventional religion and the organized church. They did, however, share with the other groups represented in this trend a repugnance for the bourgeoisie or the petty bourgeoisie as the icon of the profane. This essentially aesthetic utopianism, or quest for the sacred, coincides at key points with the more strictly economic or political criticisms of figures such as Marx, to whom some but not all of them subscribed to a degree. Even before the Revolution in Russia, many different intellectual groups sought greater power and authority as a means of assuming a sacerdotal role in society. After the Revolution, many, but by no means all of them, devoted their lives to the cause of the Revolution's culture as a possible step toward realizing their goals; Meyerhold, the Formalist theoretician Osip Brik, and others even flirted with the Cheka (the secret police) as the force most committed to driving the moneychangers out of the temple. Others worked for the Bolshevik state with heavy hearts as an uneasy and ultimately turncoat ally in the pursuit of the millennium. (Many of them abandoned this pursuit, whether to external or internal emigration, or because they had themselves been purged or enticed into becoming Soviet "hacks.") Still others resisted the Bolsheviks from the very outset as false prophets of a purifying transformation, as a force for darkness or heresy. The Great Experiment's master narrative, one that can be associated with the story of how Christ drove the moneychangers out of the temple, involves the repurification or resacerdotalization of space. This was a foundational myth of Soviet culture in the1920s and 1930s (its centrality in the latter decade, a time of purging, is not far to seek). Masha Lipman's grandparents, like so many others, sought to purify even the most banal corners of their private space. But the concern with private space was essentially subsumed under the overriding concern with public space. It is in this latter concern that the trend intersects with Russia's main myth of national identity, the myth of Petersburg. ## Petersburg In 1913 Andrei Bely published his Symbolist novel Petersburg,³ which opens with a playful disquisition on the existence of the city. The narrator concludes: "If Petersburg is not the capital, there is no Petersburg. It only appears to exist." He then goes on to insist that no matter how it might seem, Petersburg must exist because it appears on the map in the form of two concentric circles with a dot in the middle (the marker of the capital city), and "from precisely this mathematical dot, which has no dimension, it proclaims forcefully that it exists: from here, from this very point, surges and swarms the printed book, from this invisible point speeds the official circular."4 When Bely wrote his Prologue, he did not realize how serious his implied question was to become. Just a year later, after the Great War started in August 1914, Petersburg was no more in the sense that its name had been russified to Petrograd lest it be mistaken for a German name.5 And in five years, in March 1918, the city lost its status as the Soviet capital, since it was deemed too close to the West and the sea and hence more vulnerable to attack than Moscow. The new Bolshevik city fathers in Petrograd lobbied periodically for returning the capital to their city, not, needless to say, because it had been the old Imperial capital, but on the grounds that it was the "city of the Revolution" (the new point of origins). A particularly concerted effort was made after the Civil War ended—and with it much of the danger of attack—but all their bids were in vain. The issue of whether Petersburg exists is not, however, only about whether or not it is the nation's capital. What Bely is also alluding to in his Prologue is the sense that Petersburg at some level "exists" only as the focus of a myth of Petersburg, that is, only in books, and versions of that myth question whether the city exists as an actuality at all. The myth of Petersburg, sometimes referred to as the Petersburg theme, has been an obsession of Russian intellectual life since at least the beginning of the nineteenth century. There is scarcely a major writer, historian, or thinker who has not examined the meaning of Petersburg. The city was founded by Peter the Great in 1703 to effect the transformation of Russia from a "rude and barbarous," semi-Asiatic country to a respected member of the concert of Europe. All interpreters set themselves the task of defining this event as an emblem for Russia's historical destiny or the identity of its culture. The myth rests on a somewhat legendary account of the city's foundation.6 By the will or genius of one man, Peter the Great, the boggy wilderness was transformed into a resplendent capital. When, with a system of canals, Peter tamed the waters of the Neva and drained its adjoining swampland, a city of culture arose where once there had been only desolate nature. And then, as if to proclaim the transformation from nature to culture, statues were erected in the new city, principally at points where they preside over the tamed waterways, on the Neva embankments and the canals. This traditional account of Petersburg claiming that the town was built on an uninhabitable swamp is not entirely based in fact. Equally dubious is the myth's insistence that the fabled city emerged "suddenly."7 But the facts of the city's foundation matter less than the function of its myth. As cultural anthropologists and historians have noted, in each major culture system a city has emerged as its emblem or paradigm, always embodying particular values, political, metaphysical, or aesthetic.8 Generally, each culture has fastened on a particular city as the privileged subject for successive readings of itself.9 As Clifford Geertz has remarked, "Political authority requires a cultural frame in which to define itself and advance its claims," and hence the city chosen as emblem has most often been the nation's capital.10 In eighteenth-century Russia, the achievement of Petersburg and the story of its foundation became the focus of legitimizing myths for the Russian empire. Peter emerged as the principal actor in the new originary myth, a mvth of the magnificent city founded ex nihilo. The response to Petersburg was not all laudatory, however. As Geertz has pointed out, the opposition to the regnant political authority requires a "cultural frame" no less than does the authority itself and tends to articulate its case within the same frame. Together with the official foundation myth of Petersburg there developed a foundation antimyth that included virtually the same elements in the story of Petersburg's foundation as did the official myth, but reinterpreted each. Such negative interpretations had been largely festering in oral lore, but in the early nineteenth century the antimyth assumed a major role in the written tradition. Writers identified the foundation of Petersburg in a poor, inhospitable, and dreary site as Peter's cardinal error, the moment that symbolized how he turned Russia from her natural course; they lambasted the city as "founded on tears and bones."11 In 1833 Aleksandr Pushkin, Russia's most famous poet, published a long poem entitled The Bronze Horseman (Mednyy vsadnik, a reference to the famous equestrian statue to Peter the Great erected by Catherine) incorporating many of the clichés from both the positive and the negative versions of the myth. The poem concerns an actual event, the disastrous flood of 1824, generally regarded as the most severe of all the recurrent floods to which Petersburg has been subject. The poem opens with a laudatory preamble, written in the style of the occasional ode, in which Pushkin praises the great builder of Petersburg and his "creation" and, by implication, the great line. After this, however, Pushkin shifts both genre and tone to treat the flood in a fictive account of a poor clerk, Evgeny, whose fiancée is drowned when raging waters engulf the island in the Neva where she lives. Evgeny is driven insane and challenges the statue of the bronze horseman, who proceeds to gallop after him through the deserted squares of Petersburg; in the end, Evgeny is so reduced by hunger and exhaustion that he dies. The poem has been widely interpreted as an attack on autocracy. Another common interpretation has to do with Peter's role in opening up Russia to the West and its toll on native traditions and citizenry. Both interpretations see as the center of the poem the confrontation between the oppressive tsar and the raging Neva as a figure for the "elemental" masses who periodically rise up against his repression. The Bronze Horseman, locus classicus of the Petersburg myth, has launched a thousand creative works (poems, films, plays, paintings, and so on), including Bely's Petersburg. Although Pushkin was far from the first to rework the myth, with his poem the myth cohered and the equestrian statue became the city's genius loci.12 Since The Bronze Horseman appeared, its tropes have become standard for the Petersburg theme, but they are continually being reaccentuated. Many of the landmarks in this process are among the best-known works of Russian literature; Petersburg has ranged in meaning from a phantasmagoric and unreal city in a Gogol or a Dostoevsky tale to, in modernist works of the early twentieth century, the raw materials of a metaliterature that explores the role of art and the artist, and the problematic nature of consciousness. One might thunk that the Revolution would have killed off this already overused theme. After all, it overthrew the hated autocratic order; moreover, in its wake the capital and bureaucracy were moved to Moscow. But in fact this was not so. By 1918 Petersburg no longer existed either in name or as those circles around a dot on the map which proclaim it to be the capital. Yet it has persisted in Russian culture to this day as an idea, an ethos, an ideal, and above all as a language of clichés that Russians have deployed in debating the country's way forward. Although in the 1920s Moscow became ever more powerful politically, it was not until the 1930s that a cogent Soviet myth of Moscow emerged and the first great Muscovite novel of the Soviet period, M. Bulgakov's The Master and Margarita, was written (final draft version 1938-1940). Even then the myth of Petersburg continued to captivate the imagination and to generate new interpretations in response to a changing reality. To this day, its principal terms have proved tenacious as frames for the inevitable identity search conducted in literature, theater, and film after the cataclysmic upheaval of revolution.13 Some versions of this myth might have questioned whether Petersburg exists, but an even greater illusion is that it is a unique myth. It seems quite derivative in many of its clichés (for example, "the city founded on bones and tears" is but a variant of the myth of the building of the pyramids or of Versailles). Russian writers found many of their "Petersburg" tropes among those that Balzac, Hugo, and others applied to Paris.14Also, the representation of Petersburg as phantasmagoric came not just because of its peculiar history and geography but also because Russian writers wanted to inscribe E. T. A. Hoffman into a Russian reality and fastened upon Petersburg as the most grateful site for this. The Petersburg myth is essentially a variant of the myth of the center and as such is very comparable with the myth of Paris. There are elements that make this particular version distinctive, however, not the least of which is that there exists another claimant for the title capital, Moscow, the one superseded when Petersburg was founded. Each of the two capitals has functioned as the symbol for rival interpretations of the national identity. In the old days, as Lewis Mumford and others have remarked, a city was seen as a simulacrum of the heavens.15 Petersburg was originally conceived as a seat of power, and also a city of science and culture. As such, with its statues and grid of broad avenues and canals, it was deliberately contrasted with obscurantist, medieval Moscow, a city of narrow, winding lanes and onion domes. In other words, it was built in the image of a new belief system. Petersburg, as anti-Moscow, was always considered more secular and cosmopolitan. This was an important element in those interpretations of the myth that saw the city's very existence as illusory. Yet, in actuality, the city was the most insistent reality of a highly centralized state. To see it as a phantom-like mirage is to deny the kingdom of necessity. In the nineteenth century Petersburg was, for all its statues and canals, a paradigm of the industrializing city. By the middle of the century the statues were anachronistic, like the medieval parts of Paris or London in the mercantilist era. As Petersburg industrialized, a huge population growth exacerbated the already dramatic divisions of class and education and was accompanied by the predictable gamut of social problems (poor public health, prostitution, housing, and so on). When Russians wrote about urban problems they often used elements from the myth of Petersburg as their frame. This is evident in Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment when the narrator dwells on the horrors of the Haymarket district, which is situated just behind grand buildings of the city's center. In the 1910s and 1920s, many intellectuals used tropes from the myth of Petersburg in interpreting the meaning of revolution for Russia. Some saw the city as standing for all that was retrograde in the old Russia, as a constraining, stagnant, or polluted space, a scab that obscured or putrified the purest or most vital expressions of culture and therefore had to be removed.16 For others, by contrast, Petersburg became the symbolic site of humanistic culture, of a quasi-religious value system that many believed should become the basis of a new social order. After 1917, some enjoined the state to realize these "Petersburgian" ideals, the more naive of them contending that it could be done by reviving the very architecture and culture of the city. Others, however, saw no such role for the Soviet state but, on the contrary, regarded the spirit of Petersburg as something that had to be kept alive in the face of Soviet barbarism. In 1920 Osip Mandelshtam pronounced, "We shall gather again in Petersburg," suggesting that though a dark cloud had obscured the sun of the Great Tradition, "we," its torchbearers in the Soviet night, might triumph yet. Petersburg became the locus, actual or symbolic, of certain segments of the intelligentsia who saw themselves as not implicated in the regime's culture and who declared themselves bards of Petersburg. The clichés of the myth had become so standardized that they could be used as a code. Now frequently focused on a cult of past intellectual giants associated with the city (such as Pushkin), they were used as a sort of Aesopian language for discussing the fate and role of the intellectual in Soviet Russia. The cult of Petersburg substantially underwrote the poetry of Anna Akhmatova and of her disciples, who formed a "Petersburg school" that continues to this day and includes such names as A. Kushner, E. Rein, and Joseph Brodsky.17 Thus there is some logic in the fact that in the initial years of Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost Petersburg culture rose up to prevail over the discredited Brezhnevian culture and Akhmatova became an idol for the young and mater dolorosa of Stalinist oppression. The subject of this book, however, is not the Petersburg myth per se and its many transformations over time, but rather the ecology of Russian revolutionary culture. The myth of Petersburg played an important role in this because it was a myth about transformation whose frames of reference had resonance in the historical moment. It might be said that Stalinist culture was formed at least in part as the myth of Petersburg (the main secular myth of Russian national identity) was married to Marxism, but this would be a very crude and mechanistic account of a much more subtly calibrated dynamic. Neither Marxism-Leninism nor the myth of Petersburg was a static, hermetic system, and both participated in a larger European intellectual force field. This is evident in the case of Bely's novel. As Bely's disquisition about the dot on the map playfully proclaims, his Petersburg is both a symbol and a city. It is the place where the city as a historical entity gives intimations of other possibilities. The novel is set at a moment early in the twentieth century when worker unrest seems about to explode in revolution; phantom-like hordes advance toward the capital's center, preserve of the upper class, and their rumblings carry across as the sound "oo-oo-oo." In the city itself, the grandeur of the facades and statues is deceptive; on closer inspection, they are crumbling and decaying. The canals seethe with bacilli unseen by the naked eye while the veneer of European culture acquired by the Imperial elite who frequent the city's grand buildings conceals a fundamentally Asian interior. The ticking of a time bomb in a can of sardines intended for a political assassination punctuates the narrative, suggesting an impending explosion when the makers of those inchoate sounds penetrate the city's center. But the ticking bomb does double duty as a figure for mind expansion; Bely projects a scenario whereby, as the victim's head explodes, his mind soars beyond the limits of his skull to reach the astral, resolving the dialectic of the inner and the outer, of appearance and essence. Thomas Mann's Death in Venice, published just two years earlier, suggests a similar scenario. Venice is in his account no less a city of illusion than Petersburg. The novella's central conceit for multiple contrasts of veneer and actuality is the facade of the Grand Canal, which is, on closer inspection, crumbling; to go behind it is to descend into a maze of ever darker and seamier alleys. In Mann's city, too, disease (cholera) lurks everywhere unseen and to drink the water is to invite a death that is figured as both grotesque in its naturalistic inventory and paradoxically alluring. The protagonist even hears the same sound, "oo-oo-oo," as was heard by his upperclass counterparts in Bely's Petersburg. But here it is not the sound of revolution but the vocative ending of the name of his obsession, the boy Tadzio. Its sound is borne up to him from the shore as "Tadziu-u-u" by a mysterious wind from the East bearing the Dionysiac, that other reality lurking behind the grand facades of Venice and the pretense of respectability maintained by the tourists.18 Obviously, the differences between these two works, diminished in my schematicized account, amount to more than the import of the sound "oooo-oo" heard by their respective protagonists. Yet even this difference is not as great as it might seem. Bely's sound of impending revolution ("oo-oooo"), like Mann's mysterious wind from the East, essentially augurs the possibility of liberation from the time-space of actuality. In Bely it bears witness to his identity as a sometime Symbolist, a member of a school that proclaims its preference for realiora over realia, but who at the time he wrote the novel was often translating this into terms provided by his current obsession, anthroposophy (hence his periodic invocations of the astral). Simultaneously, the sound motif bears nostalgic witness to Bely's enthusiasm for the 1905 revolution in Russia, which occurred immediately after the time of the novel. As for Mann's novella, the Nietzschean frame of reference (Dionysian / Apollonian) is not far to seek. But the impulse that underwrites both works is broader in its frame of reference than any single literary movement or influence. The similarities between these two works are not a function of influence but attest to the way both catch common concerns and prejudices of the time and organize them using a very basic set of oppositions. The opposition grand buildings and statues versus fetid waters informs the symbolic systems of much European literature of the nineteenth century about the city (in novels of Balzac and Hugo, for example). In the case of Petersburg such a choice of imagery is hardly surprising since for much of the nineteenth century the city lacked a proper sewage system and its canals functioned both as sewers and as sources of water, with inevitable consequences for public health.19 Thus in Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment a cluster of motifs having to do with canals and with the opposition pure and impure water is crucial to the symbolic system. The opposition does not derive just from literary conventions or from pressing real-life problems. Several theorists have in recent years explored a broader context for it. One of the most comprehensive schemata is provided in Peter Stallybrass and Allon White's The Politics and Poetics of Transgression, in which they give the opposition a place in a general model for what they call the "popular Imaginary," that is, the axiological model that in theory underwrites popular and even highbrow attitudes. Their basic opposition is high versus low, or hegemonic and canonical versus noncanonical, but they adduce an entire series of homologous oppositions that figure high and low in specific realms. Among them, "sewers versus grand buildings" plays a prominent role as the opposition within the symbolic space of the city. Parallel to that opposition are high and low in class terms, high and low in the body—roughly the higher bodily strata versus all those unmentionable orifices and protuberances in the lower—and high and low in language, that is, the classical or standard educated language versus the unruly vernacular and scatology.20 Clearly such binaries are overly spatialized and essentialized. They do not allow for the considerable ambivalence in attitudes toward the two poles, an ambivalence that was particularly marked early in the twentieth century and that can be seen in Mann's and Bely's novels. For example, the lower orders have often been regarded as Stallybrass and White insist they are in the popular Imaginary, as the Great Unwashed, that is, in terms of filth and disease, and therefore also of contamination and danger. Yet the general thrust of many of the "isms" dominating intellectual life at the time, and of so-called Modernism in particular, was a perverse reversal or confusion of the spatial and temporal hierarchies that Stallybrass and White associate with the popular Imaginary but that it might also be said Europeans had generally inherited from the Enlightenment. So often what is underground, or what lurks in the dark, fetid recesses of the mind, is considered more fundamental and essential than what is in plain view. The canals are the point of greatest ambivalence on the symbolic map of the city and hence natural choices as figures in modernistic fiction. On the one hand, they are fetid waters, unacknowledged sewers, and as such suggest sex, disease, flux, decay, and corruption. In the myth of Petersburg, they also suggest the masses—those forces Peter thought he had tamed in building his city but that reassert themselves in a raging fury. On the other hand, they are an integral part of the grand design for taming nature and imposing order on the city; they are of a piece with the statues and grand facades that line them and as such represent culture--the high. Such hierarchies are only constructs. That other construct, the myth of Petersburg, is in a sense only a narrativized and localized embodiment of a similar register of oppositions. The October Revolution translated the potential of the myth into the sphere of politics, promising to reverse the ratio of high and low, of center and periphery. The interesting question for the purposes of this book is what happens when there is an inversion in the hierarchy of class—as allegedly occurred in Russia after 1917. Are all the other binaries so much in sync that they follow suit? This is a problem for anyone seeking to essentialize class divisions, and particularly pertinent for anyone seeking to adduce a model for culture in a postrevolutionary society. If all these oppositions were truly in sync, then when low became high in the social order in theory there would be analogous reversals in the symbolic systems and canons of culture. Initially this might have seemed to be the case. After the February Revolution in 1917, and again after October, there was a flurry of iconoclasm as enthusiasts set about tearing down the statues. This is depicted in Sergei Eisenstein's film October (1927), which opens with an emblematic scene as the Lilliputian "folk" bring down a massive statue of the tsar, a moment that is recapitulated parodically as all manner of bric-a-brac and statues from the Winter Palace are destroyed by derisive montage. The actual storming of the Winter Palace is represented as a lava-like flow of the masses streaming to engulf it (as it were, the sewers and canals flooding the statues). The tearing down of statues is largely a symbolic gesture. A fundamental inversion of the hegemonic hierarchies is much more difficult to attain. Reversal of the sociopolitical or economic status quo does not necessarily bring about corresponding reversals in other hierarchies (such as the bodily or, particularly pertinent to this book, the aesthetic or linguistic). Those who occupy a low position on the socioeconomic hierarchy are, if elevated for some reason, not always eager to jettison the cultural baggage of their former superiors. Any renegotiation of the ratio of center and periphery (canonical and noncanonical) takes place within the existing language, as cultural revolution can only occur within a given ecosystem. Consequently, this book rejects the notion that Soviet culture was formed in the 1920s and 1930s as the Party advanced, Bronze Horseman-like, upon an unsuspecting intelligentsia, imposing upon it an abomination of culture called socialist realism; there was no absolute agency in the evolution of Soviet culture. Fernand Braudel, among others, has argued against concentrating in historical studies on those dramatic and volatile "events" that chronicle surface change (such as, in this instance, Party decrees). Such events, he argues, are themselves constrained by structures and narratives present at a more profound level and observable over a much longer period of time (what he calls longue durée), the parameters, as it were, of a given culture system. Thus, if one looks only at the surface one sees only what is active at a particular time, oblivious to the currents and countercurrents that may be dormant, as well as to the hierarchy of elements informing surface events.21By studying a given society or culture system over a long period of time one may observe the successive cycles and intercycles within which the dominant narratives of the culture are played out. The Bolshevik Revolution and its aftermath, those events in which Russia attempted to overcome history, were worked out within a pre-existing cultural system in which the myth of Petersburg enjoyed a dominant presence among the master narratives. The myth proved particularly tenacious after the Revolution not just because long-established myths die hard, but because it was a myth of radical transformation and modernization centered on a city. The issue of urbanization, which has always been at the heart of the Petersburg myth, was made particularly urgent after the Bolshevik Revolution. Marx and Engels, children of nineteenth-century Europe, in their Communist Manifesto virtually equate Communism with overcoming the "idiocy of village life" by transforming society using the model of the modern city, a program that became central in Lenin's and especially Stalin's appropriations of their mentors' writings. This had particular resonance for Petersburg both as the capital of Russian science and as a focus of ongoing debates about modernization. In the twentieth century, even before the Revolution, the city served for many as the emblem of a total transformation to a post-traditionalist society. Those pursuing the Bolshevik experiment frequently articulated their aims using elements from the myth, which was even incorporated into Stalinist rhetoric, as we shall see. The myth of Petersburg is itself about how a transformation in space stood in for a transformation in time. The extraordinary time lag between Russia at the beginning of the eighteenth century and its more advanced rival powers in Europe (it had never had a Renaissance, and so on) was overcome "suddenly"when Peter created the new capital. Time was surmounted, but space, as if in compensation, acquired enormous importance. After 1917, the successive phases of cultural evolution were each marked by a distinctive model or master narrative informing official pageantry, literature, film, theater, and so forth. As the ensuing chapters will show, each of these master narratives attempts to figure the October Revolution (as the paradigm of national identity) in a distinctive model of space and time. Most frequently, time is collapsed in some way and greater emphasis is given to space. In this respect, Bolshevik Russia was not unique. In several other cultural movements of the twentieth century there has been an analogous foregrounding or even sacralization of space and de-emphasis on time. One should note, for example, that in Braudel a temporal model is figured spatially (in order to find longue durée, you must dig deeper into the "depths"22). The Nietzschean, or post-Enlightenment, transvaluation of values was frequently conceptualized in a different sense of space. Most often some Manichaean, binary pattern was adduced, a binary formed around the opposition polluted space (sewers, swamps) and pure space. Thus much cultural endeavor was informed by a rejection of the impure space and a quest for a pure one, as it were, a secularized version of the Christian dichotomy of heaven and hell but now with contamination rather than scorching fire characterizing the cautionary space. Transformation was represented as salvation from pollution. A contrast was drawn between the surface as the here and now, and some purified, authentic, other space. Different groups figured this model differently; some sought to dig down into or to divine some more fundamental reality below, others to transcend by moving above this reality, and still others to go beyond it. What is essential in all such scenarios is the thirst for a break between the two spaces, or at the very least a conviction that the difference between them is absolute. Bely's Petersburg and Mann's Death in Venice typify this trend in that they are about not just cities but the problem of pollution and inauthenticity Mann and Bely essentially challenge the old Enlightenment values by showing how the established (high/low) binaries have broken down (the grand buildings and statues crumble, are a ghostly veneer,and so on). 'They seek the more authentic, a culture that is not fundamentally polluted. The myth of Petersburg, like Marxist theory, was, however, originally a narrative of the Enlightenment; it enacts the way Peter overcame the hold of the Orthodox Church, the "swamp" of obscurantism and stagnation, so that Russia went from mud to marble. The city had now become problematical (polluted, inauthentic), thus a new or revised narrative, a narrative of repurification, was needed. Repurification, however, presupposes a repurifier. Marxism-Leninism, as an account of how some people, or more specifically the vanguard, can intervene consciously in the course of history, potentially intersects with the myth of Petersburg with its all-powerful hero, Peter. Peter is the icon of absolute break, of the triumph of intention over habit. He is a political Christ who liberates the spirit from desuetude, who reclaims the city for authenticity. Such absolute breaks are problematical for most versions of evolutionary theory, but not for Marx. In a footnote approximately half way through Volume I of Capital, he announces that he is trying to do for the history of economic relations what Darwin did for natural history.23 Although Marx's Capital and Darwin's then recently published On the Origin of Species, two materially based macro-histories, are comparable in many respects, there is a fundamental difference. Darwin in The Origin of Species invokes the maxim natura non fecit saltum (nature makes no leaps) so frequently that it emerges as one of the first principles of his evolutionary theory—doubtless a reason for his using a Latin expression. Subsequent evolutionary theory has modified Darwin's position, but without ever approaching the extremism of Marx, for whom "leaps"—revolutions—are the nodal moments of history, the engines of sociopolitico-cultural evolution. Indeed, it might be argued that the centrality of all kinds of genetic quackery in the history of Stalinist intellectual abuses (Trofim Lysenko, Ivan Michurin) was precisely because Russia was a fertile place for the kind of evolutionary impatience implicit in Marx's theoretical writings. At any rate, in this aspect the myth of Petersburg lent itself to templating onto Marx's theory; Lenin could become the great acrobat of history. But it is important to note that around the time of the Revolution similar tropes also became popular in avant-garde and Formalist theory and practice, especially in the theater. A circus technique, the salto mortale (as it were, the ultimate leap), functioned in theoretical writings and performances as an icon of the new epistemology, a marker of impatience with physical time (see Chapter3). The temptation to assume absolute agency for extraordinary figures was not, then, exclusive to the Bolshevik leadership. It can also be seen in the intelligentsia. In the twentieth century, as European culture generally became more preoccupied with intellectuals, the Russian intelligentsia began to arrogate to themselves the two central roles in the Petersburg myth as crystallized in The Bronze Horseman: they became either absolute transformers (like Peter) or absolutely repressed (like Evgeny)—or both, since martyrdom legitimizes and enhances radical gestures. It should be added that not one of these striking tendencies in the Bolshevik appropriation of Marxism was necessarily caused by the dominance of the myth of Petersburg in the intellectual landscape. It would be more accurate to say that there was a dialogic relationship between intellectual traditions (and this one a fortiori) and Marxism that led to new inflections and to a foregrounding of specific elements in both discourses. Moreover, the myth did not have any timeless identity or special agency of its own. Thus there was not a break between the myth, to be found at some kind of deep structural level, and mere events on the surface; myths are themselves events that are constantly occurring. Braudel and many others have hypostatized and reified these distinctions to the point where they participate in the same kind of romance of the two absolutely separate places that we see as endemic to Modernism. The two places are not separate, but together form a single cultural ecosystem. It is in the constant interaction between such master narratives (or myths) and events—and between myths and events in the Russian arena and those in Europe, or even America—that Stalinist culture emerged. Of relevance here are some recent Western interpretations of fascism, such as Zeev Sternhell's The Birth of Fascist Ideology, which reject the notion that fascism arose as an aberration or temporary (if ugly) blip on the screen of Europe. Sternhell argues that "before it became a political force it was a cultural phenomenon. The growth of fascism would not have been possible without the revolt against the Enlightenment and the French Revolution which swept across Europe at the end of the nineteenth century and beginning of the twentieth." He sees fascism as the "product of the antimaterialistic and anti-rationalistic revision of Marxism" synthesized with "organic nationalism." The fascists, in his account, adopted the economic aspect of liberalism—market forces and private property—but completely denied its philosophical principles. Stalinism is different from fascism in that it does reject the market and severely limits private property, distinctions that cannot be immaterial. The applicability of "organic nationalism" here is also problematical; as will become clear over the course of this book, in the case of most of the cultural trends in late Imperial and Soviet Russia, including the Stalinist, the issue of cultural identity (Russian? European? international? Soviet? Imperial?) was a fraught one. Nevertheless, Sternhell's analysis of fascism is suggestive for the case of Stalinism because, like fascism, Stalinism represents an extreme manifestation of a much broader and more comprehensive cultural phenomenon with, paradoxical as it might seem, antimaterialist proclivities.24 Stalinism is analogous to fascism in this respect, but not identical with it. Many of those Russian idealists who were actively committed to revolutionary culture shared a set of prejudices and agendas commonly found among European intellectuals of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries that can be accommodated under the rubric Romantic Anticapitalism (both Bely and, especially, Mann fall into this category to some extent25). Its prejudices and agendas, which many Russian intellectuals brought with them in 1917, were worked through in the somewhat singular conditions of a Communist revolution in Russia and its aftermath. Although few of the agendas were realized in anything like their original conception, they proved one of the critical factors determining the contours of Stalinist culture. ## Russian Intellectuals and Romantic Anticapitalism The term Romantic Anticapitalism was originally used by Lukács in an essay of 1931 about Dostoevsky to denigrate some right-wing intellectuals.26 More recently, however, it has been used by scholars such as Michel Löwy to categorize an extremely broad range of intellectuals, principally, but not exclusively, leftists, and ranging from conservatives to Marxist intellectuals such as Walter Benjamin and even Lukács himself, but including Max Weber, Ferdinand Tönnies, Georg Simmel, Ernst Bloch, and some cultural movements such as Expressionism and Surrealism. Two gatherings of intellectuals are important in its history—Max Weber's Heidelberg Circle, which met between 1906 and 1918 and included many of the above among its members, and the Frankfurt School.27 In other words, its epicenters in the 1910s and 1920s were the leftist intellectual circles of Wilhelminian and Weimar Germany, though they do not begin to define its geographical or intellectual range. But then Romantic Anticapitalism is not so much an ism or a movement as a formula for accounting for a large variety of thinkers and movements with certain common concerns. Romantic Anticapitalists might somewhat loosely be defined as those who foreground three points in the standard critique of capitalism: alienation, individualism, and the commodification, or market model, of culture. Their stance becomes not just anticapitalist but specifically "romantic" in the degree to which it rejects them and proposes an alternative model of society. All isms are suspect, but Romantic Anticapitalism, in which two disparate categories—anticapitalist and romantic—are hitched together almost for oxymoronic effect, is particularly so. Too many movements and thinkers can be housed under this rubric. Some have attempted to break down the various versions into a typology, but they risk the danger of overschematicization. Essentially there are two major variables within this ism. The first is the extent to which in a given instance the romantic-like pole is the dominant one, and the second is the extent to which the anticapitalist is. At each extreme one finds trends where the copulative has essentially come unstuck and the other pole has faded from view completely. While Romantic Anticapitalism is generally articulated as a social critique, it cannot be demarcated from aesthetic utopianism. The critique of capitalist society often evinced an antipathy toward its commodification of culture—which was seen as undermining true aesthetic values—and this position can readily translate into a defense of High Culture. Hence in the Petersburg journal Apollo (Apollon), a mouthpiece in the 1910s for highbrow intellectuals with elitist proclivities, one frequently finds a pointed contrast between "humdrum reality" (seraya zhizn') and beauty. The attempts of the Romantic Anticapitalists to flee humdrum reality frequently involved absolutizing one or the other pole in the hierarchies of high and low, generally to the exclusion or denigration of the other pole, but certainly to the exclusion of the possibility that any middle ground between the two could be entertained. What is "fled,"or resolutely renounced,the middle ground between the poles of high and low, is in effect ordinary reality. Versions of the idealized low include the masses (the quest for the authentic was sometimes played out in terms of class), but also the subterranean aspect of the self as in the Dionysiac, the Unconscious or dream. Thus in Mann's Venice the object of the protagonist's obsession, Tadzio, is botha Greek statue and a Hermes who beckons to that realm where the comme il faut no longer obtains (including conformist sexual morality); rarely is he the middle-class boy in a sailor's suit. The mark of the true Romantic Anticapitalist is not just the impulse to flee the profane, but a critique of capitalist society as well. This critique generally focuses on alienation and the loss of a sense of unity. The critique of individualism, allegedly a scourge endemic to bourgeois society, frequently led to a form of utopianism in the sense of some dream of a society where all were truly one, a sort of secular religion of the one, whether achieved by reviving some version of the precapitalist world (the most common prescription) or in a Dionysiac frenzy, or in a revolution that smashed class divisions. The single point of most common ground is a rejection of the market and of the commercializing forces of culture. In some versions, the basic objection to capitalist society was directed at the marketplace in its more figurative sense of the middle point between hierarchies where different values jostle, some to prosper, others not. Romantic Anticapitalists were objecting, as it were, to fluctuating currencies for elements used in verbal, visual, or aural communication, to allowing hierarchies to float at the stock exchange. Ultimately, this position undermines communication in the sense that it denies to all forms of communication the aspect of currency or commerce. One example would be that central doctrine of several Russian Futurist writers' regenerated verbal aesthetic, the "self-valuable word," the word that has no currency outside itself. In practice, this often meant that the word was all sound with no dictionary potential. This position represents the ultimate in the flight from the profane—a flight away from meaning itself, or at any rate away from conventional meanings. One is left with the "oo-oo-oo" of a Bely or a Mann. The unsullied collages of sound were not to be mired by the slough of any this-worldly referent. Some poets experimented with poems made up entirely of vowel sounds.28 "Oo-oo-oo" is the sound of the absolute. Such positions did not take the avant-garde off the Romantic Anticapitalist map because most were also specifically anticapitalist. This fact helps explain why, for instance, many French Surrealists clung to their Communist Party with such zeal even after it no longer saw much use for them, why so many Expressionists joined the Communist revolutions in Munich and Berlin, and why Ilya Ehrenburg, the experimental novelist and habitué of Parisian bohemia in the 1920s, was able in reasonable conscience to serve the xenophobic Stalinist regime during the Cold War by penning the most blistering attacks on the West. A major motive was in each instance a fundamental loathing of capitalism and its perceived effects on culture. Although the term Romantic Anticapitalism seems so broad in its referents and shaky in terms of its ability to define a clear trend or movement, it is nevertheless useful here because it shows how a broad range of intellectuals warring among themselves in many respects could find common cause. It also helps find the points of common interest between the Bolsheviks and a wide range of intellectual groups, enabling them to become bedfellows after the Revolution, if at times strange ones. Of course not all Russian intellectuals were opposed to capitalism, but those giving capitalism (as distinct from modernization) a central role in their schemes for Russia's improvement were far from legion and tended to be based in Moscow rather than Petersburg; the best-known examples are the Riabushinsky Circle (which advocated a curious amalgam of capitalism and Old Believer tradition) and the controversial liberal Petr Struve.29 In Europe, the antipathy toward capitalism generated among many a sense of pan-European common cause and led to several de facto alliances of intellectuals crossing national boundaries, such as that between the French and the Czech leftists between the wars. In the case of Russia, the Romantic Anticapitalists were largely linked to a loose Central European alliance, centered in Germany for most of the 1920s and embracing leftist intellectuals such as Lukács, Benjamin, and Bertolt Brecht, and also Expressionism, which had a particularly strong impact in Leningrad. During the course of that decade, many Europeans joined the Communist movement and some were drawn to Moscow.30But the traffic was far from one way, and the Romantic Anticapitalists of Central Europe, many of them non-Marxist, remained major influences on their Russian counterparts for all the formative years of Soviet culture. Various intellectuals might have gravitated to some form of Marxism to satisfy their anticapitalist zeal, but surely Marx himself was much more hardheaded with his economistic analyses of power than these would-be epigones. What could provide a better cold shower for a romantic than those three volumes of Capital? Let us embrace the people of the satanic mills, Marx enjoined, sweat, grit, and all. Let us ground our theories not in those airy categories of the superstructure, but in economic and power realities. Let us call exploitation by its name. And yet, even as Marx threw down the gauntlet to the illusions of the intelligentsia of his age, his own theories were not free of the potential for illusion. An obvious point of possible romanticism is the heroic billing Marx accords the proletariat. Similarly, the more leftist among the Romantic Anticapitalists, rather than revile the masses as the Great Unwashed, have idealized them. In some of their writings, proletarians emerge as projections of the ideal intellectuals, more purely devoted to the life of the mind than any actual intellectuals.31Others, by contrast, do not portray them as lovers of high culture, but idealize them for their alleged resistance to it, for safeguarding the low. According to such accounts (to be found even today in simplistic appropriations of Mikhail Bakhtin's theory of carnival) the lower orders are by nature rebels and revelers, and thus the only ones who can help regain humanity's lost unity; the bourgeoisie are labeled repressed and repressive, and proletarians are said to reject instinctively bourgeois conformism. Whether, then, the masses were projected as ideal versions of the low, or of the high, they were not seen as degraded (filthy and so on). But as a consequence the rhetoric of filth and contamination was transferred to two other sociological categories, the upper and, particularly, the lower middle classes. In so much literature by Romantic Anticapitalists, bad taste, commercialism, conformism, repressiveness—the entire gamut of the bad in culture—are laid at the feet of the petty shopkeeper (lavochnik) as icon of the petty bourgeoisie. One sees this among German leftists as well, but attacks on the mentality and culture of the petty shopkeeper are also a feature of Bolshevik rhetoric.32 Both the upper and the lower middle classes have contaminated culture, but the source of such contamination is the market. The "canals" of commerce seethe with bacilli that the unsuspecting do not see (flux by another name). To commodify art is to threaten the cultural gene pool; in discussing how to guard its purity intellectuals frequently confounded cultural purity with biological purity. The metaphors of prostitution or the house of ill repute were favorites for condemning commercialized (inauthentic) culture. This was a pan-European trend but it gained particular currency among Soviet intellectuals as the ultimate rationale for the Soviet state. To jump forward in time, even after the Soviet Union under Gorbachev was liberated from its last shackles of Stalinist dogmatism, the suspicion of the market proved more tenacious among intellectuals than any espousal of specifically Communist ideals.33 This market phobia was the cement of Soviet culture. In prerevolutionary Russia, intellectuals were haunted by the way mass commercial culture—what was sometimes called an "Augean stable" of virtually insurmountable filth—was constantly being dumped on society by the bourgeoisie, the class most clearly implicated in the market. It would obviously take a Herculean figure, or some god, to clean it all out. In many Russian revolutionary scenarios the proletariat emerge as the group whose very function is not so much to serve as production-fodder as to repurify the world by driving out the market. But at the same time, with a certain amount of casuistry many leftist intellectuals argued that the proletariat, who would normally see more truly than any other class the dangers all around, have been blinded temporarily by those iniquitous commercializing forces and cannot see the bacilli polluting the precious bodily fluids of culture. Enter the intellectuals as temporary guardians, saviors of fallen women, surrogate gods. They have not been so blinded and in this crisis situation can fend off the menacing commercializing hordes. But as gods their prototype will be not Hercules but Hermes, the messenger between two worlds and hence the god of communication. So many of the Romantic Anticapitalists and other intellectual groups of the early twentieth century exhibited what I refer to as a "Hermes complex," which by another name could be called guild megalomania. They advanced their own group as "messengers" to mediate between the world of truth (aesthetic or political) and the world of actuality, where people are afflicted by blindness—a version of Plato's Myth of the Cave in The Republic. Some German political theoreticians called this a "temporary dictatorship of trust" whereby the masses should accede to the will of the educated "temporarily."34 Lenin called it a "vanguard of the proletariat" whereby the few who were truly enlightened politically ("conscious") should guide the less enlightened masses of the proletariat to their own hegemony.35 The avantgarde and many other groups saw themselves as ahead of their time and hence able to lead others to a future place-time. But even the guardians of the Great Tradition of high culture often saw themselves as mediators between their version of a great place-time and the present; in Petersburg, a local movement for regenerating society by bringing Greek drama to the people, the Nietzschean project, founded a journal that was actually called Hermes (Germes). Where, then, might a revolution fit into this scenario? A revolution would mean giving power to Hermes (the intelligentsia/vanguard) to unbind the prisoners who can see only the shadow world so that they might experience the true forms. It is at base a revolution in epistemology. Thus the identification of political and epistemological revolution in Bely through the metaphor of the sardine-tin time bomb is no mere expedient born of aesthetic purposes (trying to represent as many ideas as possible with the one metaphor), but reflects a marked trend to obscure the distinctions between the political and the aesthetic, making possible alliances with, and even commitments to, the Communist movement. It is at this point that the most fundamental differences emerge between the Marxist-Leninist position and that of other Romantic Anticapitalists. Marx and Lenin saw a socioeconomic revolution as a precondition of any spiritual revolution; most non-Marxist anticapitalists (and some Bolshevik intellectuals) insisted that this sequence had to be played in reverse. In many of its manifestations, then, the Hermes role might be seen as serving the masses. But it might also be interpreted as an unacknowledged reach for power. Fritz K. Ringer in The Decline of the Mandarins discusses this kind of reach to power among intellectuals in turn-of-the-century Germany and extending into the Weimar period. He identifies a sort of window of opportunity for intellectuals, the period when the power of the aristocracy was in decline as the nation drew away from a primarily agrarian level of economic organization but full industrialization had not yet been achieved. In this period when hereditary titles based on landholding were no longer guarantees of status in society and the ownership of significant amounts of liquid capital was not yet acknowledged as entitling such status, intellectuals tried to constitute a nobility of the educated to supersede the "merely traditional" ruling class. Moreover, they were not interested in mere social status, in just serving the state as specialists, but sought to form an aristocracv of the intellect (or spirit) that would lead the nation.36 If the dynamic is seen in these terms, the real class struggle was between the would-be aristocrats of culture and the aristocrats of capital; indeed, that between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, which intellectuals were wont to represent in their writings as a tussle to the death, merely obscures this. Ringer's analysis focuses on academics in Germany but in Russia it would apply more broadly. Early in the twentieth century one sees a shift in the nature and composition of the Russian intelligentsia in response to a historical moment analogous to the one Ringer describes in Germany. No longer was it the characteristic pattern for creative intellectuals to be sons of the nobility (as during Pushkin's time), or déclassé graduates of the seminaries (as in the second half of the nineteenth century). The age of dilettantism was ending as the intelligentsia evolved into a caste with a sense of ongoing generations in a line that intermarried with increasing frequency. As is often remarked, many of the leading writers of the period around the Revolution, such as A. Blok, B. Pasternak, M. Tsvetaeva, and Bely himself, were children of professors (or in Tsvetaeva's case a museum director), while in art and architecture the Benois dynasty (see Chapter 2) was a formidable presence.37 For dynastic intellectuals, the historical moment ushered in by the October Revolution might seem to have been particularly opportune. The landed nobility and the rentier-mercantilist class were routed, and the New Class had not yet become so entrenched that the intelligentsia had to be coopted into it or suffer the consequences if they remained aloof. By another ongoing historical dynamic, however—modernization and the democratization of education—their newly won sense of dynastic succession was to meet a challenge from below. With the ever broader spread of education through the populace, and, as a concomitant of modernization, a shift of emphasis in determining status in intellectual fields to professional qualifications (which in Russia became increasingly marked in the 1910s), the intelligentsia as a group was being desacralized. Positions within its traditional bailiwick became available to those who advanced through a standardized educational route. Intellectuals resisted the trend to specialization by advancing models for intellectual life (most often from the past) in which the different branches of their activity were united in a special place—an academy, or a Gesamtkunstwerk, or a Bauhaus.38 Those who could participate in several different intellectual fields were particularly prized. In other words, though for different reasons, the intelligentsia were resisting divisions of labor within their world as were the Marxists within society at large. In this context, the Hermes agenda might be viewed as a preemptive strike. The sardine-tin time bomb was ticking away. Thus in the specific case of the journal Hermes, a cynic might analyze its altruistic mission in terms of a last fling by those who have benefited from the old education system built around expertise in the classics before the shift to a more pragmatically and democratically oriented system of secondary and tertiary education robs them of their special status.39 But the cynics would also be wrong. Conviction was the stronger emotion. It is all very well for us with our ex post facto perspectives to impute selfserving or caste-preserving motives to what intellectuals attempted in Russia circa 1917. What many of them undertook was the Great Experiment: not a flight to some better place, not a voyage autour de mon livre, but a transformation in place. They attempted to transform a Russia trailing its alleged peers, Britain, France, and Germany, in most indices of political, economic, and cultural development into a society that would be a beacon for the rest of the world in all three-to accomplish a "Petersburg" on an even grander scale. They believed they could achieve this through work on the cultural front. The most zealous spared no efforts for the cause. Many of them later paid for these efforts with their lives. ## The Quest for a New Culture Many of those Russians who in the 1910s and 1920s sought to realize a culture that might transform society were looking for a medium that was the purest and the most authentic: the purest movement, sound, language, or organization of space. It was felt that by finding (or recovering) this distilled essence of culture, society would be able to transcend the profane and regain its lost wholeness. Thus the prescriptions were for a kind of revolution—a radical transformation—whether or not they were conceived within the framework of political revolution. The ritualization of space was a common denominator of all prescriptions for realizing this goal. Consequently, in the 1910s and 1920s architecture and theater (or, more broadly, the performing arts) emerged as the sites most commonly chosen for factories of the perfect. This may seem unexpected given that the official culture of the 1930s, socialist realism, is most often associated with literature. In socialist realist literature, however, symbolic space is even more fundamental than the ritualized biography that structures the master plot.40 In this book, then, I analyze the changing models for a sacralized space. The book is arranged in approximate chronological order, while seeking to avoid the implication that it charts a linear development from 1913 to the 1930s. Hence it essentially comprises a series of essays each of which covers a phenomenon characteristic of a particular time in the overall span—the exception being the first, which looks at the avant-garde during the entire period covered as a sort of frame for the subsequent chapters. In this way, the book gives some sense of the tortured political, sociological, and institutional history of Petersburg's intellectual life in these years but does so largely as a setting for its central theme, the intellectuals' quest to find the quintessential revolutionary culture. In charting this, I touch on most branches of cultural activity: painting, music, architecture, film, linguistics, opera, ballet, official pageantry, history, literary theory, and literature itself, although I do not pretend to cover them all in great detail; indeed, I do not profess to encompass all the cultural life in Petersburg during these years or all its political and institutional history. I do not even give center stage to many of the cultural giants from this time, such as Velemir Khlebnikov, Mandelshtam, and Bakhtin. Their very singularity, the mark of their stature, makes them less grateful subjects as examples of general trends. Also, as the focus of endeavor shifted in Russia to a culture appropriate for the masses (a shift that can be perceived even before 1917), the agendas of avant-gardists such as Khlebnikov and Kasimir Malevich proved less viable, as did the kind of high culture that presupposed a classical or higher education, such as the poetry of Mandelshtam or the novels of Konstantin Vaginov. Such figures therefore assume much more peripheral positions in this book than their intrinsic merits would warrant. Because the trans-sense language of Khlebnikov and the nonrepresentational art (Suprematism) of Malevich also represent limit cases in the quest for a purified culture, however, they have been taken as the subject of the book's opening chapter and then reappear periodically in its narrative as a kind of bench mark against which other trends are measured. The book's "heroes," Sergei Ernestovich Radlov (1892–1958), Adrian Ivanovich Piotrovsky (1898–1938), and other cultural activists of the 1920s, do not leap to the minds of many, not even to experts on the culture of that decade. They were scions of the Petersburg intellectual elite and continued throughout the 1920s to be active players in the city's intellectual life. Yet they played leading roles in the transformation of Petrograd /Leningrad culture, from elitist and highbrow to mass and agitational, retaining their identities as distinctive players even as their work reflected, successively, all the phases and volte-face of that most volatile of decades. This book is not about these figures, but as their careers keep resurfacing in the narrative they provide case studies in the twists and ironies in the formation of Soviet culture which illustrate my general point that its evolution was far from unilinear. The examples of Piotrovsky and Radlov are adduced for the way they challenge some common assumptions about the provenance of Soviet culture. In particular, they raise questions about how alien official Soviet culture was to both the work of the non-Marxist European avant-garde and the high intelligentsia. Their original training was as classical scholars and translators and they belonged by birth and association to the cultural elite of Petersburg. They were never Party members, and they never abandoned their identity as intellectuals. Even in the 1930s when Piotrovsky was the artistic director of Lenfilm, the body that produced the canonical socialist realist film Chapaev, he would come to work early to put in some time on the classics before turning to his administrative work. Not surprisingly, Piotrovsky and Radlov brought much of the baggage of the cultural elite with them when they went to work for the Revolution, which they saw as a means for realizing their ideals. They exemplify that broad category of intellectuals who believed they could play a role as Hermes figures. In a sense, they represent an Enlightenment heresy; they saw themselves as cultural ecologists who were ahead of their time because, they believed, they had divined the formulae that might transform Man. As with Mandelshtam, Bakhtin, and many of the finest minds of their generation, their university training in the classics gave them, more than a set of skills, ideals that fired their future work. Radlov and Piotrovsky, like many others of this period in the grip of a "Greek" ideal, wished to revive what they saw as the ethos of the old polis. Unlike Mandelshtam, who interpreted the classical idcals differently, they were prepared to work as cultural bureaucrats for the new state.41 Thus they are representative of that broad and variegated category of intellectuals (by no means all of them influenced by classical ideals) that, out of idealism, mediated between the world of intellectuals and state institutions. Consciously or unconsciously, they recognized that in order to achieve a radical transformation some kind of state intervention or sponsorship was necessary. Much of Western historiography has seen the evolution of Soviet culture in terms of a battle between the avant-garde, as the force most committed to transforming culture, and traditionalists who sought to set the clock back rather than forward. This was a battle that began well before the Revolution (seen in, for instance, the exchanges from 1912 to 1917 between Alexandr Benois and various Futurist groups); in the Soviet period the traditionalists ultimately triumphed at the cost of the avant-garde (or, as in Boris Groys's recent revisionist book, vice versa).4 The avant-garde have thus played a central role in Western paradigms of Soviet cultural history as valiant fighters against Stalinist entropic forces. This scenario is valid, but also inadequate. The avant-garde was far from unitary and the fates of individual avant-gardists have no necessary bearing on the extent to which their agendas influenced the subsequent shape of Soviet culture. More important, the opposition avant-garde/traditionalist was not as absolute as avantgardist rhetoric claimed. This is well demonstrated in the cases of Meyerhold, Radlov, Piotrovsky, the Leningrad Formalists, and many other figures treated in this book who identified with avant-gardism but were also in many senses traditionalists. Indeed, an important reason for their centrality in the book is that they stand at the center of a host of dialogues (the Party / the intellectuals, the intellectuals/the masses, Western European cultural trends/native traditions), including that dialogue between would-be avantgardists and traditionalists. Much more fundamental in the formation of Soviet culture than the opposition between avant-gardists and traditionalists was another dichotomy that might be called monumentalist versus iconoclast. Any revolution draws heightened attention to meaning, but there are several possible ways meaning is figured. Paul Ricoeur in Freud and Philosophy has explored for the case of biblical hermeneutics two diametrically opposed ways meaning can be prosecuted—either by deepening truth and elucidating it more fully, or by tearing away the masks of false interpretation that have overgrown the text—demystification—to reveal more authentic meaning in a new interpretation. Ricoeur does not lament this polarity, but on the contrary sees it as "the truest expression of our 'modernity."" He continues: "The situation in which language today finds itself comprises this double possibility . . . on the one hand, purify discourse of its excrescences, liquidate the idols, go from drunkenness to sobriety, realize our state of poverty once and for all; on the other hand, use the most 'nihilistic, destructive, iconoclastic movement so as to let speak what once, what each time, was said, when meaning appeared anew, when meaning was at its fullest. Hermeneutics seems to me to be animated by this double motivation... ."43 Arguably, the quest for a revolutionary culture was also animated by the tension between these two hermeneutic poles. Marxism was originally conceived as an act of demystification, of tearing off the masks of false consciousness, but the more it became institutionalized, the more the other pole, affirmation, figured in interpretation. Versions of both poles can be found among the programs for a new culture: on the one hand, the impulse to monumental gestures of affirmation, to write the true or the beautiful more clearly and in bolder strokes than had been done before (hence totalizing schemes, gigantomania, a proclivity for "mysteries" in the movement for a mass theater, novels as Manichaean epics, and so on) and, on the other, an iconoclastic, demystifying gesture that not only tears off the masks of the old, rejecting all the cant and ossified conventions, but in its quest for a more authentic culture advances the non- or a-canonical, the parodic, the eccentric, unsystematic, "peripheral," or even trivial. The two poles are obviously not absolute since such binaries as monumental/iconoclastic and canonical/noncanonical themselves depend on the "situatedness" of the person who pronounces them so. Today's noncanonical may become tomorrow's doxa, thus psychoanalysis, which Ricoeur identifies with the demystifying pole, has over time become institutionalized in the West and is even now being subjected to its own demystification. Moreover, the two poles are interdependent (monumentalizing schemes depend on iconoclastic acts for their realization). What is important here is that in all the movements that sought to create a new, revolutionary culture, one can find a tension between the two poles The defining gesture in the cultural history of the 1930s is not the killing of the avant-garde per se, but the attempt at censoring out the iconoclastic, demystifying pole, leaving a more purely ritualized and sacralized culture such that cultural artifacts became acts of affirmation. This statist culture could have been presided over by the avant-garde in its most monumentalizing avatars (as in Mussolini's Italy), but was in fact generally not. In the initial years of this study, the tension between the monumentalist and the iconoclastic poles found its expression in rival scenarios of cultural transformation figured spatially. Returning to the two models of revolution presented in Bely's Petersburg, revolution occurs when the workers who live in the outer suburbs invade the center, the realm of the privileged, but it also occurs as an explosion eliminating the center and hurtling the detritus out beyond its confines. Is revolution, then, a centripetal or a centrifugal event? In Marxist-Leninist analysis it was primarily centripetal; the socioeconomic periphery should take over the center. In prerevolutionary Russia there was a whole range of people who saw the panacea for the profane not in a revolution, nor even in rituals of revolution, but in terms of elevating the intelligentsia to a greater status and consolidating the center—pure culture unsullied by commerce and secured by norms. In 1913 they formed the aesthetic majority. To an extremely vocal minority, however, revolution appealed as an explosion of a limiting conceptual frame (sardine tin/skull) that would simultaneously be an explosion of class constraints ensuring humanity's transformation. Marx in Capital once used a similar figure for revolution when he described the end of the capitalist system in terms of its "integument" (Hülle) being "burst asunder."44In Marx, this was a peripheral trope for revolution. The more extravagant Russian fantasists, however, gave a central role to such tropes because they saw revolution as a centrifugal movement out toward an entirely different realm.