# REVOLUTION AS REVELATION: THE AVANT-GARDE In the 1910s and 1920s a sort of international avant-garde emerged, one that spanned all of Europe and to some extent the Atlantic Ocean as well. This was not a single and unified group, but a somewhat peripatetic and inchoate collection of individuals who floated over the map of Europe from country to country and city to city with Paris as their most frequent symbolic base. Characteristically, in the early period especially, a number of individual avant-gardists from different countries and backgrounds would find themselves in a particular town, and for a brief period they would arrange exhibitions and theatrical happenings, issue some manifestoes, and publish a journal or two before the constant comings and goings of the conspirators, the chronic bickering and divisions, took their toll and brought the moment to an end. But once dispersed, its members would soon participate in other such brief flowerings, perhaps in another town and with a somewhat different configuration of participants. The Russian avant-garde were largely part of this inchoate group, though some cultural patriots resisted all implication in it. The tyranny of distance limited their participation to some extent in the prewar years; the war itself, then the Western blockade of Soviet Russia from 1918-1920, and other barriers set up by the tensions in the 1920s between the new regime and the West also frustrated their attempts at contact with their European counterparts. Nevertheless, most Russian avant-gardists shared a sense of common cause with them and fought to maintain contact as much as possible.' This sense of common cause does not suggest that a single motivation or set of beliefs could characterize so fiercely individualistic a group. On the contrary, for every general trend to be found among certain avant-gardists, the very opposite can also be found among others. One can, however, isolate a particular core of beliefs that were characteristic of a range of individuals and movements and that were to play a significant role in the evolution of revolutionary culture.2 ## Perceptual Millenarianism Many avant-gardists, particularly but not exclusively in Russia, were in the thrall of "revolution," but they interpreted it as essentially the acquisition of a "new vision" (novoye zreniye). This new vision was in their account a precondition, not an end result, of any fundamental political or social revolution. The avant-garde ideologues claimed that through their art modern, bourgeois, conventional man with his tired assumptions might be jolted out of his epistemological rut and helped to "see" and therefore "be" anew, an idiosyncratic version of Romantic Anticapitalism. For this position I am coining the term "perceptual millenarianism"—the belief that the millennium could only be reached through a new vision. Walter Benjamin discusses something like perceptual millenarianism in his essay on the Surrealists where he notes their yearning for a kind of "profane illumination" that he contrasts with, and also sees as a substitute for, the mystical epiphanies of Catholicism.3 The essay is entitled "Surrealism: The Last Snapshot of the European Intelligentsia," suggesting a broader frame of reference. The quest for a kind of profane illumination was at the heart not only of the Surrealists' mission but of many other factions and individuals in this heroic age of the avant-garde. For this reason, the present chapter confounds chronological and geographical distinctions, moving back and forth from Russia to Western Europe, from the prerevolutionary period to the late 1920s or the initial postrevolutionary years, all in the service of elucidating an ethos that largely resisted such changes and distinctions. One reason perceptual millenarianism was generally impervious to the barrier of the Russian Revolution was that for its enthusiasts profane illumination was the stuff of revolution, of a revolution in consciousness, which was to them the essential one. For the millenarians, revolution was revelation, but a secular form of revelation. Most European avant-gardists were captivated by the notion of revolution or at least attracted to some political movement that promised a radical transformation of society, an end to the hegemony of bourgeois, mercantilist culture, and greater social equality. Hence alternative, though less common, allegiances were to anarchism or Italian fascism. In the early days even many Italian Futurists, who have been more or less written off politically as fascists, were leftists or anarcho-syndicalists. In Russia, the religious-like fervor and rhetoric of avant-garde projects were particularly marked, possibly because Russia was one of the last great theocracies in Europe and, the apparently more secular Revolution of 1917 notwithstanding, it had taken that society longer to secularize. Yet not all avant-gardists in Russia in the 1910s and 1920s could be categorized as perceptual millenarians. Indeed, the term does not even define a particular group or movement. Rather, it pinpoints an ethos and a set of prejudices to be found among many European groups in the 1910s and 1920s, but most classically in the work of those avant-gardists who from late 1912 through early 1914 came together in Petersburg. In the 1910s, the Russian avant-garde had operated very loosely on a Moscow-Petrograd axis but were gloriously decentered, split, and embattled. In late 1912 and early 1913, however, several leading Futurists from Moscow, such as Kasimir Malevich, Vladimir Mayakovsky, Aleksey Kruchënykh, and Vladimir Tatlin, joined the Union of Youth (Soyuz molodëzhi), which had been founded in Petersburg in 1910 and was led by figures such as Mikhail Matyushin but also included Velemir Khlebnikov. The frail merger lasted only until December 1913, but, thanks in part to a wealthy patron, L. Zheverzheyev, it generated some of the most famous works of Russian Futurism.4 Around this time the Russians wearied of merely following the latest ism from Paris and launched a "campaign against Paris," with the intention of capturing the lead with their own outrance. Vociferously declaring their independence from French Cubism and Italian Futurism (also launched in Paris), they worked up new isms that they claimed to be not merely more radical than those of Paris, but the ultimate in avant-gardism. The tone was essentially set in December 1912 when leading Futurists issued their foundational manifesto, "A Slap in the Face of Public Taste," with its call to heave Pushkin and other writers of the Great Tradition off the "steamship of modernity" (again, purification of space). Leaders of the Union of Youth, including Khlebnikov, Kruchënykh, and Matyushin, followed this up with a series of manifestoes and anthologies that established the theory and practice of trans-sense poetry (zaum) and other literary and artistic techniques designed to take avant-gardism beyond any point reached thus far.5 Such techniques were to provide the royal road to a new vision. But the most coherent general formulation of the avant-garde's theory is to be found not in such Futurist tracts, which tended to be allusive and frequently alogical, but in the earliest writings of the Futurists' eager ally, the future Formalist Viktor Shklovsky. Russian Formalism in some senses began with a lecture by Shklovsky entitled "The Place of Futurism in the History of Language," delivered when he was still a young student, on December 23, 1913, at the Stray Dog Cabaret, a center of theatrical experimentation. A later essav by Shklovsky that makes similar points, "Art as Technique" (Iskusstvo kak priyëm, 1915-1916), the de facto manifesto of early Formalism, contains a quintessential account of the first premise of perceptual millenarianism. Here Shklovsky quotes a passage from Tolstoy's diary of 1897 in which the writer remarks how it is often the case that with a routine task such as dusting the room one cannot recall whether one has dusted the divan or not. If one has dusted it but forgotten about it, it is as if the act had not occurred, so little has it impinged on one's consciousness. Indeed, Tolstoy concludes, "If for many people an entire complex life passes by unconsciously, it is as if this life had not been." Shklovsky goes on to say that "art exists in order to recover the sense of life, in order to feel objects, to make the stone stoney" (not coincidentally, perhaps, Stone [Kamen'] was the title of Mandelshtam's first collection of verse, published in 1913).6 Shklovsky, like the Futurist artists and so many other avant-gardists of his time, gives the ability to "see" an object or word absolute priority. He draws a distinction between "seeing" (videniye) and "recognizing" (uznavaniye), the latter being what happens when a word or object has been routinized: "Once objects have been perceived several times one begins to perceive them by recognition: an object stands before us, we know about it, but we do not see it."7He labels such a predicament "automatization" (avtomatizatsiya), and he provides a solution for it, a technique he calls "making strange" or "defamiliarization"(ostraneniye). This technique involves taking things out of their context as a means of seeing them and "using an impeded [zatrudnênnaya] form that increases the degree of difficulty and the length of perception, for the process of perception in art is self-valuable and must be prolonged; art is a means for experiencing the making [delan'ye] of an object, and what is made [sdelannoye] in art is not important."8 In this essay Shklovsky focuses particularly on defamiliarization in language. He decries the way conventional meanings and usage have become so automatized that they no longer have any resonance. One can combat this by combining words in an unexpected and perhaps even jarring way, and in their combination draw attention to the words themselves, bringing about, as suggested by the title of his essay of 1914 based on the foundational address at the cabaret, "The Resurrection of the Word."9 By such incongruous, or clashing, juxtapositions of words or word units (phrases, sentences, or even entire plot morphemes), the author draws attention to the very process of making a creative artifact and in this way heightens the reader's consciousness of words and the creative act. Moreover, Shklovsky contends, new meanings are thereby created and, as a corollary, new possibilities for reality are presented to the beholder. Thus, although his formulation was one of the more secular and analytical of the perceptual millenarianist position, we see here the common project to overcome the ordinary and banal and attain a level of experience that is more intense and more authentic. The scenario Shklovsky outlines here, mutatis mutandis, underwrote much Russian avant-garde creative endeavor both before and after the Revolution. One can recognize it in, for instance, the theory of montage as outlined in the late 1920s by Eisenstein (who was originally Meyerhold's pupil), at the heart of which is the juxtaposition, both within and between frames and shots, of radically contrasting material resulting in what he variously describes as "clashes," "collisions," and even "explosions." With such explosions, and by certain other montage techniques, such as setting up contrasting rhythms within and between shots, Eisenstein claimed that the audience would not be lulled into passivity, as is usually the effect of watching a movie, but would be forced to attend to what was happening on the screen; in their efforts to comprehend it, they would attain a new revolutionary consciousness.10 Thus Eisenstein in his essays on montage was constructing a new film aesthetic with an allegedly ineluctable connection to Marxist-Leninist dialectic. Here we see how epistemological and political revolutions were identified among perceptual millenarians. But in such formulations, in effect, the Kantian revolution in philosophy was taken up and extended.11This revolution had entailed a shift of focus from reality to the perception of reality. Kant argued that insofar as we cannot perceive the thing in itself, what we do "see" is a construction. The avant-garde radicalized this position in what was, de facto, a crude appropriation of Kant's views inasmuch as their work was implicitly based on an assumption that since we do not see the thing in itself, it is available for reconstruction. A version of Kantianism was adopted by the new philosophy and aesthetics in which the models were often given prescriptive rather than descriptive force. As can be seen in the case of Eisenstein's theories of montage, perceptual millenarianism can in no way be identified with the Union of Youth merger, nor did it evaporate as a trend with either the merger's dissolution in late 1913 or the Union's in early 1914. Given the itinerant nature of the avantgarde, even the contention that the Union of Youth or, worse still, perceptual millenarianism itself, was a Petersburg, or even a Russian, phenomenon has to be an act of literalism or casuistry. Similar prejudices can be found in many avant-garde groups in Europe and America in the 1910s and 1920s, and for that matter among non-avant-gardists as well. They are particularly characteristic, for instance, of Dada; there is a minor link here in that the Russian Futurist Ilya Zdanevich (a.k.a. Iliazde), who had, inter alia, organized some theatrical events in Petersburg in 1915, gave a reading of Russian trans-sense poetry at a Dada evening in Paris in 1923.12 The perceptual millenarian ethos particularly informs the Suprematist movement in art, promulgated by Malevich at an exhibition of 1915 and developed further in the postrevolutionary period while he was based (1919-1921) at the Popular Art School in Vitebsk (at the time a common place of retreat for intellectuals from civil war-torn Petrograd), where he formed the association UNOVIS (an acronym for the Affirmers [utverditeli] of the New Art), with branches in several major Soviet cities. The principal focus of this movement for a new vision might seem to be the verbal and visual arts. Yet another medium—performance—was a dominant force in the avant-garde's conception of both. The new vision was not to be won by passive contemplation; accounts of it included some dimension of action—the stuff of revolution. It is important to note that when Shklovsky in "Art as Technique" defines "defamiliarization" he uses routinized action as a trope for verbal routinization. Also, the various prescriptions for zaum poetry emphasize the sound potential of such verse, thus implying performance; in some accounts, the word emerges as an actor in its own right.13 The bread and butter of avant-garde movements from the 1910s and 1920s—manifestoes, manifesto-like works, theater, épatage in the art exhibitions—all have a dominant performative element. Mariorie Perloff, in her book on the pre-World War I avant-garde, has defined their paradigmatic gesture as collage; related gestures include framing or confusing figure and ground, the canonical and noncanonical.14 Such definitions are clearly analogous to Shklovsky's defamiliarization or to Eisenstein's montage inasmuch as, whichever way the paradigmatic gesture is defined—collage, montage, breaking or confusing the frame, and so on— it involves placement or juxtaposition with the aim of confounding borders and hierarchies. One has to place the like against the unlike in order to "see" anew; one has to cause a violent movement such as an "explosion"; or one has to (or the artifact has to) move in time or space for a radically new epistemological experience to be possible. Epistemological transgression (confusing seemingly unbridgeable cognitive or discursive boundaries) was the dominant aim of all these movements that saw such a crossing as the road to any new vision. Often, however, epistemological transgression was figured as, or conflated with, sexual or political (revolutionary) transgression. This is most clear not in a text by a Russian avant-gardist, nor in a prerevolutionary text, but in Nadja, a novel published in 1928 by the French Surrealist André Breton. In Nadja, the narrator wanders around Paris in the late afternoon, buys a copy of a book by Trotsky, and then encounters workers streaming out onto the streets at the end of a day's work. As he"unconsciously watch[es] their faces, their clothes, and their way of walking," he concludes: "No, it is not yet these who would be ready to make the Revolution." The narrator walks on and crosses an intersection. Then he "suddenly" sees a "young, poorly dressed woman." His attention is drawn to her eyes, which are made up in an unusual way, but are above all such as "I had never seen." The woman smiles, "but quite mysteriously and somehow knowingly." This stranger is Nadja, who is to become the enigmatic object of his erotic obsession-cumexistential/aesthetic quest.15 We tend to dismiss the Surrealists' invocation of Trotsky and revolution, together with their ultimately abortive attempts at joining the Communist Party, as a kind of leftist infantilism, an aberration in Surrealism and not part of its essence. Yet among so many avant-gardists, especially those of the 1910s and 1920s, one finds that same combination of commitment to a radical political movement and aesthetic iconoclasm. In Nadja, this allegiance to a leftist revolution is not merely prominent on the surface of the novel, but is powerfully present in its subtext as well. Most of the places in Paris where the narrator has an overpowering sense that something momentous or inexplicably painful will occur have associations with revolution.16 Benjamin called the Surrealists "adoptive children of the revolution,"17 and they were subjected to the sort of ambiguous status that too often comes with that relationship. As adoptive children, they were also of a different bloodline. One would have a hard time recognizing the iron maiden of revolutionary commitment in Nadja. She is a sometime prostitute, an immigrant girl who otherwise supports herself through menial tasks. Unaccountably, she is also attracted by the same writings as are the Surrealists. But is this really "unaccountable"? Nadja's pedigree, for all her lower-class identity, clearly derives from Baudelaire more than from Marx. Nadja is elevated above the status of tawdry figure from the demimonde not just because of her exotic allure but also because of the intensity of her gaze. Her most crucial characteristic is that she perceives the world differently from the way it is perceived by others; she seems to have powers of clairvoyance, to be able to make connections between trivial details and occurrences from ostensibly different epistemological series. She also hallucinates and does not always distinguish between that which "is" in conventional reality and that which "is"as seen from within. In the lengthy first part of Nadja, before the narrator encounters the alluring object of his obsession, he essentially outlines for the reader the nature of his project. Nadja is sought before she appears "suddenly." The narrator begins with a project to investigate, during his strolls around Paris, "things which, reaching me in unexpected ways," seem to be "at the mercy of chance .. . [and which] admit me to an almost forbidden world [note the spatial transgression] of sudden parallels, petrifying coincidences, and .. . facts that may belong to the order of pure observation, but that on each occasion present all the appearances of a signal, without our being able to say precisely which signal."18 Breton describes these "experiences" as "flashes of light that would make you see, really see, if only they were not so much quicker than all the rest."19 For such avant-gardists, this profane illumination was the stuff of revolution, of a revolution in consciousness that was to them the essential one. They believed they should make that leap, see the sudden flash of light, and be changed. Or, at second best, they, like the narrator of Nadja, should follow someone else who can make, or has made, that leap, and try to acquire some of the light by osmosis. Of course Russia with its Revolution of 1917 had already, allegedly, made such a leap on a national scale. Once that revolution occurred, the Russian avant-garde, more than any other non-Party group (actually, some of them were Party members), supported it, and the Revolution—as it were, a trump card the Russians could play in their "campaign against Paris"—became a beacon for many of the avant-garde in Europe. At more or less the same time as Breton wrote Nadja, in the late 1920s, Mayakovsky and others were traveling to Paris emphasizing the links between French Surrealism and the Soviet avant-garde, while Malevich traveled to the Bauhaus in Germany where El Lissitzky, his erstwhile disciple from Vitebsk, was established; Malevich brought with him color charts done by his coterie in Leningrad that were the fruit of the experimental work on perception. Slightly earlier, in the years immediately following the Revolution, Russian Futurists, who after 1917 preferred to be called "left artists," served as propagandists and cultural bureaucrats of the state, while German Expressionists such as Ernst Toller were involved in the Munich Communist government, and Dada's Richard Huelsenbeck served as Commissar of Fine Arts in Berlin after its short-lived revolution of 1918. Symptomatically, in the early years after the Revolution the avant-garde of Russia sought to found an artistic International (analogous to, but not connected with, the Communist International) and proposed that embassies for art be opened in the different countries, thus implying that art was a country unto itself. This aim also implies a separation of art and state, although in Russia initially the two were not seen as in conflict. As time wore on, however, many avant-gardists became more ambivalent toward the new state. Their writings began to reflect a much more complicated and enigmatic attitude toward the Communist Revolution than is evident in Nadja. After all, Communism was not for them an alternative to the temporal power, but had the misfortune to be the name of that power itself. Moreover, highly formulaic ways of expressing enthusiasm for a Communist state were already becoming the expected norm. This more mediated response to the Revolution can be seen in an approximate Russian analogue to Breton's Nadja, two novels published in 1929 and 1931 by the Leningrad writer Veniamin Kaverin, The Troublemaker, or Nights on Vasilevsky Island (Skandalist ili vechera na Vasil'yevskom ostrove) and Artist Unknown (Khudozhnik neizvesten). In both, as in Nadja, an intellectual of letters—identified with the author himself—follows a mysterious and potentially crazy acquaintance all around the city, drawn by the belief that he may thus learn to "see" a reality of an entirely different order from the conventional one, and to which his subject seems to have unique access. There are substantial differences between Kaverin's novels and Breton's Nadja. For example, not only is there no sign of Trotsky in Kaverin (hardlv surprising given that Trotsky had been ousted from power in 1926), but in the more puritanical political climate of the Soviet late 1920s the object of epistemological quest stands for bohemian eccentricity rather than sexual transgression.20 As with Nadja, however, the motif of revolution is ever present in cryptic allusions to revolutionary moments and figures (here, as in Nadja, primarily of French revolutions); in The Troublemaker, for example, the most intense experience of the observer figure, the student Nagin, in trying to follow his enigmatic seer around Leningrad occurs as the two stand on the icy Neva between the Lieutenant Schmidt Bridge (a name associated with Russia's revolution of 1905) and Equality Bridge (associated with the French Revolution) and are cut off from the city by mist.21 Of Kaverin's two novels, Artist Unknown contains the most sustained and idealized account of the visionary eccentric who becomes the object of an aesthetic-cum-epistemological quest. I say idealized advisedly, even though the visionary, the artist Arkhimedov, is represented as a quixotic and totally inept figure. At the end of the novel, Arkhimedov seems defeated by the forces of the new age; his wife has committed suicide and he has fallen into such a state of madness that his child has been taken from him. Yet in an epilogue we are given the following account of a picture by an "artist unknown," whom the reader assumes to have been Arkhimedov: .. . This could have been achieved only by someone who with all the freedom of genial talent strode through the barriers set up by timidity and constraints. . . . His mixing of the high with the trivial, of everyday detail with a profound sense of the times is of an order that cannot be learned at the feet of other masters, living or dead. Only an artist's eye [zreniye] boldly orienting itself around material others consider contingent [sluchaynyy] or banal could resolve to return like this to a childlike perception of things.. . . One would have to have been smashed to death to paint such a thing . . .22 Both of Kaverin's novels are also romans à clef of his own intellectual set. These figures who "truly see" are based on particular idols of the author's milieu, although Kaverin in representing them used caricature, inversion, and other forms of distortion. The subject in The Troublemaker is E. Polivanov, a noted linguist originally from the Formalist circle who in the late 1920s was the only prominent linguist to attack the theories of N. Marr (see Chapter 9). In Artist Unknown, the subject represents a conflation of Petersburg avant-gardists from the perceptual millenarians'pantheon, the poet Velemir Khlebnikoy and the artist Pavel Filonov, and to some extent also Kaverin's own mentor (and relation by marriage), the Formalist theoretician Yury Tynvanov.23 In short, Arkhimedov is a composite representation of the ideals of his set; the novel is a rather curious—and devious—form of iconography. Even in the above quotation from Artist Unknown there is an emphasis on the necessity for shattering as a precondition for creating anew and on having a Nietzschean "courage" to transgress boundaries. Such convictions were by no means confined to Kaverin. Nor were they just a phenomenon of the late 1920s. They can be seen as a central credo of the Union of Youth merger, one most clearly present in that milestone of Russian avantgardism, the 1913 production of Victory over the Sun. ## Victory over the Sun Nineteen thirteen, the annus mirabilis of Russia's avant-garde, culminated in two theatrical productions that some have seen as an orgiastic effort after which the Petersburg-Moscow merger was spent and disbanded.24 From December 2-5 in Petersburg the Union of Youth sponsored Russian Futurism's first two theatrical ventures, Vladimir Mayakovsky's Vladimir Mayakovsky: A Tragedy (Vladimir Mayakovskiy: Tragediya) and Victory over the Sun (Pobeda nad solntsem), a joint effort by Kruchënykh, Khlebnikov, Malevich, and Matyushin.25 Recent Western productions of these plays, especially Mayakovsky's, have frequently interpreted them as absurdist proto-Pinter. Yet with "A Tragedy" as the subtitle of Mayakovsky's work and "An Opera" as the subtitle of Victory over the Sun, one should not overlook the extent to which both were written in the context of the Nietzschean/Wagnerian movement.26 This was especially true of Victory, which with its "strongman" characters and rhetoric of "daring" can be read as a Nietzschean parable. Victory over the Sun contains not so much a coherent plot as a series of events that are interconnected to some extent at the level of action but more by allegory or "associative chains." The main events in the play illustrate its title: a time traveler arrives at an unidentified time and place, reporting that he has wandered through all the ages and in the thirty-fifth century the people are waging a battle against the sun; some characters then capture the sun. The inhabitants of this unnamed place thus live in a world without the sun and in a dwelling where the windows are arranged alogically and all look inward (when the sun was pulled down it was not destroyed, but rather redirected inward, so often the locus of the new vision). At the end of the play, an aviator crashes, but only laughs at this and sings a "military song" consisting almost entirely of consonants.27 These vaguely related events are interspersed with scenes of struggle and violence, including military action, duels, and suicides. It is hardly surprising that the play should have a leitmotif of combat because a major theme is confronting and confounding one order of reality with another. This theme is enacted at all levels, from language to the play's major metaphor of victory over the "sun." According to Mikhail Matyushin, the composer of the "opera," the sun stands for the "sun of cheap appearances."28 It stands for the conventional sense of reality, for existing scientific systems, and for sterile rationality; after the sun is captured, an unidentified character remarks, in an obvious reversal of Galileo's famous pronouncement about the earth's moving: "You know, the earth does not move," whereupon those at the scene report, "We tore out the sun with its fresh roots /They were thick and smelled of arithmetic."29 The play is thus a parable about overcoming the limitations of received science, in that sense a further development of the charge of Dostoevsky's narrator in Notes from the Underground that "two plus two" must equal "five."For the Russian and European avant-garde, this was a typical theme. So much of their work starts with the premise that the old science has been superseded in the work of scientists such as Georg Riemann and Nikolai Lobachevsky.30Lobachevsky, a nineteenth-century Russian mathematician, was a favorite not just of the Russian avant-garde but of Dada as well; his work establishing that parallel lines could meet (contrary to Euclid's eleventh "axiom") had particular appeal because it showed how one could overcome a seemingly unbridgeable boundary—that between two lines that should forever maintain a stipulated distance from each other.31 Many avant-gardists, particularly in Russia and France, were absolutely opposed to all closed scientific systems (such as that of Euclid), which they saw as akin to that "wall" which Dostoevsky's narrator in Notes from the Underground insists must be challenged, no matter how illogical and even painful and self-destructive it might be. In their place they sought totally new scientific systems in which "contingency," "chance," and the seemingly trivial— that which is irrelevant or nonsystematic according to the established systems—might become the central "scientific" principles. Accordingly, Dadaists generated a series of new principles for a science of systematic aberrancy, such as "chance selection," hasard objectif, and geste gratuit. Dada artists such as Marcel Duchamp and Kurt Schwitters (with his Merz) reified contingency in their works of art by declaring bits of trivia (newsprint, debris, and even dust) randomly or haphazardly collected to be the work of art itself. Thus in Victory over the Sun "science" is interpreted in a rather extended sense to mean the old (conventional) epistemology and axiology. Within those systems, language and visual representations were the most fundamental for members of the Union of Youth. Artists and writers tried to conceive a new language that would be constructed on a system quite antithetical to that of conventional language, and frequently random; they delighted in all examples of linguistic singularity and aberrance. Thus, more figuratively, Victory is a parable about overcoming the limitations of conventional systems of meaning and of the aesthetic. But it is simultaneously an object lesson with its extensive use of zaum (as in the "military song" that consists entirely of consonants). The sets and costumes by Kasimir Malevich were, analogously, intended to confound conventional systems, in this instance of visual representation. One particular backdrop has been claimed to represent proto-Suprematism, his avant-gardist movement in art (first proclaimed in 1915) which purports to represent a nec plus ultra in that it has renounced all ties between art and representation. Instead, quasi-geometric shapes (squares, rhomboids, crosses, circles, triangles) painted in a limited register of colors were placed in seemingly random patterns on a painted background (the backdrop in question makes gestures toward the "black square" that was to become one of the signatures of Malevich's Suprematism). Victory over the Sun is not just an attack against received science and linguistic conventions but also more directly a Nietzschean parable about "victory"over the Apollonian, which is in its very name associated with Apollo, the sun god. Nietzsche in The Birth of Tragedy identifies the Apollonian in terms of the principium individuationis, or principle of individuation, that is, in terms of the individual's sense of boundedness, which is shattered in Dionysian frenzy.32 The general mission of the various artists associated with the Union of Youth in Petersburg at this time was to shatter the precise and unerring logic of line and contour that Nietzsche associated with the Apollonian. They sought to transgress or confuse all manner of set bounds. Thus in the backdrops for Victory Malevich incorporated musical notes to symbolize the way the barrier between the musical and the visual had been flouted in this "opera." This tendency is particularly marked in the writings of Malevich, who liked to define Suprematism in terms of exploding boundaries and creating new forms out of the pieces. In an article of 1917 entitled"The Theater," recalling the effect of Matyushin's atonal music at the performance of Victory over the Sun, he wrote: “Matyushin's sound smashed to pieces the crust of the old music . . . while the words and word-letters of Aleksey Kruchënykh [the librettist] turned the stock [veshchevoye] word to dust. The facade was shattered and in the same moment the wail of the consciousness of the old brain was shattered as well.. . ."33 Here we find a formulation similar to Bely's central trope in Petersburg of the assassination explosion that shatters the skull, used by Bely as a figure for mind expansion, or Marx's trope for the end of the capitalist system as the "integument" bursting asunder. Bely's and Malevich's referring to the brain in formulations that are otherwise analogous to Marx's is symptomatic of the fact that the avant-garde, unlike most Marxists, generally gave priority to some kind of spiritual revolution. Many of them sought true authenticity in absolute otherness, though it remained elusive. For example, a favorite technique of the Surrealists was automatic writing, writing often attempted immediately upon awakening in an effort to obscure the boundary between the conscious and the subconscious. Potentially, automatic writing (and zaum) could be a kind of speaking in tongues, yet somehow the veil of the culturally conditioned was never ripped off and their allegedly unfettered and spontaneous verbal compositions came out in complete sentences. As this example shows, a fundamental problem for such varieties of avant-gardism is that nothing can be random or noncanonical except in relation to that which is fixed. This is particularly apparent in the use of the alleged zaum in Victory over the Sun. The play seems to alternate between zaum and outright proclamation. Moreover, even in the use of zaum, although there is much "madness," there is also clearly method. The method consists in part in the fact that the authors have used a perfectly methodical system for the "deformation" of conventional verbal and even plot material (putting unusual suffixes on recognizable roots, substituting a word that rhymes with the original one, and so on). The text is constantly walking a thin line between semantic iconoclasm and proclamation. In Khlebnikov's Prologue, a virtual Sargossa Sea of neologisms, the audience has no difficulty grasping the most fundamental tenets of perceptual millenarianism as he readily deciphers the neologisms in statements proclaiming that those with a new vision will lead and transform ("sozertseben est' vozhdeben" and "sozertsavel' est' preobrazhavel'"). Victory over the Sun is written as a textbook of semantic iconoclasm. At base, however, it opposes meaning for the purpose of substituting other meaning. Paradoxically, in order for the practitioners of zaum to demonstrate how they have flouted conventional usages, they are often obliged to use the most familiar and mundane as points of orientation. Frequently, commonplaces or well-known quotations are invoked at inappropriate moments or with substantial changes; for instance, "All's well that begins well" is used at the beginning of the first act and also in the play's closing line. Similarly, Pushkin's title and the opening line from his famous poem of 1836, "I have erected a monument to myself. . .," is invoked in the play unacknowledged, but is debased by the use of the more prosaic verb "I have put up [postavil]" rather than "erected [vozdvig]." Moreover, the character making this claim is lying down—and hence far from a vertical position and talking of suicide rather than immortality. The Pushkin (mis)quotation comes from a poem in which the poet makes his greatest claim for the significance of his own writing, metaphorized as a monument erected to himself but "not made by hands." It also alludes to an earlier poem, Horace's Exegi monumentum. As is typical for this play, then, the theme of art is invoked in a context where it is not explicit. The Pushkin figure in this scene is parodied as a cowardly buffoon, inept in the face of a canon attack by Futurist forces (budetlyane). Then, following the canon attack, comes the extravagant remark, attributed extremely vaguely, "I am without continuation and imitation."34 The implication, then, is that the kind of art being showcased in this production represents not just an attempt to decenter existing meaning, an exercise in cognitive estrangement, but an attempt to discover a unique meaning, to find an irreducible specificum. The meaning of zaum is to get out of a discourse in which you have the rational possibility of generalizing; not to get out of language for its own sake, but to achieve a perception of a unique meaning. Most visions are comprehensive, general, and in that sense utopian; this is a vision of the particular. These perceptual millenarians seek an art that reaches even beyond the intrinsic state of the aesthetic; they seek something so absolutely in itself that it has gone beyond self-valuableness (aestheticism) to another and more radical degree of in-itselfness. Despite such iconoclastic bravado, many avant-gardists laid some claim to science as a legitimating authority (hence the Russians' need to invite Shklovsky, a young scholar of literature and language, to pronounce on their work). In this respect, the avant-garde seem to find common cause with the Bolsheviks. In the writings of both groups science emerges as the emblem of revolution. One of Leninism's greatest claims to superiority was its promise to establish a kingdom of science and advanced technology where before, under the tsars, there had been a kingdom of obscurantism, a major factor in Russia's backwardness compared with Western Europe. However, Lenin's understanding of science differed from that of the Russian avant-garde; he essentially favored the old science and, in famous polemics with members of his own party, insisted that the world is not "constructed" but has palpable—material—existence.35 In their account of science the avant-garde were generally less systematic than he was, as can be appreciated in the fact that even Kaverin (a disciple of the Formalists), when he called for a more rigorous and scientific approach to literary theory and practice, adduced the work of E. T. A. Hoffman as a model.36 Perceptual millenarians presented themselves as occupying a kind of liminal position between art and science. Hence their task of achieving profane illumination, an essentially aesthetic experience that leads to a new way of knowing. They often represented their artistic projects as "experiments," or conducted experiments themselves as if no less justified in doing so than scientists. Indeed, Duchamp insisted not merely that the new artist is like a scientist, but that in his work he would surpass even the most pathbreaking scientist. In this conviction he conducted systematic experiments with chance. In Leningrad after the Revolution, the coterie of Malevich, Matyushin, and Filonov pursued their activity as artists by conducting "scientific" experiments on perception of color and light. In their more extravagant formulations, they contended that the artists, as those with the "keener vision" who can more readily perceive new meanings and new systems behind that which is ostensibly "contingent" and inconsequential, will, rather than the scientists per se, be the ones to lead humankind to epistemological revolution. In order to do so, however, they must train their eyes to see or, as in Breton's Nadja or Kaverin's novels, move around in order to have chance occurrences impinge on their consciousness. In training themselves to become open to contingency, they must overcome the limitations in perception that have been culturally conditioned. One limitation that particularly concerned the Petersburg perceptual millenarians was the fact that individuals cannot simultaneously see all 360 degrees. The solution they proposed was a heightened intuition (such as is attained in Victory over the Sun when the sun is not vanquished in the "victorious" struggie but brought to reside within). This problem was addressed in an article Matyushin published in May 1923 in the leading Leningrad cultural journal, the Life of Art (Zhizn' iskusstva), to introduce his new movement, Zorved (roughly, "see-know"). Zorved proposed overcoming normal human limitations in perception by heightening the artist's capacities until there is "a physiological change in the previous method of perception," introducing for the first time the observation and experience of the "rear plane" that was hitherto hidden, of all that space that, hitherto, was "outside the human sphere due to inadequacies of experience." "New data" from the experimental work of the Zorved group, Matyushin continues, "have revealed the influence of space, light, color, and form on brain centers through the back of the head [zatylok]," "clearly establish[ing] a sensitivity to space to be found in the visual centers located in the rear [zatylochnyy] section of the brain. In this way a great power of spatial apprehension has suddenly been opened up to man. . . the most valuable gift for both man and the artist is knowledge of the spatial. . . ."37It was commented at the time that Matvushin's theories in this article represent a version of the "fourth dimension" for art, but by this dimension is not meant Einsteinian theory.38 When in 1913 Matyushin published Albert Gleizes and Jean Metzinger's Du cubisme in Russian translation, he interspersed sections of it with quotations from P. D. Ouspensky's Tertium organum (1911), a key text for these perceptual millenarians that viewed the "fourth dimension" in a mystical or theosophical framework.39 Thus the perceptual millenarians, as those who claimed that they could give man new vision, represent a limit case of the Hermes complex. Their role as the privileged few who could go beyond the conventional systems and "really see" conferred on them a sort of nobility of gnosis (generally referred to as Intuition). The practitioners of zaum might be seen as paradigmatic Hermes figures, mediating between a language no one speaks and a language everyone speaks. The problem, however, is that were one to come back from a truly different reality, one would be unable to describe it in terms recognizable to those who had not been there—perhaps one could only act it out or try to render it not in words but in the more expressive medium of sound. Arguably, this was one reason for the attraction of zaum with its incantatory potential. Naming was in general very important to the avant-garde. Consider, for example, their proclivity for renaming themselves (well-known examples include Tristan Tzara and Velemir Khlebnikov). This convention suggests that when a new self has been constructed a new name is in order (not coincidentally, perhaps, this practice was also popular among the Bolshevik leaders). Thus avant-gardism is an Adamic ideology, a form of paradisiac hermeneutics. At the same time, names play an important role in the avant-garde's paradoxical, self-ironizing underside (an aspect not shared by the Bolsheviks), its salutary antidote to the heavy mystical/ religious and self-aggrandizing tendencies. Thus, though Dada's leaders kept rehearsing how they discovered the movement's name, they also stressed that the name was gratuitous (it was allegedly found randomly in a dictionary and is in any case from the realm of baby talk). Similarly, Duchamp and Man Ray gave many of their works of art fatuous names that involved punning, challenging artistic canons, and playing with sexual crossing and linguistic hybridicity. Naming and renaming have to do with the Hermes role assumed by a perceptual millenarian. It might be argued that the basic device of the avantgarde manifesto, the catalogue of names, is a favorite not only because of its incantatory-cum-performance value, but also because, given that the essence of their movement is so radically other that it cannot be conveyed directly, they try to capture it by maneuvering within a series of paradoxical juxtapositions of nouns. Kruchënykh in his canonical account of zaum talks in terms of seeing both "here" and "there."40 Thus zaum is a concept that centrally entails a journey. Perceptual millenarianism involves, metaphorically at least, getting away, going beyond, going to a place or time that is not of this world in the sense that its "reality"is not of this world's systems. ## The Myth of the Journey to Atlantis In 1922 Yury Annenkov noted in an article in the Leningrad journal The Life of Art that the three latest rages among the intelligentsia were Einstein, Oswald Spengler-and a novel by the French writer Pierre Benoit called Atlantis(Atlantide, or Atlantida in Russian).41What an unholy trinity—the leading scientist of the age, a gloomy philosopher of history, and a novel about fatal attraction! Atlantis is an improbable tale of exotic adventure and mystery in the vast, unexplored reaches of the Saharan desert, where the characters stumble upon the lost city of Atlantis, which is presided over by a bewitching queen, Antinea; the price to pay for one glorious night with her is to die and be embalmed so that one can be displayed as a trophy in one of her opulent marble halls. But Antinea rules a kingdom that is not merely "lost"; it is the (unknown) center of alternative science, of that body of knowledge that for centuries has been marginalized or proscribed; it is the place that functions as symbolic worthy antagonist of the contemporary European world. As in Nadja, sexual transgression, epistemological transgression, and to some extent political transgression are conflated, but the enabling trope is a journey to a totally other place. Thus this unholy trinity—Benoit, Einstein, and Spengler—stands at the intersection of the exotic journey (Benoit), the abolition of conventional concepts of space and time (Einstein),42and millennial expectation (Spengler). That point of intersection marks an attempt at epistemological iconoclasm that typified avant-garde extremism. A first premise of the avant-garde was the destruction of time and space as they were then understood. Indeed, The Founding and Manifesto of Italian Futurism proclaims: "Time and Space died yesterday." Of the two, the destruction of time is the most apparent. There is not a great deal about the future in this manifesto, nor indeed in most other such manifestoes of the avant-garde. And as for the past, Italian Futurism and many of its Russian counterparts called for incendiarism, for torching or dynamiting it, as the only way to destroy the cult of the past (passéisme),while Dada claimed it had no past or future but was "ageless." Similarly, the avantgarde tended to reject linear or cyclical models of time (and therefore of narrative), favoring epiphanic or fragmentary structures. Thus in a sense Futurism is a misnomer and"presentism"would be a more accurate name for these kinds of movements, although even that is imprecise. There is no "present" as a point in time, for nothing can be more than process (hence, for example, Shklovsky in"Art as Technique" privileges "experiencing the making [delan'ue] of an object" over "what is made [sdelannoye]"). So often, in consequence, the work of the avant-garde became a kind of metaphysical or metaphorical journey, a journey that sought to transcend time and thereby "find" a new order of space. Malevich frequently insisted that "my new [Suprematist] art does not belong to the world exclusively. Earth has been rejected as a home . . ."; in man's consciousness he is drawn into space and experiences a pull to "cut loose from the terrestrial globe." "I can't wait to hear that breaking off [razryv]," he would say. "When will we take off?"43It is perhaps not surprising, then, that perceptual millenarianism in Russia coincided with a time of great interest in utopian fiction shading into science fiction fantasy literature. The possibility of seeing a new world elsewhere, which the prerevolutionary avant-garde erected into a radical epistemology, was, then, at that time far from their obsession alone. A similar impulse informed the popular press and fiction of the day. One can, for example, sense it by looking at the journal Argus, a periodical particularly representative of the times. Argus was first published in 1913, at the height of prerevolutionary avant-garde activity. It attracted some highbrow readers (several noted writers published there4) but generally aimed for a broader audience. Its title refers of course to Argus with his one hundred eyes, which could, as the journal's subtitle proclaims, "see everything" (vsë vizhu). But the name also suggests the possibility of the argonauts, especially since most of the articles and photos in the journal were devoted to accounts of exotic travel, of far-flung and primitive peoples, of flight, ballooning, or exploration (in 1913 it published as a supplement the journals of Captain Scott's expedition to the Antarctic of 1910-1913). Another favorite was firsthand accounts of extraordinary visual experiences; one such gem, an article entitled "What the Blind Journalist Saw," provides a utopian vision of the future.45Argus also had a section titled, as if in paraphrase of Kruchënykh's claim for zaum, "Both Here and There,"which contained somewhat popularized tales of "believe it or not." This fare was accompanied by Gothic short stories embellished with illustrations of skulls and such, and adventure romances set in exotic climes à la Rider Haggard (or Benoit). Such publications did not merely supplement the work of the avantgarde. The avant-garde themselves, in their writings from both before and after the Revolution, frequently invoked moments from science fiction especially from H. G. Wells and Jules Verne, as symbolizing a radically different order of experience that ordinary folk-earthlings—would find alien, incomprehensible, and perhaps even frightening. Thus in Victory over the Sun, for example, one of the characters is "the time traveler" in the manner of Wells's The Time Machine. But the most often appropriated motif from science fiction was "Ullya, Ullya [we are] the Martians," a version of the Martians' call in Wells's War of the Worlds as they made their inexorable advance on a terrorized London. This phrase was used by the Russian Futurists as a sort of war cry heralding their own advance with that which was radically new and which threatened to destroy the old completely: Khlebnikov used it in 1916 in "The Trumpet of the Martians," and Shklovsky picked it up in his opening sally for a programmatic article of 1919 entitled "On the Art of the Revolution" (and elsewhere).46 In fiction of exotic adventure travel, such as Benoit's Atlantis, the essential characteristic of the traveler-protagonist's destination (Mars, in space, in the desert) is less crucial than that it should be absolutely cut off from all else. Very frequently at the center of this new world there is, as in Benoit's novel, a femme fatale, a version of Rider Haggard's She who stands for the spirit of the new place. She is the icon for "there," for "Atlantis," for desire, for the journey bevond the mind (za-um). "Atlantis" (Mars, and so on) is not a place but a symbol. Yet in Russia elements from the myth of Petersburg are often incorporated into this kind of literature, perhaps because that myth is associated simultaneously with the rigid and centralized as well as with radical change. This can be seen even in Victory over the Sun. Although the setting in the thirty-fifth century represents both anywhere and no place, the authors implicitly invoke patterns of contrast recognizably associated with the myth of Petersburg. For instance, a random remark by one of the characters about how the place where they are ("here") is the opposite of what obtains on "the islands"47suggests the pattern of contrast that is fundamental to Bely's Petersburg. This character reverses the meaning of these poles in Bely's novel, however; in Victory, the central location stands for the chaotic and the islands for the ordered. It might seem that the aim of the journey to Atlantis is to discover Atlantis, to attain a new time and place. But just as Heinrich Schliemann's discovering Troy destroyed the myth of Troy, the discovery of Atlantis would no doubt also strip "Atlantis" of its magic and mystery. The journey to Atlantis cannot be a journey to a place that is found Modern historians such as Paul Carter who write about the great explorers have begun to emphasize the distinction between "discovering" a place and "exploring." When you are traveling the names you give to what you perceive en route are never definite statements of arrival (hence the gesturing with catalogues of names in an effort to interpret for those who have not taken that route). Such places always point to what V. S. Naipaul has called "the enigma of arrival."48 The whole function of Atlantis is to serve as a beacon for setting out on the journey, but its purpose is to occasion exploration and not discovery. At the end of Breton's Nadja, the heroine is institutionalized in a mental hospital. The narrator rants about this, pointing out that such an institutionalization was the fate of three heroes from the Surrealist pantheon: Baudelaire, de Sade, and Nietzsche.4 Yet he appears to do nothing to help Nadja, who fades from his purview. Some have viewed this as evidence of the essential male chauvinism of the avant-garde or of an unacknowledged elitism whereby such lower-class exotics can be consumed and spat out when no longer of interest. But it might also be argued that the narrator, the questing Surrealist, cannot follow Nadja to that end, her end, which is totally beyond the systems of this world. In a lengthy footnote toward the end of the book the narrator relates how one day as he was driving Nadja around she covered his head with hers in a passionate clinch and then put her foot over his on the accelerator. He confesses that he was unable to take this moment, to hurtle on to his death in an access of passion, claiming that he did not love Nadja enough.50 This exercise in situational ethics highlights a major dilemma for the perceptual millenarians. Perhaps that is why it was coyly hidden in a footnote. In the vertigo of the earlier years of the avant-garde, many flirted with the idea of pressing down on that accelerator and reaching true otherness: "Lâchez tout!" was a slogan of Dada, an instruction from ballooning to cut all the strings so that the balloon can fly up from earth, but which might also be read more literally as "Leave everything [behind]," and is comparable to Malevich's "When will we take off?" cited earlier. This is the ultimate project of the avant-garde, and they flirt with it like the narrator in Nadja, but leave before they reach any "Atlantis," or mythical destination to be sought but never found. Thus the aim was not ultimately to go right out of this world. You cannot "lâcher tout" or you will end up with a language no one speaks. The first-person narrator (or, in the case of a Duchamp or a Schwitters, the "creator"/ namer of a reified contingency) provided a travel diary of his journey. But most often the narrator journeyed as a sputnik, or co-traveler, of the putative visionary, returning "here" before his journey took him beyond the chartable. The enigma of arrival is akin to the ambiguity of revolution, an event that is meant both to destroy and to create. Malevich had advocated destroying boundaries and then putting together the new out of the shards of the old. But unless you smash the new bounds, you merely get a new fixity, what Yevgeny Zamyatin in a famous essay of 1923 called "entropy."51 Recall here that Hermes, a patron of hermeneutics, is also the saint of thieves and heralds. He is a go-between but also a trickster. The messages he carries with him have to be interpreted; hence allegory, enigma, pun, parable, and paradox are avant-garde favorites. It is often difficult—or inappropriate?— to decide whether, when a Malevich, for example, writes of his art journeying like planets through space, this is to be taken literally or as a trope. Such vagueness, however, was scarcely appropriate in that other enterprise in which most Russian avant-gardists were also sputniki, the Revolution. Both the perceptual millenarians and the Bolsheviks sought revolution, but both claimed a special, elite function for themselves that was legitimated by alleged access to a "consciousness," whether that consciousness was political (Marxism-Leninism) or aesthetic (the "keen eye" [zor'kiy glaz]). When D. Shterenberg, the first head of the Art Section (IZO) within the Commissariat of Enlightenment52(Narkompros) of the new government, wrote a major report on the "theoretical principles" for the new State Free Art Studios (SVOMAS), the institutional backbone of a reformed program of tertiary art education, he asserted that the aim of such places was to help the underprivileged, who would fill the studios and acquire a new vision. Consequently, he continued, "the organ of sight" would "play a decisive role" in their artistic training. "The cultivated and keen [zor'kiy] eye can open up a world of phenomena in nature that is still infinitely vast yet remains closed for the majority of people. Thanks to this organ and their capacities for invention, artists have given these phenomena concrete reflection in works of art. But even the works of art themselves can be understood completely only by a highly cultivated eye." It is unrealistic to expect that their worker and peasant students could immediately find the "true path," however, and hence for the present the SVOMAS can teach them only the "craft of art." Ultimately, they would be able to produce "creative people who follow the one and only effective [tselesoobraznyy] method."53 Implicit in this somewhat self-serving proclamation of first principles, then, is a hierarchy in people based on the quality of the "eye," a hierarchy that has not been overcome by the Revolution and the setting up of the SVOMAS themselves. It is analogous to the hierarchy in "consciousness" of Marxism-Leninism, and, like it, implies training in, and gradual progress toward, such a consciousness. After the Civil War the Suprematist movement UNOVIS petered out in most cities, but in Petrograd Malevich, along with other leading artists of a perceptual millenarian orientation such as Matyushin and Filonov, found a base for most of the rest of the 1920s in a Leningrad art institute (see Chapter 5), where they spread their ideals and conducted experimental work on color and perception together with their disciples. Seen from this perspective, the Revolution of 1917 marks no border, no break in cultural trends. There was bound to be change as such a movement which, as Irving Howe has remarked, is always in danger of becoming solipsistic encounters the triumph of another that preaches the collective existence.54 How could the kind of radical individuation and cult of contingency that so many perceptual millenarians espoused be reconciled with the aims of a mass revolution, their frequent, intense dedication to such a cause notwithstanding? Initially, perceptual millenarianism was a dominant trend among Russian avant-gardists. But many of them had begun to rethink their position even before the Revolution. The shift is exemplified in Mayakovsky's declaration "A Drop of Tar" of 1915 in which he announces the death of Futurism as an "idea of the elect." Futurism, he claims, has now gone beyond its first, iconoclastic phase: "Don't be amazed if in our hands instead of rattles you will find the designs of an architect."55After Constructivism emerged around 1920, many who had previously taken a perceptual millenarianist position joined that movement, which was centered in Moscow. It came to dominate Soviet architecture, photography, avant-garde film, and set design, and was also a significant, if more minor, force in literature. A core of intellectuals based largely in Leningrad, however, were still guided by the ideals of perceptual millenarianism and effectively carried its flag through the late 1920s and even the 1930s, when such a position became much more difficult to espouse.56 These included Malevich, Matyushin, Filonov, and their followers, the followers of Khlebnikov, and also some leading Formalists and a group of writers and students associated with them (such as Kaverin). Although they cannot be identified as a group, they shared certain fiercely held common values. The Constructivists believed that a new man and a new consciousness could be created less by individual acts of perception than by establishing a totally new aesthetic-cum-material environment: buildings, clothing, utensils, and even the organization of one's basic day should be completely restructured, as should such obviously aesthetic objects as theater, film, and art. The new man would be formed, they believed, if one applied "scientific" laws to man's behavior patterns at home and in the workplace so that in his every movement he might live the maximally rationalized and simultaneously collectivized and aestheticized existence: key values for them were hygiene, regularity, efficiency, and utility. In other words, while Shklovsky and the perceptual millenarians deplored routinized action and designed their entire aesthetic system with the aim of counteracting it, the Constructivists, on the contrary, sought to perfect just such routinized action.57 This is one of the paradoxes of the avant-garde. But there are other paradoxes to be found in the case of perceptual millenarianism. On the one hand, it stands for all that was to prove most threatening to Stalinist culture, yet, on the other, the myth of perceptual millenarianism itself can be seen as providing narrative norms used in much of the writing and ritual occasioned by the Stalinist cult of personality (see the Epilogue). One should not conclude, however, that the avant-gardist figures discussed here were the secret legislators of that cult. For a start, perceptual millenarianism was far from confined to the avant-garde; indeed, in the initial postrevolutionary years, a time of general millennial expectation, it is to be found in a wide range of cultural expressions. A case in point would be the work of Boris Pilnyak, "the first celebrity of early Soviet literature."58 His most famous novel, The Naked Year (Golyy god), was the main Russian literary hit of 1922, the year of Einstein, Spengler, and Benoit. The Naked Year, which is about 1919, a year of chaos, famine, and civil war in Russia, in some senses picks up where Bely's Petersburg left off; although its setting is provincial Russia, its framework is the myth of Petersburg and it chronicles the time after those turbulent forces gathering on the islands ("oo-oo-oo") have taken over the capital.59 Pilnyak takes what might loosely be described as a Scythian position, that is, the position of a literary movement in which Bely was a leader—but to which Pilnyak had no formal connection—and which was active between 1916 and 1924 and centered in Tsarskoye selo, outside Petrograd. Most of its leaders were sons of professors, making this yet another case in which the scions of the intellectual elite become infatuated with the primitive. The Scythians were fierce nomadic tribes that left Central Asia in the 8-7th centuries B.C. and established an empire between the Don and Dnieper Rivers. The movement sought to revive what it took to be the spirit of these Scythians, which was characterized in the foreword to their first miscellany (published in the spring of 1917, between that year's two revolutions) as "eternal readiness to revolt" against—yet again—"petty philistinism [meshchanstvo]": "It is he, the worldwide philistine . . . who is now destroying . . . art in aestheticism, science in scholastics, life in stagnation, revolutions in petty reformism."60 Essentially, then, Scythianism involves marrying Romantic Anticapitalism to one of the myths of Russian particularity (its essentially Asian identity making it freer and more expansive than the dry and repressed "logical" Europeans). Pilnyak, in several lyrical passages in The Naked Year, identifies the possibility of being able to "see, really see" with liberating oneself from society, from its materialism and even its laws to gallop across the steppe, wild and free. Although this is the iconic image of the Scythian, here he identifies it with a pagan sect, a common variant. Thus Pilnyak provides another version of the "seer" who is an outsider or marginal in society, comparable with those in Nadja or Artist Unknown, but in this instance a primitive child of nature.61 Pilnyak's heroes declare the mandatory scorn for material possessions or comfort: to see is all. "[I longl to renounce possessions," one of his characters cries in inspired frenzy, "to renounce time, to possess nothing, to neither desire, nor to have regrets, just to live in order to see,"62while another goes further: "Let the trains stop running in Russia [a symbol for technological progress] . . . We must learn . . . just to look, to belong to no one and go on farther and farther, to get beyond both joy and suffering."63 Here we see the kind of zeal for a rigid purification of space already noted in the Introduction in the example of Masha Lipman's grandparents. The technological utopia of many Futurists is explicitly rejected, and the model for a purified space is sought in examples from the past. Yet in this novel Pilnyak uses many experimental techniques aimed at undermining linear narrative and even stable identity of character, time, and place. The opposition avant-gardist/Retrospectivist is, then, full of holes. Indeed, one half of the Union of Youth merger in 1913 came from Hylea, a group that in their very name identified themselves with a version of a Scythian identity. In The Naked Year we see a common pattern whereby this zeal for purification is married to a scenario involving a journey at breakneck speed to radical otherness. The subject is to hurtle on ever faster. But once time has been overcome, space becomes the dominant dimension. Indeed, most artistic movements of this time tended to foreground one of two things: either accelerated speed and dramatic gestures of iconoclasm or an idealized space.