# IMPERIAL PETERSBURG,1913 Nineteen thirteen, the last year before the Great War, was an extraordinary time for the arts in Petersburg. Bely's novel Petersburg appeared. Mandelshtam published his first cycle of poems, Stone. And the Russian seasons in Paris, a Petersburg export organized by the enterprising Sergey Diaghilev since 1909, saw their apotheosis when the Ballets Russes presented Stravinsky's The Rite of Spring danced by the legendary Vaslav Nijinsky. The Rite provoked one of those succès de scandale that are de rigueur in Paris if a work is to be deemed avant-garde, and the music could not be heard above the din of an outraged audience. In Petersburg itself, 1913 was also a year of high drama, manifestoes, and scandals, especially centered around the Futurists. In November a group of Futurists toured the country shocking the public with the ever more outré. They declared that all the world was becoming one huge city and nature would soon be obsolete, which would make the poetry of nature obsolete, too; hence the emergence of nonreferential (trans-sense) verse. The Futurist salvoes were met with impassioned denunciations and accusations, especially from self-appointed guardians of Russian culture; so charged was the atmosphere that when a crazed man named Balashov slashed Repin's painting of Ivan the Terrible, some of their opponents argued that the Futurists were responsible. Nineteen thirteen was notable in Petersburg not just as an incredible year in the arts but also as the three-hundredth anniversary of the Romanov dynasty. The climactic moment of the anniversary celebration was the Jubilee day, February 21 (March 6 new style),1 when a triumphal procession of the tsar and his family proceeded from the Winter Palace along Nevsky Prospect, the legendary main thoroughfare, to the Kazan Cathedral for a solemnizing mass.² The entire processional route was lined with lavish decorations. The most monumental of these were placed on the Winter Palace and the Admiralty building opposite, which were adorned by huge double-headed eagles and portraits of famous tsars in the Romanov line. The side facade of the Admiralty was draped in imperial purple with a coat of arms covering its entire length, topped by a crown about fourteen feet in diameter. These decorations were all in place by nine o'clock the night before the procession. At ten, however, a fierce wind came up and destroyed all the decorations on the Admiralty. It blew down Nevsky all the next day as well, wreaking further havoc with the decorations.3 It does not take much imagination to see heavy symbolism in this destruction of the largest decorations for the Jubilee, emblems of imperial might placed by the very seat of power, the Winter Palace, where in 1917 the final storm would rage, tearing down the last vestiges of the old order. In literature, revolution was most often likened to some elemental force; in Bely's prophetic Petersburg (1913), as already noted, the sound of the wind, "oo-oo-oo," carried intimations of the gathering mass uprising, while in the most famous literary celebration of the October Revolution, Aleksandr Blok's poem "The Twelve" (Dvenadtsat', 1917–1918), it is represented as a raging snowstorm. The winds of revolution were indeed blowing in 1913. Even as the Imperial family traveled around the country attendingendless ceremonies reaffirming their enduring power, worker unrest was increasing and becoming more organized. By April 4, preparations in Petersburg for huge strikes and demonstrations to mark May Day were already so advanced that the police began mass arrests in anticipation and closed down several revolutionary presses, including the Bolshevik Pravda and Zvezda.4 A wind or some other natural catastrophe such as a flood is most often used as a metaphor for revolution because it suggests a force that is elemental and irresistible. Analogously, when Russian creative intellectuals wanted "to take Paris by storm" they often conceived their project in terms of the pagan (as with Stravinsky's Rite of Spring), or of that which is "Asian," that is, something that confounds European systems and aesthetic expectations, is wild, daring, and erotic. The latter was a common interpretation of another item from 1913's Russian season, Nijinsky's legendary performance of the virtuoso"Polovtsian Dances"from Borodin's opera Prince Igor; a proud Petersburger reported back to readers of the Stock Exchange Gazette (Birzhevye vedomosti) that "all of Paris. . . was captivated in the most elemental way [stikhiyno] by the primitive power of the frenzied dance of the steppe nomads who were dressed with an 'Asian-daring' gaudiness [aziatski-derzkoy pëstrotoyl."5 This claim, however accurate, encapsulates one popular version from that time of what Russian culture represents. It combines a Nietzschean predilection for Dionysian frenzy with the sense, common among Russians early in the twentieth century, of Russia's singularity and her essentially "Asiatic" identity, which made her a potentially healthy antidote to staid and effete Europe. Indeed, versions of this can be found even in statements by some Russian Futurists.6 Not all intellectuals sought an "Asian-daring" cultural identity. As the performers for the Russian season were leaving Petersburg that year, Fyodor Chaliapin told the excited throng that had come to see them off that he was leaving with great pleasure because "however much I might love my native land. . . there one can breathe true 'European' air."7 Those who sought out Europe were looking not necessarily to its actuality or current vogues but rather to what they perceived as a greater commitment to culture and innovation and also a less oppressive state presence—hence the air there is "true" as contrasted with autocratic Russia, where it is "unbreathable." Petersburg mav have been the cultural capital of Russia in 1913 but it was also the center of its civil service. The Imperial Chamber controlled the main opera and ballet theaters, and would-be innovators were subject to not only political but also aesthetic censorship. This was particularly frustrating for the Mariinsky Theater (called the Kirov between 1934 and 1991), whose troupes provided the virtuosi Anna Pavlova and Nijinsky, the innovative choreographer Mikhail Fokine, and most of the others who dazzled Paris in 1913. Thus when Diaghilev took the "Polovtsian Dances" to Paris he was not really exporting Petersburg art in the sense that at that time the dances first introduced in Paris in 1909—were banned in staid Petersburg and Prince Igor had to be performed there without them. In Petersburg, 1913 was the high point of an age when large sections of the town's educated classes were obsessed by a desire to shine as Europeans. A variety of intellectuals found the air of the capital unbreathable and looked to Europe for its purification. Europe had for them become both a yardstick against which Russia should be measured and a panacea for her ills. For them, the antonym of "Europe" was "provincialism" or "ignorance." Many argued that it was time to "break down the ghetto of Russian culture" and finally enter "the family of European peoples."8 But if Europe was an ideal, America was a sort of bogeyman, the land of pure commercialism, of arrivistes and of a degraded popular culture (frequently identified with the latest Petersburg craze for the roller-skating rink).9 It is important to note here the Manichaean hierarchy of space, the concern with purification, and the phobia of the commercial—that common pattern among Russian intellectuals that was to play a decisive role in Soviet cultural history. The apparent contradiction between the "Asian-daring" or pagan fare of the Russian season and the idealization of Europe among its star performers was not so fundamental as it might seem. Both orientations essentially identify a symbolic locus in space and time as a focus of aspirations to found a new, secular culture. The Futurists, for example, gave both Asian and European accounts of their iconoclastic stance: they were an Asian or pagan force assailing the stultifying conventions of European Christian civilization, which was, as Spengler was even at this time formulating, spent and in decline, or they were the voice of the new technological age more fully realized in Europe that would extirpate what Marx had called "the idiocy of village life" with its Christian "obscurantism" and fill the landscape in its stead with smokestacks and other cathedrals of the post-Christian city. The two avant-garde trends that emerged in Petersburg circa 1913, transsense verbal art and Suprematism, also entail purification—in this instance of mundane referentiality. Yet neither was to play a significant role in the formation of Stalinist culture. Much more determining of the ultimate shape of that culture was another formula for aesthetic transformation proposed by many of the Futurists' antagonists in Petersburg. This formula, widely supported among the educated classes, sought the revival of a distinctly Petersburgian Neoclassical style in art and architecture that had seen its apogée under Alexander I in the early nineteenth century in an Empire style (so named for the Napoleonic original on which it was partly modeled) or Alexandrine style, or Empire Alexandrine style. The style had been in decline ever since Alexander's reign and recent vogues for Russian national revival, eclecticism, and style moderne (more or less art nouveau) threatened even further decline. The revival of interest in Old Petersburg, a movement referred to here as Preservationism,10 was not an innocent gesture that merely reflected a predilection for antiquarian styles. This was especially not so given that the current tsar, Nicholas II, like his father Alexander III, had shown active distaste for the Empire style and even for Petersburg itself, preferring Moscow and other provincial cities and the Russian architectural stvles of the seventeenth century. Some have argued that Alexander and Nicholas's preferences for Moscow over Petersburg and for styles of the seventeenth century over those of the eighteenth and early nineteenth are also preferences for what they saw as an uncomplicatedly autocratic Russia in which the tsar enjoyed the enthusiastic loyalty of his subjects, allegedly the Russia of the seventeenth century before it was Europeanized by Petersburg's founder, Peter the Great.11 Thus, for instance, Alexander III had insisted that the Cathedral of the Savior of the Blood in Petersburg, erected on the site where his father had been assassinated in 1881, be styled after the period of the seventeenth-century Muscovy tsars, resulting in a near copy of St. Basil's cathedral in Moscow. Most Petersburgers were appalled by its gaudiness and found its general style absolutely out of keeping with its surroundings. The battle of the styles (Empire versus national revival), closely related as it was to the issue of which tsar or period should provide the national model, was at least in part a battle over issues of national identity and governance. Thus in Petersburg the Jubilee decorations were strictly in keeping with the Empire-style architecture while in the rest of the country they were mostly in Russian national style; analogously, in many instances the busts and bas reliefs placed along the Petersburg route started their series of great tsars with Peter, ignoring Mikhail Romanov, whose ascension in the seventeenth century was ostensibly being celebrated. As hasbeen recognized by numerous theoreticians, form is value and value is the stuff of politics.12 In the movement for reviving the Empire style one finds a curious example of that aesthetic absolutization of space that was so characteristic of groups in this period who sought some radical transformation in the name of, or through, culture. The Preservationists believed that the authentic essence of beauty had been established in the classical era, and their panacea for lapse and decline was to fill space with its pure forms, a position in this respect not so remote from the aspirations of such avant-garde movements as Suprematism and Constructivism. A crucial difference, of course, was that the Preservationists valued historical precedents while the Futurists wanted such precedents "thrown off."In the case of Preservationism, the transformation entailed, paradoxical as it might seem, not iconoclasm but preservation. But the paradoxical formula "transformation as preservation" inescapably led to its equally paradoxical corollary "preservation as transformation," for the Preservationists sought to implement their aesthetic ideals on a monumental scale—that is, totally. (Analogously, the Futurists in 1913 had promised a new age when "the city" would fill the landscape completely.) ## The Revival of Empire Style The movement for a revival of Neoclassical Petersburg was part of a general trend early in the twentieth century for rethinking the meaning of Petersburg, and with it, national identity. The transcoding of the various clichés associated with the myth of Petersburg that occurred then should not be regarded exclusively within the hermetic series of art or literature, for it was in its own way a politicalgesture. The foundation of the city had in most of the literature of the nineteenth century been represented as Peter's great blunder. Now it received much more ambivalent treatment. On the one hand, a cult of Peter emerged qua founder of Petersburg, the nation's greatest achievement. On the other, one of the negative interpretations of the founding of Petersburg was preserved from the standard nineteenthcentury version—the notion of Petersburg as wrought by an absolutist monarch and at the cost of the oppression and suffering of the people, now generally represented in terms of persecution of intellectuals. An influential proponent of the new positive interpretation was Alexandr Benois, a leader of a group associated with the journal World of Art. His essay "Painterly Petersburg," published there in 1902, played an important role in the transvaluation of the meaning of the city. Benois's point of departure in this article is that Petersburg should no longer be scorned by artists as a subject for painting. He called for a renaissance of Petersburg art that would, he believed, lead to a renaissance of art in general. In establishing his point, Benois went over the clichéd criticisms of Petersburg to be found in nineteenth-century literature—that it was built on marshes, was unhealthy, "fantastic," and so on—and counterposed each with a positive interpretation. Responding to the usual charge that the city was alien to native Russian traditions, he asserted that it was high time for Russians to get out of their "Slavophile nappies" and stop being afraid of showing the European side of Russian life.13 Although, he admitted, most of the major buildings and town planning of Petersburg had been done by architects from Europe, this did not mean that it was, as usually claimed, a derivative architecture. Rather, the country had left its mark on the work of these Europeans. Consequently, Petersburg architecture was unique within the Neoclassical tradition and as such was worthy of European admiration.14 The cult of "Old Petersburg" grew into a movement. A group of artists including K. Somov, M. Dobuzhinsky, and A. Benois's nephew E. E. Lanceray, together with a number of architects and specialists on architecture such as I. V. Zholtovsky, I. A. Fomin, V. A. Shchuko, V. Ya. Kurbatov, and Georgy Lukomsky, formed the core of the movement, which gathered strength over the next two decades. They became a dominant presence on the cultural horizon of Petersburg, organizing their own exhibitions and public lectures and enjoying de facto control of the line on culture in the liberal press, where articles on Old Petersburg appeared with predictable regularity. They also launched their own journals, in most of which Benois had editorial control. Besides the World of Art, Benois founded Art Treasures of Russia (Khudozhestvennye sokrovishcha Rossii) in 1901, which he edited until 1903, and between 1907 and 1916 he co-edited Bygone Years (Starye gody), a magazine specifically devoted to Old Petersburg. The Preservationists also acquired ever greater power through their empire of institutions. They assumed leading roles in the Society of Architect-Artists, organizing under its auspices a Commission for the Study of Old Petersburg, and in 1909 they achieved their aim of establishing a Museum of Old Petersburg, which was opened to the public in 1912. In 1911, the Society sponsored an Exhibition of Architecture and the Applied Arts, which put on view extensive plans, models, documents, and historical paintings of Old Petersburg, many of them from private collections, giving the public a much fuller sense of the development of classical Petersburg than had been remotely possible before. Also in 1911, Benois became vicepresident of the new St. Petersburg Society for the Protection and Preservation of Russian Monuments of Art and Antiquity, the most powerful focus of the lobby that continued its activities even in the initial years of Bolshevik rule, under the sponsorship of its Commissariat of Enlightenment. By 1913, its apotheosis year, the revival movement had become so entrenched in mainstream Petersburg culture that scarcely a day passed without some item in the press devoted to it. The movement's mouthpiece, Bygone Years, was the most popular magazine of the time.15 The proselytizers for Old Petersburg were not so much concerned with the functionality of the buildings as with their external appearance. In the exhibition catalogues, books, articles, and artwork inspired by this movement, a body of characteristic vocabulary and attitudes emerged; the terms "ensemble," "facade," "panorama," "harmony," and "the integrated whole" keep recurring as self-evident values exemplified in Petersburg's Neoclassical buildings (these same epithets were used in the liberal press to describe the decorations on the procession route for the Romanov Jubilee16). The Preservationists essentially wanted to create a static, monumental landscape.17 In a move reminiscent of the paradigm of Christ's chasing the moneychangers out of the temple, Benois and others constantly stressed the need for spatial purification, to create great squares or other vast, uncluttered spaces around the major buildings; in 1913 the Society passed a resolution that the area around the Kazan Cathedral be cleared of street stalls (those accursed lavochki of the petty traders), which destroyed the "panorama" of the building.18 So wedded were the Preservationists to their aesthetic that a building's value consisted for them in its ability to lend itself to being painted in a certain style. Little wonder their Society was called "of Architect-Artists"; the order of the two professions in its title implies priority for art over architecture. Thus the leading article in the official book for the 1911 exhibition praises Thomas de Thomon, the architect who designed the Petersburg Stock Exchange, for his project for a mausoleum that was "more like a picture than a design."19In the Preservationists' conception, however, the two purposes were essentially combined. While architecture was to look like art, conversely, much of the art inspired by this movement and created principally by members of the Society or of the World of Art group makes Petersburg's buildings and urban scapes look more like architectural models than lived-in spaces (some called them"architectural landscape artists"20). In A. P. Ostroumova-Lebedeva's painting Kryukov Canal (1910), for instance, there are no humans and the canal is unruffled by the wind. The obverse of static, harmonious, and an integrated whole would be what happens when the peaceful "ensemble" is ruffled by the wind (as were the decorations for the 1913 Jubilee). Disorder, as Benois made clear in "Painterly Petersburg," was anathema to his ideals. He contrasted the "elemental force of the old lady [Moscow]" with Petersburg's "Roman severe [zhestkiy] spirit" of "order"(a strange attitude in a modernist, to be discussed later).21 The epithets he and his fellow Preservationists most often used to describe the buildings they praised were "simple," "severe" (strogiy), "austere" (surovyy), "restrained" (vyderzhannyy), and "lucid" (svetlyy). The writings of the Preservationists idealize not only the classical landmarks of Petersburg, such as the Admiralty and the Stock Exchange, but also their architects. There is a marked tendency to represent them as having sacrificed themselves in the supreme effort of designing and overseeing construction of their genial buildings so that they are totally spent thereafter.22 Even more striking is the tendency to isomorphy in the depiction of the architects and their buildings; the architects are “stern," "restrained," "strict," and "simple," as are their buildings.23 Such epithets are fairly standard in writing about Neoclassicism and are implied in its classic formulation from Johann Joachim Winckelmann: "noble simplicity and calm grandeur" ("eine edle Einfalt und eine stille Grösse"). Other standard characterizations of Neoclassical architecture include: "sober clarity and archaic purity"; "firm, unequivocal contours"; a simplified color scheme or none at all (a marker of their absolute opposition to the nexus of values encapsulated in "an Asiatic-daring gaudiness"); "calm"; and "noble."24 These iconic qualities have specific significance in the Russian context, where the small details of language are even more likely than is generally the case to indicate large-scale cultural prejudices.25 Their being cited as values in Preservationist literature signified in itself a revalorization of those associated with the myth of Petersburg; in nineteenthcentury versions "order," "strictness," and so on were indicators of soullessness, emptiness, constraint, and the alien. What began around 1902 as a movement for the revival of classical Petersburg developed over time into a much more ambitious and comprehensive cultural movement. A landmark in this progression was the formation in 1909 of a new journal, Apollo (Apollon). The World of Art had ceased publication in 1904, but many of its core contributors and editors, including Benois, worked on Apollo, which became a mouthpiece for the Preservationist position in art, the theater, and literature.26 The continuity of personnel is deceptive, however. Apollo's "world of art" was more inclusive than that of its predecessor, for it espoused a new conception of "classical" form. The models chosen expanded its canon beyond familiar Greek or Neoclassical sources to include examples from a variety of times and places in European history. The journal also shifted its account of the "classical" from styles to values. By 1913 the kind of Neoclassicism most often espoused did not just entail going back to a certain point in time, or even, as Benois and others preferred to put it, reviving the informing aesthetic principles of an earlier movement while developing them further in the modern age. Georgy Lukomsky, one of Preservationism's most ardent proselytizers, described the movement's aims in an article of 1913 in terms of leading to a "clearly formulated new world view [mirosozertsaniye]."27 The lead article in the book published by the Society of Architect-Artists on the occasion of their exhibition of 1911 includes an illustration depicting visionary architecture of eclectic Egyptian and classical origin, below which is printed an inscription from Gogol: "Can it be that the age of architecture is gone forever? Can it be that we will no longer be graced by greatness or genius?"28 The Preservationists longed to usher in an age of architecture. By this they meant not just a time when great buildings would be erected, but a utopian aestheticism when people's entire visual environment would be controlled and there would be, as Lukomsky defined the essence of Petersburg architecture in an article of 1913, an "overall harmonious interconnectedness of all its component parts."29 This aspiration was a version of the post-Enlightenment quest for a form of the sacred vested in some aesthetic. The sought-after "age" would see the flowering not just of architecture but of a whole complex of arts and other fields that organize the spatial environment and the objects within it. Architecture would be the queen, and the other fields would be subordinated to it. Preservationists liked to draw analogies with the time of Palladio (whose buildings inspired much of Neoclassical Petersburg), when all the arts were subordinated to the will of the architect.30 Not all factions in Petersburg cultural life subscribed to this idea that the architect should be hegemon, but architecture, or more particularly architectonics, the way a work of art is put together, became for many groups the central metaphor for creativity. For example, the poetry and theoretical work of Acmeism, a movement that emerged around 1912, was informed by the ideal of an art that was static, eternal, and crafted the way the artisan constructs a building. By 1913 Apollo had become the defacto organ of the Acmeist movement and printed several manifesto-like works by its leaders.31Among these were poems by Mandelshtam that focus on famous architectural monuments, singling out in each that quality of "overall harmonious interconnectedness of all the component parts." But even the ostensible opponents of any kind of Retrospectivism such as the Futurists (the principal bugbears of Benois) had begun to proclaim that what is important in a work of art is not the "what" (the subject depicted) but the "how"(the way it is put together).32 Preservationists spoke wistfully of "the good fortune that any architect dreams of having—to be able to create huge architectural complexes."33As early as 1908 Alexandr Benois's older brother Leontiy, an architect from the family dynasty, unsuccessfully urged the Petersburg city council to develop a comprehensive plan for the city to restore its unity; in 1916 he renewed the campaign against "lack of system" in the city. But slightly earlier, in 1911 and 1912, his fellow Preservationists Fomin and Lukomsky had become agitators for a "new Petersburg" in which giant Neoclassical complexes would mark the city; only two were attempted, the most ambitious being a new suburb in Neoclassical style that Fomin planned for Golodai Island. At its center was to be a vast square from which radiated streets. Fomin's conception is reminiscent of Bath, but even more than that the square replicates on a grander scale the Palace Square itself.34 Thus the Preservationists had a distinctly utopian streak, but the underside of utopianism is dictatorship by an elite. Preservationism, its purist aesthetic stance notwithstanding, was also about power and control. In order for "the architects" to realize an aesthetic utopianism, they needed not just "empty spaces" but also the means for actualizing their grand schemes, usually by finding some powerful patron or client. It was frequently said that only the control of a great man can realize such aims. Lukomsky in a 1913 article pointed out that in order to create the great "ensembles" of the "new Petersburg" what was needed was a "single will" and a "center."35 In actuality, the movement for the preservation of Old Petersburg depended to a large extent on the patronage of the Imperial family and the upper nobility.36Several of the names that regularly published in Apollo were prefixed by baron or knyaz' (prince or duke). The 1911 exhibition of historical material related to old Petersburg would have been impoverished had members of the Imperial family and the upper nobility not generously lent material from their private collections. In the catalogue for the exhibition the enabling role of each successive tsar is described with great enthusiasm while the buildings are often described in terms of their regal bearing (tsarstvenno-velichavyy).37 The question arises, is this homage a result of the Preservationists' dependence on Imperial patronage, or does it reflect a natural alliance, as is suggested in the fact that Fomin seems to have drawn his inspiration for town planning from the focal point of Russian monarchical power? It would be difficult to provide an unequivocal answer to this question. It should not be assumed that the Preservationists were all monarchists. Around the time of the 1905 revolution, several of them, including M. Dobuzhinsky and Benois's nephew Lanceray (but not Benois himself), contributed antitsarist lampoons to the satirical magazines Adskaya pochta, Zritel', and Zhupel. Preservationists also found advantage for architecture in autocracy. For instance. L. Rudnitsky in the lead article of the exhibition's catalogue talks of how the court's control in architectural matters under Alexander I made it possible to achieve a "unity of impressions," and he lamented the decline since then into a more “individualistic" situation in architecture. He also contrasted unfavorably the chaotic development of the traditional Russian town with the situation in Petersburg, where everything was subjected to the control of a Buildings Commission (Komissiya stroyeniy).38 Rather than being either for or against the monarchy itself, the Preservationists favored the powerful autocrat because they recognized that such a concentration of temporal power was essential to realizing their own aims. Although their monarch, Nicholas II, was far from obliging in his architectural policies, other members of the Imperial family supported them. The movement to revive Empire style in Petersburg can be read as an instructive chapter in the story of the intellectuals' "reach for power" at about this time. The Preservationists sought greater control over the way the arts were administered in the state. During the 1910s, they began to find common cause with a number of other groups within Petersburg with whom they seized the moment after the February Revolution and formed a lobby for a ministry of the arts. The composition of the leadership that presided over their successive meetings varied a little, but the hard core generally included representatives of Acmeism, Apollo, the World of Art (an association of artists that took its name from the journal and included many Preservationists), the Society of Architect-Artists, and leading names in music and the performing arts such as Chaliapin and Vs. Meyerhold, and Maksim Gorky. The group also elected a body to press for safeguarding the nation's cultural treasures (sometimes referred to as the Gorky Commission).39 The aims of the ministry were to release the arts from subordination to the Imperial Chamber and to give them an enhanced position within society with more funding, freeing them from overdependence on market forces. The issue of the ministry divided the intelligentsia because some factions, such as the avant-garde, were for greater autonomy for art, but most favored more control and paternalism, hoping that the administration of the arts would be run by authority figures from within their own ranks. Most Russian mandarin intellectuals of this time sought to justify the huge and privileged role in society that they wanted to arrogate to themselves in terms of cultural myths. The majority of these myths involved points of reference in the past. The Neoclassical revival and the cult of Petersburg, though undoubtedly reflecting widespread tastes and prejudices, must also be analyzed in this broader context. ## Neoclassicism and the Lobby for a Secular, Post-Autocratic Culture Neoclassicism is far from a watertight concept and covers a range of trends to be found in different countries at different times. Some sort of a classical revival has been a perennial of European cultural history since at least the Renaissance, and more recently in America and other countries of the colonial diaspora as well. But Neoclassicism has, in its many expressions, been larger than a movement for a classical revival in the arts, which it also incorporated. An obvious reason for the popularity of classical revivals has been the need, whether consciously felt or not, to legitimize a given political or aesthetic movement. The more a regime has been in need of legitimization and aggrandizement, the more likely it has been to appropriate Neoclassical architecture and symbols, as has been seen in the well-known examples of the French Revolution, the Napoleonic regime, Stalinist Russia, and fascist Europe. The Neoclassical revival in Petersburg early in the twentieth century can be associated with one of the dominant strains in the movement that found its canonical expression in late-eighteenth-century France, that Neoclassicism which in art is most associated with Jacques-Louis David. His painting The Oath of the Horatii (1784-1785) is generally taken as the beginning of a Neoclassicism that came to dominate during the French Revolution and continued, if in somewhat distorted form, in the Empire style of the Napoleonic years, progenitor of Russia's Empire style that flourished under Alexander I. Thus this strain is associated with a revolution—the French Revolution. Indeed, David played a considerable role in the revolutionary government, serving not only as de facto official artist and organizer of the mass festivals, but also as an active political leader. But there is no necessary connection. The French Neoclassical artists reacted variously to the Revolution itself; while some, such as David, were attracted passionately to it and even to its terror, others, such as the architect Thomon, joined the monarchist diaspora (he ended up in Petersburg).40 These French artists regarded their work as "revolutionary," but in a different sense from that of most political revolutionaries. They were offended by the tastes of the aristocratic and monied classes. However, the logic of their position entailed not the overthrow of the privileged classes but their moral/aesthetic reformation. They rejected previously regnant styles such as rococo as frivolous and self-indulgent, as mere ornament or entertainment to gratify the whims of an idle aristocracy of sybarites; their own art was by implication the more authentic. The Neoclassical revival of early-twentieth-century Russia was informed by a similar rejection of the tastes of the monied classes, characterized by Benois in "Painterly Petersburg" as that "infectious... illness that has befallen modern society: the spirit of easy money and the glitter of the café chantant [kafeshantannogo bleska]."41 At a general level, then, this movement can be seen as a variety of Romantic Anticapitalism. Its purist avatars did not share the antirationalist proclivities that so often characterized Anticapitalism, however. Indeed, some have characterized the French Neoclassicists as a sort of artistic arm of their Enlightenment; they had strong links with the philosophes, particularly with such figures as Diderot and Rousseau. The Russian Preservationists, like the French and several other Neoclassical movements, had a commitment to order, the mind, and "science"-and most of them to secularism as well. Like the French, they sought to unify the arts and sciences as a classical ideal4² and to collect and systematize knowledge (one of the philosophes' greatest causes was the Encyclopedia). In this respect, the Preservationists can be seen as a particular expression of a marked trend among Russian intellectuals at this time—one not exclusively associated with Petersburg—toward looking at systematization, rationalization, and a greater role for culture and science as key items in an agenda of social transformation. These figures and groups were to be found primarily among liberal intellectuals, the mainstream (many of the leaders of the liberal parties were professors or former professors43), but also among Bolsheviks and other leftists. Comparable attitudes were also to be found in Germany at this time. For example, Weber's introduction to The Protestant Ethic of 1920 is informed by a similar nexus of values, including the notion that a proclivity for systematization is a "European" trait. Many Russian intellectuals in the liberal movement shared a faith that science and culture could potentially transform society. Here one might cite the geochemist Vladimir I. Vernadsky and his circle whose members contributed considerably to the leadership ranks of the Kadet Party. They believed that the "antediluvian" state with its "anarchic" organization and arbitrary exercise of power was holding the country back and should be progressively phased out in favor of a constitutional democracy. To this end, they proposed a package of reforms that were designed to rationalize government and the legal system, and to reform educational and cultural life, giving intellectuals more autonomy, expanding the tertiary system, and raising educational standards.44 Their drive to rationalize society has to be seen in the context of the fledgling emergence around 1913 of Russian sociology—the science of society—featuring figures such as the Petersburger Pitirim Sorokin, whose first book appeared that year.45 Vernadsky was also involved in a venture that essentially attempted to arrogate some of the state's administrative functions to intellectuals. Under his initiative, in 1915 the Academy of Sciences founded KEPS, The Commission for the Study of the National Productive Forces. This title was a little disingenuous in that the intention of KEPS was not merely to "study" the productive forces, but also to plan for a more effective mobilization of them than the tsarist government had as yet achieved (initially, KEPS was intended to find ways of averting the disaster caused when Russia found herself at war with Germany, the chief supplier of her technology) The liberal intelligentsia wanted to curb or obviate the arbitrary exercise of power on the part of the monarch and, generally, of the Orthodox Church as well. To that end, many intellectuals lobbied for the adoption of the Julian calendar, which would synchronize Russia with the West, a move of symbolic as well as practical value, but their efforts were frustrated by the Holy Synod, who branded the Western calendar "papist."46 Faith in science and culture was by no means confined to liberals. Petersburg cultural journals from around 1913 are full of articles about how science and reason married to culture might provide the magic formula for political reform and democratization in Russia.47 One of the most active advocates of this marriage was the Bolshevik fellow-traveler Maksim Gorky After he returned to Petersburg from exile in 1913, Gorky delivered public lectures on this topic and organized a society of scholars and intellectuals, the Free Association for the Advancement and Development of the Positive Sciences (SARRPN, its leaders included Vernadsky), which was aimed at fostering scientific research and utilizing its findings in the hope of spurring Russia's growth and propelling her into something closer to European norms. In 1915, he founded the journal The Chronicle (Letopis'), which attempted to bring together leading scientists (such as K. A. Timiryazev and Ivan Pavlov) and other intellectuals (Vladimir Mayakovsky, Sergei Esenin, and others) in the cause of raising the scientific and cultural consciousness of Russia. The mandarins of prerevolutionary Russia dreamed of foundingsome version of the academy or of a "city of science" that would function as a cauldron of the new order (frequently somewhat on the order of Bacon's The New Atlantis). The Academy of Sciences had already been in existence for almost two hundred years, but it was generally rejected as a model because it was seen as too academic and did not embrace a sufficiently broad spectrum of intellectual activity. They wanted something closer to an elite forum that would debate—and very possibly legislate on—the key issues of the nation. Vernadsky and Gorky toyed with different versions of the city of science. Benois, for his part, like David before him in revolutionary France, sought to revamp the Academy of the Arts (another of those institutions laboring under the voke of the Imperial administration) as a headquarters for the "architect-artist" from which he could lead the nation by designing huge ensembles that would bring the environment “into [an aesthetic] order, into a system."48 A great deal of the activity of Russian intellectuals in these years can be subsumed under the headings "encyclopedism" or “a cult of systematization and classification." The programs of Alexander Bogdanov, a Bolshevik and chief theoretician of the Proletcult (an organization founded in 1917 and dedicated to fostering proletarian culture), come to mind particularly Between 1913 and 1929 he worked to adduce a system of systems, or "tektology." He also advocated producing an encyclopedia for the proletariat and used the metaphor of the "engineer-architect" for the intellectual leading society, anticipating a key metaphor of the Constructivist movement. As Bogdanov's career demonstrates, these ideals and efforts did not disappear after the Revolution; indeed, the years 191S-1921 saw rampant encyclopedism, with Gorky one of its principal promoters (see Chapter 4). Thus the movement for a Neoclassical revival in Russia was not just a matter of aesthetic taste, but more a particular expression of a recognizable nexus of values that informs many Neoclassical movements but was also more broadly found in Russia at this time. The movement assumed a rational human nature and sought an ordered, regulated society whose art and architecture represented aesthetic counterparts of the architectonically integrated whole that is society. In order to streamline and regulate human activity, and in order to abstract the beautiful from other possible aesthetic expressions, one must pare away all that seems incidental, contingent, merely whimsical, or ornamental, leaving only the essential essences.49It is in establishing such criteria that the classical model plays its crucial role: antiquity was deemed to have established most perfectly the dividing line between essential and inessential. Neoclassicism is at base a historicism oriented toward the establishment of norms that enact certain values. As such, it does not have any necessary connection with either ancient Greece or Rome, though there is a certain inevitability about the selection of the two as points of reference, given their unchallenged status in the Europeans' account of themselves. Some other contemporary movements imputed entirely different meanings to"Greece," while others found Neoclassical values in different aesthetic traditions. Thus, for instance, Mandelshtam in his architectural poems of 1913 celebrates similar values in homages to three buildings, each of which represents a separate tradition: Hagia Sophia for the Byzantine, Notre Dame for the Gothic, and the Petersburg Admiralty for the (Neo)classical. Those who sought a Neoclassical revival might, then, seem to be resisting change. But the movement can also be seen in a broader context that essentially has to do with modernization and increasing state, as distinct from autocratic, control and regulation. In this context, one is struck by the applicability of Ernst Gellner's recent theoretical writings on the rise of nationalism to the Russian historical moment. Gellner has argued that nationalism does not "arise" to impose on the populace a standard account of themselves (of the nation) but that the sequence goes in reverse: with modernization, the uneducated and largely rural masses begin to acquire a standard "high culture" (that of the educated) as a necessary condition for their becoming actors in the new society. They then change from a situation in which they define themselves by local identities and speak local dialects to attaining a trans-local identity and language that come from high culture though they are frequently attributed to the low. This includes a constructed or abstracted identity for the nation and its citizens.50 What Gellner is really talking about is modernization as standardization. He has largely established that there is a coincidence between the two events (modernization and the rise of nationalism), but not that the connection is always a necessary one. During the 1910s, the modernization of Russia was the cause that attracted the greatest consensus among the educated populace of the capital. But many of those who sought a more rationalized society articulated their goals in terms of reviving the spirit of Peter's-burg. In their redaction of the Petersburg myth, Peter and his city became twin symbolic heroes. They functioned as emblems rather than necessarily representing historical realities. In the liberal press of 1913 the time of Peter in Petersburg was a positive obsession and journalists contrived to provide historical precedents from it for a host of contemporary events, extending to such unlikely subjects as Easter and May Day.51 The prominence of such articles reflects not only the antiquarian interests of their readership but also a shared ideological program. A highly selective account of Peter is advanced; he is remembered as the Europeanizer who founded the first secular intellectual institutions in Russia.52 Modernization was no less central in the Bolsheviks' agenda of proletarian revolution. This became clear when, soon after gaining power, Lenin revamped his account of Marxism to fit an agenda of modernization. In 1920 he announced the slogan "Communism Equals Socialism Plus the Electrification of the Entire Countryside," which essentially means "Communism Equals Standardizing Cultural and Social Identity" plus "Modernization as Industrialization" as two oxen hitched to the same yoke. Unlike Gellner, however, Lenin was not observing or predicting a process; he wanted to press the pace of change. When Stalin came to power he tried to modernize by fiat. What might otherwise have been a result of this process of modernization—cultural and linguistic standardization—his ideologues saw, as we shall see, not as an effect but as an instrument of modernization. There is even the potential to see some of Lenin's agendas as expressions of a belated Aufklärung. For example, in his account in State and Revolution of the way the state will "wither away," he foresees that oppressive state organs will be replaced by bodies and individuals whose function is to rationalize and systematize the business of production and distribution within society.53 This is not intended to imply an equation between Lenin-or even those who held a touching faith in the transformative potential of "science,"such as Vernadsky or Gorky—and those who lobbied for a Neoclassical revival. Although Lenin's aesthetic tastes were conservative (as were, for the most part, those of Vernadsky and Gorky), his position is radically different from that of the Neoclassicists in that he gave absolute priority to practice, to politics and affairs, whereas for the Petersburg Neoclassicists of the 1910s aesthetic values had absolute precedence even over considerations of utility. This trend reached an extreme in articles published in the journal Apollo, especially as Russia went through the two revolutions of 1917 and the Preservationists set themselves up as watchdogs to guard cultural treasures against theforces of revolution (Benois took an extreme position, maintaining that the Revolution should exclude all artistically valuable sites from its sphere of operations).54 The Preservationists, like so many in that broad category Romantic Anticapitalists, were effectively looking to some prebourgeois model for the role of the artist in society. Many were attracted to ancient Rome or Greece, which fit the centralizing ideals of the movement. But a more frequently invoked precedent was the time of Louis XIV, whose court was held by many to be an emblem of good taste. One of the many associations sought in the title Apollo was that the motif dominated the decor of Louis's Versailles (many of the classical Russian ballets from the turn of the century also paid homage to Versailles).55It should be noted, however, that Louis's court also represented the centralized, absolutist state that was combatting local feudal loyalties and a different style of politics;56 Preservationism was not just about taste but also about national aggrandizement and centralization, values no less important in Stalinism. Any monarchist leanings among the Preservationists declined after the February Revolution in 1917. They welcomed the overthrow of the old order in which many of them had in some senses been implicated, but did so in terms of its having failed its mandate to provide an aesthetic aristocracy. It was said that Nicholas II, the deposed tsar, had truly reprehensible, "petty bourgeois taste."57 Thus he was, by implication, a sort of usurper to the title tsar in that his taste befitted a lower social station; in this respect, he was sometimes contrasted with the positive example of Louis XIV.58 The February Revolution, imperfect as it was, seemed to promise the triumph of "Petersburg," that is, the triumph of the ideal of a more European and secular society that would seek to regulate everything rationally and to observe due process, a society in which the arts would play a central role, civic virtue would be extolled, and science would flourish. But the new government continued the unpopular war and failed to redress glaring inequalities. This led some intellectuals to part company with the liberals who gained power. Even Benois was alienated and left the liberal journal Speech (Rech'), to which he had contributed a weekly column since 1908; for a time he joined Gorky's New Life (Novaya zhizn'), a socialist outlet.59 Nevertheless, the ideals of the February Revolution appealed to most intellectuals and they were reluctant to accept October. Yet, as we shall see, in the initial years of Bolshevik power many of the same figures who led the lobby for a ministry of the arts also played a prominent role in bodies set up in Petrograd by Narkompros. Intellectual aristocrats as agents of Bolshevik cultural policy? How could those who yearned for an aesthetic aristocracy serve the cause of mass culture for the Great Unwashed? Actually, in the countdown to 1917 many in the Apollo set shifted their position and began to talk with increasing frequency of their mission to bring culture to the masses; to this end, they attempted to set up a "palace of culture" in Petrograd.60 At some gatherings organized for the masses Preservationists clashed with Futurists, with both sides claiming the right to save the workers' souls with their cultural offerings.61 It should be pointed out that canonical Neoclassicism is associated with the move to spread enlightenment to the masses. It ushered in an age when great public libraries, art galleries, and museums were founded; in many instances the projects were even initiated by Neoclassical artists. Thus the movement presided over a period when culture was passing from the preserve of the aristocracy to the public domain. One should not, then, conclude that the movement for a Neoclassical revival represents only a lobby for turning back the clock and resurrecting a dated architectural or aesthetic style. It is not even true that Benois and his fellow Preservationists were monomaniacally pursuing this retrograde aim. With such strong links to the World of Art, the group responsible for introducing Aubrey Beardsley, Gauguin, and Cézanne to the Russian public at the turn of the century, the Preservationists themselves were not rigidly committed to allowing only an art that represented a revival of old forms. Indeed, some members of their set (for example, M. Dobuzhinsky) represented Petersburg in their art more in terms of the opposite interpretation— as the site of phantasmagoria and repression. This ambivalence is characteristic of Neoclassicist movements. For all the insistence on purity of line (or perhaps precisely because of the utopian rigidity), Neoclassicism rarely appeared in pure, unalloyed form. It is, for instance, difficult to disentangle the Neoclassicism of late-eighteenth and early-nineteenth-century Europe from Romanticism, a movement to which it might seem fundamentally opposed. And in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries it is equally difficult to extricate the Hellenic revival—as an example of Neoclassicism—from Nietzscheanism and other such movements that reveled in excess. The stance of some of those who lobbied for a Neoclassical revival, such as Benois, shaded in practice into Modernism. Others, like Gorky, who can be associated with its ideals (indeed Gorky's later account of socialist realism is often called classical) were professed "realists." Still others, arguably, practiced the ultimate of Neoclassicisms, a Neoclassicism of pure forms known as Suprematism or "nonobjective art," thus in a sense continuing the line from the utopian architecture of Etienne Louis Boullée and Claude Nicholas Ledoux (the latter, incidentally, was Thomon's mentor). The example of the Preservationists has been adduced here because it raises questions about the provenance of the somewhat singular variety of culture that emerged in the 1930s as "Stalinist."In many respects, this was a bowdlerized version of what the Preservationists sought. Yet, as was also true in the case of the Preservationist movement, its aims of achieving a standardized, "high" culture eluded realization. But even before the Bolsheviks came to power other intellectuals whose prerevolutionary stance can be linked with Retrospectivism and the lobby for a ministry of the arts saw radical rather than conservative potential in such a movement. A prime example would be the theater director Vsevolod Meyerhold.