# MASQUERADE On Saturday, February 25, 1917, a new production of M. Lermontov's play Masguerade (Maskarad, 1835) opened at the Imperial Alexandrinsky Theater. The play—very approximately a Russian Othello in that it is a tragedy in which the hero is tricked into believing his wife is unfaithful to him and learns his mistake only after he has killed her—was originally meant to be staged for the one-hundredth anniversary of Lermontov's birth, in October 1914, but bureaucratic problems and the outbreak of World War I in August of that year led to a series of postponements. The premiere's ultimate timing in February 1917 enabled it to coincide with another anniversary: the occasion was used to mark the twenty-fifth jubilee in the Alexandrinsky of Yury Yuriev, a famous classic actor who played the leading role in the production. By the time the audience poured out of the theater at 2 A.M., shots could already be heard on Nevsky Prospect. The February Revolution had begun.1 Obviously, this coincidence of events invites dramatic interpretations, but the production of Masquerade was also seen as a historic landmark for reasons not connected with the February Revolution. It is recognized as a milestone in the career of its director, Vsevolod Meyerhold (1874–1940). Thus the fact that Sergei Eisenstein attended this premiere (while still an engineering student in Petrograd) has the status of an iconic moment in his biographies. 2 The production is also famous for Meyerhold's collaboration on its opulent sets with an artist from the World of Art, Aleksander Golovin. Together they stylized Imperial Petersburg of the 1830s after one of the principal metaphors for the city—the "Northern Venice." In a time of disastrous war and concomitant misery, when the "bankruptcy" of Imperial Russia was all too evident, the theater had spent thirty thousand gold rubles on the staging. The empire was going out in grand style—Empire style, to be exact. The extravagance of these sets and the perception that they celebrated an odious Imperial Russia made the production one of the many highly controversial acts of Meyerhold's career. During the course of the year he drew away from such lavish sets to use ever sparer stage settings and ever more grotesque representations of Imperial Russia. As memoirists are fond of noting, a prime example of this new trend, his production of The Death of Tarelkin from the Sukhovo-Kobylin trilogy, premiered "on the eve of [the] October [Revolution]."3 In actuality, these two coincidences did not occur quite as neatly as commentators would have it. The February Revolution grew out of disturbances in the capital city that had been gathering momentum before February 25. Thus "February" did not have a precise originary moment, the equivalent of the salvo from the battleship Aurora that was the signal to start "October." Moreover, the premiere of The Death of Tarelkin occurred not "on the eve of October," but a day earlier (on October 23). The need to identify these two productions with the Russian landmarks of political revolution—indeed, to see them as having occurred, in Ivan Turgenev's resonant phrase, "on the eve"-is symptomatic of the extent to which intellectuals saw theatrical revolution as the midwife of the political. It also shows the leading role that the movement for theatrical reform played in contemporary conceptions of cultural revolution, and Meyerhold's special status as a leader in that movement. Thus the production of Masquerade was both exultantly retrospectivist and insistently prospectivist. Begun in 1912,4 it represents a belated flowering of prewar (Imperial) culture swept along by contingent forces into a different historical moment, as well as a salvo at the "Winter Palace" of the old cultural order. As such, it illustrates the point that 1917 represents no mystical dividing line between tsarist and revolutionary culture. But it also provides a paradigm for identifying the dominant thrust of all cultural trends of the years just before and after the Revolution. For many intellectuals, theater provided the charter myth of revolution, not theater up on a stage that an audience watched passively, but theater as a construct for a totalizing experience. Throughout Europe, theater was queen of the arts, but that was not coincidental. Interest in the theater was not merely voguish, but tied to a larger view of the world as a theatrical possibility. In the Russia of the 1920s, the work of leading theoreticians and directors of the theater continued to function, as it had for the past decade, as a major frame of reference for conceiving revolutionary culture. In the years leading up to the Revolution, Russia was a principal player in a pan-European movement for the reformation of the theater and the performing arts. This movement had become a focus of avant-garde activity and of would-be social reformers as well. Its major theoreticianssuch as Gordon Craig, Georg Fuchs, Adolphe Appia, Romain Rolland, Max Reinhardt, Tommaso Marinetti, Isadora Duncan, and Emile Jaques-Dalcroze, not to mention Rousseau, Wagner, and Nietzsche, on whose shoulders many of these figures stood—represent a variety of positions. There was sufficient common ground between them, however, that, for the purposes of this book, one may refer to the various supporters of this new wave in the theater, Russian and non-Russian, as the "theater activists," a term that suggests the wav the political and the aesthetic were conflated in their mission. Petersburg was a center of this movement. Almost all the major figures in it visited the city at least once over the first two decades of the twentieth century, often staging model productions there, while their writings were published in Russian translation. By 1913 it was Max Reinhardt who had become the most modish of them. Fashionable theaters in Petersburg vied with one another to entice Reinhardt himself, or failing that one of his assistants, to come and direct a production in their theater.5 New-wave Russian theater had become very fashionable in Europe, too, with "Russian weeks" in Berlin, Vienna, and Munich;6 Petersburg was exporting to Paris not only Diaghilev's Russian seasons but her directorial expertise as well.7 Even Stanislavsky's troupe was in demand. In Russia, however, theater activists were by then contending that Stanislavsky represented not the new and innovative but the stale and old. The years since 1907 had seen a shift in thinking about the theater and the way plays should be staged. As elsewhere, this shift was felt in a reaction against the prevailing "realist"approach, which the theater activists associated with the nineteenth century and saw as reaching its apotheosis in Stanislavsky's productions.8 The theater activists contended that an important factor in the decline of their art into dull respectability was that the modern stage rode roughshod over the traditional organization of theatrical space. They bemoaned the fact that the theater of the day was a box in which the privileged classes were cooped up, backs straight, away from the masses and the hurly-burly of life itself. They also decried the way certain features of the internal organization of the theater, such as the footlights and the proscenium, created a gulf between the actors on the stage and the audience; many urged that the theater be taken out into the streets and squares, where it could regain its role in the life of the city—or that at the very least the architecture of the theater be reorganized so that actors and audience might be closer to each other and even intermingle.9Reinhardt's formula—one that was to be very influential in the initial postrevolutionary years—was to stage Shakespeare and Oedipus in a circus. Meyerhold, however, contented himself for the time being with reorganizing the interior of the Alexandrinsky by getting rid of the curtain, footlights, and prompting booth and having the actors act on a proscenium jutting out into the auditorium, leaving the rear stage largely the realm of the sets. Stanislavsky had wanted to institute a fictive "fourth wall"in the theater so that the actor might be enclosed in a simulation of reality, but the theater activists wanted to break down such walls; many of them contended that in so doing they could break out of an elitist culture. The constraining "box" of the theater was their analogue to Bely's sardine tin or skull (see the Introduction), and hence to break out of its physical constraints would be to break out of conventional (realist) epistemology. This movement, then, extends in its aims and implications far beyond the sphere of theater reform. Why would Meyerhold have chosen as his vehicle for a revolutionary approach to the theater a play that is from the classic repertoire set during the era of greatest autocratic oppression, Nicolaevan Russia, and that concerns the life of an idle upper aristocracy (card games, masked balls, intrigues over love and honor)? All this seems a far cry from the productions he staged after joining the Party in 1918 and particularly after he moved to Moscow in the fall of 1920 to direct the Theatrical Department (TEO) of the Commissariat of Enlightenment, launching his new career with a call for a "theatrical October," a theater adequate to the revolutionary moment. For these later productions he had Red Army troops parade around the audience and eager young men in leather jackets on motorcycles charge up to the stage to deliver the latest news from the Civil War front; when one of them announced the fall of Perekop to the Red Army in a crucial battle, the entire audience stood to sing the "Internationale." But it might be argued that though such postrevolutionary productions were more blatantly about political revolution than the major prerevolutionary productions, which all depicted aristocratic society and used highly stylized, Retrospectivist sets,10 these differences were more superficial than they might seem. Meyerhold's work on Masquerade, no less than his productions after 1920, can be seen as an exemplum of revolutionary culture as many conceived it at the time. The production was to be a showcase for his kind of new theater. In the theory and practice of this new theater that he and others were working out in the 1910s, one can see a sort of synapse between the theories of political and aesthetic revolution. Yet the twin gods who presided over the breakout from the Stanislavskian theater were not Marx and Lenin but Nietzsche and Wagner ## Nietzsche, Wagner, and Marx Nietzsche and Wagner were particular obsessions of Russian intellectuals from all over the political and aesthetic spectra from the 1890s through the first two decades of the twentieth century.1 The two German theorists did not, of course, create the dominant cultural trends of prerevolutionary Russia. To begin with, the question of "influence" is a very fraught one. In any case it is misleading to equate the two with a slash (Nietzschean/ Wagnerian) since, after initial enthusiasm for each other's theories, they had fallen out. But as Nietzsche's and Wagner's ideas reached Russian soil they had inevitably been refracted through a Russian prism; indeed, the Russian translations of their works are notoriously inaccurate. Nietzschean/ Wagnerian can be used as a convenient cipher for discussing a particular broad-ranging trend because so much cultural activity can be accommodated under that umbrella. It is a construct, admittedly, but one at least in part created by Russian intellectuals of the time who chose to ignore the crucial distinctions between the two thinkers. What concerns us here as Nietzschean / Wagnerian will be less that overworked binary of the Dionysian and Apollonian—although if it was overworked anywhere it was in Russia—than the implications of their theories for theatrical reform. Essentially, one can find in Nietzsche and Wagner a set of narrative norms and also an inventory of categories structured by these narratives which, in the years immediately preceding and following the Revolution in Russia, inform agendas of the various factions—Bolshevik, revolutionary, avantgarde, and even reactionary. Nietzsche and Wagner advocated several specific reforms in the theater that were similar to those of the theater activists, such as revamping its physical arrangement to minimize the demarcation between actors and audience.12But for them, as for most other gurus of this movement, these modifications were not self-valuable. Their central project was the regeneration not just of the performing arts but of culture itself. Both believed the royal road to its regeneration led through the theater and from there to the regeneration of mankind. Here we are at the point of intersection between political and aesthetic revolution. But what we see is not just a case of theoreticians from the sphere of culture with illusions of grandeur poaching on the territory of political and social theorists. Arguably, key political and social theorists of the Russian Revolution conceived their programs using categories and scenarios sufficiently similar to those of Nietzsche, Wagner, and those of analogous persuasion to make possible the great joint-stock company of political radicals and intellectual idealists who forged the Great Experiment of October. Western commentators on Nietzsche in Russia like to point out that 1898, the year the first Russian translation of a Nietzsche text was published (Zarathustra), was also the year the World of Art organization was founded; with Benois and Diaghilev among its leaders, this moment was a landmark in Russian cultural history, and many scholars date the Silver Age from its inception. But 1898 was also the year the Russian Social Democratic Workers Party was formed, that is, the Marxist party that was to spawn the Bolshevik Communist Party.13 Clearly, Russian Marxism grew up in tandem with Nietzscheanism (and with Wagnerism, too). But problematical though all emphasis on coincidence must be in cultural history, one is compelled to point out a further and earlier coincidence that potentially has great bearing on the Russian movement for theatrical reform on the eve of October: the time when Wagner penned two texts that are among the most seminal for theater activists, Art and Revolution and The Art-Work of the Future, both of 1849, was approximately the time when Marx produced his Communist Manifesto (1848) and also a work that will be of greater importance to this book, his Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (1851-1852), which Lenin pronounced the more incisive of the two in his seminal text State and Revolution (1917).14 The two Wagnerian texts were written in a flush of enthusiasm after the author stood at the revolutionary barricades of Dresden in 1848 (together with Bakunin, which is one reason he was adopted by Russian Marxists). The Eighteenth Brumaire, by contrast, was written in response to the French postrevolutionary reaction of 1848-1851 leading to the restoration of the Napoleonic empire. This is a political tract, whereas Wagner's works are more concerned with aesthetic questions. Yet these texts, antithetical in many ways, are closer than one might first suspect. Marx's Eighteenth Brumaire begins with his famous salvo: "Hegel remarks somewhere that all facts and personages of great importance in world history occur, as it were, twice. He forgot to add: the first time as tragedy, the second as farce." Marx has, then, essentially redirected the focus of Hegel's discourse. In a treatise dedicated to elaborating further a philosophy of history, Marx presents a highly detailed, if partial, chronology of the political events taking place over a small time span (what Nietzsche decried in The Uses and Abuses of History as "micrology"). He rescues his account from some academic dust heap because the implications he adduces from these events are consistently subordinated, as in the above quotation, to the dominant trope of the theater. Wagner's texts, similarly, are grounded in a highly politicized account of historical progress, but they foreground a critique of culture that is figured as a sort of tale of the knight in shining armor who can save all; that knight is a purified "drama."Nietzsche began his career with The Birth of Tragedy, which, though published in 1872, twenty-three years after the Wagnerian texts were written, in many respects elaborates the themes of Wagner, particularly that of the saving potential of a purified drama. This text was, together with Zarathustra, to have the greatest impact in Russia. Marx in his account of the Brumaire episode, like Wagner and Nietzsche in their ostensibly aesthetic tracts, advances changes within the theater as a synechdoche for reforms in society at large. But if the synechdoche in Marx can be said to be only a rhetorical flourish (a position that is open to question), in the build-up and aftermath of the Revolution in Russia what the synechdoche possibly only rhetoricizes was taken more literally and the theater was seen as a space for social transformation. As will be shown, the revolutionary mass spectacle institutionalized a set of prejudices that are already working in these texts of Nietzsche, Wagner, and Marx. All three thinkers, Marx, Wagner, and Nietzsche, share a horror of the alienation they perceive in modern society. This is hardly remarkable, since that revulsion might be described as a common denominator of most Western intellectuals in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. But, arguably, Russian Marxists, Wagnerians, and Nietzscheans all succumbed to the temptation of theatrical space in seeking remedies for this alienation. Within the theater one can engineer the interworking of previously unsynchronized—alienated—sectors of people, and many began to think one could use it as a basis for affecting social space as well. These thinkers tended to template theatrical space onto social space and to identify what they saw as a fall from a lost unity in the theater as the original cause of alienation. Nietzsche and Wagner locate this fall within the sphere of culture and specifically in terms of a fall from Aeschylus as the high point of Greek drama. Wagner also insisted that such a fall occurred when and because all the arts lost their unity and became separate. In its general outlines, his account reads as a more aestheticized version of the tract by Marx, who discusses the fall in terms of the shift from a unified community to one with a division of labor alienating man from man. All three propose remedies for this loss of wholeness. Marx's seem quite different from those of Nietzsche and Wagner in that he prescribes politicalcum-economic revolution while their remedies are confined to the arts. But in The Eighteenth Brumaire Marx couches his account in theatrical terms, suggesting that one of the problems in the current historical moment is that the proletariat have been swept to the back of the "stage,"implying that when they emerge to retake center stage the genre of world history might change from "farce" to that preferred genre of all three thinkers, tragedy.15 Thus the dynamic of center and periphery, of hegemonic and subordinated, is figured using the trope of the theater. Nietzsche and Wagner have a different solution and suggest that the drama will be saved by reuniting "sister"(Wagner's term) arts that were previously melded in the drama but have been cloven asunder. Their frame of reference, however, is not confined to the drama, or even to culture. They propose that the theater take its cue from the acting traditions of classical times whereby, allegedly, the actor transcended his individual self, breaking down the barrier between himself and his audience so that both attained a new sense of identity as at one with all others, or, in other words, a sort of millenarian psychology.16 In Nietzsche, this scenario is closely tied to his division into the Apollonian and Dionysian. Central to the Apollonian is boundedness and definition, the principium individuationis, which is at the same time its virtue and its limitation (man cannot reach beyond his own boundedness), while the Dionysian knows no boundaries. Thus the chorus in the Greek tragedy, as an expression of the Dionysian, enables both actor and spectator to break out of their limited horizon and fuse with others. Transgression of psychophysical boundaries—which are at the same time metaphysical or epistemological—is thus a synechdochal means for overcoming the problem of alienation, class divisions, and so forth for realizing the political agenda. Hence revamping theatrical space, breaking down its borders, and theatrical conventions—restoring "music"and the tragic chorus—were seen as the way to effect a fundamental political and social revolution. Nietzsche and Wagner's account of how alienation is overcome shades over into, but is not identical with, Marxism-Leninism's insistence that citizens transcend their individualistic identities and attain a collective identity. Wagner in The Art-Work of the Future even insists that what he meant could not be known by any other name than "Communism"(though this initial enthusiasm for Communism faded out in his later writings). Russian intellectuals such as Vyacheslav Ivanov who took Nietzsche's or (initially) Wagner's theories on the theater as their point of departure frequently articulated this scenario in terms of an ecstatic rite that would impart to all present a profound sense of community or sobornost'. The term sobornost' has particular resonance in Russian Orthodoxy, where it is a technical term generally translated as "collegiality," "communality," or "conciliarism" and has to do with the allegedly democratic relationship between church members. In the various intellectual movements of the early twentieth century that sought to rethink Orthodoxy outside the formally constituted church, sobornost' characteristically assumed a central role. Initially in Nietzsche and Wagner the return to beloved Hellas is figured as a flight to the pre-Christian, but not all Russian theater activists felt constrained to eliminate Christianity from their accounts of a "Greek" revival. However, most theater activists, whether or not they gave their accounts such religious or mystical coloration, insisted that the crucial move for the theater was to democratize, to include the masses, thereby breaking down distinctions of class and occupation. They explored the potential of several historical precedents for the "mass" theater—Greek drama, the medieval mystery play, the Italian popular tradition of the commedia dell'arte, and a Russian variant of it, the balagan (fairground theater). Most commonly, taking their cue from Nietzsche, Wagner, and others, zealots advocated a return to Greece. So many of the big names in the pan-European movement for theatrical reform looked to open-air Greek drama in its huge amphitheater as the ultimate model and began to rival one another in the size of the new amphitheaters they were setting up; when Isadora Duncan visited Petersburg in 1913, she declared that she had to rush back to Paris to establish hers.17 This transnational trend had its nationalistic underside; a cynic might say that Nietzsche's entire tract was an elaborate superstructure made to posit a line between "Greece," the originary moment in Europeans' account of themselves, and the "German spirit." Some Petersburg intellectuals, in turn, appropriated Nietzsche's agenda of a "yet-impending rebirth of Hellenic antiquity"18 and conflated it with versions of Russian messianism in prophesying an imminent "Third Renaissance" in Russia whereby the spirit of ancient Hellas, recaptured in the Renaissance, would soon see its third, final, and greatest flowering in their city. Such schemes were meant to usher in a society of the liberated masses or lower classes. In the countdown to 1917, the conception of what the new theater might be was becoming ever more democratic; "We must democratize the theater!" was a slogan heard with greater frequency.19 However, one finds in the writings of those influenced by Nietzschean and Wagnerian models no less casuistry about what a theater of the masses might mean than can be found in those of their mentors; theater activists lambasted those who interpreted the concept too literally as "vulgarizers."20 As we know, however, terms such as "masses" and "people" are all too vague, and there is significant ambiguity in all three thinkers' accounts of them. Wagner, for instance, identifies the "folk" as the group that can revivify the drama and hence society, but sometimes the "folk" are clearly the toiling masses while at others they are defined as those who divine the essences of nature. A similar ambiguity can be found in Marx's account of the lower classes even though he shifted the focus from the "folk" to the proletariat (he used Volk, too). This ambiguity is particularly marked in The Eighteenth Brumaire, in which the proletariat is divided up into true proletarians and false ones. The "true" proletariat are defined as the producers, but in a swift move they can be transformed into the “creators."Marx also adduces a second category, the Lumpenproletariat, or riffraff proletariat. This category comprises those who try to scrounge a living at the margins as ragpickers, organ grinders, prostitutes, and the like—in other words, they operate in the market, albeit on a small scale and often reprehensibly (this category also includes Louis Napoleon himself). In enumerating the sorts of professions that fall into this category, Marx slips into the middle of the list the literati.21 Thus the proletariat emerge as the only true intellectuals and revolutionaries, while actual intellectuals are either bourgeois hirelings or Lumpenproletariat. In the Communist Manifesto, Marx holds out the hope that the proletariat will be transformed from drudges and drones to creators, but allows that as yet they are still mere drudges. This proclivity for idealizing the proletarians' intellectual leanings was intensified later by Bolshevik theorists of proletarian culture, in whose writings, as in Nietzsche and Wagner, the masses emerge as the only authentic aesthetic subjects who truly yearn for Beethoven and Shakespeare (and among the Russian theorists Pushkin as well).22Additionally, Nietzsche and Wagner show a distinct bias against academic types and “arid" theory,²3 a bias that dovetails well with the Marxist predilection for praxis. In Nietzsche and Wagner, what democratization really amounts to is impressing onto the many the template of the solitary "soul genii," as Wagner calls them, or the "untimely"—Unzeitgemässe, as Nietzsche was to call them. These genii allegedly embody or intuit the spirit of the folk/ masses. Essentially, then, there is to be a single template or biography for all and yet among them some emerge as privileged creators (the paradox of elitist populism); democratization means less giving a role to the Great Unwashed than a mystique of universal community. The theater, refined to a universal art once music's role in it is restored, is commissioned with providing the medium for this spectacular conversion. In this respect, the pattern projected is not unlike that found in Marx. All three theories have at their heart a myth of a Promethean man who brings a new consciousness to save the world.24 Ostensibly democratic, such theories are incipiently elitist inasmuch as they advance a hierarchy in "consciousness." Wagner places particular emphasis on the contrast between the "conscious" and the "unconscious" or "involuntary"(unwillkürlich). Marx was less elitist, but an analogous model can be found in Lenin's doctrine of the vanguard (those more advanced in political consciousness and hence in a sense unzeitgemässe). Although in these scenarios provision is made for some intermediate stages, generally they entail a sort of death-defying leap from the one to the many, from the singular and solitary hero or isolated group to the universal, no less—a kind of utopian recapitulation. Both Nietzsche and Wagner looked not only to democratize society but also to cleanse it of commercialism. Part of the appeal of Greek culture for them was that in the polis the artist was allegedly not dependent on any mercantile patron; his patron was the state and his products were "civic" or "public" art. The one thing that united most of the different factions among the prerevolutionary theater activists was a scorn for the commercial theater. They sought to ban not only the commercial element in culture per se (the profit motive and cultural exploitation), but also those genres, institutions, and styles that they viewed as owing their genesis to the profit motive. The icon of commercialism was for them the café chantant, as it was for so many cultural visionaries at that time, including Benois, whose capsule characterization in "Painterly Petersburg" of what is wrong with modern culture invokes the café chantant but makes no reference to architecture.25 There was a strong puritanical streak in these attacks. Nietzsche and Wagner set the model by accusing the commercial theater of being a form of prostitution while Georg Fuchs, one of the movement's chief European mentors, spoke of the "sexual, foul-smelling atmosphere" of this culture;26 this equation with sexual pollution also underwrote the choice of similes used by Russian theater activists in condemning commercial enterprises.27 The abhorrence of the market can be seen as a version of the flight from the profane. The impulse is expressed most strongly in Nietzsche, who talks of the nausea (Ekel) occasioned by everyday reality.28 But the inherent escapism also had its dark potential. "Beneath the pure, clear skies of Hellas [Ellady]" was a refrain of articles on theater and ballet in the 1910s. Such "clear skies," of course, represent not only that boundless blue of Greece, envy of all Petersburgers condemned to grey and cold, but also the hygienic, noncommercial environment where true art and knowledge can be pursued. They sought a "pure, clear sky" unsullied by factory smoke or the sewer or foul, sexual smells. The Russian word for "clear and pure" has as its root chist-, which is also the root for the word meaning a purge (chistka). The "clear sky" is also the sky of a tabula rasa from which mundane particularity, including the particularity of Hellas itself, has been "cleared." It is perhaps no accident that the romance with ancient Greece flourished at the time when the fledgling science of eugenics was about to take its first steps in Russia.29 The Bolsheviks shared this vision of a renewed, universal society to which has been restored that purity lost in the incursions of the barbaric, commercializing hordes. This common purpose led many of the theater activists to make common cause with them. When, after the October Revolution, Meyerhold addressed members of the ImperialMariinsky Theater who refused to cooperate with the new regime, he tried to win them over with the prospect that they would become the spearhead of a "theater of the entire world,"30essentially conflating in this rhetoric a revolutionary political agenda with a specific agenda of aesthetic revolution. It may seem hard to reconcile the intensely ideological culture we associate with Bolshevism with the theories of Nietzsche and Wagner. In recent scholarship, accounts of Nietzsche seem to have gone beyond his discussion of the Superman and his cult of Greek tragedy. When his name is mentioned it is usually in the context of the fundamentally metaphorical nature of language and the destabilization of essentialism. These interpretations of Nietzsche from the 1980s and 1990s did not escape intellectuals of this earlier time, but they drew different conclusions and saw them as recipes for revolution. Many of the same insights underwriting that overused term Postmodernism are precisely what authorized the theatrical model adopted by the willing volunteers from the Russian intelligentsia who worked to develop a new revolutionary culture. A key insight for them was that the theater is ipso facto conditional construction. In Russia, the two banner terms under which a massive overhaul of the theater was undertaken were uslovnost' and teatral'nost'. Teatral'nost' translates fairly readily as "theatricality," a term not unknown among Western theater theoreticians and especially popular in the 1960s among figures such as Richard Shechner, but uslovnost' eludes satisfactory translation. Variously rendered as "conditionality," "artificiality," "stylization," or "conventionality," uslovnost' essentially entails a recognition of the impossibility of mimesis, of reflecting, representing, or recreating"reality"in the theater—or for that matter in any art form—and of the consequent necessity for "conventions." The task of the theater director or theoretician was seen as one of devising or perfecting conventions to maximize that essential quality of theatricality that, allegedly, the bourgeois theater (and Stanislavsky particularly) had contrived to deny its public. Although Nietzsche is one of the most unsystematic thinkers, about this time Russian intellectuals were drawn to the challenge of systematizing what they had adduced from the writings of gurus such as Wagner and him. In Russia there had been a reaction against Nietzsche around 1908, when many of his former epigones such as Vyacheslav Ivanov began to attack his theories. But in the "post-Nietzschean" phase defining elements of Nietzscheanism remained, just as in Postmodernism one can find defining elements of Modernism. In both instances, they have been reaccented. It was not only Nietzscheanism and Wagnerism that had undergone such a shift, but the whole movement for Retrospectivism. By the 1910s there was a sense that Retrospectivism was not enough in itself, that no single model from the past was adequate to the problems of the contemporary theater or culture. The search for past models was an attempt to elucidate principles and criteria rather than normative practices. We have already seen this trend in the case of the Preservationists, the Acmeists, and the Apollo set, but it was represented more broadly.31 As an aspect of this trend, theater activists tried to adduce an architectonics of the theater, a science of theatricality and uslovnost'. Thus, although the defining thrust of this movement was to break out of existing bounds and conventions (the thrust of revolution) the movement was generally far from anarchic. On the contrary, each faction was working out its own highly codified system. Each insisted on a total overhaul of the theater (not just of theatrical space) and sought to institute new principles for all its elements: sets, acting, music, lighting, script, directing, and architecture. In Petersburg, those bent on investigating this science set up a series of experimental studios and summer or underground theaters. Some of these places did not merely investigate the theater arts, but sought ways to make the theater the crucible of a classless society. Such experimental theater studios were conceived in a synechdochal relationship vis-à-vis the society in which they operated. The loci of the most famous European directors of the new movement to renovate the theater, places such as Wagner's Bayreuth, Oberammergau, Dalcroze's Hellerau, and Reinhardt's and Fuchs's theaters in Munich and Berlin, became as it were topocosms of a new secular culture, Nietzsche had been offended by Bayreuth, which he saw as all too implicated in national imperialism. In the analysis of the leading Russian Wagnerians, the opera house there had become the preserve of the haute bourgeoisie and hence had been false to Wagner's original conception.32 The way was open for the true theater to appear in Russia and regenerate that society, and through it the world. Yet those who sought this regeneration were in actuality focusing on perfecting uslovnost'. How could any concept that can translate as "artificiality," "stylization," or"conventionality" have much to do with radical social reform? I would argue that uslovnost', or more specifically the move to transcend actuality, particularity, and brute materiality, characterizes not just a particular branch of the movement for theatrical reform; it is a fundamental principle of this time, something comparable to, although not identical with, the Nietzschean call for wresting values from their conventional systems. ## Meyerhold and the Science of Theatricality In describing how this project of a revolutionary, total, and yet uslovnyy culture was prosecuted, I am going to look principally at Meyerhold's work. Meyerhold suggests himself because not only was he the leading director and theoretician of the 1920s, but some of his disciples ran most of the revolutionary mass spectacles, while another of them, Sergei Eisenstein, went on from apprenticeship in Meyerhold's Moscow studio to become the leading Soviet film director. Moreover, he combines in his profile certain elements that are crucial for this study—cultural revolutionary, theatrical reformer, and avant-gardist. At the beginning of 1913 Meyerhold published an anthology of his essays entitled On Theater (O teatre) comprising recent writings published elsewhere and also a new essay,"The Fairground Tent" (Balagan). This collection, and especially the latter article, was intended to articulate the basic principles of theater as Meyerhold had reconceived them in his recent work. The book's appearance was followed by the founding of a new Meyerhold studio on Borodinskaya Street in late 191333that attracted professional actors and theater students who came to work with the master and his cohorts as they attempted to investigate these principles further in their experimental work. The studio generated a new journal, The Love of Three Oranges (Lyubov' k trëm apel'sinam), subtitled The Journal of Doctor Dapertutto, which began appearing in 1914. Out of this studio and journal emerged many of the figures who were to play leading roles in the revolutionary theater of Petrograd/Leningrad in the 1920s, especially after Meyerhold himself left the city in mid-1919. Three of them were to be particularly prominent: Vladimir Nikolaevich Soloviev (1887-1941), a close associate of Meyerhold's in his work on the commedia dell'arte who was to carry faith in that medium through the 1920s, long after Meyerhold had relegated it to a more peripheral position in his theories, and two young enthusiasts who will become central figures in this book but were then essentially starting their careers, Sergei Radlov and Adrian Piotrovsky. Meyerhold's production of Masquerade was intended to be a milestone in this movement to adduce an architectonics of the theater. Few critics saw it as such at the time. In fact most fastened on the opulent sets and condemned the production for pandering to commercialism and the forces of cultural hegemony. The sets and props offended for the additional reason that they emphasized the Venetian motif, suggesting a grand genealogy for Petersburg, and thus for its tsar. After all, the Italian Futurists had singled out Venice as a model of the passéisme they so deplored. In other words, the sets seemed to confirm the insinuation of recent caricatures of Meyerhold that represented him as the erstwhile experimental director who had grown fat as an employee of the Imperial bureaucracy.34 Yet Meverhold's own colleagues hailed the production as an exemplum of uslovnost', with the Lermontov text providing a rich mine for theatricality.35 Such contradictory accounts of the stature of the production are echoed in its very make-up. Indubitably, the production was the child of the studio on Borodinskava, yet the acting and sets were done by professionals of the Imperial theater and artists from outside the studio. Hence the production's status in the history of this particular movement for theater reform is ambiguous, which some saw as its fatal flaw. Soloviev complains in a review he wrote for Apollo that the staging is magnificent in terms of the direction but that the actors are not up to it. One problem he notes is that they still feel bound to subordinate their acting to the laws of psychological motivation read, "Stanislavsky," or, as Nietzsche preferred to put it, they opt for "the death leap of the bourgeois theater."36 Another criticism Soloviev makes is that the actors in Masquerade do not know how to read the lines of their script, which are in verse form; they think that stressing its rhyme is enough, ignoring not only its rhythm but also the caesura.37 This seems a minor criticism by comparison with the volley against the Stanislavskian system, and unexpected from a protoavant-gardist. At the time, however, the criticism was far from minor in its implicit frame of reference. The relationship on stage between word, music (or sound and rhythm), and dance (or gesture or bodily movement) had become the critical focus of the theater activists. It was, in other words, the Nietzschean—or more particularly the Wagnerian—frame of reference that dominated the theoretical explorations and practical work of the theater activists in the 1910s.38 Most wrested the basic Wagnerian terms from their mystical narrative in which such elements as "sound" (or tone—Ton), "dance,"and "poetry"are metamorphosed into characters in a Promethean saga. Theater activists sought to investigate the actual interrelation of such categories—the architectonics and thereby to forge a science of the theater; V. N. Soloviev tried to represent his collaborative experimental work with Meyerhold in algebraic terms.39 They sought to crack the code of theatricality so successfully that the findings could be universally applicable, to adduce a universal grammar of theater. Underlying the most radical experiments in the theater at this time was the impulse to get away from language, which always carried with it the possibility of difference and hierarchy-two taboos of truly democratic revolution—and to plunge into a prelinguistic world of what Nietzsche had called "music." The Nietzschean/Wagnerian model was for a theatrical form in which music was to play a dominant role, whether as the element prior to the verbal text holding out the promise of a universal language (as in Nietzsche40) or as a crucial element in the preferred genre, the "musical drama" (as in Wagner). The central place accorded music in the cultural hierarchies of the 1910s is evident in the fact that the café chantant was so anathema then. In actuality, the cinema represented a far greater threat to the theater because of its great commercial success, and there was no dearth of articles in highbrow journals discussing this threat. But the café chantant provided musical spectacle and thus it most closely rivaled what the theater activists sought to do (while film, which as yet had no sound track, was in no position to do this). The question of the relationship between word and music did not only concern theater reformers but underwrote exploratory work in many fields of culture at this time. Thus, for instance, many poets and scholars turned their attention to questions of prosody. Sergei Radlov proved one of the most zealous in attempting to recuperate the "spirit of music,"and in 1916 he presented to the Society for the Lovers of the Word (a group that emerged under Apollo's patronage and included poets and philologists) new translations of Greek dramas now rendered in Russian for the first time in their original Greek trimeter form, which was quite alien to Russian prosody.41 This somewhat quixotic gesture represents an extreme implementation of the belief that rhythm (or music) is prior to the actual words and hence any rendition that merely attempts to translate the words themselves is a mistranslation. The recurrent concern of Petersburg articles in the 1910s about the theater was some program to reorient it from the dominance of the literary text to such nonverbal forms as gesture, sound, pantomime, and dance.\*2These programs were not necessarily Wagnerian per se. Wagner was himself critical of pantomime and also allowed the verbal text an honorable role in his musical drama. But in the 1910s the campaign against the verbal text reached such extremes that some, following the lead of Georg Fuchs, whose Revolution in the Theater was published in Russian translation in 1911, and who advocated a theater without words, based their productions instead on the rhythmic movement of the human body.43 Few Petersburgers took such an extreme position but some proposed that words be kept from the stage as a temporary measure while the theater sought to correct the distortions they caused.44 There were other contemporary gurus of this movement, such as the freespirited Isadora Duncan, but also the more earnest Swiss Emile Jaques-Dalcroze. The main fare of the Dalcroze school was rhythmic exercises to music or, at their most expansive, "allegorical spectacles" at which a singularly limited repertoire of rhythmic movements to music was meant to convey a range of moods and events.45 The reverberations of this new interest in choreographing bodily movement to music and rhythm extended beyond the walls of the theater. Dalcroze was particularly interested in the effects of rhythm as a "regulator" on the psyches of those trained by his methods. He believed that such training would "ensure accuracy [tochnost'], ease, and success in work."46 Such claims impressed the idealist brothers Dom when they were setting up a model garden city for German workers at Hellerau; they invited Dalcroze to move his headquarters there so that their workers might have "rhythmic education."47 Dalcroze's Petersburg disciple, Prince Sergey Volkonsky, was impressed too. He believed that in the work of Dalcroze (and his predecessor F. A. Delsarte) the whole question of the interrelation between movement, sound, and rhythm had been put on a "scientific basis" for the first time, promising a more "hygienic world."48 In an article of 1912 Volkonsky describes his visit to the Dalcroze school at Hellerau to see a performance of their spectacle Orpheus, which was performed without costumes or sets, but also without words. In their place was a combination of singing and rhythmic dancing while a choir sang variations on the words "Do, ray, me, fa, so" to their corresponding notes.49 Needless to say, Meyerhold did not identify with any of this sanitized and wooden "musical theater." To him pace was all, not such ponderousness, and he was opposed to melodeclamation and "rhythmic reading."s0 "Play," "entertainment," "improvisation"and even "caprice" he nominated as the magic wands to be waved over the theater to save it from its current torpor; didacticism, improving messages, and "rhetoric" were anathema to him— though, like Wagner, whom he often cited in On the Theater, Meyerhold did not seek to abolish the verbal text completely.51 Yet, as Meyerhold acknowledges in On the Tc. h:s a:est :deas developed out of the direction indicated by Dalcroze and Duncar. ir. their pioneering work.52 In "The Fairground Tent" he asks: "When will thev write on the tablet of laws for the theater that the word in the theater is e wore than a decoration on the canvas of movement?"53 At a public debate on the theater in December 1913 he pronounced most crucial for the actor the mastery of techniques for bodily movement and of rhythm, declaring that the "actor who has not prepared his body"is "not worthy to go on stage."4By then the studio on Borodinskaya had been founded, where his class ("Movement on the Stage") began the work that would culminate in his theory of Biomechanics.55 Meyerhold, like Dalcroze, identified bodily rhythm as the organizing focus of theatrical production to which all gestures, physical or vocal, should be subordinated.56In consequence, he stressed musical abilities as a prime criterion for admission to his studio, and he maintained that dance skills are essential for an actor as well.57 In all his productions of the 1910s, which were intended to be exempla of the uslovnyy theater, some musical form, such as a casual dance rhythm or a melodic walk, functioned as the dominant element defining individual scenes or characters; not merely their bodily and vocal gestures, but even the deployment of props and so forth were subordinated to it. This privileging of musical form may be seen as the ultimate in uslovnost', a flight from verbal literalism (doslovnost'). Meyerhold's proto-biomechanics with their emphasis on subordinating all to a rhythm other than the organic (resulting often in somewhat contorted or jerky movements) can be seen as an attempt to impose a system other than the conventional, quotidian one as a key to reordering the world. Bodily movement is, after all, the most basic human activity, thus the focus on it as the key is a kind of dream of ab-originality. Some believed that such fundamental reform in the theater might provide a formula for redoing society itself; as it were, if one reorders the base of bases, one will reap a fundamentally renovated superstructure. This is a particularly tempting scenario because it involves a less overwhelming task than tackling the world economy and sociopolitical order—a Goliath for the Soviet David. Around the time of the Revolution, it was not just Meyerhold and other cultural reformers who sought to orchestrate bodily rhythms according to some system, thus transcending the natural order; indeed, in Petersburg both the physiologist A. A. Ukhtomsky and the efficiency expert A. Gastev were experimenting with bodily movement in the workplace as the key to transforming productivity and even workers' psyches. The emphasis on rhythm and musical form, and the corresponding deemphasis on language, is in a sense also a gesture toward the kind of utopian, totalizing culture that might be universally applicable. It is the dream of a pre-Babelian state where everyone speaks the same language and there are no differences. We might seem here to be identifying the paradigm of the age to which all of the arts subscribed. Music, or an overriding scheme for systematic interconnectedness (architectonics), would appear to be the trope that links the architect-artists (Goethe in that overused quotation defined architecture as "frozen music") with the poets and theater reformers of the 1910s. Indeed, it might seem on the face of things that Benois and Meyerhold could find a lot of common cause. Both were interested in architecture as well as theater; both looked to the court of Louis XIV as a cultural apogee; Meyerhold stylized several of his productions using conventions of that time.58Doubtless one element that appealed to both was the way in which life at Versailles was ritualized as theater, with everyone having an assigned role. Yet the two were in fundamental disagreement, disagreement more basic than, for instance, Meyerhold's calling for "movement" while Benois advocated static grandeur and panorama. Benois wrote several crusty and negative reviews of Meyerhold's theories and productions, while Meyerhold opened his manifesto-like article "The Fairground Tent" with a lengthy sally against Benois's cult of the mystery. Fundamental differences between them can be seen in the way Meyerhold identifies "the fairground tent" and the strolling player or cabotin as the essence of theatricality. To him, theatricality means popular theater, puppet plays, strolling players, and especially the commedia dell'arte. These are all subcanonical theatrical genres, although that fact in itself should not deter a Benois, who himself designed the sets for the premiere of Stravinsky's Petrushka for the Paris Russian season of 1911. Also, in 1913 the Petersburg Preservationists attempted to revive the annual spring tradition of setting up "popular entertainments" on Mars Field replete with "fairground tents."59 But Meyerhold did not envisage reviving the theater of the fairground tent as Preservationism, as filling in a blank in the panorama of Old Petersburg. As well as being popular attractions, the fairground theaters were commercial ventures like the sideshows. As such, they were the direct antecedents of the cinema, which effectively swept them out of business. But Meyerhold was not as repelled as were Wagner, Benois, and so many others by the specter of the popular lowbrow theater with its "sexual, foul-smelling atmosphere." On the contrary, he identified the variety theater, the music hall, and so forth as the new home of the cabotin after he had been chased from the legitimate theater.60 Like Marinetti in his "Foundation and Manifesto of the Italian Futurist Theater," published in Russian translation in 1914, Meyerhold looked to lowbrow genres, including the café chantant and the circus, to revivify the stage61 (incidentally, Marinetti was one of the few outsiders taken to visit the studio on Borodinskaya, in 1914).62 To Meyerhold, the "leaps" of the acrobats, the "jokes" of the clowns, the skill of the juggler, and the thrill of the salto mortale were the stuff of true theater.63 Thus though Benois dismissed Meyerhold's new work as a "more bombastic version of the fare of the fairground tent," which was his way of damning Meyerhold for slipping below the standards of high culture, for Meyerhold that characterization was high praise. "The theater of the fairground tent is eternal," he asserted, meaning of course what he discerned as its essence, the very spirit of theatricality.64 To him, in the fairground tent and the commedia dell'arte, if they be true to their essence, the actor will "transport his audience into the world of invention, amusing him all the while by dazzling him with virtuoso displays of technique [bleskom svoikh tekhnicheskikh priyëmov]."65 This characterization sounds all too reminiscent of Russian Formalist writings. One is particularly reminded of the centrality of play with devices in Shklovsky's classic account of early Formalist theory, "Art as Technique" (1915-1916, published in 1917), written even as preparations for the production of Masquerade were under way.6In Shklovsky's conception, as in Meyerhold's, the stature of the writer/creator was a function of the extent to which he could dazzle or surprise his reader or audience with displays of finesse through digressions, improvisations, and other tricks of the repertoire. In his early postrevolutionary articles he drew parallels between these techniques in literature and those of the commedia, the circus, and other such performance-oriented theatrical traditions.67 Moreover, these articles appeared in the main Petrograd cultural newspaper of those years, the Life of Art, virtually alternating with theoretical or programmatic statements by activists (such as Radlov) working for a revolutionary "people's theater" that was likewise oriented toward dazzling displays of technique involving bodily movement (see Chapter 4).68 Shklovsky also subscribed to the banner term of the theatrical reformers—uslovnost'.69 Indeed, the agendas for theatrical reform were closely tied in with those of the avant-garde and the Formalists, and also of many other groups that looked to some kind of cultural revolution in that their specific programs sought a kind of uslovnost' in the sense of remaking the given, the conventional, and the quotidian. For example, the ideal of divining the pure essence of theater (teatral'nost' or teatr kak takovoy) could be seen as analogous to the aims of the Formalist movement, trans-sense, and Suprematism, which likewise sought to catch the essence of, respectively, the verbal and visual arts. Not coincidentally, all three movements dabbled in the theater, and the Formalists in particular drew heavily on the vocabulary of the theater activists in their early literary analyses.70 The Formalists with their demand for a "resurrection of the word" might seem to have been out of step with an age bent on toppling the verbal text from its pedestal in the theater. Yet their emphasis on competence in the formal qualities of the artwork and downplaying of content can be seen as analogous to the theater activists' interest in the architectonics of sound, movement, and language on stage—the Wagnerian project. It is symptomatic of a general return of interest to formal questions; even Volkonsky identified rhythm as "form,"while Soloviev's main criticism of the actors' inadequacies in Masquerade was that "our Russian actors are very much against anything smacking of 'form.' "71 Meyerhold, the Formalists, and many avant-gardists gave a central role in their theories to techniques for juxtaposing polar opposites (for example, high and low), a widespread strategy among all avant-gardist groups. Meyerhold describes some of these techniques as "attractions," or in other words as scenic pyrotechnics analogous to the star turn in a circus or a dizzying ride at the fun fair (two definitions contained in the literal meaning of the Russian word "attractions," or attraktsiony). Here he also anticipates "The Montage of Attractions" (1923), that famous essay of his future disciple, Sergei Eisenstein, who was in the audience in 1917 for Masquerade. Such attractions were used to shake the beholders out of what Shklovsky called their "automatized" perceptions; Shklovsky termed his version of such techniques "defamiliarization" (ostraneniye); Eisenstein called his "montage"; and Meyerhold referred to his as "the grotesque."72 But they all represent versions of the belief that truth is to be established by demystification. Here we see how alien Meyerhold's approach must have seemed to a Benois who looked to a preservation of the traditions of high art, to static grandeur and unruffled panoramas—to harmony. Meyerhold's constitutive principle was the unharmonious, yet he was far from advocating free expression and unstructured anarchy. On the contrary, he called for precisely measured choreography. As he said pointedly, in the commedia, and even in Dionysian rites, improvisation is never unstructured or (pace Nietzsche) open-ended, but is kept within the parameters of highly conventionalized traditions; there are no "random elements" (sluchaynosti).73 Likewise, for Eisenstein the essence of montage was strict rhythm and precise cutting (timing) as much as it was "contrasts." Meyerhold in his final sentence of "The Fairground Tent" characterizes that theater's essence almost oxymoronically as "dissonance elevated to the harmoniously beautiful,"a distinctly post-Nietzschean sentiment.74Dissonance is, however, no absolute quality; it must be defined against the conventions of consonance. One can see a similar proclivity for contrariness in Formalist theory (especially that of Shklovsky), which pays particular attention to exceptions to the ostensible form used, rather than to the form itself (for example, omitted stresses in verse, digressions that retard or frustrate the unfolding of the plot). Essentially, the Formalists were exploring systematic nonsystem (although Shklovsky at the end of "Art as Technique" spoke of the impossibility of systematizing aberration). Meyerhold, analogously, wanted systematic improvisation, systematic grotesqueness, and so on. He advocated a kind of dissonance as the new harmony. The approaches of figures such as Meyerhold and Shklovsky can be read as a response to the Nietzschean call to reorder and revitalize as an aesthetic agenda of revolution. As yet, however, their "revolution"was conceived almost exclusively in aesthetic terms (though with reverberations beyond the aesthetic). Thus after the February Revolution Meyerhold was more or less able to make common cause with the highly aesthetic Apollo set and join in their lobby for a ministry of the arts. ## Masquerade and the Mask For Meyerhold, then, the principal vehicle or demonstration model for this revolutionary aesthetic agenda was, incongruous as it might seem, a production of that old chestnut of the classic repertoire, Lermontov's Masquerade, a production in which, moreover, the stylized sets placed him in the Preservationist camp. This fact raises the whole question of trajectories. We see here a Meyerhold with close links to both the Apollo set and the avant-garde, two groups that in the years 1912–1913 had emerged as absolute antagonists. (Benois through his regular column for the liberal paper Speech [Rech'] functioned as antagonist en titre of the Russian Futurists.) After the Revolution, however, the kaleidoscope shifted a little: Meyerhold identified himself as a revolutionary activist-cum-avant-gardist while many in the Apollo set established their repugnance for the culture of the Revolution. The quirks of the trajectory are even more striking in the case of Radlov, who was associated with Meyerhold in this prerevolutionary period, but was possibly even more implicated in Acmeism (he was an aspiring poet and close to Akhmatova). As late as July 1917 in a letter to Akhmatova Radlov expresses his angst at the confused political situation and uncertainty about the future, suggesting that he did not anticipate the path he was to take after "October."75 The choice of Masquerade as a vehicle for uslovnost' was, however, neither a Preservationist gesture nor an arbitrary selection. In "The Fairground Tent" Meverhold identifies what the actor must do on stage with "going to a masquerade ball"-the term used in Russian, maskarad, is the title of the play itself. He also defines the essence of theatricality (cum fairground tent, cum commedia dell'arte) as a "theater of masks."76 This emphasis on the mask was typical of theater activists throughout Europe at this time (Gordon Craig gave the name the Mask to the journal he ran between 1908 and 1929 that was a focus of the movement). Indeed, this equation has its own logic since not only are masks (or rather half masks) an integral element in the commedia, but the mask might be called the very signature of uslovnost'—that which both signals and enables the cut-off between reality and theater. It also functions as a prop for"play" (improvisation). The mask also has its philosophical dimension. It focuses the question what is real and what is illusory—a question raised by the very title of Lermontov's play. Both Nietzsche and Wagner insisted that everyday reality was an illusion: Wagner contended that it was art's task to strip it away to reveal the essential inner depths of the soul, while Nietzsche emphasized the project of freeing the revivifying Dionysian forces. Both believed that the mythopoeic and eternal must be saved from the dulling veneer of the quotidian; when the transformative powers of the aesthetic or the Dionysian are unleashed, reality assumes the status of the mask or veneer, the Schein. Thus, when the Revolution began, led by a party that promised to institute the kingdom of historical materialism, many in cultural life were exploring the notion that causality and external reality are mere masks and illusions. Masks were particularly in vogue in the culture of that time, but the meaning of the mask varied. Some gave the mask pride of place in a program of aristocratic aestheticism. There was considerable interest in such historical precedents as the status quo-affirming masques of the court of Louis XIV and the aristocratic masked balls of Venice at its height—as well as in their local avatars, the masques of Pavlovsk (held during the time of Alexander I).77 In Petersburg around 1913 society ball matron and aesthete alike sought to revive this bygone glory. For others, however, the mask offered the promise of a revival of the low, of the "fairground tent," conceived not literalistically but more in terms of what Bakhtin was later to call "carnival." Meyerhold identified himself as among them and in his account of the mask stressed its potential for ambivalence and the parodic.78 The parodic/ grotesque element was a sort of fifth column in Meyerhold's work as director of the Imperial theater, a hallmark of his other directorial persona, Doctor Dapertutto (an alias from Hoffman Meyerhold used for the experimental work he did outside his sphere of duties in the Imperial theater). Many among the upper-class audience essentially came to Masquerade and its predecessors to gasp at the extravagant Golovin sets and did not "see" the parodic aspects of these Meyerhold productions. Masquerade uses the mask, yet in some senses it attempts to tear off the masks of a false consciousness that was both political and aesthetic. Thus, for instance, those controversial sets were conceived as a veneer "mask"-ing the decay of Nicolaevan Russia. The production was also intended to be an object lesson in demystifying the masks of allegory and developing a new science of the theater that exposed any pretentious or mystical illusions the audience might entertain. In this, Meyerhold was at cross purposes with the dominant trends; whether the new theater was conceived as a Greek tragedy or a mystery, most contended that it should maintain a solemn and elevated tone and present a "heroic" drama on some "monumental" scale.79 But in his work of the 1910s he sought to undermine such agendas by constantly drawing attention to the theater's essential constructedness. For instance, in an earlier production of A. Blok's The Puppeteer (Balaganchik, 1906), he had actors go through a window on the set, thus piercing, and therefore revealing, the painted paper representing the panes and the sky beyond. In Meyerhold's theater, actors were to wear masks in the service of taking off those more metaphorical masks of delusion, a version of that key Shklovskian program of "laying bare the device" ("obnazheniye priyëma") Yet tearing off the masks was also a recurrent strategy of Marx (see, for instance, The Eighteenth Brumaire). By the Stalin era, it was to reappear as a crude slogan vindicating repression. Here we are at the heart of an ambivalence that hung over the would-be revolutionaries, Marxists and theater activists alike. Did they conceive revolution in terms of some scenario of tearing off the masks, of attaining a higher consciousness that superseded that of class, station, lineage, and occupation (something like what Marcel Mauss in his article "A Category of the Human Mind" calls the personage or role),s0 or were they looking to give everyone a role in a perfectly choreographed (conflictless, ritualized utopian) society? Were citizens to break out of the "mask" of class and station, occupation, and even heredity and religion so that in Communist society individuals would not be mere subfunctions of their places on the grid of the division of labor and class? Then they would be able to change roles—occupations and so forth—which are a modern analogue to changing tribe or totem in traditional society. In this way they would become conscious beings, overcoming the problem of alienation (of inauthenticity) and reaching up in a Hegelian scenario of ever higher degrees of political (or self-) consciousness. Or were citizens in the new society to be subfunctions of some aesthetic grid (a mask), a higher-order version of the way their identity is structured in traditional society? Or would this even be possible given that such a grid is always in danger of being corroded by selfconsciousness? Hence in The Eighteenth Brumaire Marx is not just using the theater as a master metaphor. Theater (ritualization), mask, and role lie at the heart of the problematic he airs. The true revolution might be a matter not just of one class gaining hegemony over another, but of crossing over to a new paradigm of identity; all citizens might attain a postalienation, "authentic" identity. Nineteen thirteen, according to Akhmatova's Poem without a Hero (Poema bez geroya), was a time when all of Petersburg was cavorting in masks. In this long poem, the year 1913 is represented as a nodal moment in a cautionary tale of intelligentsia folly; the perpetual carnival of masked happenings has its underside of suicides, an unheeded portent of the nightmares to come. The poem was begun many years later on the eve of the war (1940), and completed only in 1962. Thus her account of 1913 was given from the perspective of the intervening purges, though both the vogue for masks and the veritable epidemic of suicides are borne out by a reading of the press of the time. Akhmatova saw the mask as iconic of 1913. It obscured the view of the "real twentieth century," which by her account began not in 1910 (as for Virginia Woolf and others), but in the year immediately after 1913—in 1914, when Russia entered what was for her a disastrous war. One might disagree with Akhmatova and say that in 1914 the Russian intelligentsia took off the mask of the theatrical frolic only to don military costumes. Indeed, many did not see military action but were able to serve in relatively undemanding posts in the capital, so undemanding, in fact, that they were still able to carry on many of their intellectual activities. In a sense, the greatest problem for them was the widespread withdrawal of funds from culture in favor of the war effort, causing deprivation and forcing many of their projects to be postponed (such as Masquerade).81 They did not fall on Flanders Field along with Rupert Brooke and the flower of English youth; their movements were not decimated by death as were those of the avant-garde of France and Italy. The Revolution and the Civil War were to be their major traumatic experiences that would overshadow that of the world war. On February 25, 1917, the intelligentsia's flight from the profane was about to be halted by the intrusion of an insistent reality. "The masquerade" was drawing to a close, though there would be a respite. The February Revolution, which gave the country many of the liberal reforms the intellectuals had long sought (such as freedom of belief), captivated their imagination, and figures like Meyerhold spent much of it organizing "masques"—outdoor festivals-in support of such civic causes as war bonds. But then would come October, which would take them from their sandbox revolution to a real revolution in which they would confront the Great Unwashed. The hour for removing the masks was at hand.