# THEATERANDREVOLUTION INTHE NEW REPUBLIC In November 1918 for the first anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution the central streets and squares of Petrograd were decorated by artists. The focal point, the Palace Square, was assigned to the avant-garde artist Natan Altman, who draped it with gigantic festoons of red cloth on which were printed revolutionary slogans. Among them one taken from the communist movement's hymn, the "Internationale," stood out: "HE WHO WAS NAUGHT SHALL BE ALL." This is of course the meaning of revolution: turning the power structure on its end to bring the powerless to power. But what were its implications for intellectuals? Potentially, it suggested overturning the personnel or the values that dominated cultural life. Could the intellectuals ever be party to implementing this slogan literally, since that would mean total selfeffacement? In the actual resolution of the question as to who or what would dominate in postrevolutionary culture, much depended on how the issue of power and patronage was resolved. After the February Revolution, Petrograd intellectuals had agitated for a ministry of the arts essentially as a move to give them more autonomy, status, and funding, making them less dependent on either an abhorred market or a constrictive Imperial Chamber and Imperial Academy of the Arts. After October, the possibility of an enlightened private sponsor fell away as property was confiscated, many fled abroad, and before long privately owned cultural institutions were nationalized. Yet despite the usual laments about Bolshevik repressiveness, in many respects Petrograd intellectuals were able to run their own show during War Communism (that is, the period stretching from 1918 to early 1921 that was dominated by the Civil War, the foreign Intervention, and the Blockade). In Petrograd this opportunity was, paradoxically, due in no small measure to the city's recent calamities. A severe economic crisis, unusually harsh winters, supply problems, and a civil war led to a spectacular depopulation of the city, particularly among Party members and workers. Moreover, when the capital moved to Moscow in March 1918 a large number of senior Party and government officials moved with it. Many intellectuals fled from Petrograd in those turbulent times, most seeking havens in the south, where conditions were less severe and it seemed there was less danger. Others were simply hostile toward the Revolution and refused to work in its cultural institutions, or they got by with minimal contact by undertaking translations. But many of those who remained accommodated to the new order and their new patrons. For most, the ideological adjustments to be made were less arduous than they were to be later. An important consequence of this emptying out of the city of workers and senior Party people was that there were few left who had the time or the inclination, in these extreme times of civil war, to oversee the development of a proletarian or revolutionary culture. Moreover, the administration of culture was low on the list of Party priorities. Symptomatically, sections of the Commissariat of Enlightenment (Narkompros), including its head, Anatoly Lunacharsky, were among the last pockets of the central government to be transferred from Petrograd. In fact, between the Civil War and the recurrent transportation crises, even after the cultural sections of Narkompros moved their headquarters to Moscow, for some time several of their Petrograd branches were officially or de facto autonomous or equal to their counterparts in the Moscow headquarters.1 Also, it was difficult to persuade Party members to work in cultural administration. The characteristic pattern was for the wife of some prominent figure to oversee cultural life for the Party; these included wives of Party leaders, such as N. Krupskaya (Lenin's wife) and O. Kameneva (Kamenev's wife and Trotsky's sister). Zlata Lilina, the wife of Grigory Zinoviev, the headof the Petrograd Soviet, also worked in culture, primarily on education. This meant that the Petrograd intelligentsia were in a better position to conduct their own affairs. Cultural bodies there were largely run by enthusiasts from within the non-Party intelligentsia who served as intermediaries between Party, military or state officials, and the intelligentsia at large. Few Party members played a major role in the actual administration of culture. A major exception was M. F. Andreeva, Gorky's common-law wife who became the single most powerful figure in Petrograd theater. Andreeva was hardly the conventional Party member, however. Of noble origins, she was the daughter of a former director at the Alexandrinsky Imperial Theater and herself an actress who had worked at the Moscow Arts Theater (MKhAT), a background that facilitated her appointment in October 1918 as head of PTO, the municipal theatrical department, which meant that she not only controlled what happened in Petrograd's theaters but played a major role in the staging of the famous mass spectacles of 1920. Gorky himself was initially a vehement public opponent of Bolshevik policies, but after his reconciliation with Lenin in September 1918 he began to play such an extensive role as intelligentsia patron that he could be called with some justification a Soviet Lorenzo the Magnificent.² He ran a veritable court from his Petrograd house, a court to which many an intellectual would come as petitioner or protégé, and where the more favored were housed. In addition, he founded a series of new institutions that enabled Petrograd intellectuals to continue working—and many even literally to survive. The most famous of these is the House of Arts (Dom iskusstv, founded in 1919), which played a critical role in fostering new literary movements such as the Serapion Brothers (see Chapter 7).3 Also, as early as September 1918 he established the publishing house World Literature (Vsemirnaya literatura) as an autonomous department of Narkompros that gave several hundred otherwise destitute scholars and writers employment, often as translators. Under his patronage, the intelligentsia were sustained, and with relative autonomy. The figures who dominated their cultural events were for the most part those who had been prominent before the Revolution or their protégés. Where, then, was the great bouleversement? In some senses, it had not yet occurred. Intellectuals were not so much"working for the Bolsheviks" as working under the general auspices of one of their own number (even Lunacharsky had been, and continued to be, active in non-Party intellectual life). They had been freed from both the conservative autocratic regime and crass commercialism, but most were not enthusiastic about working for the Bolsheviks per se; indeed, when the latter called a meeting with Petrograd intellectuals in December 1917 it was poorly attended. Many were, however, attracted by the possibility the Revolution offered to try out their particular agendas for cultural regeneration. But the question remained: Which new values—orientations, styles, groups, and even branches of art—would prevail? Initial answers proved deceptive. For example, after the Revolution the avant-garde artists shifted roles from roués who defined themselves through épatage to establishment figures. As such, they dominated statefunded official art in providing decorations for revolutionary anniversaries, agitational posters, and so forth. And they were rewarded with institutional power. One of the first cultural departments established in Narkompros, the Fine Arts Department or, IZO (Izobrazitel'noye iskusstvo, founded on February 6, 1918), was headed by avant-gardists almost exclusively. Under their leadership, the Academy of Arts was abolished and in October 1918 the first SVOMAS studios were founded in Petrograd. The studios were open to all with the intention of redressing the elitism of the old Academy by helping the formerly underprivileged obtain places there so that they might acquire the new vision. Thus when Altman, one of those who subscribed to the idea of the new vision, decorated the Palace Square, he was determined to enact revolution in his very art. He sought to "counterpose" that Empire style "ensemble" with "a new beauty of the victorious people."4 Needless to say, the decorations by Altman and company drew fire from Preservationists—and from the Proletcult—who complained of their "contempt for architecture," for the "majestic facades" of Petersburg; the avant-garde would (allegedly) have done better had they followed Shchuko, a Preservationist who, in his decorations for the Taurides Palace, used primarily greenery and flags, the formula for the Tercentenary celebrations of 1913.5 The broad spectrum of cultural activists offended by Altman's decorations lobbied to try to prevent the avant-garde artists from participating in the next major revolutionary celebration, May 1, 1919.6 The power struggle that ensued was at least in part between IZO and official theatrical bodies. The theatrical bodies prevailed, and Andreeva, a determined opponent of the avant-garde, was made one of the heads of a new committee formed to organize revolutionary celebrations. From then on, their theatrical component became more important than the decorations. Many of the avant-garde became so disaffected that they left Petrograd for Moscow. There a new avant-garde movement, Constructivism, developed as a postrevolutionary mutation from Futurism. Even the early prominence of the avant-garde in the administration of Soviet culture was far from unchallenged; when in February 1918 the avant-garde got their power base in IZO, the Preservationists got theirs in another new Narkompros department, the Department for Museums and the Preservation of the Historical Heritage (Otdel muzeyev i okhrany stariny)—under Alexandr Benois. It was not only avant-garde art that became a diminished presence in the city; its musical life and ballet were decimated by emigrations. After the October Revolution, the Ballets Russes and many of the avant-garde composers (Stravinsky and later Prokofiev), together with prominent musicians, those whose art could be appreciated by audiences who did not know Russian, opted to live in the West, where conditions and commercial opportunities were better. Such an option did not realistically exist for the theater. The experimental theater emerged from its marginalized position in cellars and dachas and stepped into the breach to lead the intelligentsia's initial efforts at forging a revolutionary culture. As for the former Imperial theaters, their change of name to State theaters did not affect them radically. Most of their administrators and artists at first resisted the new order, but after an administrative purge they resigned themselves to their new masters8 and continued serving the public with Aida and Rigoletto while Petrograd was in turmoil all around.9 ## Theater as the Cradle of Soviet Culture The conservatism of the academic theaters notwithstanding, the stage was to play a major role in the cultural life of revolutionary Russia. So many theater activists had been champing at the bit to find opportunities to implement their agendas for transforming man via theater. After October, finally, the government was committed to more or less the same cause. Most Bolshevik leaders were impressed by the theater's potential for education and propaganda.10 The majority of the populace in those days was illiterate, especially the peasants, whose support would be crucial if the Bolsheviks were to win the war, but one did not have to be literate to understand a play's message. The task of spreading literacy and popularizing the Bolshevik cause among the civilian masses was largely assigned to the Red Army and Navy, and to the Department of Extra-Mural Education (Vneshkol'noye obrazovaniye), headed by Lenin's wife, Krupskaya, who had great faith in the power of the theater."1Lenin himself favored film as the best medium for agitation, but he made his famous statement on this in 1923; in these early years there was a chronic shortage of film and projectors so that the theater as a cheaper and more realistic option dominated agitational work. The statistics speak for themselves: by October 1, 1920, the army had organized 1,415 theaters but only 250 cinemas.12 The First National Conference on Extra-Mural Education, convened early in 1919 as the first major forum on how to remedy the backwardness of the masses, resolved that the theater was such a vital instrument for education that it should be included in the general system of education and also be made a centerpiece for the arts, the medium that would incorporate all others.13 With a massive state investment, the theater became in effect the cradle of the cultural life of the new Soviet republic. Thus many intellectuals were drawn into its orbit, whether as writers, scholars, directors, actors, set designers, or administrators. Activities with no ostensible connection to the theater, such as Petrograd's Free Philosophical Academy (Volfila), were often housed and funded under the umbrella of one of the bodies set up by the state to organize theatrical work.14 Actually, the theater had been queen from virtually the very beginning of Soviet power,15 and several other factors conspired to give it a dominant role. For one, theater was also the rage throughout Europe, where even the avant-garde were turning to that medium.16 And in Soviet Russia Lunacharsky, the Commissar of Enlightenment, had himself worked as a theater critic while in exile in Paris and was an aspiring playwright: several of his plays were dutifully produced during this period. The Civil War was in general a time when oral forms of culture dominated the written, and the theater was in a sense merely one of the more elaborate of them. At all levels of culture, from Party oratory to highbrow institutions, great emphasis was placed on oral performance.17 Reliance on nonwritten communication was in any event a necessity given not only the widespread illiteracy but also a chronic paper shortage.18 Writers depended largely on public and private readings of their works in order to disseminate them— the age favored genres such as poetry and short stories, which were best suited to declamation. Thus the movement for theatrical renovation got an impetus from the Revolution. Whether by purse strings or by inspiration, however, it shifted its orientation from a relatively hermetic remodeling within the theater energies were now more consistently directed outward at theatricalizing "life" (as had been attempted only sporadically before in places like Dalcroze's Hellerau). One of the most articulate and flamboyant ideologues of a comprehensive transformation through theater was Nikolai Evreinov, Meyerhold's chief rival as leader of the experimental theater in Petersburg / Petrograd. In his Theater as Such (Teatr kak takovoy, 1912), Evreinov maintains that from the earliest times man has been motivated by an "instinct to transform himself," by a drive to make himself other, and thus transcend the banal self.19 One can see this even in the most primitive savage who dresses himself in feathers and paint, not, Evreinov holds, for utilitarian or aesthetic reasons, but to make another self.20 Theatricality and assuming roles are to Evreinov, then, by no means confined to the theater, but are an important element in life (as theorists such as Irving Goffman have since worked out in greater detail). Evreinov developed this theme even further in his later book Theater for Oneself [or Itself] (Teatr dlya sebya, vols. 1–3, 1915–1917), in which he calls for the elimination of the theater on the stage and asks for the creation of theater in everyday life. In this book he insists that individuals should not trust the professional theater for a vicarious thrill derived from the performance of others, but should perform themselves. All people should call on their innate theatrical instincts and consciously develop roles and dramas for themselves, subject only to their own desires and fantasies. They should, Evreinov concludes, become actors, directors, and playwrights in their own lives. Hence Evreinov advanced the slogan, "Let every minute of our life be theater."21 How prophetic Evreinov was to be! Although drawing parallels between theater and revolution or theater and war often results in a cliché, when talking of the Russia of 1917-1921 the temptation is too great. In the chaos and turmoil that followed the February and October revolutions, rare was the individual who was to continue performing his old roles. Some people adopted dramatic roles as agents of revolution or counterrevolution, others escaped the grim times in theater, while still others were forced by those times to assume roles that were tragi-comic or grotesque. Most realized another of Evreinov's slogans: "The main thing is to become other and do something other."22 A characteristic form of theater under War Communism was the drama circle, the group of amateurs, be they workers, sailors, librarians, or just neighbors, who came together to act in plays. In Petrograd the drama circles were very popular and began to "multiply like infusoria."23 Although the theatrical craze had this spontaneous element, it was also highly organized. In Petrograd, the way theatrical life was ordered was complex and changed over time. There were five main bodies that ran it: first, TEO, the Theater Department of Narkompros; second, PTO, the theater and entertainment section of the so-called Northern Commune, or Petrograd City Soviet, which was responsible for the majority of city theaters and placesofentertainment (which by 1920 numbered forty);24third, the Narkompros Department of Extra-Mural Education, which was combined in November 1920 with ROSTA and other agitational bodies to form Politprosvet, or "Political Enlightenment" (again under Krupskaya), a body far from as singularly agitational in its activities as the title might imply;25 fourth, bodies set up by the Petrograd Military Command and the Baltic Fleet to organize agitational and theatrical work among their men; and fifth, the (semiautonomous) Proletcult.26 Space does not permit here a proper account of the administration of theater policy through these five bodies. But they were not mutually exclusive in the sense that certain figures played leading roles in more than one of them, though they did have separate jurisdictions and to some extent separate profiles. What is striking about the composition of the various committees set up by such bodies is that in these early years they reveal a distinctly highbrow rather than Party or worker bias. This trend was partcularlv marked in TEO, which functioned, in effect, as one of the Petrograd inteligentsia's first postrevolutionary homes. Many of the figures who sat on its committees (such as Blok and F. Zelinsky) were either the sons of schoiars or scholars in their own right. TEOsponsored a range of organizations which went on to develop their own independent existence and which, in toto, represented a spectrum of the Petrograd highbrow intelligentsia—making it much more representative than the spectrum offered by the leadership of IZO, for instance, TEO's main rival as the cradle of Soviet culture. Many of the activists who ran the revolutionary theater in Petrograd were not particularly Bolshevik. They could probably be identified more with the ethos of the February than the October Revolution. Many of them, including Blok and even Lunacharsky, had worked on cultural bodies set up under the Provisional Government; Gorky and Andreeva had headed the administration of Petrograd municipal theaters under the city Duma.27 Several of those active in TEO, including Gorky, left Soviet Russia later, while others, such as Blok, were Left Socialist Revolutionary rather than Bolshevik in orientation.28 Normally one would assume that a theater run by the intelligentsia would be doomed at the box office, especially in such hard times. But the theater under War Communism was artificially maintained at the very time it might otherwise have collapsed under dire conditions.29 The show could still go on, for it was subsidized by some government agency. Lunacharsky had been arguing for at least two decades that the theater should be accessible to the masses,30 and he was delighted to be able to enforce those policies himself. With free performances and subsidized tickets, his government attempted to bring the lower classes into the theater on a large scale. There was an official policy that ultimately all the seats should be free, and this policy was achieved to a greater extent in Petrograd than anywhere else. The aim was to squeeze out the private theaters by unfair competition, and the town Soviet was paying for this. Large blocks of seats in the theaters were allocated to enterprises, trade unions, or the military to distribute.31 Later, the price of theater tickets was reduced progressively until, in early 1921 (that is, on the eve of NEP), it amounted to just a few kopecks.32 Thus the theater activists were freed from box office concerns in their efforts to reform the theater. However, these subsidies came with the understanding that the activists were, like the government, committed to serving and educating the masses. Fortunately, at this stage the Party was more interested in fostering mass culture and agitation than in anything rigidly proletarian. Thus most of those who agitated for cultural change, Party, government, and intellectuals alike, could find common cause in the campaign for a "people's," or "mass" (narodnyy), theater. ## The People's Theater For much of the 1920s the movement for a "people's theater"spearheaded the campaign to transform bourgeois culture into a socialist or proletarian culture. A theater of mass participation was a project that both intellectuals and the Party carried in their knapsacks as they entered the battlefield of revolution. It flourished particularly in the two periods of revolutionary extremism (which essentially flank the decade), the times of greatest common cause between government cultural policies and intellectual schemes. In the first of the periods, War Communism, the movement dominated cultural life in Petrograd. It was never clearly established what that rubric meant, however. The term "people's" (narodnyy) has a wide range of meanings and connotations. It can mean "popular," "mass," "folk," and even "national" or "state." Thus it lends itself to appropriation by persons from all points on the political spectrum. Even if the term is given a more democratic interpretation as meaning"of the people,"the question immediately arises: Who are they? Are they the proletariat? the peasantry? the disadvantaged? the uneducated masses? or all citizens? And then again does it mean for the people, for their education and enlightenment, or even just for their enjoyment? Or does it mean by and of the people? Will the proletariat gain not just political but also cultural hegemony? In those heady and confused years of War Communism, all manner of interpretations of the term were de facto accepted, but few advocated giving the proletariat very real power in legislating the new culture. In part, this was because of the historical moment when the Bolsheviks needed all the support they could get and were committed to encouraging the professionally trained bourgeois specialist (spets) to work for their government.33 But Lenin himself in State and Revolution, his major treatise on postrevolutionary society on which he was still working at the time of the Revolution, had been vague about which version of "the people" would enjoy hegemony after the Revolution. Society is divided into two groups, to be sure: oppressors and oppressed, and the oppressors are the bourgeoisie and their stooges, but the oppressed, who are to take power after a revolution, are characterized in various ways, including as the "majority of the population," the "workers and peasants," and "those lowest on the social scale, the oppressed and exploited." In some contexts, Lenin equates proletariat' and narod, while in others he differentiates between them. In truth, the movement for a people's theater was not in itself a response to the Bolshevik Revolution and had generally not been conceived rigidly in class terms. As was so frequently the case, what happened under the rubric "people's theater"in postrevolutionary Russia represents the intensification of trends that began in Europe, were marked in Russia before the Revolution, but flourished under War Communism with Bolshevik patronage. Late in the nineteenth century under the banner of the people's theater idealists in Paris, Brussels, Vienna, and Berlin tried to bring the theater to the people by offering them free tickets or subsidized subscriptions to good theaters, or by founding theaters in working-class neighborhoods or workers' clubs. The movement reached Russia early in the twentieth century in institutions such as P. P. Gaydeburov and N. F. Skarskaya's Traveling Mass Theater (Peredvizhnyy obshchedostupnoy teatr Gaydeburova i Skarskoy), founded in Petersburg in 1903. Lunacharsky's efforts to provide Soviet workers with subsidized tickets can be seen as an example of this trend.35 Another broadly accepted account of the term (discussed in Chapter 3) was that it meant the theater should be democratized by breaking down the gulf between the actors on the stage and the audience by changing its physical organization. As it happens, these principles suited the reduced circumstances of postrevolutionary Russia. Indeed, in the profusion of street theater troupes that appeared in the Revolution's wake it was often difficult to tell whether a given troupe was performing on a street corner in order to serve a principle, or because its members had been reduced by unemployment and need to becoming buskers.36 The exigencies of the times had a similar effect on state-funded theaters. Given the chronic shortages of all commodities, it was fairly inevitable that the "new" theater was going to have to be fairly stripped down and ad hoc. Plays were often produced in the open air (especially those performed at the front), under canvas, or on a makeshift "stage" with only the most rudimentary of sets and possibly without make-up. Thus most agreed that a people's theater meant serving a more democratic audience in a less artificial setting. But it wasn't so clear how to translate the new theater's aims into the specific context of a Bolshevik revolution. There was less consensus on what the repertoire or aesthetic of the people's theater should be. One solution would have been to write an entirely new repertoire of plays, but as it happens this was an era when dramaturgy was at a low point. Assorted official bodies in Petrograd ran competitions for new plays in the hope of stimulating the drama with enticing prizes, but the quality of the entries was invariably poor and the judges sometimes decided that they could not give any awards.37 Typical of the plays from this period was The Bricklayer (Kamenshchik, 1918) by the Proletcult activist Pavel Bessalko. Written in praise of the new age of technology and proletarian hegemony, it concerns the wife of an architect who, predictably, becomes disaffected with her bourgeois husband and runs off with a bricklayer to join the revolutionary movement—to her greater fulfillment, no doubt, but not to the satisfaction of critics,who found the plot poorly motivated and the play terribly dull.38 Thus the issue became one of what existing plays would be staged, and in what manner. One common interpretation, associated with Andreeva, Gorky, Blok, and most of those who sat on the various repertoire committees set up in Petrograd at this time, was essentially that the people's theater should mean the transformation of the theater into the gymnasium (privileged, classical secondary school) of the Great Unwashed, who had been deprived of this kind of education by the inequalities of the tsarist regime. Such Kulturträger made the theater the central focus of a range of activities aimed at redressing this wrong (others included symphony concerts, public lectures, and literary readings).39 Lunacharsky and Gorky looked to the theater as a good place to teach history and called for several different cycles of historical plays to be written on, for example, the history of culture, the great epochs of scientific invention, and the genesis of the great religions of the world.40 Such projects are reminiscent of the eighteenth-century French mania for encyclopedism. A similar ethos can be seen in many of the projects sponsored by TEO, a body whose members seemed to be reaching out via "theater." broadly conceived, to found an entirely new cultural program. Thus, for instance, they sought to set up a theatrical university and produce a theatrical encyclopedia. They also launched an ambitious program for publishing annotated critical editions of a large number of Russian and foreign plays, a project closely tied to the World Literature publishing house Gorky had founded—one of many examples where the Petrograd TEO embraced the interlocking world of the city's intellectual life.4 Cultural enlighteners like Gorky favored uplifting, highbrow fare for the theater. He, Lunacharsky, and others advocated that the cornerstone of the new theater be either tragedy or melodrama—melodrama, that is, in its old sense of high drama interspersed with musical renditions.42 Gorky, Blok, and Andreeva, aided by Lunacharsky for as long as he remained in Petrograd in 1918, set out to stage the great classics of world drama for mass audiences. Their program for the people's theater merged with a local initiative attempted, yet again, before the Revolution (around 1914), and which was led by Andreeva (together with others, such as the singer Chaliapin and the classic actor Yu. Yuriev, who had plaved the leading role in Meyerhold's Masquerade). These leaders advanced the slogan "Back to the Classics!" as they called for a theater of classical tragedy, high comedy, and romantic drama that would stage plays devoted to historical subjects. An attempt was made after the February Revolution, in May 1917, to start this venture, but it was only after the October Revolution that their campaign bore fruit. In May 1918 Yuriev staged Oedipus Rex in the Chinizelli Circus, and, in August, Shakespeare's Macbeth. Then, early in 1919, this group was able to open a new, state-sponsored theater, the Bolshoi Drama Theater (whose board included Andreeva and was ultimately presided over by Blok).43 The government had also financed a series of free performances of recognized classics for worker audiences, starting with a production of Gogol's Inspector General in January 1919. The repertoire advocated by these lovers of classical drama included Shakespeare, Schiller, Victor Hugo, Aeschylus, and Aristophanes.44 In other words, proponents singled out the more stirring among the various dramas that might be set for study in a gymnasium schoolroom, hoping to cast the pearls of the old culture before the underprivileged. It might have been intended that class divisions be broken down thereby, but the grand gesture in effect also represented a cultural dictatorship by the scholar caste. Although this movement back to the classics had very powerful sponsors in Andreeva, Gorky, and Lunacharsky, arguably it did not represent the dominant response to the task of defining in practice what a revolutionary people's theater should be. This response was no less highbrow in the repertoire it sought to stage, but its account of itself was tinged with Wagnerian or, especially, Nietzschean vocabulary. A range of theaters, individuals, and groups saw the people's theater not so much as an institution for the lower classes as an ambience in which all classes could commune in harmony; as actors and audience intermingled, they might have the ecstatic or mystical experiences of a Dionysian rite. In the initial postrevolutionary years, this orientation was strongly represented in the Department of Extra-Mural Education, the department that was most directly mandated to help enlighten the Great Unwashed and that was also in the initial years to be one of the most important in formulating policy for the theater. At its first All-Russian Congress, held in Moscow in May 1919, which stressed the central role to be played by the theater in educational and agitational work, the keynote address on the theater was given by the Symbolist poet Vyacheslav Ivanov, who in prerevolutionary Petersburg had been a leading interpreter of Nietzsche (his "tower" apartment had been a focal salon for modernist endeavors) but was at this point head of the Historico-Theoretical Section of TEO. In language similar to his earlier writings but also anticipating some later Stalinist rhetoric, he urged his audience to take the Soviet theater out of the "paltry"(malyy) art that was being produced today, to overcome the art of yesterday, class art, and produce something that was "great and universal [vsenarodnyyl." Later all the delegates were taken to see a performance of Wagner's Valkyrie, preceded by an introductory lecture in which Ivanov quoted liberally from Nietzsche's tract on tragedy and called for sobornost' in art.45 If such events seem a little unexpected for the platform of a proletarian revolution, it might be helpful to point out their timing. In May 1919 the power struggle over who should run the revolutionary mass festivals had just been resolved with the avant-garde excluded, and Lenin in his speech to this same Congress on Extra-Mural Education attacked the avant-garde. Hence the Nietzschean/Wagnerians profited from a power vacuum and emerged to prominence as the line of least resistance. The interest such directors had in founding a new religious consciousness is not, however, as far from the official view of the new theater as one might suppose. Lunacharsky himself, in a prerevolutionary article entitled "Socialism and Art" (1908), in which he outlines his conception of a new peoples' theater, praises Wagner's "Art and Revolution" and calls for a "collective production of a tragedy that should raise [the participants'] souls to a state of religious ecstasy." The theater of the future should be a "free religious cult," closely linked to the new religion of socialism; hence theaters would be "turned into temples and temples into theaters."46 By 1917, the quasireligious aspects of his cultural program had become muted, but they had not disappeared.47 In revolutionary Petrograd, a similar position was taken by the head of the Theatrical Department within the Institute for Extra-Mural Education, P. P. Gaydeburov, a veteran of the prerevolutionary movement for a peoples' theater who during the years of War Communism was at the height of his success (as was his Traveling Mass Theater). Gaydeburov sat on several PTO and TEO committees and trained Red Army soldiers for theatrical productions. His speeches and writings were influential at this time, particularly his People's Theater (Narodnyy teatr), published in 1918 but comprising articles written and largely published before the Revolution. As this fact suggests, Gaydeburov's understanding of people's theater in Soviet Russia was virtually unaltered from his prerevolutionary position; it was to seek "an art for all [vsenarodnoye] based on a shared [vsenarodnoye] religious consciousness."48 The prominence afforded leading Neo-Nietzscheans from the prerevolutionary period, such as Ivanov and Gaydeburov, in the movement for a peoples' theater was to prove short lived, but they are important figures in the story of how, later, a more rigidly proletarian, Soviet agitational theater emerged in Petrograd. Many of those who pioneered such theaters took on the work after an initial postrevolutionary apprenticeship in Gaydeburov's theater, or escorted their students to it as a model.49 Others began their theatrical careers in a Proletcult studio run by A. A. Mgebrov, another theater activist prominent before the Revolution who had worked with Evreinov and Meyerhold; his studio was the first to press its services to tour the front for the Red Army, but his account of the revolutionary theater was tinged with Nietzschean vocabulary.50 By the end of War Communism, most of these directors' epigones had parted company with their masters, and before many more years had elapsed the Revolution spat their masters out and closed their theaters down. Nevertheless, the hands of Nietzsche and Wagner had not withered entirely. Individuals from a younger generation no less in their thrall—and here I have in mind particularly Radlov and Piotrovsky—were to weather all the successive political moments of the 1920s to emerge as the most consistently dominant figures of the decade in the revolutionary and agitational theater of Petrograd /Leningrad. In the work of these figures, Nietzscheanism and Wagnerism are conflated not with highbrow benevolence, as in the case of Gaydeburov, but with a version of avant-garde experimentalism. Much of the work and ethos most characteristic of the theater in postrevolutionary Russia was an outcome of the experimental and theoretical work of Meyerhold and his disciples in prerevolutionary Petersburg, or by the coterie of Evreinov. Most of those who were to become major names in the revolutionary theater of the 1920s (such as Radlov) had some prerevolutionary association with both. However, neither Meyerhold nor Evreinov was himself destined to become a leading figure in the Petrograd revolutionary theater. The most exciting time in civil war Soviet theater was the period from 1919 through the spring and summer of 1920, when the open-air mass spectacles were staged in Petrograd. But during this precise time Meyerhold was in the south of Russia, and Evreinov was in Tiflis. Evreinov returned to Petrograd after a three-year absence in September 1920, that is, at the very time Lunacharsky invited Meyerhold to Moscow to head TEO. Evreinov was initially feted, given his own theater, and appointed head of the consortium of directors planning the famous reenactment of the storming of the Winter Palace, thus stealing much of the glory for an enterprise already under way.51Yet of the two coteries, in Leningrad that of Meyerhold was, despite his permanent departure from the city, to be the dominant one; crucial factors proved to be his tenure in 1918-1919 as deputy head of the Petrograd TEO, which, though brief, enabled himto set up a number of institutions that had a major impact on the evolution of the city's revolutionary theater, and his early acceptance of Soviet power. The Revolution gave Meyerhold an opportunity to resolve his split directorial persona as Dr. Dapertutto of the experimental theater and Meyerhold, a director of the Imperial theaters. He abandoned the Imperial theaters in 1918 to concentrate all his energies on producing a new avant-garde theater for the state. After he was appointed head of the entire TEO in September 1920 this commitment intensified and he called for a theater at one with the October Revolution, a "theatrical October." Meyerhold always insisted that theatricality could not be compromised for any cause, however, and even in early 1921 he was still insisting on the primacy of form over content, something that exacerbated his problems with Lunacharsky and precipitated his demise as head of TEO shortly thereafter.52 This reversal of fortunes gave Meyerhold less bureaucratic power to dictate the direction Soviet theater should take. However, the theater Meverhold set up in Moscow in late 1920, the Theater of the RSFSR (later named the Meyerhold Theater-Teatr imeni Meyerkhol'da, or TiM), became a vardstick and trendsetter for revolutionary theater. Its innovative productions attracted the greatest attention in theatrical journals in Moscow and Leningrad so that he came to dominate the Soviet theater in the 1920s de facto as he no longer could de jure. His work in the Moscow theater essentially picked up where it left off when he was obliged in 1919 to leave Petrograd for health reasons; Meyerhold's Moscow"theatrical October" began in Petrograd.53Moreover, he remained a presence in the Leningrad theater throughout the 1920s, bringing the Moscow troupe there for a whole month every year to show his latest productions and also debate his theories with his old interlocutors. Meyerhold's most seminal act during his brief tenure at the Petrograd TEO was to found, in June 1918, the Courses in the Mastery of Staging (Kursy masterstva stsenicheskikh postanovok), established under the auspices of TEO.54 These Courses were essentially a new home for the Meverhold camp, a revival of the studio on Borodinskaya (most of the old names regathered there), and yet there were marked shifts in its orientation as compared with the old studio. An explicit aim of the Couzzes was : get for the theater "new forces from the democratic masses :o air instructors who might lead the burgeoning drama groups among the masses. This represented a break with the prerevolutionary de facto elitism of the Meverhold camp (few outsiders had been admitted to the studio on Borodinskaya), as did the understanding of those involved that their productions would be more ideologically inspired. In most other respects, however, the Courses represented a continuation of Meyerhold's prerevolutionarv studio in that they stressed improvisation and the acting styles of the commedia dell'arte, and their announced first principle was "to recognize 'theater' as an autonomous artistic activity and to insist that everything in the theater be subordinated to a single set [yedinym] of theatrical laws."55 These Courses proved to be a springboard for disciples such as Piotrovsky, Soloviev, and Radlov, who all taught there. After Meyerhold's departure, the position of director of the Courses was assumed by Radlov, who had joined the staff in November 1918.56 These three also made their own mark by setting up a series of experimental theaters that sought to become models for the people's theater.57 The last and most successful of these was the People's Comedy Theater (Teatr narodnoy komedii), founded in late 1919, which was run by Radlov and Soloviev, and in which Piotrovsky also periodically played a role as author or director of a given production. Part of the considerable popularity of the People's Comedy Theater must be ascribed to the verve of its approach. Figures such as Richard Shechner (and Meyerhold) draw a distinction between "drama," or the inert text, and "theater," or performance,58 but never has that distinction been so glaringly apparent as in postrevolutionary Russia. Among the avant-garde of the day, values like dynamism and pace were de rigueur,59 and the bottom line in evaluating any work of art or theatrical production was its value as "spectacle" (zrelishche).60 But at the hands of the Meyerholdians a crucial addition to this troika was "play." Indeed, Meyerhold was able to capitalize on his position in the Petrograd TEO to found a journal of that title (Igra) whose avowed philosophy was that one could revolutionize education by the use of theater as play.61 The People's Comedy Theater exemplified these values. Rather than search for new plays, they tended to restage the old or to put together sketches based on the tritest of plots. Plays were redone to streamline them, to alter or emphasize their ideological message, and to reduce their ponderous verbalizing and increase the potential for movement and caper. On Radlov's initiative, the theater invited a group of circus professionals (primarily acrobats and clowns) to join forces with them in staging a series of plays using the principle of improvisation but in which the audience was to be attracted by the actors' comic antics and daredevil feats—those revolutionary saltos.62 The supporters of the People's Comedy Theater claimed for it a respectable pedigree in a European tradition of the people's theater; parallels were frequently drawn with the theater in Shakespeare's day or the commedia dell'arte.63The theater also owed much to Meyerhold's investigations of bodily movement on stage. But the players' work could equally well be seen as influenced by the Italian Futurist theater, which used the precise nexus of techniques for which the People's Comedy Theater was famous: circus performers, improvisation, short skits, techniques of the cabaret and music hall, and de-emphasizing the verbal text.64 Two other versions of the people's theater tried in civil war Petrograd that could lay a more convincing claim to a pedigree in folk traditions were also fostered by Meyerhold. The first of these was attempts made under the auspices of the Courses at staging new redactions of plays from the Russian folk, or narodnyy, theater, the potential of which had attracted the attention of Meyerhold and avant-gardists before the Revolution who were drawn to the particular combination one finds in these plays of drama and tragedy relieved by pantomime and comic intermedia with pithy folk repartee.65 The avant-garde wanted to appropriate the conventions of the folk theater for developing an experimental theater that would be at the same time revolutionary and serving the masses. The difficulty of combining these three versions of the people's theater was demonstrated earlier in the famous production of Mayakovsky's Mystery-Bouffe (Misteriya-buff, 1917-1918), a hybrid of folk drama and avant-garde experimentalism directed at the service of the revolutionary cause. This play was staged for the first anniversary of the Revolution and directed by Meyerhold himself, who was then still in Petrograd. Mayakovsky's Mystery-Bouffe became for the Futurist camp a cause célèbre. It was their postrevolutionary attempt at conquering the theater and represents a considerable accommodation on their part to the demand for a revolutionary, mass culture (gone was the trans-sense language of Victory over the Sun).66 The play was destined to become instead a symbol of the persecution of "left art," as the erstwhile Futurists had come to label their movement, the perennial (contested) charge being that it was unintelligible to the workers; in Petrograd the chief opponent was Andreeva, once again, and her power was a factor precipitating Mayakovsky's move to Moscow in 1919.67 Mystery-Bouffe was intended to introduce its untutored (mass) audience to the rationale behind the Revolution. The plot is based not on any of the existing Russian folk dramas but rather on the biblical legend of Noah's ark, which it conflates with the convention for representing the Revolution in terms of some natural cataclysm (a relatively bloodless trope for spatial purification). As with productions of the People's Comedy Theater, in Mystery-Bouffe cardinal values of the studio on Borodinskaya—pace, improvisation, the commedia, theatricality—were married to the cause of agitation and education. In a way, much of the prerevolutionary theater had become like the colorful revolutionary poster. Dramas were simplified, pared down, and protagonists caricatured—sometimes to the point of crudity—in order for the message to be immediately accessible to mass audiences. Productions had little complexity, subtlety, or exploration of characters' inner lives. Here we find points of similarity with those who favored the fare of the Bolshoi Drama Theater; their spokesmen, such as Gorky and Lunacharsky, insisted that the theater should dispense with all "half tones" in favor of a clearly delineated black and white.68 The theater activists—avant-gardists, Nietzscheans, and highbrow zealots—wanted such simplification as a necessary gesture to unsophisticated audiences, yet their own sense of the world was at this time fairly Manichaean. They saw the much hated rentier-mercantilist class and bourgeoisie in terms comparable with the grossly caricatured "cleans," members of the oppressing classes in Mystery-Bouffe who were sketched as circles to look distinctly bloated, ridiculous, and incapable of purposeful action. It was perfectly predictable that during the period of iconoclastic fervor marking the aftermath of a revolution antibourgeois themes would be the predominant fare of all the theaters. This was a topic on which theater activists could happily produce plays that their patrons (the state) would generally finance. The theater activists were opposed to the bourgeois, commercial theater not just because it entailed the dread market per se, but also because of the alleged lulling effect of its fare on the audience. Lunacharsky, and many other figures who controlled theater life in Petrograd (such as Gorky, Andreeva, and Blok), railed against the commercial theater as one that inclined its audience to decadence, inactivity, or pessimism69 (shades of Plato's attack in The Republic on the kinds of poetry that inspire inertia, but also reminiscent of influential contemporary European thinkers such as Romain Rolland70). Consequently, it should be a theater of action and heroism above all. The Bolsheviks shared with the majority of intellectuals this distaste for the cultural fare of commercial enterprises. In 1918 Kameneva, then head of the Theater Secti n of Narkompros, claimed with a certain naive faith that if only Narkompros worked up a "healthy repertoire," then "our competition would force the private theaters to follow suit."71In actuality, the commercial theaters of Petrograd were jolted more by harsh economic realities than by any competition from a "healthy repertoire." During the turmoil of 1917-1919, one after the other they began to close down because they were not making enough money. The state gave them a nudge with a 500 percent tax on theater profits that it imposed in 1918 rather than nationalize the theaters (they were nationalized anyway in 1919). But when a commercial theater closed down, usually PTO would send in a newly formed experimental theater or studio to take over the premises.72 Many cultural zealots, on seeing the private sector among theaters, the press, and so on so badly battered, seized their moment to demand what amounted to the eradication of commercial, lowbrow culture. Spokesmen at a Petrograd Proletcult conference of 1918, for instance, called for the abolition of all "boulevard" literature and of "the yellow press."73 Others fingered that old bête noire of the theater activists, the café chantant. Fortunately for the theater activists the combination of harsh economic conditions and government policies forced many a café chantant to close down.74The phantom of the cabaret and the café chantant resurfaced whenever conditions favored them, however, attracting not only good audiences but also opera singers and assorted other servants of high culture who were reproached in the press for demeaning themselves by moonlighting in such places.75It was as if the highbrow intellectuals wanted to eradicate a more successful rival for public attention. Western commentators have focused on the Bolshevik state's repression of intellectuals. But during War Communism, while the Bolsheviks approached the issue of whether to nationalize commercial cultural institutions quite gingerly and debated the issue among themselves, several spokesmen for non-Bolshevik intelligentsia positions—particularly from the avant-garde—urged total intolerance for cultural approaches other than their own.76 Typical of this trend would be Adrian Piotrovsky's article "Dictatorship," published in October of 1920.77 Piotrovsky opens with a preamble reminiscent of Lenin's famous essay of 1905 "Party Organization and Party Literature." Like Lenin, he dismisses those who quake at any infringement of creative freedom, arguing in this case that a lack of state control will only give full rein to the "petty shopkeeper" (lavochnik) and "man on the street" (obyvatel'). The article is rife with intellectual elitism as he goes on to contend that the problem with the petty shopkeeper is that he is very "superficially educated." One senses deliberate stylization arter Ler:nnce again. in his further contention that "either the proletariat will make art or :t will be made by the petty shopkeepers." The proletariat are as vet toc weak to make their own art, and hence, in a familiar move, those who are less "superficially educated" have to step in to "show another way by force"; Soviet Russia must perforce have a "repressive policy in the arts" ("politika khudozestvennogo nasiliya"). "Let the theaters be empty," Piotrovsky asserts, "Let the philistines stay at home."78 Here, then, we see guild megalomania melded with Bolshevik repressiveness and its doctrine of the vanguard, but the catalyst is idealism. Certainly not all intellectuals in Petrograd were demanding a cultural dictatorship. Many favored unlimited cultural freedom. Under War Communism, however, the theater in Petrograd was run largely by would-be enlightened despots who sought to impose their highbrow or avant-garde tastes on the culture of the city. Significantly, within the theatrical world many of the people demanding a dictatorship were themselves actual or proto-scholars who were at the same time active in the theater. This trend is particularly marked among that new generation of Meyerhold's disciples who succeeded him in Petrograd in running the Courses for the Mastery of Staging and in the experimental theater. Several of them were the sons of prominent academics who had themselves begun preparing for an academic career; they were inspired to work both for the revolutionary experimental theater and as cultural bureaucrats, but they did not abandon their scholarly interests, even though the demands of the Revolution and the cause of the new theater often led them to some fairly unscholarly pursuits. A good example would be Konstantin Derzhavin, the son of the Slavist N. S. Derzhavin. Konstantin himself later went on to be a professor at Leningrad University, but during War Communism he worked (from 1918-1920) as Secretary to the Council of TEO, and also in a series of experimental theaters where he could on occasion be seen doubling for the famous circus acrobat Serge (A. Aleksandrov). This pattern is amply illustrated in the biographies of Piotrovsky and Radlov. Both were professors' sons: Piotrovsky was the illegitimate son of the leading classicist F. Zelinsky, and Radlov the son of a scholar of idealist and classical philosophy, Ernest L. Radlov. They—especially Radlov— moved in the highest intelligentsia circles. Radlov was married to Anna Radlova, who at that time rivaled Akhmatova for the title best female poet in Petrograd (M. Kuzmin thought Radlova the better of the two, and Akhmatova was apparently so threatened by Radlova that she would not read on the same platform79), while his brother N. E. Radlov was, even before the Revolution, a prominent art critic. Moreover, the artist who throughout the 1920s generally designed the sets for Radlov's productions, Valentina Khodasevich, was the adoring niece of the poet Vladislav Khodasevich, who emigrated in 1921; thanks to his connection with Gorky in emigration, Valentina was able to flit back and forth to Europe for most of the 1920s and participate in the theatrical world there, too (at one point she designed sets for Luigi Pirandello). Piotrovsky and Radlov were not just habitués of the best intelligentsia circles; they were serious scholars in their own right. Before the Revolution both had, in addition to their association with Meyerhold, been pupils and disciples of Zelinsky himself. As such, they produced scholarly translations of classical plays and worked toward their production, activities they pursued no less ardently after the Revolution.80In 1919 Piotrovsky in his incarnation as classical scholar was a member of the Petrograd Formalist group OPOYaZ.81Yet he was also the zealot who had written the article "Dictatorship." Moreover, the two occupied a series of administrative posts in government bodies set up to oversee propagandistic cultural work, both in the civilian sector and in the Red Army and the Baltic Fleet.82 Plato in his Republic had recommended that society be governed by philosopher-kings, with their positions secured by the guardians. The theater activists of postrevolutionary Petrograd had an uncannily comparable vision for the future role they would play in society. Evreinov, Piotrovsky, and others began to talk of instituting a theatocracy.83 But by implication this theatocracy would be led by scholar-dramatists, scholar-directors, and scholar-bureaucrats (such as Evreinov, Remizov, Radlov, Piotrovsky, and even Lunacharsky, who fits this category since he published both plays and scholarly articles). Yet they claimed for themselves the right to legislate cultural taste on behalf of the masses and in the name of the Revolution, to dictate and repress if need be, though dictatorship for Piotrovsky as a classical scholar did not have the black connotations it has in our postfascist era. Although they went through all sorts of contortions to introduce a popular, mass theater (right down to co-opting circus acrobats for theater work), they were in many respects trying to turn the clock back culturally rather than forward. The theater activists did allow popular genres into the revolutionary theater, such as the Russian folk theater and the commedia dell'arte, which derives in part from the ludic popular tradition—the Roman Atellanae—and in part from classic literature. This kind of people's theater no longer represented vital popular theater, however. In the prerevolutionary years Blok and others had begun to champion the theater of the fairground tent at the very moment its popularity had gone into sharp decline in the fairground itself. To give them their due, the theater activists were caught in a paradoxical situation. On the one hand, they wanted to revolutionize the theater and bring it closer to the masses and popular theater forms. On the other hand, they sought to eradicate the commercial theater and all vogues representing the misguided taste of the as yet not fully enlightened masses, a move that brought them perilously close to stemming the tide of theatrical evolution. This paradox was by no means unique to the theater. The first premise of revolution is that the present is so bad it must be annihilated, and consequently its models tend to come from the past. Thus a revolution is both radical and conservative. This can be seen best in the case of another expression of the people's theater, the mass spectacle, the genre that sought to provide historical paradigms for the new age.