# PETROGRAD: RITUAL CAPITAL OFREVOLUTIONARY RUSSIA In culture, there are no absolute beginnings, even when revolutions invested with messianic presumptions take place. The art that follows a revolution and that we, in retrospect, say defines it, is really a selection and elaboration of pre-existing tendencies. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the mass spectacle in revolutionary Petrograd, in those dramatic pageants staged in the city to mark the festival days of a newly instituted revolutionary ("red") calendar. ## The Mass Spectacle On November 8, 1920, at ten in the evening on the vast Palace Square in Petrograd there began what was billed as the biggest mass spectacle of all time, a re-enactment of the storming of the Winter Palace. The re-enactment was staged in celebration of the third anniversary of the Revolution, and it was directed by Nikolai Evreinov.¹ Its cast of six thousand was made up largely of members of the army and navy drama circles and even authentic army units, but it also included professional actors, ballet dancers, circus performers, and drama students. An audience of one hundred thousand is said to have gasped with dismay and cheered with delight as the fortunes of the Bolshevik faction fell and then rose again in the course of a spectacle intended to evoke strong reactions with its overwhelming scale and dramatic special effects.² The spectacle opened at a point after the February Revolution of 1917 when Alexander Kerensky, the head of the Provisional Government, was at the height of his power. The Government and its supporters, the liberal bourgeoisie, huddled in interminable meetings, while the oppressed masses were in disarray. As the spectacle progressed this situation was reversed, with the supporters of the Provisional Government recemir moze and more flustered while the masses, by contrast, became ever m.ore rganized and decisive, eventually forming themselves into armed detachments. Then came the October Revolution itself. Onto the square cam.e rumbling real armored cars along with thousands of actual soldiers and sailors, converging from all corners for the final storming of the Winter Palace. The members of the Provisional Government were by now panic-stricken, and the audience was treated to a comic interlude as the circus stars who played these roles gave free reign to buffoonery and acrobatics in representing their flight before the advancing Bolsheviks. The one group that remained firm was the Women's Death Battalion, which paraded with a banner declaring, "We will win through to the Dardanelles!" a claim belied by their appearing "like characters from an operetta." As the climax approached, Evreinov as director turned more and more to special auditory and visual effects. Fifty windows in the upper story of the palace were suddenly illuminated, and in them spectators could see a shadow play of tussling silhouettes. Shots were fired from the battleship Aurora, still anchored at the position from which it had fired the shot that signaled the start of the October Revolution. For two or three minutes all other sound was silenced as machine guns crackled, rifles fired, and the artillery thundered. Then, to signal the victory, a rocket was sent up, and all became silent. The pathetic figure of Kerensky was seen scurrying off dressed in women's clothing. The event broke up after a stupendous finale with a mass rendering of the "Internationale," a fireworks display, and a military parade.3 The Storming of the Winter Palace, with its huge cast and audience, represented the culmination of the movement for a truly mass theater, the crowning achievement of the year 1920, which saw five mass spectacles in Petrograd, all of them open-air performances like The Storming of the Winter Palace with casts and audiences numbering in the thousands. Petrograd was not the only city to stage mass spectacles after the Revolution, nor even the first. Many provincial cities also performed them—as, of course, did Moscow.4 But all experts are agreed that in scale, in panache, and in the frequency with which they were produced, Petrograd's performances outdid those of all other cities. It was the ritual capital of revolutionary Russia. Why was this role not assumed by Moscow? In fact, Moscow planned some ambitious mass festivals involving Meyerhold and others that would have rivaled those of Petrograd, but they were never realized.5 One reason may be the fact that while Moscow might be the capital, Petrograd was the place of origin for the Revolution and could thus claim more right than any other city to hold ritual commemorations of that event. Moreover, that claim was one of the few left that might give the city status in the new society. Hence an ambitious Zinoviev (head of its Soviet and Party Committee) was probably more motivated than even his Moscow counterparts to see that such massive events were realized in his city. Petrograd was also the center of an intelligentsia infatuated by the dream of Nietzsche and others for outdoor rituals of togetherness. The mass spectacle became the focus of their endeavors to smash that "sardine tin"of aesthetic-cum-social constraints; their rituals of transgression were to provide the sympathetic magic that would transform society itself. Each of the successive spectacles of 1920 outdid its predecessors in the sheer scale of its outdoor arena and in the numbers in its cast and audience, but The Storming of the Winter Palace surpassed them all.6 Evreinov, no stranger to hyperbole, boasted at the time that this mass spectacle, like the Revolution itself, had been of an unprecedented scale that would secure for it a unique place in the history of theater.? The spectacles of 1920 provide, to invoke the title of Lenin's tract on Tolstoy, "a mirror of the Russian Revolution." In the story of their staging can be traced some of the contradictions between the theory andthe practice of revolution, and above all the problem of how to involve in one harmonious "performance" (or revolution) three crucial but somehow disparate groups: the Party or state, intellectuals, and the masses. Our image of these famous events is largely of spontaneous, iconoclastic rituals, of joyous mass celebrations of the overthrow of the old order. Such a perception of the mass spectacles has given them a special status in our imaginations as a high point of the initial years after the Revolution, a time of revolutionary idealism and millennial fervor. And this perception is not without foundation. During the first year or so after the Revolution, there was a frenzy of cultural iconoclasm. The past was to be destroyed to make way for the new era. "Only he is a Communist," the poet Mayakovsky declared in 1918, "who has burned his bridges against defeat," and "To destroy is to create, for in destroying we overcome our past."8 Art and culture were to be both liberated and democratized by taking them out "onto the streets," and the streets themselves, the squares and even the buildings around them, were all to be repainted.9 The focus of the movement to bring art "to the streets"was the theater. Its chief ideologue was Platon Kerzhentsev, a theorist of the Proletcult and national head of the telegraph agency responsible for making most of the famous Soviet revolutionary posters (ROSTA). His Creative Theater, with its thesis "the new art will grow outside the walls of the theatersme a sor: of little red book of this movement.10 While Kerzhentsev in The Creative Theater reiterated manv of the corrnonplaces of the pan-European movement for a theater of mass participation, he also gave them a utopian coloration with his theorv of the "eternal studio." The new theater should, he contended, follow the "principle of amateurism."1 Its mainstay should be the nonprofessional actors from the working classes. But although these actors should be trained and forever perfect their art, they must never become fully formed professionals, for if they did they would lose their closeness to the masses.12 Kerzhentsev also wanted to see the division between the players and their passive spectators abolished. He predicted that in the future a member of the audience might say not "I am going to see something" but rather "I am going to participate in something."13 If you abstract the class bias of Kerzhentsev's theories, you find here a vision of eternal liminality and intermingling of all. In this respect, Kerzhentsev's theories are reminiscent of those of Bakhtin in his theoretical writings of the 1930s, particularly in the Rabelais book, where he discusses the notion of carnival. Bakhtin's predilection for carnival arises out of his obsessive concern for a breakdown of borders of all kinds, a predilection very characteristic of the distinctive millenarian culture of the initial postrevolutionary years. One of the first characterizations of carnival that he provides in Rabelais and His World is formulated in terms of the breakdown of distinctions between stage and audience.14 In the same formulation, Bakhtin also draws an absolute distinction between carnival and theater on the basis of universality of participation, that ideal which was so important to Kerzhentsev, too: "Carnival does not know footlights in the sense that it does not acknowledge any distinction between actors and spectators. .. . Carnival is not a spectacle seen by the people; they live in it, and everyone participates because its very idea embraces all the people."15 Thus for many intellectuals after the Revolution, a focus of their dreams of breaking down the boundaries between educated and uneducated, rich and poor, nation and nation, and even man and man was the carnival or mass festival in which "everyone participates" in what Kerzhentsev described as "pure joy and unrestrained merriment."16 But this was all in theory; the practice was somewhat other. There were, it is true, several attempts to organize some "folk carnival" (narodnaya radost') on revolutionary holidays with dancing, sideshows, mummers, masks, games, and songs, but in reality neither the powers that be nor the intellectuals themselves could be content with just unfocused liminality; something more educative was required.17 Thus the high point of the revolutionary festival became an improving theatrical production, a mass spectacle. Yet the mass spectacle was by no means viewed by theater activists as simply a propaganda vehicle; it was the apotheosis of the theater of mass participation, the ultimate in cultural iconoclasm and democratization. Adrian Piotrovsky, one of its principal directors, saw the spectacle as the ideal school for its participants, the "crowning achievement" of revolutionary cultural work which, in the "transformed" world it presented, would give the participants a "window into the future."18 What we want, he said, is "not dressing in costume, but a transformation." ("Ne pereryazhivaniya a pererozhdeniye [rebirth!]").19 Thus those who were directing these spectacles saw their task as not just one of putting on plays or pageants, but of making citizens. Performance was to be participation in the life of the new society. The mass spectacles were to recapitulate or define the form of revolution. But at the same time this revolution was to be in sync with a revolution in the consciousness of the participants themselves, a revolution both aesthetic and political-cum-social. As the first such spectacle was being prepared in Petrograd, Kerzhentsev came to conduct a series of lectures explaining these ambitious aims. He delivered the lectures to a packed audience gathered in the Proletcult and including most of the principal future directors of these spectacles (Piotrovsky was particularly prominent in the debates).20 The first of the Petrograd mass spectacles of 1920, The Mystery of Liberated Labor (directed by Yu. Annenkov, A. Kugel, and S. Maslovskaya), was performed for May Day on the steps of the Stock Exchange. The Mustery of Liberated Labor presented a generalized account of the progression through the ages to the socialist utopia. The setting was dominated by a huge backdrop placed on the upper platform, above the Exchange stairs, depicting a medieval castle with large golden doors closed by a hanging lock that was meant to bar the way to the Kingdom of Freedom. According to the libretto, after a fanfare, the performance opens with a procession of various members of the exploiting classes and their retainers (such as Napoleon, a Chinese mandarin, a plantation owner, the Emperor of Byzantium, and assorted merchants) who proceed to a banquet table on the upper platform where they feast and are entertained by musicians and ballet dancers. A group of slaves in chains enter, their backs bent by their hard lives, and begin their labors at the bottom of the stairs. The two groups continue their respective occupations in a dramatic contrast of "parallel play." But suddenly, when there is a lull in the drunken bacchanalia on the upper platform, the slaves are able to hear the strains of a "heavenly music" issuing from the Kingdom of Freedom. Thev begirto rumbie and. successively, groups of rebels attempt to defeat their masters and reach the Kingdom of Freedom, taking the spectacle in rapid succession through a series of famous revolutions, starting with the Spartacus Revolt of 73 B.C. and culminating in the canonical revolutionary moments of the modern era: the French Revolution, the Paris Commune, and the two Russian revolutions of 1917. The victory in each uprising is short-lived as the oppressors soon exert their might to quash it. Even the great October Revolution is soon threatened by a foreign intervention and civil war. In the latter instance, however, the masses' resolve is stronger then ever before; under Bolshevik guidance, echelons of the Red Army are formed. The rebellious crowd grows ecstatic as more and more troops waving red banners appear until, in the end, the sea of red overwhelms their oppressors; the sealed gates open and all the actors freeze in an "ecstasy of victory." In the final act, the backdrop of the castle falls away to reveal a representation of the Kingdom of Freedom, in the center of which stands a huge "tree of freedom" decked out with red ribbons. The soldiers beat their weapons into plowshares and other implements of peacetime labor, and then all the peoples of the earth mingle together around the tree in a joyous round dance, and festivals of many ethnic groups are celebrated. The "mystery" is brought to a triumphal close with fireworks and a mass singing of the "Internationale."21 Even in this sketchy account of the libretto, one can see how several disparate agendas for theater or revolution came together. For instance, the depiction of the exploited classes as slaves echoes Lenin's general paradigm of revolution in his most recent treatise, State and Revolution (1917), whereby the "slaves" smash the apparatus of state oppression and drive the monied classes and their henchmen from power. At the same time, the dance around the tree at the end realizes Rousseau's iconic account of true theater (a favorite of theorists of the people's theater) figured in terms of the citizens' dancing around a pole,22 or more specifically recapitulates the dance around the Liberty Tree, which was a core element in the festivals of the French Revolution (this particular spectacle was the one most indebted to precedents from that source).23 But the spectacle also seems to provide a literal translation of a scenario in Nietzsche's Birth of Tragedy whereby the world of "appearance" and "measure" is penetrated by ever more alluring and "ecstatic tones"of "reawakened tragic music"until"the enchanted gate that leads into the Hellenic magic mountain" (which even Goethe and Schiller could not breach) opens suddenly of its own accord.24 Thus those who produced The Mystery of Liberated Labor, as with the other mass spectacles of 1920, tried to create a genealogy for the new state but inscribed it into narratives—not all of which were concerned with political revolution—that had captivated the imagination of intellectuals. In these mass spectacles they tried to overcome not only the confines of the conventional theater in their staging (in the open air) but also the confines of spatial borders and historical time. The Mystery of Liberated Labor, though quite singular in many respects, follows a general structure to be found in all five of the mass spectacles of 1920. Each depicted a historical progression that began at a different point in time, but that charted the progressive triumph of some subjugated, oppressed group (the toilers) over its oppressors, the ruling classes, disregarding the differences between countries and historical periods. The central figure for revolution was movement in space rather than time, however. The binary opposition (oppressed /oppressors) was always represented spatially, with each group having its assigned area: for the two spectacles staged at the Stock Exchange the oppressed occupied the area at the bottom of the steps, their oppressors the top, while for The Storming of the Winter Palace, following a convention of many earlier revolutionary dramas of mass participation held indoors,25 the oppressors (the Provisional Government and their ilk) occupied a specially constructed stage situated, appropriately enough, on the right-hand side of the Palace Square, while the oppressed masses and Bolsheviks occupied another on the left. Each mass spectacle also utilized a third, intermediate area (a bridge, a corridor, or a flight of steps between the two spaces) where the two parties in conflict met for their tussles. The moment of triumph for the oppressed was represented by their permanent occupation of the space of their oppressors. Here we find a major difference between the Russian spectacles and those of the French Revolution. Most of the recent analysts of the French spectacles have stressed that their locus was the free and open space outside of town. Even when there was a progression through town, generally the classic sites were avoided. There was a distinct bucolic element in the choreography (emphasis on plants and greenery, on fecundity and the life cycle) as a guarantee of liberation from oppression. But in the major Russian mass spectacles the very sites chosen (the Palace Square, the Stock Exchange) were homologous with the ritual enacted, and they proclaimed that the new regime had occupied the central sites of hegemonic forces, the government and the rentier-mercantilist classes.26 Thus the mass spectacle essentially involved a ritual enactment of transgression, of that crossing of borders that Bakhtin had so loved and Bely and so many others hungered for. Whether choreographed as a vertical or a horizontal progression, the transgression was of the low onto the territory of the high. This same move became a paradigm of revolutionary epiphany for much of Soviet culture to come. Its impact can be seen particularly in films For instance, in Eisenstein's The Battleship Potemkin (1925) the famous massacre on the Odessa steps was arguably a parody of the movement of the oppressed classes up the stairs of the Petrograd Stock Exchange in The Mystery of Liberated Labor (and the later spectacle For A World Commune).27 Indeed, the entire film can be analyzed in terms of the conventions of the mass spectacle and its binary structure.28 The progress of the revolutionary movement was represented not just in spatial terms; in general it was motivated more on a symbolic level than by laws of historical causation. After all, the mass spectacle was a pageant and did not, as in a drama, have much scope for reasoned dialogue (which could in any case not be carried far enough in the open air), although it was not just practical considerations that mitigated against extensive verbalizing in this intensely anti-logocentric time. The symbols used were primarily visual and auditory. For instance, the spread of the red flag, handed from worker to worker, or passed on like a baton from revolutionary movement to revolutionary movement, became the principal motivation for the growth of revolutionary consciousness. The basic division into oppressors and oppressed in these spectacles was not just into two sets of spatial, visual, and auditory symbols, but also into two dramatic modes. The representation of the oppressed was initially realistic, although the oppression was exaggerated to heighten the pathos, but it became ever more elevated as the spectacle progressed. For scenes involving the oppressors, however, the mode was satiric or grotesque. In them, the audience was usually entertained by buffoonery, especially when the ruling classes made their inept attempts at resisting the rebels. For such scenes, directors used the techniques of the commedia dell'arte and the circus. In other words, they followed the tradition of the prerevolutionary experimental theater of Meyerhold or Evreinov, which many of the directors of the mass spectacles had themselves continued in the early postrevolutionary years.29 The heavy stylization and exacting demands of commedia dell'arte acting meant that the binary extended to a total division among participants in a mass spectacle. Those playing the oppressors were professional actors, ballet dancers, or circus people, while the oppressed were the semitrained masses from the worker or army drama circles, or even completely untrained enlisted men. Those playing the oppressors had more individual roles, were more lively and entertaining, had elaborate costumes, and even on occasion wore papier-mâché masks.30 Those playing the oppressed, by contrast, tended to act only in group scenes, usually wore just ragged, grey costumes or drab military uniforms (their color derived from their red flags), and were never made up. Thus, even though the representatives of the oppressor classes were, so to speak, the bad guys, and had to be unceremoniously defeated and evicted from the stage at the end, if one compares the two groups from the point of view of theatricality the bad guys were the privileged ones—the reverse of the pattern in Mayakovsky's Mystery-Bouffe. These mass spectacles were meant to be homogenizing rituals, yet in a way they enacted the very differences between the cultured and the uncultured that they were intended to transcend. This basic opposition in the spectacle amounts to more than just a matter of mode. It reflects the spectacles' dual function as both a celebration of iconoclasm and a ritual legitimization of the status quo. Most mass spectacles began as a celebration of the destruction of the old order. Indeed, one could view their satiric and grotesque sections as a sort of ritual purging on the part of the intelligentsia of the old mercantilist-rentier culture they so despised. When, however, in the mass spectacle the boundaries between low and high in the social order were transgressed, there was no comparable transgression in the area of culture. On the country, the clash between the positive and the negative camps was played out in terms of high and low musical taste; that the exploiters opted for the low (or poorly executed) was the surest sign that they should be supplanted. The class war was conventionally represented as a duel in music: for The Mystery of Liberated Labor, the oppressed classes' signature tune was Chopin's funeral march, while for their oppressors it was gypsy music, but the "heavenly" music issuing from the Kingdom of Freedom was Wagner's"Lohengrin,"which ultimately triumphed over the gypsy music; for The Storming of the Winter Palace there was a duel between the "Marseillaise"(used to represent the Provisional Government), which was played progressively out of tune, and the "Internationale," which drowned out the sounds of the "Marseillaise" in the end. The highbrow prejudices that inform these spectacles are most strongly felt in The Mystery of Liberated Labor, where the group of what the libretto calls "oppressors from all times and all peoples" are depicted from the point of view of an intellectual puritan. The libretto stipulates that various among them should be overweight, drunken, and show signs of "debauchery, depravity, and lechery." Prominent among the oppressors is the so-called king of the Stock Exchange, whose face shows an "intellectual obtuseness and naked greed" and out of whose coat pocket there sticks a large bottle of spirits. The group feasts away in a drunken bacchanalia, for they are anywayindifferent to the heavenly music coming from the Kingdom of Freedom. Their tastes are low-to-middlebrow and oriented toward entertainment rather than culture; they prefer gypsy music (Viennese waltzes in For a World Commune) to Chopin and Wagner! Their retinue of retainers, characterized as "parasites and unprincipled servants of capital," a group comparable with that of the Lumpenproletariat in Marx's Eighteenth Brumaire in which are lumped "the artist, scholar, priest, soldier, sailor, prostitute, entertainer, musician, magician, and satirist," pamper to the oppressors' execrable cultural tastes, which are quintessentially expressed as they "dance around the throne of the bourgeois in a servile cancan"-the fare of the café chantant and the dance particularly despised by Wagner.31 We see here that equation of sexual transgression and cultural impurity that was so frequently part of the intellectuals' call to arms against mercantilist culture. This modal binarism meant that the spectacle accommodated both sides of an important division among theater activists before the Revolution those who, like Meyerhold, wanted grotesque theater and those who saw the regenerated theater as providing monumental and mystical rites— "mysteries," as in the title of the first mass spectacle. The iconoclastic or purging function weakened as a given spectacle progressed, however, and the second function—that of affirming the status quo—took the ascendant. An important dividing line occurred at the moment the Red Army first appeared on stage, a moment generally accompanied by the lighting up of a red star on high or in the East and other such symbolic fanfare. By the finale, the spectacle's most ritualized moment, all traces of the satiric or grotesque had disappeared and the tone ascended into one of elation. Fireworks were ignited and an attempt was made to break down the gulf between actor and spectator in a mass rendering of the "Internationale," generally by audience and actors together. Often there was a military parade as well, with the troops mingling with the audience by marching among them. The best-achieved example of the bonding military parade is to be found in the fourth of the five mass spectacles, an abridged version of For a World Commune. This one was sponsored by the Army Reserves and was staged before new recruits in a natural amphitheater at their base in Krasnoselsk, outside Petrograd, the aim being to prepare the recruits by means of this "audio-visual aid" for their imminent military operations against the Polish. Since the audience was made up entirely of the military, its members joined the soldier-actors for the parade at the finale, leaving no one among the spectators. Then truly could Kerzhentsev have claimed that the audience could say not "I came to see the spectacle," but "I went to participate in the spectacle." But how much like a "carnival" was this kind of mass spectacle? To what extent do these occasions really represent spontaneous iconoclastic rituals or joyous mass celebrations? René Fülöp-Miller in his contemporaneous account of these spectacles has described them in fact in quite the opposite terms—as joyless events, totally mechanical in their execution, and in which the impersonal mass has triumphed.32 In reality, these spectacles were neither particularly spontaneous nor totally joyless and mechanical. The mass spectacle was not the child of October, but had been a feature of both Russian and Western theatrical life over the precedingdecades. It had been used primarily to reinforce the status quo through the patriotic historical drama or a pageant celebrating the founding of a city. In America, where it was particularly popular earlier in the twentieth century, it was called the civic theater. In fact in 1916 as Yale was celebrating its bicentenary, there were Evreinov take note—more people gathered on the green in the shadow of its ivy-covered walls to act out a mass spectacle celebrating "for God, for country, and for Yale"—7,000 in fact—than were to gather on the Palace Square four vears later in 1920 to stand for Bolshevism, Soviet power, and Lenin (incidentally, Kerzhentsev cited the Yale spectacle as a possible model for the Bolsheviks in The Creative Theater).33 But Imperial Russia had been active in this area, too. For instance, in 1912 A. Ya. Alekseyev-Yakovlev had staged a mass spectacle about Yermak's conquest of Siberia which proved so successful that the following August he put on The Fall of Azov on a lake in a Petersburg park intended to "illuminate in the minds of the working people some moments from Russian history." This spectacle attracted an audience—at 194,000, considerably larger than the 100,000 who came to see The Storming of the Winter Palace.34Radlov must have remembered these successes because when he came to stage The Blockade of Russia (also on a lake in a park) he used Alekseyev-Yakovlev as a consultant.35Indeed, after the February Revolution the same combination as later staged The Storming of the Winter Palace—Evreinov as director and Yu. Annenkov as artistic director— worked on a mass spectacle in celebration of the French Revolution.36 In revolutionary Russia, the aim of the mass spectacle as centerpiece of the theater of mass participation was to relive the Revolution, but the Revolution meant two contradictory things. It meant, on the one hand, the moment in a status quo-affirming myth of origins, and thus the Revolution was comparable to, for instance, the founding of the city, a favorite subject in American civic theater. On the other hand, it meant an iconoclastic act. Thus the directors of a mass spectacle of 1920 sought both to relive the very moment of historical revolution (hence, for instance. a reenactment of the actual storming of the Winter Palace) and to revive the pathos of revoiution, its élan, and its collectivist, iconoclastic spirit. But the Revolution was already three years old in 1920. Theoreticians like Kerzhentsev might have inspired intellectuals to seek to realize a "festival of pure joy and boundless merriment" by staging spectacles in which thousands of nonprofessional actors from workers' clubs would improvise together, but this ideal eluded implementation. Doubtless, The Storming of the Winter Palace was more perfectly executed in 1920 than it had been in 1917, and yet it was less "revolutionary" and some of the spontaneity and pathos were lost. The actual directors of the mass spectacle subscribed to a vision of its function in the future society that was no less utopian than Kerzhentsev's, but they believed at the same time that a mass spectacle demands above all control and planning. As Piotrovsky concluded, "You cannot have a ritual without regimentation."37 The mass spectacles were regimented—highly organized and virtually militarized. They were organized by special troikas and committees set up for this purpose, some by the military, some by the local Soviets, some by the Provincial Department of Political Enlightenment (Gubpolitprosvet).38 Indeed, presentations of mass spectacles in the West reached their height during World War I largely because it was only in wartime conditions that it was possible to mobilize the huge numbers of people, transportation, and so forth required.39 Similarly, the peak period for mass spectacles in revolutionary Russia was that moment when the Civil War in European Russia was winding down, when the troops were less engaged at the front, but before they were demobilized. Piotrovsky himself developed a system for organizing all the participants in spectacles into groups of ten arranged in an elaborate pyramid structure at the apex of which stood the directors, who were situated physically apart from the actors. Radlov, his usual co-director, ecstatically recalled in a later article how he directed operations by telephone so that a mere press of the button or brief command over the wires would unleash an attack by thousands or a barrage of canon fire; he called this, in an obvious allusion to Lenin's panacea for the backwardness of Russia, "the electrification of the theater."40 But this also meant the directorization of theatricality. Thus the mass spectacle may have been a theater without footlights, but it was certainly not a theater without telephone lines. It may have represented the democratization of the theater in that the masses and the professional actor alike participated in it, but this democratization was illusory, for the god-director, invisible to the spectator and set apart from the actors, directed every movement on the stage, almost as the puppeteer pulls the strings for his puppets. Piotrovsky had demanded in an article of that year "dictatorship" in the theater, and in a sense his ideal had been realized. It was, however, not just the need for organization that threatened the revolutionary nature of the mass spectacle. One also has to question how iconoclastic its function really was. Essentially, the intellectuals who staged these spectacles wanted less to "destroy the past" than to replace one set of cultural myths from it with a new set, which happened to come largely from the past, too. The mass spectacle was an exercise in creating a new identity for the nation by reference to past models. ## The New Historical Paradigms In 1913 there had been rival accounts of the past, but in Petersburg liberal intellectuals saw Russia's identity primarily in terms of a tradition established by Peter the Great for secularizing, modernizing, and Europeanizing Russia. Proponents of these values frequently singled out the Neoclassical or Empire style in architecture as emblematic of them. Thus Russia's cultural identity implicitly stretched back to ancient Greece. For the Bolsheviks, however, the primary historical referents, or great ages in the past to be resurrected in greater glory through their revolutionary work, were more recent and French—the French Revolution and the Paris Commune of 1871. Of the two French revolutions, the first had been the greater source of models for those who staged the mass spectacles. Indeed, the very fact that the storming of the Winter Palace was singled out as the iconic moment for the mass spectacle is symptomatic of this. This storming had not in fact been either the most climactic or the most heroic moment in the 1917 Revolution, but it lent itself to becoming the moment because it could be seen as Russia's analogue to the storming of the Bastille (it is of course also true that practical considerations led to the choice of the vast Palace Square as a site for mass spectacles). However, Marx, Engels, and Lenin had singled out the Paris Commune as the great harbinger of future revolution because, in their view, the Commune was the embodiment of the principle of the dictatorship of the proletariat; the French Revolution, dramatic and laudable as it was, was still only a bourgeois revolution.41 At this time, however, Bolshevik accounts of the Paris Commune did not always stress the aspects of class struggle and dictatorship. In more leftist formulations of Marxism-Leninism, including even Lenin's own State and Revolution of 1917, the commune as the city controlled by the Soviet became a symbol for participatory democracy by the masses and as su as cear. a precedent for the movement for a theater of mass participation. For most Russian intellectuals, however, the true geneaiogy o: the mass spectacle extended back in time beyond the Paris Cormune. the French Revolution, and even the writings of Jean Jacques Rousseau. which had inspired much of the cultural work of the first French Revolution (Rousseau as refracted through the recent works of Romain Rolland and Julien Thiersot that had influenced the Russians' work on their own spectacles).42 It began in ancient Greece. The open-air theater of Greece had been an ideal for Rousseau, and a point of reference for those who organized the festivals of the French Revolution as well as for Nietzsche and for many of the theater activists. As these disparate sources suggest, there were many "Greeces." Since well before the Revolution, Russian intellectuals had been in the grip of a Greek revival that had swept Europe in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. One need only recall the figure of Isadora Duncan, who in bare feet and Greek tunic captivated audiences in the salons of Europe-and Russia. Nowhere was the Greek ideal more often a referent than in writings about the mass spectacle, which was interpreted as a veritable reincarnation of the Greek theater in that performances were in the open air and used masks and a chorus. In revolutionary Russia, Nietzsche's followers seized on the open-air Greek theater as a place where all classes might commune in harmony and have the ecstatic or mystical experience of the Dionysian rite. It might seem incongruous or foolhardy to impose this open-air Greek ideal in Petrograd, where the summers are so short and the winters so severe, but if Petersburg had long been declared the Venice of the North, why should it not become the Athens, too? It was not so much the superficial trappings of the Greek theater, such as the tunics, that theatrical directors sought to revive—that was in fact done more in the spectacles of the French Revolution. Rather, they wanted to revive a distinctive ethos that they saw as vital, but now lost. This ethos included a true sense of community, and the subordination of the individual to the common good, as well as the emphasis on mass participation. These values more or less coincided with those of the Bolsheviks. Indeed Bolshevik intellectuals sometimes invoked ancient Athens and the Hellenic as models for the Communist ethos, although, as was also true of the French revolutionaries, their model from the classical era was more often Sparta. Actually, those who ran the various mass spectacles of 1920 were quite variegated in their backgrounds. For example, Dmitry Tyomkin, or "Comrade Tyomkin," of the Petrograd Military District's troika for organizing mass agitation among the soldiers was a graduate of the Petersburg Conservatory. A director of both The Mystery of Liberated Labor and The Storming of the Winter Palace, he is perhaps better known to us (in his postemigration phase) as the composer of music for such films as Tales from the Vienna Woods—with its Strauss Waltzes!—and that great spectacle of American national myth High Noon. In general, however, members of the teams that ran these spectacles represented one of three orientations. On the one hand, there were artists associated with the Neoclassical revival, such as M. Dobuzhinsky, I. A. Fomin, and V. A. Shchuko. In fact, Fomin created on Stone Island (renamed the Island of Marvels) a new amphitheater for mass spectacles stylized along classical Greek lines.43 On the other, there were theater directors of the Meyerhold or Evreinov schools, including N. V. Petrov, N. V. Soloviev, Yu. Annenkov, S. Radlov, A. Piotrovsky, and Evreinov himself. The most consistently represented group, however, was those who saw their own work as recapturing some version of Hellas. In fact even Evreinov—not himself a disciple of anyone, to be sure-was at about the time he was preparing The Storming of the Winter Palace at work on his own scholarly writings, in which he investigated the origins of Greek tragedy in the satyr play, an issue that had become important in the wake of Nietzsche's writings.44 Sergei Radlov and Adrian Piotrovsky, though former disciples of Meverhold who now ran an extremely popular experimental theater in Petrograd, were at the same time disciples of the principal local guru of the Nietzschean revival, Faddey Zelinsky, an extremely popular and influential professor of Classics at Petrograd University.45 When Isadora Duncan came to Petersburg to dance in 1913, it was Zelinsky who introduced her performances. He had also been, since before the Revolution, the leader of a movement to revive the Greek theater in open-air performances for the populace and the moving force behind the journal Hermes, the movement's mouthpiece. Piotrovsky and Radlov themselves contributed to Hermes, translated Greek plays, and pursued their interests in classical scholarship. And yet these zealots of Greek revival were the most active of all in the agitational theater, writing and directing both mass dramas and mass spectacles, training Red Army and Navy recruits to act and direct, writing about the spectacles, and serving on various bodies set up to oversee mass propaganda. Piotrovsky directed the Krasnoselsk mass spectacle, which was overwhelmingly military and propagandistic. It would be tempting to assume that this apparent split personality serving scholarship and culture, on the one hand, and the Party's propaganda effort on the other—resulted from the necessity of earning enough to keep starvation at bay in these extraordinary times. or responding to political pressures, while the scholarship and work in the regular theater represented Radlov and Piotrovsky's true vocation. But both these directors actually believed they were getting closer to the spirit of their beloved Hellenic Greece with their work on the mass spectacles than they could with any translation of actual Greek texts. Their ideal was not to revive Greece, per se, but to found a greater "Greece" than had been achieved in antiquity. An article by Piotrovsky of November 7, 1920 (on the eve of the reenactment of the storming of the Winter Palace), catches the pathos of their vision of a transhistorical ethos, unbounded by time and space. Piotrovsky talks in extravagant terms, in some respects reminiscent of the later rhetoric of High Stalinism, about the "New Man" who is "slowly being born" in "a new generation of the October Revolution that speaks with a loud voice and has a vision that knows no bounds and a will that cannot be broken. It is a generation of giants who breach the abysses of timelessness to join forces with their forebears in Greece [and the Renaissance]." "The twenty-fifth of October," he declares, "has given the world back Aeschylus and the Renaissance. It has given birth to a generation with Aeschylus' fiery soul."46 Piotrovsky and Radlov's sense of mission can be seen in one of their first collaborative projects in the Soviet theater, a play entitled The Battle of Salamis, which they wrote together for schoolchildren, drawing on sources from Herodotus, Thucydides, and Aeschylus, and which Radlov directed in 1919.47 The authors declared that their aim in staging this play was to work for a theater of the future. They were eager for the young to learn from the "talking past," but of course they wanted a particular lesson to be learned from the story of the battle, which they saw as "the triumph of spiritual forces over the material"—in other words, they reversed here the Bolshevik order of priorities. The play showed its audience "the struggle of Hellenism against the brute power of the Persians," and later "the awakening of consciousness in Hellas as a cradle of culture."48 The Battle of Salamis, then, though not a mass spectacle, was comparable with one in that it was a play about a great historical time. And like a mass spectacle, it showed the necessity of battle in preserving a superior civilization. We might see in the revolutionary mass spectacle incongruity between its iconoclastic and its military-cum-ceremonial elements, but this incongruity did not exist in the eyes of directors like Radlov and Piotrovsky, for whom the two elements were integral, if distinct, parts of the whole. The informing model that inspired these two, and many other theater reformers in these years, can be sensed in Piotrovsky's remarks from an article of September 1920 entitled "The Artist and His Patron." Here he makes the claim that both ancient Athens and the Renaissance did not know the distinction between the poet and the masses, for then the artist "knew well his social value as he fulfilled the orders of his people." "Such an artist," Piotrovsky continues, "knew his place within the walls of his city. And the city gave its artist all the inspiration of its collective heart, together with all the many and varied resources and manpower needed for decorating the city's festivals. The wise patron and the responsive artist were the enabling antithesis of all the creative epochs in the history of art." But—and this is Piotrovsky's particular version of the fall from wholeness—"the philistinism of the last century transferred the center of power from the town hall to the stock exchange and substituted commerce for art so that ordering a piece of art became a matter of buying a ready-made [shades of Benjamin]."49 The ideal that informed so much of the artistic activity in civil war Petrograd, then, was that of a hermetic city-state in which artists were at one with their government—a polis—Petropolis, if you will, as the city had so often been called over the past decade by intellectuals inspired by a Hellenic ideal. The city was seen as united against the philistines, the uncultured ones (as the Athenians had been united against the "crude" Persians at Salamis). These philistines would sully the city's purity and unity with the rentiermercantilist spirit; they would degrade its fine culture with those "servile cancans." The great ages of the past such as ancient Greece and the Renaissance had featured city-states like Athens, Venice, and Florence. Petrograd, as a"commune,"was in the eyes of these intellectuals a sort of modern, socialistic version of the old city-state. The next step-the move to a world commune—would entail expanding that model to embrace the entire world. In the meantime, Petropolis was a besieged city, an island surrounded by a sea of marauding mercantilist forces who threatened it. That is, in effect, the meaning of the Civil War, the Foreign Intervention, and the Blockade. The defense of the polis takes on crucial importance, as it does in so many utopian works. Thus military maneuvers in the mass spectacle are not a concession to the powers that be but rather an ineluctable aspect of the genre. Of course the ideal city or polis that the Petrograd intellectuals had in mind is not really a civil state in the sense that the entire rationale for its being is aesthetic rather than at all practical. In 1920 Piotrovsky called for establishing a "theatocracy."50 One senses the dead hand of Nietzsche in these ideals except, of course, that when Nietzsche's Zarathustra wanted aesthetic or intellectual sustenance he would take himself away from the city and into the "thin air" of a mountain wilderness. There was no lack of "thin air" in the myth of Petropolis. The grit, the smoke, and the bustle of Russia's industrial capital and major port evaporated in that vision. The image of Greece and the Renaissance on which it was based was illusory. Piotrovsky and company would fain keep commerce out of their city and yet the model cities they chose as historical paradigms'very might and power as patrons of the arts were a function of it; surely the Peloponnesian war and the battle of Salamis were less about a struggle between the civilized and the philistines—which the Persians were far from being anyway and Piotrovsky as a classical scholar must have known that—than they were about a struggle for trade advantage. The ideal that inspired those who directed the mass spectacles of revolutionary Petrograd did not derive from the actual Greek polis, but rather from a German dream of Greek wholeness, which they had found in Nietzsche and other German thinkers popular at the time, but more directly in the works of Zelinsky and Vyacheslav Ivanov, both of whom were Germantrained. More than a hundred years of German scholarship had celebrated the idea of the Greeks as the last whole society. Just as Hegel believed that we have fallen into a period of alienation and must regain wholeness (the kind of historical analysis taken up by Dostoevsky and others who saw it as Russia's unique mission to restore it), the directors of the mass spectacle were inspired by the dream of a renewed Einheit, a cosmic reunification, in which the people, the artists, and their patrons would be at one again and all would participate in the commmon weal. The Bolshevik slogan "All Power to the Soviets" takes on new meaning here as a dream of the people taking over the city again. The mass spectacle was an attempt to find an analogue for the epic or tragedy in Greek society. It was to involve a mythicization of the great bonding events in the lives of the people—even of all people. The spectacle presented, in capsule version, a "living" account of the history of these events culminating in the moment when the people reclaimed the city. Thus The Storming of the Winter Palace represents the storming, by the people, of the citadel of an alien, bourgeois state. The myth of Petersburg, the teachings of Nietzsche and Wagner, and Lenin's State and Revolution all came together for a glorious finale. ## Tatlin's Monument The November 7th anniversary in Petrograd in 1920 marks the height of revolutionary utopianism in the period of War Communism. Not only was The Storming of the Winter Palace staged, a climax of the movement for a people's theater, but the model and designs for Tatlin's Monument to the Third International were put on display as well. This monument was never built (the feasibility of its design was questioned by engineers from the very beginning), but throughout the 1920s (and to a lesser extent since) it has functioned among Constructivists and other avant-gardists, both in Russia and at places such as the Bauhaus in Germany, as the icon of revolutionary avant-gardism. Tatlin's Monument, familiarly known as his "tower," was a megastructure of iron and glass in which three huge glass geometric volumes, stacked one on the other, were cased in a complex system of iron vertical pivots and spirals that thrust up at an acute angle from the ground. The glass volumes were all to rotate, but each at a different speed. The lowest one, a cube, was intended for legislative use and was to complete one rotation per year; it was to house conferences of the International, and other large legislative meetings. The middle one, a pyramid, which was to complete one rotation per month, was intended for use by executive and administrative bodies of the International. The highest glass volume, a cylinder, was to complete one rotation per day and was to function as a center for information and agitation; it was to include a news bureau, a newspaper, publishing offices that would put out proclamations, brochures, and manifestoes, a telegraph, a projector for a large screen, and a radio station whose antennae would rise above the monument.51 Superficially, Tatlin's tower and the mass spectacles of 1920 might seem to represent different series. The spectacles were an event in theater while the tower was an event in art and architecture. The spectacles were clearly influenced by Nietzsche and Wagner, and proclaimed a lineage that stretched from ancient Greece to the present, but Tatlin's tower was intended to break with such traditions. Nikolai Punin, one of its principal champions and a head of IZO, its sponsor, proclaimed in a pamphlet published at the time to explicate the tower's significance that such a revolutionary venture could only appear then because, with the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the classical tradition of figural statuary and the Renaissance have been reduced to "ashes"and "the charred ruins of Europe are only now being cleared."52 In terms of the major concerns here, however, the mass spectacle and the tower can be seen as closely related because both these products of revolutionary utopianism entail the sacerdotalization of space and highly ritualized movement through it. It could be said that Tatlin's tower derives its inspiration from the mass spectacle or even provides a way to make that spectacle permanent. Tatlin's tower represents a new concept of the monument not just in the sense that it is nonfigural. In the first flush of iconoclasm after the Revolution, the old tsarist statues had been pulled down and replaced with avant-gardist ones, but these were still statues in the corventional sense of objects of contemplation intended to remind the contempiator of some historicopolitical or aesthetic value. Tatlin, however, like the directors of the mass spectacle (and the movement for a peoples' theater), broke down the boundary separating"viewing subject"from "work of art" so that the subject could penetrate beyond that boundary into a special space (art). Punin in his pamphlet said, in a formulation that could be taken as a virtual paraphrase of the views of Piotrovsky and others on the role of art in the polis, "The monument must live the sociopolitical life of the city and the city must live in the monument."53 Also, both the mass spectacle and the tower use a hierarchical pattern of spaces; in the case of the mass spectacle, the highest stage is the space of the oppressors that the mob occupies, but in the case of the tower it is the space of agitation, or in other words of new-age art. In Punin's account of the tower, one finds notions of purification of space and transcending the profane, which were so defining of intellectual ventures at this time. He insists that the fact that the inner structures of the tower are of glass "signifies the purity of their initiatives, which have been freed of any material dead weight."54 Punin interprets the spiral, the tower's principal figure of the modules' steel casing, as "the line of movement of a liberated mankind. It is the ideal expression of emancipation; it rears from the ground, escapes from the world, and rises as if a beacon dispelling all that which is motivated by the bestial and mundane or self-serving toadyism."55 As such, it transcends the spirit of "petty-bourgeois life," providing a "liberated life [that] rises above the earth, above the humdrum, materialistic world" (with its shops and so forth).56 In this respect, of course, the tower project also participates in the dreams of the perceptual millenarians and other Russian visionaries of "leaving all" and going out into space.57 Tatlin's tower can be seen as a belated expression of the "campaign against Paris" that the members of the Petersburg group Union of Youth (to which Tatlin then belonged) undertook circa 1913. It is patently conceived against the Eiffel Tower, which had, until that point, functioned as an icon of avant-gardism and architectural épatage. Tatlin's tower was to be much larger than the Eiffel Tower, but it also had the potential of a perverse antimonument that resisted being symmetrical or vertical (as the Eiffel Tower is); it was to be placed at some arbitrary angle to the ground, though some have interpreted its placing as suggesting a telescope strained on the heavens or a rocket launcher. Thus Tatlin's tower presents the paradox of monumental antimonumentalism. Of course, had the principles of its creation been adopted as canonical (as Tatlin, Punin, and others hoped at the time), the paradox would have been resolved. The utopianism of the project consists not just in its possible lack of feasibility, but also in the way it was originally conceived without a specific location. Tatlin was not sure whether it would be erected in Moscow, or Petrograd, or elsewhere, and it was only after he received a commission that it became a monument specifically for the Third International with a probable site in Petrograd. He also toyed with the idea that in Petrograd it might span the Neva River; as it were, he would be outdoing Peter in taming wild nature with culture. The tower was a monument to and for revolution in culture and stands from our present perspective as both a summa and an end of revolutionary utopianism. It is important to note that the basic pattern of movement anticipated in the project is not the centrifugal dash out, the smashing of bounds, but rather the movement in to an enclosed space (no matter how transparent), and its rhythms (revolutions in the original sense) are to be absolutely regular. In this respect, the tower points the way forward to Constructivism—whose icon it became—and to the patterns of spatial movement that were defining of the next phase in the development of Soviet culture.