# NEP AND THE "ART OFCAPITULATION" In the Spring of 1922, a new magazine of the avant-garde, Veshch'/ Gegenstand/Objet (the Object), edited by El Lissitzky and I. Ehrenburg, began publishing out of Berlin. The journal was intended to realize the quixotic dream nurtured by the left artists under the Blockade that they could found an international avant-garde in the arts: although on its pages articles in Russian predominated, some were in French or German, and there were contributions from some leading Western intellectuals as well, including Le Corbusier. The lead article in its initial issue, under the banner title "The Blockade of Russia Is Ending," proclaimed the principles of the Constructivist movement and anticipated a new phase in the avant-garde's history. Yet there were signs in its articles that the journal arose less out of new beginnings than out of the threat of endings. In the next issue, under the title "The Rear Guard Triumphant," the main editorial noted with some bitterness the recent rise in Russia of an "art of capitulation." During the last year, it claimed, there had been a sudden and major shift (perelom) in Soviet culture: state art had been killed, so-called academic art (such as the World of Art set and the Moscow Arts Theater) now flourished under "bourgeois" patronage. The proletariat had not been able to develop their own style, and the main emphasis was now on the reactionary peasant, on an art that was "narrowly nationalistic," "superficially religious," and "traditional." The new art of capitulation was said to reflect the aesthetic tastes and lazy preference for accessibility of that favorite bugbear of intellectuals, the petty entrepreneur. The deplorable decline was epitomized in a formulation quoted from an article of that year by Piotrovsky: "We had Shakespeare in January, but got the café chatant in December."2 Of course what had happened between January and December of 1921 was that a New Economic Policy (NEP) had been introduced in March that permitted the return of limited private enterprise. In cultural life, NEP policies translated into the return of private publishing houses, theaters—and cafés chantants. Because market forces were given play once more, the NEP period, which stretched from 1921 until around 1927 when the shift to a planned, state-monopoly economy was announced, has often been seen in the West as ushering in a period of relative cultural pluralism, something closer to "normal" Western intellectual life, and hence a good time.3 It should not be forgotten, however, that Glavlit, the principal Soviet censorship agency through the late 1980s, was founded in June 1922. Indeed, recent findings suggest that the state was more interventionist in the area of culture—through censorship and other means such as interfering in paper allocation—than was previously believed.4 Some historians have even seen 1921 not as a turn to pluralism but as the death date for the great prerevolutionary cultural flowering that did not survive the witches'cauldron into which all the contradictory forces of prerevolutionary Russia were plunged in the Revolution and its aftermath.⁵ Ironically, the sense that all was lost in 1921 was also felt at the time by some revolutionary zealots who saw the market as a devil incarnate and simply could not accept the betrayal of NEP; some writers left the Party in protest. By no means should all changes that occurred in these years be attributed to NEP. It was not even really the case that in culture NEP represents a single period; a significant shift occurred around 1924-1925(see Chapter 8). Although it is true that, for instance, several of the relatively modest private publishing houses in Petrograd that were established as a result of NEP policies made significant contributions to intellectual life, the majority of them existed in little more than name.6 Private publishing houses came into existence at a time when most intellectuals could not afford to buy books; the price of books in Petrograd had just gone up 300 percent,7 and during NEP publishing costs, paper shortages, unemployment among intellectuals, and heavy taxation ensured that they progressively dwindled and were effectively eliminated well before the Plan began.8 Moreover, "freedom" had its flip side, which is implicitly mentioned in the Veshch' lament—massive withdrawal of state subsidies. NEP saw tremendous unemployment among intellectuals; by July of 1923 the local branch of Sorabis (the Union of Cultural Workers) was reporting that sixteen hundredof its members were out of work.9 Elsewhere, I have characterized the NEP period as the era of "quiet revolution" in the sense that, by contrast with the superficially more revolutionary period of War Communism, it saw a fundamentai shift in the patterns and personnel of intellectual life, a shift that extended even to the characteristic genres.10 New faces came to dominate the cultural scene, along with new literary groupings and new institutions; most of those groups that had been prominent under War Communism, while generally not disbanded as yet, were no longer the groups of the hour."1Not all these changes proved enduring,12 but what emerged during the 1930s as Stalinist culture was largely prefigured at this time (although its contours are more evident ex post facto than they were in the 1920s). NEP played no small part in precipitating this shift. With so many state subsidies cut, the house of cards that such powerful patrons as Gorky had set up for the intellectual community began to fall. When citizens had to pay more to see plays, buy books and newspapers, and so on, many theaters and periodicals closed down virtually overnight. In addition, as Narkompros's budget was cut drastically, and as most of the soldiers were demobilized and the need for a mass cultural effort among them diminished, many of the committees on which the intellectual mandarins sat were closed or superseded by new committees. Such events effected a reshuffling of the cultural power structure. The Party and Komsomol now began to play a more direct role as funders and overseers—patrons—within culture (except in scholarship, where state institutions still played the decisive role). The Party leadership did not direct Soviet cultural life, although some members (Trotsky, Nikolai Bukharin) began to pronounce on it more often. But during NEP the Party functioned increasingly as the body that intellectuals petitioned (see Chapter 8), while the Komsomol emerged as the principal patron of proletarian cultural endeavors. The Veshch' editorial's analysis of who was to be the winner in this shift around 1921 and who was to be the loser was a little premature. The movement the journal favored, Constructivism, was not to lose out as it feared but would dominate Soviet architecture and the applied arts for the rest of the decade, while the triumph of peasant culture was short-lived.13 But its author was not wrong in concluding that 1921 had seen a major shift in Soviet cultural life; that shift could be characterized very loosely in terms of another of the victors it nominated, academic art. ## The Return to Normalcy If one were to seek a formula to account for the many changes that took place in Soviet culture from around 1921, a good starting point would be the capsule characterization of the movement during War Communism for a people's theater made many years later by one of its most zealous activists, A. A. Mgebrov, the leader of a Proletcult theater studio in Petrograd for most of that period: "We fervently sought to break out of the kitchens of the past into the vast expanses and vistas of the coming future. Oh, how we yearned to smash and destroy the narrow, stuffy boxes of the old theater stage and in their place erect huge, free squares to which we might summon not tens but thousands of new, strong, and mighty people."14 In this quotation, we see values iconic of the cultural ethos of War Communism: iconoclasm (smash, destroy), gigantomania (not tens, but thousands), and the hunger for conquering time. But what is most defining is the move out of the "kitchen"/ "box" into the "huge, free squares." The box had been the favorite metaphor of theater activists since well before the Revolution for representing the bourgeois theater as a confining space and a limiting, nondemocratic aesthetic. But why the kitchens? Arguably, this is a reference to Lenin's famous dictum “Every [female] cook will rule the state" ("Kazhdaya kukharka upravlyaet gosudarstvom"), his analogue to those lines from the "Internationale" much quoted here: "He who was naught shall be all." The female, as distinct from male, cook, virtually a scullery maid, stood close to the bottom of the social, economic, and educational hierarchies of prerevolutionary urban Russia, but she would be elevated to a hegemonic position. Mgebrov, in drawing a homology between the kitchens and the boxes (theaters), is identifying the movement for theater reform with that for socioeconomic bouleversement; he sees the two purposes as accomplished in the one act. The two points of origin, the kitchens and the boxes, placed as they are in apposition, are represented as functionally identical. In this respect, Mgebrov typified the expectations and policies of that firebrand time to which he looked back with nostalgia. Starting around 1921, one finds a retreat from the "huge, free squares" into the "boxes" and "kitchens,"both literally and metaphorically. This movement defines a retreat from the utopian ideals of War Communism or, as the Veshch'article labeled it, a shift to an art of capitulation. One can see this retreat most literally in the case of the mass spectacle. In 1921 a new official policy was promulgated whereby the mass spectacle was to be scaled down, to be taken from those huge, free squares in a city's center to more modest suburban or factory venues and probably indoors.15 But it was not just the venue that was changed; the whole conception of the spectacle was rethought. Now the core of all mass theater activities was to be the Unified Artistic Circle (Yedinyy Khudozhestvennyy Kruzhok, or YeKhK). Piotrovsky was one of the theoreticians of the Unified Artistic Circle, and in its conception there is an echo of Naes (the word yedinyy is often the one used for the Gerar : : :uss:ons of Wagner's ideas—yet another instance where ransiatier :s eectiveiv recoding).16 The Unified Artistic Circles, to be set up for workers in factories and city districts, were to comprise a number of subgroups in each of which participants would develop a particular specialization such as acting, choral work, or physical culture; these subgroups would be brought together or "unified" to stage skits (instsenirovki), especially for local celebrations of the great revolutionary anniversaries. In other words, they would perform shorter and less ambitious works than were typical of mass theatrical work under War Communism. This scaling down of the mass festival represents an accommodation to the realities of NEP, when the state and municipal budgets for cultural activities were reduced and, the conscripts for the Civil War having been demobilized, it was harder to organize the casts of thousands that had been a feature of the mass spectacle during 1920. However, it is also symptomatic of the general shift to greater cultural differentiation. That earlier tension between the need to use professionals and the demands of Kerzhentsev and others for a purely amateur mass theater was, during NEP, resolved by increasing apartheid. The professionals returned to the theaters from whence they had come, taking with them some of the conventions of the mass spectacle such as the placard and poster (ROSTA was closed and the heyday of the revolutionary poster was over).17 Once the mass spectacle retreated from the squares, one division of its personnel went to the "kitchens" (factory or local workers' cultural clubs), the other to its "box" (highbrow cultural institutions). Spokesmen for the proletarian theater advocated such a division.18 Figures such as Piotrovsky, who had played a major role in the people's theater and the mass spectacles of War Communism, believing that the "boxes" and the "kitchens" (or shackles of class and education) could be smashed with that one blow of cultural revolution, began to run parallel but separate operations in this period. As it were, these theater activists recreated a version of the Meyerhold /Dr. Dapertutto split that their mentor had been obliged to maintain in civil service Petersburg. Piotrovsky as chief spokesman and proselytizer for the theory of the Unified Artistic Circle, and a godfather to several workers' theaters, was now, if anything, a more powerful figure than before in the movement to create a theater for the masses (for some of this period he was head of the Artistic Section of the Regional Council of Politprosvet19) yet he was effectively operating with a double standard: he played an active part in the highbrow theater's appropriation of German Expressionism, while for his workers' circles he advocated the skit and drawing on native Russian folk traditions.20 This greater social differentiation within culture is not to be associated with theater activists alone. Even Lunacharsky's statements of this period draw a distinction between great art and agitational art and thus seem to legitimize a sort of two-tiered culture.21 Moreover, in terms of funding for theater, state subsidies went to the academic (former Imperial) theaters while studios for the workers or mass theaters subsisted unfunded in basements or wandered homeless from venue to venue.22 The avant-garde artists of War Communism had also been committed to taking art out of the "boxes" ("Let the streets be our palettes!" was a characteristic slogan). But during NEP—in Petrograd especially—they were no longer in commanding positions and retreated from the "streets" to a museum and a scholarly institute, that is, to the Museum of Artistic Culture (founded in 1921) and the Institute for Artistic Culture, or GINKhUK (founded in 1923), two related bodies housed together. The Petrograd GINKhUK, often called the Myatlev House after the mansion in which the two were located, was run by such giants of the Petrograd art world under War Communism as Tatlin and Punin. It was also Malevich's base during NEP and the place where he, Matyushin, and their disciples continued their experimental work on color and perception. Thus, those iconoclasts who had sought to"dynamite" the academy had retreated to academic institutions. As all parties previously united in the cause of a mass culture of the "squares" retreated to their own boxes, this meant in effect greater specialization. Thus, for instance, the Petrograd GINKhUK no longer claimed to be "the ecumenical council of all the arts," with technology and science thrown in for good measure, as had Malevich's more utopian Suprematist organization UNOVIS, but pursued relatively specialized projects.23 The theater and the avant-garde artists' retreat back from the streets and into closed premises was part of a general trend toward the cameraization of culture. Whereas under War Communism culture had been to a greater extent than ever before part of the public domain, now much of the creative effort was centered away from the streets and also away from the major public institutions. An example of this decline in the public sphere is the reduced significance of the university in most fields compared with the specialized research institute (this remained generally true of Soviet intellectual life until the late 1980s, when it was re-evaluated). To some extent, the decline was due to upheavals and political vicissitudes. During NEP, Petrograd University saw an almost unending series of reorganizations: one dav a pau.ar facuity was added to the university, the next it was rehoused esewherehen :: was amalgamated with other faculties, and finally it was aboiishedThe traditional humanist disciplines were combined with others in a Faculty of Material Culture with a strong sociological/ political emphasis and a roster of compulsory courses. In addition, official policy required the university to admit more students of proletarian background or with Party or Komsomol allegiance, and a separate Workers' Faculty was founded in 1919 as a sort of preparatory division that gave the uneducated masses a chance to enter higher education.25 Many of these policies were laudable (given society's past inequalities), and some leading academics gave generously of their time to serve the new age, but these policies also made it more difficult to maintain standards within many disciplines. In consequence, the major intellectual debates and theoretical work were in these years largely focused in semi-independent institutes with a small and more elitist student body, or none at all, and in which the leading scholars of the decade tended to hold positions (though many simultaneously held positions at the university). In some instances, these debates were held in unofficial fora, such as the Bakhtin Circle.26 A prime example of the semi-independent institute is the State Institute for the History of the Arts, henceforth to be known by its initials GIII, which saw its heyday during NEP, when it was the most lively center of non-Marxist endeavor in the arts and humanities and thus the most important scholarly institution for the purposes of this book. Originally founded in 1912 by Count Zubov, who essentially gave over his own mansion and considerable library as a private center of study where lectures were arranged, the Institute had been somewhat aristocratic.27 Before the Revolution both Zubov and the Institute were closely associated with Retrospectivism and the movement for founding a ministry of culture. However, after the Institute was accredited by Lunacharsky in 1920, and began to accept students for tertiary courses in 1922, it took on a life of its own. The Department of Fine Arts remained largely a bastion of the Retrospectivists, but other departments became centers for forging new cultural theory and practice. Its Division of the Verbal Arts (founded in 1920) became an enclave of the Formalists where Yury Tynyanov, Boris Eikhenbaum, Shklovsky, and V. V. Vinogradov lectured.28 The Division for the History and Theory of the Theater (also founded in 1920), where V. N. Soloviev, A. Piotrovsky, and several other theater activists taught, was no mere dry academic center but a major player in the movement for theater reform; plays were frequently produced there, and whenever Meyerhold's troupe visited Leningrad it was the place to which he gravitated to discuss his latest work. Additionally, the Division for the Theory and History of Music under B. Asafiev played a crucial role in introducing contemporary music to Leningrad and, together with the Theater Division, working out a theory of the kind of new opera pioneered by Shostakovich (see Chapter 9).29 The Institute's lecture series gave a public forum to some of the most serious minds of the decade; many of the major Formalist writings were aired in this way.30In addition, GIII maintained a close relationship with the artists working in the Myatlev House (GINKhUK), its neighbor. GIII had a Moscow counterpart, the State Academy of Artistic Culture, or GAKhN, which, similarly, maintained close relations with that city's INKhUK.31 When cultural life retreated toward its "boxes,"one saw a return to something like normalcy, to something closer to the past intellectual life of the citv. Around 1922 many of the old academic and professional associations and journals emerged as it were from the rubble of revolution and civil war, and new journals of a distinctly academic nature were founded.32 This trend did not entirely represent a return to prerevolutionary normalcv, however. At precisely this time Marxists and Bolsheviks also began to organize themselves into militant scholarly organizations and institutions; they launched a concerted attack against idealist and religious thought. Thus no sooner was the Petersburg Philosophical Society revived in March 1921, enabling its organ Thought (Mysl') to begin appearing again at the beginning of 1922, than the journal was subjected to a barrage of attacks from prominent Bolshevik intellectuals.33 Even as the old professional associations and journals reappeared, many intellectuals were so disaffected that they decided to emigrate (particularly in 1921, when Gorky himself left), and one hundred prominent intellectual families were expelled from the countryin an infamous episode of 1922. These events, together with the death of Blok and the execution of the poet Nikolai Gumilëv in August of 1921 (for alleged White Guard activities), are landmarks in most of those accounts that see the period 1921-1922 as "the end of Petersburg," or the end of the cultural flowering, or the end of any kind of normalcy for intellectuals. As the old professional associations went back into business, much of culture became more academic. This was especially true in the theater. The trend might seem to run contrary to the Piotrovsky complaint, intoned in the Veshch' editorial, that "we had Shakespeare in January [1921] but got the café chantant in December," but of course by Shakespeare he meant not so much the Shakespeare of high culture as a practitioner of the people's theaterthe interpretation of Shakespeare shareM. and many others during War Communism. As intellectuals began to use more conventionai ces e:re. the scornful attitude toward dramaturgy that had been part.culariy marked in the 1910s was reversed. The early years of NEP saw a new emphasis on the drama as a literary text rather than as a performance. Svmptomatically, in 1924 the Petrograd Theatrical Department announced a reorganization in all its theaters, which were now to be directed by a troika comprising the theater director, its chief director of productions, and the head of the literary section.34 A defining feature of the cultural landscape of NEP was the return of literature as queen of the arts, supplanting the theater. Most of the major Party pronouncements on culture made up to 1927 were on literature (see Chapter 8). This was another sign of the way cultural bureaucrats had, de facto, abandoned the ideal of a unified culture, an ideal that at that time had to mean a nonprint culture. The return of the word in drama was part of a general shift away from cultural models that accorded preeminence to performance, spectacle, and music. In the professional theater, the word became a dominant value, overshadowing those recent ideals pageant and improvisation. This change can be sensed in the statements of the avant-garde centered in the Myatlev House. When leading figures there presented a production of their idol Khlebnikov's trans-sense work Zangezi in 1923, one of the sponsors, N. Punin, insisted that it was "not a play but a long poem,"while Tatlin in outlining his approach as director explained that "the word is the unit of [Zangezi's] construction [actually zdaniye]," and hence he did not allow any "acting stunts"because they might detract from the word.35 With the foregrounding of the word came a sharper delineation of semantics and a devaluation of the symbolic (a reversal of the Nietzschean order of priorities). In the word, you have the possibility for more quickly distinguishing the limits of transgression, a return to what Nietzsche called the principium individuationis, to the particular, the defined, and the bounded. The retreat from the "huge, free squares" to the "boxes" and "kitchens" was in effect a retreat from a more open-ended situation to one where norms prevailed, that is, the particular standards and conventions of individual fields, groups, or organizations. Cultural life was retreating from the "vast expanses and vistas of the approaching future,"from that ever more centrifugally articulated periphery back toward a center (as distinct from the center from which it had retreated). Because expertise and standards were valued, cultural life was, paradoxically, both more pluralistic and more centripetal than in the immediately preceding years. Even the phenomenon of razmezhevaniye, the increasingly intense divisions between factions and positions in the cultural sphere, can be seen as a result of this search for boundaries (mezhi)—boundaries between movements, between classes, between professions, and so forth. With the new stress on specialization and professionalism in the early years of NEP, many different factions emphasized the creative intellectual's right to relative autonomy, even to ideological autonomy, in the name of the standards of his or her field.36 It was not just independent literary groups who spoke out against the state's mandating the kind of art to be produced. Cultural intermediaries such as Radlov called in print for the curbing of the power of the"bosses" (nachal'niki, a label then commonly used in this context) in order to give the professionals more control over their own work in the theater.37 Even prominent Party officials expressed similar views: Lunacharsky, for instance, said in 1924 that art is not a state matter, and that the state could not and should not possibly attempt to encompass in its sphere of influence all of art's complexity.38 The general drift of cultural life was, however, centripetal. The years of War Communism had seen what was, for Russia, a marked degree of decentralization in the intellectual life of the country at large. This was partly a consequence of the chaos and confusion of revolution and civil war, partly the expression of a reaction against tsarist centripetal tendencies, and partly the result of a desire to redress cultural deprivation in the provinces. Signs of this decentralization include the mini-renaissances in such cities as Vitebsk, Baku, Kharkov, and Tiflis, and the profusion of new universities founded in provincial towns between 1918 and 1920.39 Under NEP this trend was reversed. Lack of funding meant closure for many of the new provincial universities, and those intellectuals who had participated in the cultural flowerings in the provinces tended to drift back to the capitals or emigrate. Another factor that contributed to centralizing cultural life was the founding of larger creative organizations combining a variety of lesser special interest groups. In literature, this process can be seen in the setting up in July 1920 of the Union of Writers (VSP), an organization that banded together primarily the nonproletarian writers. In Petrograd, VSP was initially dominated by the old literary establishment.40 The trend toward centralization was even more marked in publishing where Moscow and Leningrad emerged as virtually the only active centers.41 The founding of major literary journals in Moscow and Petrograd at the beginning of NEP particularly contributed to this trend.42Lesser journals whose existence was precarious financially could not comvete w:th ther. in the royalties or circulation they offered. Intellectuais who aspired to a place in the mainstream flocked to the new journais, while those who were disaffected, scornful, or who represented ideological or aesthetic positions that were not favored tended to publish in short-lived almanacs or factional periodicals. As was intended, the new journals effectively created a new, mainstream Soviet culture (not, of course, singlehandedly). Those writers who achieved prominence on their pages, such as Isaac Babel, Vsevolod Ivanov, and even the returned émigré nobleman Aleksey Tolstoy, became the leading, mainstream Soviet writers. But this new culture also became progressively more Moscow-centric (as is suggested in the fact that Aleksey Tolstoy lived in Petrograd but frequently published in the thick journals of Moscow, while Babel and Ivanov had commenced their postrevolutionary literary careers in Petrograd but then moved to Moscow).44 Unlike Moscow, Petrograd was given only one "thick" journal, the Star (Zvezda), which was less important and had a smaller circulation than its Moscow counterparts, which were thus able to lure away the more successful or acceptable Petrograd writers.45 During NEP, Moscow and Leningrad assumed in cultural life the roles they were to have for most of the Soviet period, with Moscow as the center, the home of mainstream culture, and Petrograd as the home for peripheral or out-of-favor culture. Its journal the Star functioned as a medium through which fringe figures on the left (proletarian extremists) and the right (such as Pilnyak, Pasternak, and Mandelshtam) could publish. While this situation afforded Petrograd the role of the more honorable, less compromised city, to some it seemed the town of the has-beens. During War Communism, Petrograd had been more or less Moscow's equal as a cultural center and the leader in scholarly and academic life; in theater and opera, for instance, between 1917 and 1922 markedly more new productions had been launched in Petrograd than in Moscow.46 Under NEP, however, Petrograd declined significantly in cultural importance. In part this was due to Moscow's receiving more state funds. For example, students at the Petrograd Institute for Screen Art were unfunded while at Moscow's counterpart GIK (the State Institute of Cinematography) they received stipends.47 It is a small wonder that almost all the big names in Soviet film worked in Moscow. For Petrograd this was a time of losses. The city even lost some of its fine treasures in the Hermitage, which were ceded to Moscow after a commission sent from the capital so ruled.48 But for those committed to forging a new, revolutionary culture, the loss of living writers, artists, and theater people was more serious than losing treasures of the past. It was particularly galling to see that the most exciting developments in music and the theater were initiated by Petrograders, but in Moscow.49 Already in 1921 Eikhenbaum was closing one of his articles with the desperate plea to the city's best poets: "For God's sake, don't leave for Moscow!"50 No longer were the most daring, new cultural events occurring in Petrograd, city of the Revolution, of the mass spectacles and Tatlin's tower. Now they tended to come out of Moscow, and to appear in Petrograd after about a year's time, if at all, and usually as imports (that is, as visiting productions), or as pale echoes of some Moscow phenomenon. Petrograd was more conservative culturally, but for many this was a virtue. In the article by Eikhenbaum in which he begged the good poets not to leave Petrograd, he ruefully remarked that in "strict" (strogiy) Petersburg there were not, and could not be, the noisy, blustering cultural movements of contemporary Moscow such as Imagism (Eikhenbaum's claim reflects a common and enduring attitude among Petersburg writers). Thus the lead article in Veshch' in 1922was not wrong when it lamented a resurgence of academic art. In particular, one finds in early 1921, even before NEP was promulgated, signs that the Preservationist movement with its agenda of strict norms and uncluttered panoramas was regaining much of the ground it lost in the initial iconoclastic phase of War Communism. When in 1918 the Academy of the Arts was replaced by avant-gardist free studios, or SVOMAS, the old art establishment had been removed from power and replaced by figures such as Natan Altman (who decorated the Palace Square in 1918), Tatlin, and the Formalist theoretician Osip Brik. On February 2, 1921, however, the SVOMAS took back their old title Academy of the Arts, a move that was far from superficial; the new leadership was swept out and replaced by more conservative department heads, such as the Neoclassicist V. A. Shchuko for architecture. Petitions were filed later that year to let such avant-garde artists as Tatlin and Matyushin retain their studios there, but in vain (hence the retreat to the Myatlev House).51 "He who was naught" could always become "all," but for how long? As Victor Turner, one of the principal theorists of so-called liminal times or movements has pointed out, liminal periods are generally of short duration, and structure (norms, bounds), their opposite in his scheme, soon returns.52 But then what did Altman and other avant-garde artists have in mind when for the first anniversary of the Revolution they decked the Palace Square with such slogans?—surely that their art and their artists (which they always insisted uniquely represented the Revoluzion ari :ne proletariat should be "all." That the political establishment was never con: :nced ef this is well known; Radlov later revealed that as earlv as the summer of 1920 officialdom prevented him from using Altman's designs for the mass spectacle he staged at the Stock Exchange.53 But nor were the hard core intelligentsia convinced. It was but a month between the high point of revolutionary utopianism, November 1920, when the model of the Tatlin tower was exhibited and the masses re-enacted the storming of the Winter Palace, and January 1921. Yet already that January, before NEP had been announced, there were distinct signs that the cultural ethos was changing. These changes were not all orchestrated from above. In late January and early February 1921, "Pushkin Days" were organized to commemorate the anniversary of the poet's death on February 10 (January 29, old style), 1837. The Pushkin Days involved a series of evenings held at the House of Literati (duplicated at the university), at which speeches were given and commemorative poems read, the most famous being those of Blok, Khodasevich, and M. Kuzmin.54 In most of the speeches and poems, a somewhat bitter, elegiac mood was struck. Speakers lamented what they saw as the end of Petersburg culture; they also complained of state interference in the arts, which made it, in Blok's words, "impossible to breathe." Such sentiments had been expressed before in works such as Mandelshtam's "The Twilight of Freedom" (1918) or the apocalyptic laments about the fate of Russia by writers including A. Remizov, N. Klyuev, and A. Blok.55 However, the year 1921 saw an unusual concentration of literary works and intelligentsia rallies where the regime of the "bosses," of the "tutor" (guvener), was denounced. Akhmatova herself contributed a poem fittingly titled "All is Plundered, Betrayed, Sold Out." It was in that year that there appeared one of the most outspoken signs of intelligentsia alienation from the state-directed culture of the day, the newspaper Literary Gazette (Literaturnaya gazeta), mouthpiece of the Petrograd Branch of VSP (the All-Russian Union of Writers). More accurately, it did not appear since the censors confiscated the first issue after it was printed.56 The paper proclaimed in its very title a direct link to Pushkin and other writers who had founded a periodical of the same name in 1830. V. Khodasevich, one of the contributors, associated this event with a remark Pushkin wrote to a friend in that fateful year 1825, the year of the Decembrist Uprising, about how "silence" is a "public calamity." This observation was implicitly taken up in an article by E. Zamyatin ("It Is Time") in which he calls for the silent majority—comprising, allegedly, 90 percent of the population—to be given some voice to counteract the hegemonic, Bolshevik 10 percent. Despite this militancy, which provoked the journal's closure, deeply pessimistic notes were also sounded as contributors pointed out a "significant decline" in literature, criticism, and literary scholarship.57 In 1921 Eikhenbaum published his essay "A Moment of Truth," in which he declares the year "marked in the history of our generation as a moment of truth" when we realize that we have no more readers and "we are needed only bv History but history is cruel." Our time of " 'dreams and aspirations' [mechtatel'stvo] is over," he concludes. "A moment of terror has come. Our generation hears the steps of the commendatore."5s The reference here is of course to the Don Juan myth, although in recent Russian reworkings of the myth, drawing on Pushkin's version in his short tragedy The Stone Guest and conflating it with The Bronze Horseman in a synthetic account of the advancing statue, the commendatore sometimes symbolized the autocratic state. But who was the commendatore now, who was it that threatened the identity of the intelligentsia? Was it the state? or the return to a semimarket situation? or was it the fact that history had bypassed them and transposed the center to Moscow? The answer is all of the above, although at this time Spengler's Decline of the West was all the rage and the sense that the intellectuals were the "derniers fils d'une [culture]épuisée" was not just a response to Soviet reality but also refracted through his models of historical evolution. Whatever the referents or influences, this was a time of existential crisis. The intellectual's self-identity as a Hermes figure had received a severe battering. The return to Pushkin was a kind of reculer to the old values and standards, and also to a sense of tradition that took their city's poet as the originary figure. The Pushkin Days were not all lament. As with Mandelshtam's poem "We Shall Gather Again in Petersburg" of about the same time, the message is ambiguous; the dirges are at the same time drum rolls rallying the troops. The readings essentially represented a show of strength on the part of the intelligentsia rather than an announcement of defeat. The occasion brought together on the same platform the leading groups of the non-Party and nonavant-garde cultural intelligentsia, including the Proletcult, Preservationists, the publishing house World Literature, and leaders of that segment of the prerevolutionary intelligentsia that had been particularly concerned about social causes. One finds in the occasion a general sense of cultural mission to the nation at large. Nineteen twenty-one did not mark a jubilee year for Pushkin. He died in 1837, and thus this was the eighty-fourth anniversary of his death. Clearly the concern to mark his death in a major way outweigred :ne semewhat flimsy motivation. One reason for this is the fact :hat Pushkir. s death in a duel and his fraught relations with Nicholas I had helped make him a martyr for the intellectuals' cause. Hence the celebration of his death was an obvious venue for them to express anxieties about preserving their values in the face of what they saw as an oppressive and unheeding state.59 This was not the first time his death had served that function; the major Pushkin anniversaries of the late nineteenth century had served as massive rallying points for intelligentsia solidarity. Throughout NEP, Pushkin and his age became favorite topics for literary and scholarly texts by intellectuals of Petrograd in which they explored their own existentialdilemmas. The Pushkin anniversary, then, was not merely an excuse for lamenting, but also an occasion for examining or reaffirming the consensual norms (ethical and aesthetic) of the intelligentsia and for looking anew at that perennial issue of Russia's historical destiny. Pushkin is no neutral figure who can stand for all the intelligentsia. In the twentieth century, he has generally served as an emblem for cultural conservatism and Retrospectivism. Consequently Mayakovsky, Kruchënykh, and Khlebnikov had encouraged the intelligentsia in their Futurist manifesto of 1912 to "cast Pushkin off the steamship of modernity . . . Off! Off! Off!" During War Communism, interpretations of Pushkin's role in the new Soviet culture had been mixed, particularly among supporters of proletarian culture, some of whom denounced him, as the erstwhile Futurists continued to do, while others (a category that included Lunacharsky and the Proletcult), using a goodly measure of casuistry, found a central role for this nobleman in revolutionary culture.60Now, it seemed, Pushkin had not merely clambered back on board the steamer of modernity, but was in danger of being put at the helm. If the cultural tastes of the Old Bolsheviks had prevailed in revolutionary Russia, this might well have happened: consider, for instance, Lenin's famous statement: "Pushkin I understand and enjoy, Nekrasov I acknowledge, but Mayakovsky, forgive me, I can't understand him."61But in this instance it was an alliance of the intelligentsia, rather than the Party, that was promoting Pushkin for the new age.62 The Pushkin celebrations coincided with a return to prominence of the lobby for Old Petersburg. An important moment was the (re-)founding in November 1921 of the Society for Old Petersburg, whose office-holders were the Preservationist old guard and included Alexandr Benois, Count Zubov from GIII, and the grand duke K. K. Romanov. With missionary zeal the Society spawned a whole series of organizations and functions designed to propagate the Petersburg tradition within a number of spheres, not just art and architecture, but music and cultural excursions for the masses as well.63 In literature, it focused efforts to foster a Petersburg school in a new "Circle of the Bronze Horseman."64 The myth of Petersburg in general, and the Bronze Horseman in particular, resurfaced as dominant themes and concerns. Nineteen twentytwo was a vintage year for these themes in terms of the number of publications concerning them, although most must have been prepared earlier.65 The second major redaction of Bely's novel Petersburg appeared that year, as did a book that has become a classic statement on the way the Bronze Horseman functions as the genius loci of the city, The Soul of Petersburg (Dusha Peterburga) by N. F. Antsiferov, a leading member of the Society for Old Petersburg. Pushkin's Bronze Horseman itself was published that year in a handsome first unexpurgated edition with Benois's illustrations. In fact the Preservationists became obsessed with the fate of the statue itself decrying in the press the way vandals were allowed to desecrate it—and were ultimately appointed its guardians.66By 1923, the popular Petrograd magazine Red Panorama (Krasnaya panorama, sic) had a regular by-line "Old Petersburg" dominated by G. Lukomsky, who in the 1910s had been one of the chief proselytizers for Empire style. The Preservationists were gaining institutional power as well. In 1923 the Academic Center of Narkompros incorporated the Society for Old Petersburg in its administrative net.67 Neoclassical architects were also on the march, not only taking over in the academies and exhibitions of Petrograd, but winning commissions to design the shrines of the Revolution as well, soon to include the first version of Lenin's mausoleum, designed by A. V. Schusev. "Hands off the sacred graves!"expostulated Punin (in vain) when he realized that the jury for the competition to design the memorials at Mars Field was stacked with Neoclassicists; they also designed new approaches to the Revolution's 1917 headquarters at the Smolny.68But the character of the Preservationist movement was also shifting.They had not only formed a strong patron-client relationship with Bolshevik power, but had also turned to the masses rather than the elite as the target audience for their endeavors (publications, public lectures, and so on). The Pushkin anniversary was far from the only one marked by the Petrograd intelligentsia in 1921. In fact 1921 saw the observance of an extraordinary number of anniversaries of literary figures: Hoffman, Dostoevsky, Nekrasov, and even Gleb Uspensky (the 150th anniversary of the architect Rastrelli who designed the Winter Palace was also celebrated). Among the intelligentsia, the two anniversary celebrations of that year that received the greatest attention were those for Pushkin and Dostoevsky. There was a difference in the way each was commemorated; whereas the Dostoevsky anniversary gave rise to some memorable interpretive scholarship and debates among the intelligentsia, the Pushkin ann:versarv seit irstitutionalize the writer it honored. A resolution was passed : make the commemoration of Pushkin's death an annual national event and to have a decree passed to this effect. The national commemorations, its organizers suggested, should involve not only memorial evenings and the publishing of scholarly collections, as this one had, but also literary competitions and dramatic renditions. The publishing house World Literature undertook to mark the occasion every year with a series of lectures on the influence of Pushkin in foreign literature.69 By 1924, a major jubilee year for Pushkin (the 125th anniversary of his birth), the celebrations had been taken up by the state and the principal venue shifted from Petrograd to Moscow. Yet the forms this celebration took and many of the sentiments expressed from the platform (minus the laments) essentially replicated the model established in Petrograd in 1921.70 Even the Petrograd avant-garde were not to be outdone in the business of creating a cult of dead—and therefore martyred—intellectuals. The celebration in 1923 of the anniversary of their poet Khlebnikov's death the previous year (from starvation and the psychophysical batterings of War Communism) had the atmosphere of a religious ritual as Punin, one of those who organized an exhibition in the Myatlev House to mark it, appealed to everyone to bring forward any relics they may have, such as memorabilia and documents.71 Tatlin took upon himself the mission of staging Khlebnikov's drama in verse, Zangezi. This event could be seen as an answer to the Pushkin Days inasmuch as some of the avant-garde's leading figures used the occasion to deliver programmatic lectures about Khlebnikov's work (it was originally intended that Radiov would co-direct Zangezi, which raises yet again the question of how to place him within the cultural spectrum of the day).72 Obviously, this occasion gave the Petrograd avant-garde a moral lift. The Life of Art presented major programmatic statements about the nature of art and of perception written by Malevich, Filonov, and other leaders from the Myatlev establishment, and including Matyushin's statement on Zorved.73 The sponsors' accounts of Zangezi called it an "autobiography" and a "heroic long poem."74 Thus the intelligentsia were personalizing historical events and trends that were broader in scope than could realistically be contained in an individual biography. The Formalists decried this trend to foreground the extraliterary in a literary study, a trend that was especially marked in the writings generated by the Pushkin anniversary, but before long they too were having recourse to biographies that were in some instances no less hagiographic.75 Indeed, Eikhenbaum's very invocation of "the steps of the commendatore" presages the extent to which the Formalists would go to articulate their values in terms of historical precedents from the Pushkin period (see Chapter 8). The martyrology, heroic epics, and exemplary biographies were all trojan horses that the various factions in the intelligentsia used to legitimize their positions. But the return to biography and autobiography also marked a shift from the "huge and free" schema of War Communism to more bounded (specified and conventionalized) narratives ofcultural identity. Linear narrative was returning, casting aside the fragmentary and epiphanic structures typical of War Communism. Despite the avant-garde's claim that Zangezi defied conventional linearity, even that work provides an instance of this trend in that they adopted Khlebnikov's biography as its frame. To smash those "boxes" and rush headlong into vast spaces is to experience the vertigo of an epiphany. Yet, no matter how vast those "squares," sooner of later one will encounter their borders. This moment is in effect a kind of falling back into time after a bout of epilepsy. But once one falls out of kairos, one is in a new kind of time that demands explanation and sequence. The major cultural expressions of these years no longer involved collapsing time in a series of high points (as one saw in the mass spectacle of War Communism); many wrote of the need for consistent, motivated sequence.76 The mass spectacle in its classic versions of 1920 had really been less an etiological myth than a mass experience for galvanizing groupness, but an age of explanation always features historicism. A cliché about literature in this period is that it saw a shift from an age of poetry to an age of prose, from an age of "short forms" (malaya forma)—such as lyric poems—to an age of "long forms" (bol'shaya forma).77 While almost all the major poets went through a period of low creativity,78 the novelwar horse of the Russian literary tradition—regained its prominence. The move to longer forms can be found not only in literature but in cultural journalism, art, and other fields as well. It can, for instance, be seen in the shift among left artists from making posters and individual pictures to designing entire, integrated Constructivist stage sets and even buildings. One could account for the shift in terms of the greater possibility for producing longer works at a time of fewer upheavals and fewer problems in obtaining materials, such as paper. Arguably, the sheer length or scale of a "long form" is, however, less defining than the attitude toward composition. Biography is in a sense the lowest common denominator of historicism, and many of the novels written during NEPwere structured around biographical myths. By the 1930sthe trend had devolved to a biographical master mvth of the Bolshevik state through which almost all cultural production had to be in some way refracted."- The arge numre: ot lizerarv anniversaries that mark the year 1921 represents a stage : tne progression to its institutionalization. In the initial years after War Communism, then, the intelligentsia of Petrograd retreated from the "streets" and “squares" to their own "boxes,"and as they did so they reaffirmed the norms of their own caste in a ritual celebration of Pushkin. Most defined their culture's identity in narrower terms than before, no longer believing they could transcend in a single smashing of those airless "boxes" (kitchens/integument/sardine tins /constraining conceptual frames) class, education, and national boundaries; pace the Veshch' editorial, it was Pushkin who reigned in January 1921 rather than Shakespeare, and attention was to be focused on how he influenced the West, rather than vice versa. But as they regained their "boxes," they also confronted once again the question of norms. The ecology of revolution is such that while a revolution occurs in a preexisting ecosystem limiting the capacity for absolute change, still it is a revolution and is bound to disturb and even transmute the local flora. The moment of truth is in a sense the moment when differences are recognized, borders, and limits. In the ensuing phase of general razmezhevanie, new principles of classification and new genres have to be identified or generated. The topography had altered. In the initial postrevolutionary period, one of the borders that had been fudged by those intellectuals captivated by the euphoria of the Revolution was that with Europe, but in these years they sensed that dividing line quite palpably. Thus when the Preservationists celebrated the Rastrelli anniversary, they insisted that he, originally an Italian, thought not "in an Italian way" but "together with all of Russia."80 The avant-garde similarly rewrote the provenance of their idols. Under War Communism, they had declared that art is a country unto itself that knows no boundaries and should even establish its own embassies in other countries, but now spokesmen had started proclaiming Khlebnikov the founder of a "national school" and claiming that Zangezi exposed the "collapse" (krusheniye) of Western European science.s1 Even as intellectuals seemed to be drawing back and defining their work within a more limited purview, however, they began to look to Europe as to their "significant other" in an effort to create a culture for the new age. In Petrograd, capital of the intelligentsia, they might rein in at a moment of truth and espouse what detractors called an art of capitulation, but they had begun to look outward with a renewed sense of urgency.