# REVOLUTIONARYCULTURE MEETS THE JAZZ AGE On June 15, 1924, Meyerhold's Moscow troupe staged the nationalpremiere of The Trust D. E. at the Petrograd Conservatory.1 As is suggested in the subtitle of I. Ehrenburg's novel of the same name on which the play is based— The Story of Europe's Downfall—the play concerns an imperilled Europe.2 The threat comes from America, where a sinister band of monopolists has formed the organization Hand over Europe (shortened in Russian to its initials, D. E.), which is bent on conquering all of Europe, depopulating it, and colonizing it with Africans. In a variant on the old motif of Russia as a bulwark to save Europe from the yellow peril, however, the Soviet proletariat is able to rescue Europe from the enemy while the Red Army assures the success of revolution in America. Despite this melodramatic plot, Meyerhold's production of The Trust D. E. is best remembered not for its themes but for its extensive use of jazz.³ His principal device for contrasting vital and revolutionary Russia with the decadent West was to set up an opposition between the West's jazz dances and the Soviet Union's healthier physical activities. For this, he placed a jazz band on stage led by Valentin Parnakh, who in October 1922 first introduced jazz to Soviet Russia; he treated the audience to eight pop-jazz hits in the course of a cabaret-type review where lurid capitalists cavorted in shimmies, apaches, and fox trots.4 The fox trot had by now largely replaced the café chantant as a cipher for Western decadence ("a new form of pornography" that has "no place in the Soviet Republic"),5 and as a counterpoint muscular Soviets performed "sporting exercises" at the Red Sailor Stadium to the accompaniment of march music played on the harmonica. As one reviewer remarked, "The freshness, vibrancy, and healthy strength of all those movements at the RedSailor Stadium stand out to their advantage against the background of the Americanized dances."6 Westerncommentators have tended to viewa tted:ferentv the question of who stood out to greatest advantage in this confrontation. S. Frederick Starr, for instance, in Red and Hot, his book on Soviet Jazz, cites such factors as the extraordinary popularity of the production to support his argument that "Meierhold . . . missed no opportunity to promote the sinful allure of the jazz band. . . . Meierhold's sympathies clearly lay with the culture of jazz and the 'fox-trotting West.""7 Such conclusions should not be drawn too hastily. The Soviet sportsmen in the Red Sailor Stadium did not just play soccer and do physical exercises, but also gave"a demonstration of Vsevolod Meyerhold's system of biomechanical exercises."8 Moreover, in a speech Meyerhold made during this same visit to Petrograd, he defined his work in terms of this system.9 The Soviet avant-garde in general viewed jazz, and all that it stood for, with great ambivalence. Many of them interpreted jazz, and the "hot" dances then all the rage in Europe, as standing in the tradition of the cabaret and music hall, which they saw, as had the Italian Futurists, as an important aspect of their agendas for revitalization. And yet they also subscribed to the common view that jazz represented the sort of Western decadence that had to be counteracted. Symptomatic of this ambivalence, Parnakh, in the issue of Veshch' following the one in which the avant-garde ranted against the threat of the advancing café chantant, published two articles advocating jazz and the "new dances."10 ## The West and Soviet Cultural Identity The appearance of jazz in The Trust D. E., billed at the time as "the most agitational of all spectacles in the Soviet Union,"11 focuses some of the major issues facing those concerned with the fate of Soviet culture in these interstitial years. Among the crucial issues to be resolved were the attitude toward Western bourgeois urban culture and where to strike the balance between high and low culture given the country's commitment to a "dictatorship of the proletariat." With the utopian nature of the Communist experiment and the conviction among intellectuals that market forces only "pollute" culture, these issues remained urgent throughout Soviet cultural history; all its major players were ambivalent about the West, and hence the zigzagging policies on Western culture and recurrent bouts of extreme anti-Westernism. War Communism had provided one set of answers to these questions: between the Blockade and the government monopoly on the cultural purse strings, popular lowbrow Western culture was essentially denied access to the country and the masses were given large doses of high culture by intellectual puritans. But in 1920 when the Blockade was lifted and the Soviet Union was no longer engaging the West in an undeclared war (the Intervention), the borders became more open. Then, with limited private enterprise permitted during NEP, cultural institutions became more sensitive to popular taste. In consequence, these issues were raised again with greater urgency. Several rival solutions emerged but, initially, those that predominated in Petrograd were largely antithetical to the solutions of War Communism, and also to those that came to the fore during its immediate sequel, the "moment of truth," that is, somewhat parochial versions of the highbrow. Between 1922 and 1924 Soviet culture was riding high on a tide of Westernism. The new cultural trends incorporated Western bourgeois or lowbrow culture, including jazz, into their purview. The tide peaked in Petrograd, the original "window on Europe,"which led the country in its obsession with the West. This fixation began quite early and was anticipated in such events as the founding there in October 1920 of the Society for the Study of Western Culture, which was explicitly set up to counteract the influence of the Free PhilosophicalAcademy, or Volfila, an intellectual forum dominated by concerns with Russian particularity and spirituality.12In the city's cultural journals, the sections where the latest books and cultural events in the West were reviewed became ever longer and a new journal devoted principally to Western culture, the Contemporary West (Sovremennyy zapad), began publishing in 1922. Similar patterns were to be found in Moscow at this time, but there they competed with the solutions of a Russo-centric, proletarian culture to a greater extent than was true as yet in Petrograd. A high percentage of the cultural fare to be found in Petrograd between 1922 and 1924 represents translations or adaptations (many of the adaptations were unacknowledged and were presented by authors as if they were their original works).13 The sheer volume and popularity of Western texts so dwarfed local production that, Eikhenbaum joked, in order to be published in the Soviet Union you now had to call your work a translation and to sign it with a foreign name or at least a foreign pseudonym (admitting that in this respect he had an advantage).14In the country at large, 50 percent of the presses gave first priority to foreign books,15 while in cinema, the country's dearth of new foreign films was relieved when in late 1922 Petrograd's Sevzapkino received three hundred titles from the West.16From then until 1927, Western movies were the main fare on Soviet screens.17 The traffic across the borders was not only in books, films, and plays; cultural luminaries were on the march, too. One after the other, the big names in Western film, theater, music, literature, and science came to visit or at anv rate visits were planned), while local lights sometimes got a chance to tour as well, a much sought after status symbol.18 In contrast to 1921-1922, when many intellectuals emigrated or were expelled, some returned in these years (such as the Petrograder Aleksey Tolstoy), and even more were rumored to be returning (such as Chaliapin and Stravinsky).19Shklovsky published in Veshch' a plea to Jakobson, his fellow leader of the Formalist movement, to return from Prague because "the flood is abating and the animals are coming out of their arks."20This very movement back and forth also facilitated closer contact with the West. As the West opened up after the Blockade, many Soviet Russians realized to their dismay that, despite their heroic efforts under crippling circumstances, the country had managed to slip behind the West in many areas. In physics, for instance, renewed contact with Western scholars21revealed that D. S. Rozhdestvensky's discoveries in the field of spectral analysis of the structure of the atom made at Petrograd's new Optical Institute in the crippling conditions of the Blockade, when electricity and fuel were hard to come by, and of which all were duly proud, could not, inasmuch as they had already been surpassed in the West, be categorized as a new discovery, but only as an incredible achievement considering the circumstances.22 All the old anxieties about Russia's provincialism came back into play The situation was not helped when it was realized that "Red Russia" was being excluded from a variety of new networks linking the leading countries of Europe; new air routes between the major cities were established as well as radio broadcasts (principally of highbrow music) from one country to another.23 This sent many to devour all that was the latest in the West with a zeal bordering on frenzy. It might be said that the country was finally able to realize its internationalist aims, which were preached during War Communism but could then be realized only marginally owing to the limits on contact imposed by the Blockade. Just as during War Communism left artists and the Proletcult attempted to set up international organizations with branches in Europe, at this time, too, every self-respecting Petrograd cultural organization aspired to have an outlet in Europe.24 There was, however, an important difference. Whereas the internationalism of War Communism had stressed liberation of the underdog throughout the world, the focus of this wave was less on revolutionary struggle than on contemporary Western urban culture. The recent period when accounts of the Revolution stressed its roots in Russian native, antiurbanist traditions had virtually evaporated.25 The literary scene was dominated by groups who were largely Western and urbanist in their orientation and who put out almanacs with titles like The City (Gorod). This shift occasioned a reaccentuation of the catch phrases and values of the new society. Many of those typical of the years 1922-1924 were the same as those found duringWar Communism, but their referents had changed. Thus "movement" and related words such as "pace" and "tempo" remained axiomatic values.26However, the "movement" intended was no longer the whirlwind of revolution that sweeps away all, the upward thrust of the spiral in Tatlin or some other perpetuum mobile, but now more the pace of city life, of a film, or of jazz music. Pace was all. There was a sense that Russians needed to catch up and introduce a fast-paced lifestyle, the life of the new age from which the Blockade and other disruptions had excluded them. There was even a premium on writing literary and scholarly works or getting translations of Western works out as quickly as possible,27and on adding pace to literary works or plays by having them imitate the tempos of the movies, a stipulation usually housed under the new slogans "cinefication" and "Americanization."28 But such injunctions were really the surface markers of a new ethos. ## The Roaring Twenties Around 1922 postblockade Russia met the Jazz Age; in that year the first jazz concert in the Soviet Union (Parnakh's) was held in Moscow. By the Jazz Age here, however, I mean not so much the time of jazz music as the time of the "roaring twenties,"captured in F. Scott Fitzgerald's classic essay "Echoes of the Jazz Age" (1931).29 This may seem a forced comparison. One could hardly claim of Soviet Russia in these years, as did Fitzgerald of his "Jazz Age" America, that it was an age dominated by a breed of affluent pleasure-seekers who "had no interest in politics at all," for "we were tired of Great Causes."30 Fitzgerald was of course being typically hyperbolic here, but what he characterizes as a lack of interest in politics and Great Causes could equally well be identified as a reorientation in the sense of time, and this was defining of the Soviet Union's "Jazz Age." Fitzgerald identifies the Jazz Age in its classic phase (which for him began around 1919) with the moment when "the generation which had been adolescent during the confusion of the War, brusquely shouldered my contemporaries out of the way and danced into the limelight." Thisgeneration ignored the values and objections of their elders, for "it seemed only a question of years before the older people wouid stedasice an :e worid would be run by those who saw things as thev wereTo them. tren. "Great Causes" were essentially the causes of the older generations. Freud. the experience of the Great War, and other factors had helped them see the world anew, and thus the old grounds of authority were no longer valid for them. This also meant that not just the older generation but the past in general receded from their purview. The "flappers," the "hedonistic" and "wild"dancers, gave the moment their all; pace, the pace of the dance, the pace with which they crossed the Atlantic back and forth in search of the perfect party, was a movement through space now. The revolt against provincialism thus defines the Jazz Age, which entailed a movement in space (dancing, travel) to overcome the dead hand of small-town values. In Soviet Russia, the new generation's counterparts were in most instances committed to the Revolution, and hence superficially the opposite of Fitzgerald's affluent hedonists. Yet around 1922 there emerged in Russia a new generation that had, likewise, "been adolescent during the confusion of the war" and "brusquely shouldered [its elders] out of the way and danced into the limelight," blithely ignoring them, for they were confident that time and reality were on their side. The greatest problem in drawing such an analogy is not the question of how much the work of the new generation in Soviet Russia was influenced by jazz so much as to what extent it exemplified a libidinous, carefree, "erotic" culture. Actually, many in that younger generation—-such as Shklovsky and Eisenstein—were influenced by Freud.31 However, it was less sexual libido that obsessed them than the libido of revolutionary pathos (though some conflated the two in their imagery). In thinking through ways to avert the decline of European culture that Spengler charts in The Decline of the West, many fastened on revolution as a force with the necessary energy and virility to counteract the drift into effete impotence.32 Freud and eroticism—generally combined in the Russian case with Marxism--provided a rationale for rejecting the values of the elders as a sort of false consciousness. The feisty young generation that emerged during these years claimed priority because they were young—and therefore not prisoners of their elders' illusions. One way of accounting for the prominence of this new generation in Soviet culture is in terms of the rise of the Komsomol as a player in that field. But then, why did the Komsomol become more powerful in culture, rivaling the Party? Why, as the Soviet Union moved to an ever more committed culture, was prominence not given to that old guard of proletarian writers who had been spear-carriers of revolutionary culture for years, suffering arrest and exile, servicing Pravda and other Bolshevik organs with uplifting prose and verse, and undergoing apprenticeships in Paris, Bologna, or Capri at the feet of Party intellectuals? In other words, the generational changeover in Soviet culture, generally explained in terms of postrevolutionary local (Soviet) politics, might also be seen as a local version of a post-traumatic (post-Great War) shift that Fitzgerald identifies for his local context as the Jazz Age. To use a dominant trope of this book—ecology-—it might be said that both in Russia and in America the young emerged to prominence as new, postcataclysm shoots. Several groups of the young and rapacious entered the "limelight" in Petrograd at the beginning of the 1920s. The most prominent in literature were the Serapion Brothers, a group that was formed in 1921 out of a literary studio founded at the House of Arts in 1919 and included such nowfamous Soviet literary figures as M. Zoshchenko, K. Fedin, Vs. Ivanov—and Kaverin.33 It was the youngest Serapion Brother, Lev Lunts, a mere lad of thirteen when the war began in 1914, who spoke for the Jazz Age when on December 2, 1922, he delivered his famous speech "Go West!" (Na zapad!) to an intimate gathering of the group. Lunts's point of departure was the crisis in literature, but he disregarded the various solutions proposed for it that involved a reaffirmation of the old values (for example, reviving the Great Tradition of "Pushkin"), declaring unequivocally that the only way to overcome the provincialism and lack of literacy in Russian literature was to learn from the West. By learning from "the West," Lunts meant not from the great eras of the past but from the urbanized and cosmopolitan West of his day. Russian literature, he maintained, will make a great leap forward only if it passes through a period of "slavish imitation of the West."34 Specifically, it should learn the mastery of plot to be found in the West's "adventure literature."35 To him, a healthy injection of plot could provide an instant panacea for Russian literature's moribund condition (especially for the novel). The mistake of the Russians, he insisted in a statement that proved controversial even among Serapions,36 was that they have given absolute priority to social commitment and contended that such formal considerations as plot construction should be waived in favor of this overriding interest. But, he countered, attention to plot does not preclude social commitment, while failure to give it its due is fatal for literature.37 Lunts and some fellow Serapions were far from the only groups advocating this approach.38 By the beginning of 1924, a critic reviewing the situation in literature remarked that literary works "now could not afford not to be European,"and pronounced the"hegemonvircor :e ew gereration such as the Serapion Brothers who nowcomrrardeè ore critical attention than Pilnyak, who had dominated as recenti as12-Lunts's main mentors, the Petrograd Formalists (themselves enly a vear or two older than the Serapions), held somewhat similar views. One of their number, B. Eikhenbaum, proposed in a milder formulation of Lunts's position that the road to a new Russian literature lies through "alien hills."40 Starting around 1921 (coincidentally, more or less on the eve of NEP) the Formalists shifted their principal concerns and began to show more interest in contemporary Western culture.41 In that year, it was announced that Tynyanov was editing a collection entitled The Cultural Life of the West (which never materialized).42They also began to analyze Western literary genres and writers whose forte was fast-paced plot construction; names such as Conan Doyle frequently appear among the examples they adduce in their theoretical writings.43 The Formalists did more than discuss the formal properties of this kind of Western writing. They attempted to form an alliance of writers and theoreticians as a sort of vanguard of the new movement, setting up in January 1924 under the auspices of the Division for the Verbal Arts (their niche in GIII) a Committee for Contemporary Literature. This committee, whose aim was to "establish a link between scholarly work in literary theory and history and actual contemporary problems of literary composition and criticism,"44was intended to be an independent center that might influence the evolution of Soviet culture; its membership included the Formalists, the Serapions, and even Ehrenburg,a Moscow writer who for most of the 1920s livedin Western Europe (where, inter alia, he co-edited Veshch').45 Some of the most interesting theoretical and literary work of the time was read and discussed at the committee's sessions; at one, Zamyatin read excerpts from his banned dystopian novel We. The committee was closely linked with the critical journal the Russian Contemporary (Russkiy sovremennik), which attracted contributions from serious literary theoreticians, including Bakhtin. Also, most of its members took its agenda seriously by taking up their pens to experiment with racy Western prose genres.46The Formalists and their GIII colleagues resisted the notion that they were just scholars, preferring to see themselves as activists for radical cultural change. Like most such activists of this time, they took the symbolism of space very seriously and made a principled stand in resisting moving to Vasilevsky Island, the bastion of the scholarly community.47 The shift to an interest in adventure genres was typical of this time. Not surprisingly, the list of publications from World Literature in 1922 was dominated by works such as Pierre Benoit's Atlantide.48Such works, which were not many steps away from the boulevard romance, stand in contrast with its typical list duringWar Communism, which comprised largely utopian fiction and European highbrow novels. World Literature was still high-minded as compared with many private presses that made a living by meeting the popular demand for detective and adventure literature. The state presses were less blatantly commercial in their output, but their publishing lists were also influenced by current vogues and the new requirement that they make do without subsidies. By 1924, Jack London was overwhelmingly the most published writer in the Soviet Union, coming out in sixty-seven separate editions in that year alone, foowed bv Upton Sinclair with thirty-four, and O. Henry with seventeen; writers such as Edgar Rice Burroughs, G. K. Chesterton, and A. Conan Dovie were also near the top of the list.49 The new vogues came up against that perennial bugbear of the Russian intelligentsia, the taint of the lowbrow or "boulevard."Even such relative liberals as Eikhenbaum complained about the recent craze for adventure literature, claiming that the "fare of the railway station has been brought into the town."50 He, Lunts, and others in his coterie drew a distinction between certain of the more accomplished Western writers of adventure fiction, such as Rider Haggard and Conan Doyle, and hacks—such as Benoit.51 Such discrimination reflects only a mild disdain for popular literature as compared with the extreme self-righteousness of the self-appointed guardians of cultural purity who, in their comments on the vogue for Western lowbrow literature or film, did the printed word-equivalent of frothing at the mouth, insisting that this was the "muck" of an“Augean stable" that must be "cleaned out" immediately52though, in actuality, the only Western popular "muck" to be cleaned out in these years was dancing on the stage; the fox trot, shimmy, one-steps, apaches, and the like were banned by a decree of the Petrograd Provincial Repertoire Committee of August 1924.53 Many intellectuals were less rigid and fanatical. Still, they faced the dilemma of how to counteract bourgeois culture without losing sight of the Jazz Age completely. One way to resolve the problem was to differentiate among countries in the West. Most intellectuals drew a distinction between Europe, which was misguided and imperilled, and America, where the true beast resided. Even within Europe, they differentiated between the good countries, especially antifascist, Weimar Germany, which had recently overthrown its kaiser and had undergone several attempted revolutions, and the bad—decadent and venal countries such as France ard Erg.and principal sources of the boulevard literature then flooding the market. Soviet intellectuals had richer cultural and scientific contacts with their German counterparts than with any other country (partly because the two were the great pariahs of the postwar period). Most Soviet scientific work reached the West via a German scientific periodical in which leading Soviet scientists published their findings,54 while in local (Petrograd) scholarly journals, the abstracts and reviews of recent German scholarship, philosophy, and literary theory crowded out most other material, leaving the impression that Petrograd was a sort of colonial outpost of German intellectual life. Berlin functioned as Russia's new "window on Europe," even replacing Paris as the mecca for avant-garde artists. The Russian émigré community then centered there numbered more than four hundred thousand; many of them were intellectuals and they established Russian publishing houses that provided alternative outlets for Petrograd intellectuals, alternative to the state publishing houses. In film, the ties between Petrograd and Berlin were particularly close; the latest Expressionist films dominated discussion among Petrograd's intellectuals, while the latest productions of Sevzapkino were given screenings in Berlin. In literature and theater, German Expressionism was also in vogue, and in Petrograd an allied movement (the Emotionalists) was set up in 1923 with Radlov and Piotrovsky among its leaders.55 Berlin also functioned as a "window" in the sense of a place to display Russian wares. Hence the avant-garde established Veshch' there, hoping through it to make its mark in the West. Most actors in cultural life, from Party leaders to the professoriate, looked to the West but were also repelled by it. After all, the translations were for the most part from the West to Russia. Thus the country that was meant to dazzle the world with a new, revolutionary culture was in fact subsisting on an imported or at best derivative one. Even the staunchest of Westernizers, such as Eikhenbaum's fellow Formalist Shklovsky, became concerned; in an article entitled "[Put] a Tax on Tarzan," he suggested taxing foreign literature and using the proceeds to foster local writers.56 It might seem that no sooner had the government subsidies in publishing been eliminated and something closer to a market situation introduced, than the mirage of "culture for the starved workers" evaporated and their true tastes began to be reflected in publications (tastes, incidentally, that were not so far from those of the bourgeoisie, who also showed a preference for adventure and detective fiction). It is also possible to view this trend as symptomatic of a general reorientation in Soviet culture, however, part of the reaction against the revolutionary millenialism of the initial years. It is worth noting here that the last time Russia experienced such a vogue for adventure and detective fiction was 1908, usually regarded as a time when the reaction against the revolutionary élan of 1905 had set in.57 In a sense, the entire shift we have been charting is neither a devolution in culture nor a revolution, but an attempt at translation. The various shifts that took place early in NEP enumerated in this and the preceding chapter involve not just differences in magnitude—more cinematic effects, a reduced scale for the mass spectacle, younger writers and filmmakers, and so on. Intellectuals were trying to make a translation across virtually all levels of existence. It was a translation in time, as was the Jazz Age. This subperiod, more than its predecessor, saw an attempt to strike through time to a new account of reality, thus providing an example of translation in its most fundamental mneaning. Few were content any longer with the standard fare of War Communism, the mass spectacles, posters, and agitational dramas; a broad spectrum aimed to generate a new culture that might compete successfully with that coming from Europe and America. But how might this be effected? Some had tried to adapt Western works for revolutionary purposes in a mechanical way and the results had been ludicrous. For instance, N. G. Vinogradov, known earlier as a pioneering director of the theater of mass participation, had pirated the score for Puccini's Tosca wholesale for a new "revolutionary" opera, In the Struggle for the Commune, performed as part of the October Revolution celebrations in 1924. He maintained that he did not have to alter the original opera unduly and was able to keep Tosca's "basic plot," and yet, he claimed, the opera was so revolutionary that it would have the effect of "a bomb exploding in the theater."58 Rather than prove a "bomb," needless to say, it bombed. Clearly, more radical translations were needed. Many literary theorists in Petrograd were engrossed in thinking through the phenomenon of translation and also models of literary evolution. They were becoming aware of the limits of mechanical translation from one language to another or from one medium to another and of how translation inevitably entails some recoding or reinflection.59The Formalists were particularly concerned with these questions, and they developed a theory of literary evolution that involves "translations," not just across languages, but also across literary levels; as literature evolves, what was considered high literature may be incorporated into the low, and vice versa.60 Their model implicitly offers, if not a solution, then at least some perspective on the "muck"of the "Augean stable,"that is, Western lowbrow culture, which so troubled Petrograd intellectuals and cultural authorities at this time; it raises the question of whether one should expend the labor of Hercules to clean out this "muck" when the very future evolution of literature may depend on it. ## The Red Pinkerton Some Party leaders had come to a vaguely similar position. Predictably, few in the Party were particularly enthusiastic about the idea of Western trash literature and film dominating the Soviet market, but some advocated co-opting this culture, a position not unlike that of the Formalists and Lunts. Among the Party spokesmen, the best-known advocate of this policy is Nikolai Bukharin, who proposed in a Pravda article of 1923 that Soviet literature produce a "red Pinkerton,"or in other words, that it apply the kind of plot structures one sees in detective and adventure literature to produce fiction celebrating the triumph of Soviet Communism.61What Bukharin had in mind was a countermodel to the Pinkertons flooding the market, one that would use their fast-paced, entertaining plots in the service of the ideals of the new society (note that the Party [Bukharin] did not originate this idea). This injunction did not fall on deaf ears. Many wanted to experience the Jazz Age, but they wanted to recode it as the age of revolution. Pace was one of the markers of the Jazz Age, but surely pace should be the marker of revolution a fortiori. Hence Jazz Age trends should be intensified in a Soviet redaction. Whether in response to injunctions from on high, or because authors were intrigued by the challenge of recoding the Jazz Age, "red Pinkertons" appeared like mushrooms in these years. Most used some variant on a fairly standard plot (not unlike that of The Trust D. E.): Europe is threatened by a conspiracy of capitalists / fascists who have gained access to some device of incredible destructive power, but a valiant proletariat (usually Russian) wrests this device from the plotters in the nick of time and saves Europe; America is soon converted as well, and proletarian hegemony and international solidarity are assured. These "red Pinkertons" represent a new phase in the evolution of Soviet culture, a departure from the conventions of War Communism. In them, for example, the cult of technology and progress was often challenged in an apocalyptic plot; science, rather than appearing as an emblem of revolution as was generally the case with the literature published during War Communism, was now often the agent of some holocaust (a trope often influenced by German Expressionism or Spengler).62 The attitude toward technology varied among the Pinkertons, but in most other respects they followed a similar pattern, and one can adduce from them a conventionalized plot structure that focuses values defining of revolutionary culture in the initial years of NEP. The Pinkertons can be seen as emblematic of the culture of that period, as was the mass spectacle during the immediately preceding period of War Communism. The Pinkertons' master plot points to the key shift in NEP culture, one more important than the generational and other such shifts chronicled here—a shift in the master model of history. When the Pinkerton was recoded as red, this led to a new orientation in time-space, a new chronotope—new as compared with that of the original Pinkertons, and also as compared with the dominant chronotope of the previously regnant genres. We seek in vain in these works for any mention of Greece or revolutionary France, which were the emblems of so much of the culture of Petrograd under War Communism. We now see not a progression over time as in the mass spectacle of War Communism (then prototypically, from ancient Greece through the two French revolutions to 1917), but a valorized contrast of places (America /Europe/Russia) with historical change effected by movement between them. This emphasis on place led to a corresponding deemphasis on time, so radical that it was not even the case that different places represent different times. This downplaying of the temporal dimension is analogous to what Fitzgerald calledthe “Jazz Age"with its rejection of generational prerogatives. The new Pinkertons retain the same essential binary of oppressors and oppressed that structured the mass spectacle. In this instance, the oppressors are international capitalists-cum-fascists, and the oppressed (those threatened with extinction) are "Europe" and the socialist culture of Russia. As in the mass spectacle, most often the plot involves an opposition between two places (in this instance, Russia and America) with a third (in this instance, Europe) functioning as the equivalent of that linking "corridor" (or staircase) where, according to the conventions of the mass spectacle, the tussle between oppressors and oppressed is fought out. In the new historical model (as defined by the "red Pinkerton") the status of that linking space is, however, much higher than in the mass spectacle (as befits a time of "interregnum"). Russian culture from 1922 to 1924 shows a marked Eurocentrism (in some instances, such as The Trust D. E., there are even racist elements). It is perhaps significant that most prominent authors of "red Pinkertons" were either themselves returnees from European emigration or had spent some time in Europe in the past (for example, A. Tolstoy, M. Shaginyan, V. Shklovsky, A. Tolstoy, and I. Ehrenburg). In novels, plays, and films of this time Europe is threatened and must be saved. But when the Russian workers "save"Europe, thev in a sense also consummate a marriage; Europe becomes one again when Russia joins it. The most famous and influential of the many Pinkertons that appeared in these years was Mess-Mend, or a Yankee in Petrograd (Mess-Mend, ili yanki v Petrograde, 1924-1925), by the Petrograd writer Marietta Shaginyan (published under the pseudonym Jim Dollar). Mess-Mend tells the story of a group of American factory workers who form a secret society called Mess-Mend (that is, deconstruct-construct) that is dedicated to thwarting the sinister plans of an international conspiracy of millionaires and aristocrats bent on defeating socialism. Their evil leader, Kressling, has invented a dread device that will ensure their control over the world. However, one of the millionaires, the engineer Jeremiah Rockerfeller (named Morlender in the revised edition), falls under the spell of the Soviet Union when he visits there. He is kidnapped by the conspirators, who fake his death to incite his son Arthur to visit the Soviet Union in disguise and avenge his father by blowing up strategic factories, including the Putilov with its great revolutionary pedigree. Arthur is to kill the Soviet leadership at the Revolution Day ceremonies by handing them a bomb in the guise of a tribute. Thus Petrograd, prime locus of the Revolution, is brought to the very brink of destruction, but members of Mess-Mend follow Arthur to Petrograd, outwit the conspirators, and save the city. In the end Arthur, like his father, is captivated by the workers' paradise. We note in this novel a reversal of the large-scale/small-scale pattern that characterized the culture of War Communism. The contrast is particularly evident if we compare this work with another that marked the climactic utopian moment of cultural life during War Communism, the fall of 1920, Mayakovsky's new epic poem 150,000,000, which he read to gatherings in Petrograd that December. This poem has a plot similar to that of Mess-Mend (the workers save the world from a capitalist hyena), except that in it the heroes are 150,000,000-strong (the population of the Soviet Union at the time), but in Mess-Mend they compose a small band. Admittedly, the small band is but the tip of a vast network behind the secret society MM (Mess-Mend), but the network is never more than a shadowy presence in the novel. Moreover, the small band, a veritable David that takes on the Goliath of international capital, is masterminded by a single individual known as Mick Thingmaster. The shift to adventure literature has meant an unacknowledged shift from collective to individual heroes. Mick Thingmaster shows incredible ingenuity in inventing and making devices that enable Mess-Mend's members to triumph over overwhelming odds, aiding the cause of their cloak-and-dagger counterconspiracy; they can penetrate walls, travel on power lines with the speed of electricity, and secretly record in sight and sound meetings of the conspirators. Shaginyan believed that her account of the workers' ability to produce such devices would demonstrate that those who work with their hands are superior to the effete capitalists.63In practice, however, it is Mick's head, his knowledge of science, rather than his actual hands, that help him outwit the capitalist conspirators. Mick appears as a combination of scientist-inventor and Sherlock Holmes, and not particularly as the fraternalist worker. Nevertheless, Meshcheryakov, the editor of the State Publishing House, recommended Mess-Mend as a "novel of our time," a novel of "movement," and as such a model for the "revolutionary-adventure genre."64Some new novels commissioned by the State Publishing House were, explicitly, to be modeled on Mess-Mend,65 and it was adopted as a model in leftist Germany as well.66 Mess-Mend, and other fiction written to a similar recipe, was published in those years in printings of tens and hundreds of thousands, while printings of nonadventure fiction rarely exceeded a few thousand copies.67 Shaginyan originally published Mess-Mend in serial form in ten inexpensive booklets, thus imitating the way most popular lowbrow Western fiction had appeared in mass editions before the Revolution.68 The booklets, however, had covers by the Constructivist artist A. Rodchenko. As this fact suggests, the attempt at adapting the formal features of Western lowbrow genres to serve the Soviet cause represents a convergence of interests between certain segments of the Party leadership and the highbrow avantgarde. Shaginyan was herself until this point best known for her essays and diaries on cultural topics and had recently become a close associate of the Formalists. Her novel is a revolutionary utopia and to that extent similar to the standard Western fare published by World Literature during War Communism, though in this instance the classic utopia has been refracted through Constructivism and then married to the Pinkerton. The actual utopia, a futuristic Petersburg that Shaginyan calls Radio City, emerges as a sort of new and more comprehensive version of Tatlin's tower. Radio City is actually an industrial complex but, as with Tatlin's tower, it is three-tiered and topped by a radio tower. On the citv's lower tier, natural resources are extracted and farming takes place. Here one sees many examples of tinkering with the ecology; for instance, in its farms everything is grown, from tropical products (coconuts, rice) to those of the Arctic (Icelandic moss), a provision that anticipates the Stalinist vogue for Michurin with his schemes for growing potatoes in the Arctic Circle and other agricultural "feats." On the second tier, the natural resources are processed, while on the third these processed materials are turned into manufactured goods. This thirá ter aiso has thousands of transport bays so that the end product can be whisked by airplanes to supply the farthest reaches.69 This tower-like colossus is more ambitious than Tatlin's in that it not merely celebrates revolution, but actually conquers nature once and for all. As if to symbolize this, Shaginyan tells us that it has eviscerated the infamous Petersburg swamps.70 The magical device ensuring this achievement is electricity. In fact Volkhovstroy, an electric station in the Petrograd Region then under construction as the pathbreaker for the Leninist scheme for the electrification of the country, is cited as the source of an "incredible energy." Incredible it must be, for it enables the industrial complex to control climate and ecological conditions completely with an "electro-climate," while simultaneously fueling the city's defense system, a high-voltage electrical field placed well above the city that in the event of an enemy attack can be turned on to serve as an impenetrable shield. In Radio City, not just defense and supply problems have been solved for all time, but also those long-standing contradictions and differences in society that concerned Marx. These include class contradictions, of course, but also the division between the country and the city and between mental and physical labor; the last has been overcome in a system whereby workers on the site intermittently leave their particular tasks to tour one of the other sections and learn about the work processes there. Radio City has also found solutions to some of the problems that utopias conventionally resolve; for instance, its planners have unlocked the secrets of retarding the aging process. The principal agenda realized in Radio City is, however, that of the Constructivists (for whom Tatlin's tower was an icon). Besides the Constructivist fetishization of technology and electricity one finds in this novel an emphasis on utilizing science to revolutionize the pace of human movement. Arthur is amazed by the incredible pace he sees on the Petrograd streets, not just of their vehicles, but also of the pedestrians who move at an inhuman speed. He meets a Professor of Striding who explains the alterations made to human physiology to achieve this (thanks to the work of Russian scientists such as M. Bekhterev). Thus the Russians have outdone even the Americans and produced the ultimate pace. The Jazz Age has met revolutionary utopia. "Here there is everything," the narrator exults, but in fact this "everything" is in just the one place—Petrograd.71 It was of course no longer the capital, and yet in Shaginyan's utopia it is all, the center of a unified socioeconomic-political system. This denouement is presented as the triumph of proletarian internationalism; all the nations are represented among those who work in the giant complex. In this utopia, ethnic and social problems have been eradicated, but at the price of homogenization. Shaginyan proudly proclaims that all production processes are standardized in a "single [yedinyy] method of economic activity."72 She likens the way everything is centrally coordinated in Radio City to a symphony in which "each performs his own partitura but hears only the symphony"—hardly jazz!73 Generically, by contrast, the novel is a hybrid made up of elements from different genres.74 With such a melange, it exemplifies what Shaginyan's friend Tynyanov called the literature of the “interregnum."In his account in "The Literature of Fact" (1923) of the evolutionary dynamic that gives rise to that kind of literature, Tynyanov posits an ongoing dance between genres at the "center" and those at the "periphery" (note how, as was typical for the culture of this time, he uses a spatial model for a temporal progression). According to Tynyanov's model, it is genres on the periphery that save (or regenerate/ supersede) the dominant genres at the center. His model, then, is analogous to that of this new kind of fiction (drama and film) in which peripheral Russia saves Europe. Such works, as it were, mediate the technology gap no less than the menace of fascism. Their basic plot also saves Russia from that recurrent phobia, provincialism: in Mess-Mend, the international conspiracy is sending assassins to Russia in order to become the rulers of Europe.75 Petrograd, so recently supplanted as Russia's capital, suddenly becomes the center of the world. It is probably no accident that while most Moscow writers of this new kind of literature set their works in some place only vaguely identified, almost all the Petrograd writers set their works in Petrograd itself.76 Tynyanov's general model in this essay, though intended to describe a dynamic in literature, was analogous to an account of cultural evolution in general that was more broadly found among the Petrograd coterie associated with the Committee on the Study of Contemporary Literature and the Serapion Brothers, and in effect represents a version of the one found in Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Like Kuhn, they posit an alternation between a period of the canonical, or "normal" science/literature, and a period of the noncanonical, as the old norms are what Shklovsky might call"defamiliarized."77 Zamyatin, another of the Serapions'mentors, in his essay "On Literature, Revolution, and Other Matters" (which he read to the Committee), figures his account of revolution in culture primarily using the alternation to be found in the theory of thermodynamics between energy and entropy, the slide into entropy being anaiogous toKuhn's slide into "normal science."Thus the main distinction between the models of Tynyanov, Shklovsky, and Zamyatin, and those of Kuhn is their respective valorization of "normal" and "abnormal." Zamyatin and the Formalists idealized heretics and those who "explode"or confound canons.78 Kuhn's model of alternating periods of "normal" and "abnormal" science was essentially descriptive, but the corresponding theories of Zamyatin and the Formalists were also prescriptive—hence the Committee. In seeking to influence the direction of Soviet literature with their prescription of "adventure literature," they as lovers of "heretics" warned against the pitfalls of slavish imitation or adaptation of existing models, recommending instead parody. The Formalists gave parody a crucial role in their account of literary evolution, where they described it as a kind of translation that more often than not involves deflation or lowering of the models of high culture. Shaginyan claimed that Mess-Mend was written as a parody of the adventure story, hence somewhat in the spirit suggested by the Formalists.79 However, the critics missed the point—as did the workers who snatched up copies and read them avidly.80 In Petrograd, the contemporary masters of parody were the young members of FEKS (an acronym for the Factory of the Eccentric Actor), a group founded in 1922 by two young enthusiasts from the provinces, Grigory Kozintsev (from Kiev) and Leonid Trauberg (from Odessa). The FEKS members, or FEKSy, were most representative of the nexus of things we have been discussing in this chapter—Westernism, co-option of Western lowbrow culture, Americanization, jazz, and a racy pace. They were young—they saw the Great War as teenagers—and they took these trends to an extreme. In that sense, they can be seen as emblematic of the age. The FEKSy picked up the baton from the avant-garde theater of War Communism, and particularly from Radlov's Peoples Comedy Theater, which also sometimes called itself "eccentric." As if to indicate this, they engaged as an instructor and performer in their "factory" the famous circus acrobat Serzh, who had been used by Radlov's theater (in Russian one of the meanings of "eccentric" refers to a clown).81 They were nevertheless careful to define themselves as younger and more truly avant-garde than such predecessors. In this endeavor they were joined by their Moscow friend and ally, Sergei Eisenstein (unfortunately, the friends' dream of combining forces in Moscow or Petrograd was never realized, but some claim that Eisenstein's theory of montage was really first conceived by FEKS). In these vears the FEKSy and Eisenstein did remarkably parallel work in Petrograd and Moscow, respectively, as can be seen in their first films, FEKS's The Adventures of Oktyabrina (December 1924) and Eisenstein's Strike (April 1925).82 The FEKSy were more radical than Eisenstein and went well beyond him in the area of épatage. But they were bent on shocking not just the bourgeoisie per se but more the tribal intellectual, the one who would react at the very mention of "the boulevard," the "café chantant," or "America," which the FEKSy proclaimed cardinal values.83 FEKS reveled in all those aspects of modern-day America that most of their contemporaries found repellant: not only the technology (focused in their cult of Edison as emblem of electricity and inventor of the cinema), but the strident, loud sounds, the ubiquitous advertisements, and even its lowbrow culture—Pinkertons, movies, jazz, and the music of the café chantant-was not merely to be tolerated, but proclaimed "the art of today" and put at the center of its cultural program.84Yet they were also fervent revolutionaries, insisting that art be "truly agitational, entertaining, and eccentric."85 The juxtaposition of these three qualities would seem to be a conundrum and in some senses FEKS represents a sort of zany version of Constructivism—Dadaist Constructivism, if you will.86 The first major production of FEKS was an adaptation of Gogol's play The Wedding (Zhenit'ba), which affronted its audience of 1922 with a cacophony of competing sounds, flickering lights, and a confusion and profusion of action on the stage. Figures dressed in garish clothing exchanged shouts and reprises about topical issues; they sang couplets and acted out strange pantomimes with dances and acrobatic feats. The affianced pair from Gogol (in conventional theatrical guise) were mixed in with constructions moving about on wheels. Then, in a flash, the backdrop was changed into a screen on which was projected a clip of Charlie Chaplin fleeing from the cops. Actors dressed and made up in the same way as those on the screen burst onto the front of the stage to act in parallel play with the movie. A circus clown shrieking ecstatically turned on a salto mortale right through the canvas of the backdrop, while "Gogol" bounced around on a platform with springs from which he was propelled to the ceiling.87 Thus Gogol was "translated" into postrevolutionary Russia. Clearly, however, this was less a translation than some sort of parody. In the earlier playful examples of revolutionary culture such as those found at the People's Comedy Theater or in the mass spectacle where the farcical essentially alternated with the tragic or elevated, the lines between genres and modes were preserved, but in this instance one finds an almost Postmodernist flouting of such borders—almost, but not really. The term “eccentric," which this group used tc nomna:e : art is a bit misleading because in the West it has connotazions of semething aberrant, unique, or even anarchic. The FEKSy did not. like manv Dadaists, for example, look to the "gratuitous gesture" as a paradigr for the sort of system-confounding art they represented. On the contrary, though they took the ideal of playful experimentation to an extreme, they were also absolutely serious about their pro-Soviet message. They were also not "eccentric" in the sense that for them cardinal values were control and discipline (even in executing the "hot" dances).88 To them "montage" meant "strict timing," a position shared by Meyerhold and Eisenstein at this time.89 In these years, the Formalists, together with representatives of left art such as the Constructivists, emphasized in their writings the necessity of organizing a given artifact or situation (be it a building, a musical piece, a painting, or a poem) and studying how it was put together.Yet at the same time the Formalists focused on the arbitrariness of a work's length or plot structure. They saw particular merit in playing with the devices in a given work, in stringing along episodes or devices, retarding plot development, and various techniques for playing with the direct chronological sequence of events (an interest in adventure and detective fiction was a natural for them).90 Thus they and other members of their coterie wanted to usher in an age of "plot" (organization) in literature. Yet at the same time what they advocated was a kind of antisystematic system. So, then, was this systematic, or not? And what, too, is jazz? Is it improvisation, or is it timing? Is it cacophony, or is it the new-age symphony? Is it a "carnival" form, or is it, as Gorky was later to contend, pornography? Is it the vice of the upper classes, or is it the voice of the oppressed (of the barely freed slaves)?91Is it a new form, or is it a corruption or degradation of the old? Is it "mess" or is it "mend"? Thus we are up against the paradox of revolution again—revolution as iconoclasm and demystification but also as affirmation on a monumental scale. This time the paradox emerges in a different articulation. One problem with the Formalists' analysis is that a parodic literature tends to be a posterior literature. The question is, how do you get from abnormal to normal science? In order for the antisystematic to become system it has to be perceived as such; much depends on institutional history and what it is modish to call "situatedness"; today's parody may become tomorrow's canon—especially if it proves to be popular, as was Mess-Mend. Moreover, a "permanent revolution" of systems, such as Zamyatin advocated, essentially militates against meaning. Even Shklovsky began to sense this. In a 1925 foreword to Mustard Gas (Iprit), his contribution to the "red Pinkerton" (a novel he co-authored with the Serapion Brother Vs. Ivanov), he confessed that in this book he had overdone "playing with the clichés" of the translated novel of adventure, that there was excessive "stylization" and "ironic parody" that he hoped to correct in his future efforts.92 By then, many had begun to think that the "red Pinkerton,"the hasty reconfiguration of Western adventure novels and films as "revolutionary culture," was only a bandaid solution.93 To say "Go West" through "alien hills" is essentially to say ditch the cult of Pushkin, ditch the norms and sacred cows of the intelligentsia. The Petrograd Formalists were not prepared to do that. Hence they oscillated. They were suspended between the Jazz Age of the immediately younger generation and the authority figures among their elders.94 There were also extraliterary factors fostering a reappraisal of Western genres, as the next chapter will show. Thus the "red Pinkerton"formula for the new culture was not productive for long. Consequently, this period proved to be more of an "interregnum" than even Tynyanov anticipated. And yet, this interregnum did not prove entirely sterile. All was not "plundered, betrayed, and sold out" as even Akhmatova recognized, but rather it had to be rethought, reconfigured, regenred. The next three chapters outline successive attempts at creating new models for a truly Soviet culture, and, as we shall see, each in its own way has distinct links with Mess-Mend and the "red Pinkerton"—and even with the work of FEKS.