# THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SOVIET CULTURE In September 1924 Leningrad was engulfed by a disastrous flood. The Neva broke its banks, covering such landmarks as Nevsky Prospect and Vasilevsky Island. Since so many cultural institutions were situated in the center of town, they were particularly hard hit. In many theaters, for instance, the costumes or the heating and lighting were destroyed; in the case of the Bolshoi Drama Theater, the roof was torn off.1 The fact that this flood occurred exactly one hundred years after its famous predecessor, the great flood of 1824, did not go unremarked. The high-water mark of that flood was the focus of newspaper reports trying to gauge the severity of the more recent one; the flood of 1824 rose to thirteen feet seven inches, whereas the flood of 1924 rose to thirteen feet, thus coming closer than any other flood to reaching the level of 1824.2 Needless to say, comparisons with 1824 need not only be in terms of highwater marks. Since the 1824 flood was the subject of Pushkin's The Bronze Horseman, the principal text of the myth of Petersburg, this flood brought into sharper focus once again the city's existential dilemmas, and also the issues of modernization and the authoritarian state that many have assumed to be aired in Pushkin's poem. On October 7, 1924, the same day that the Life of Art printed an appeal for flood relief, it also published extracts from a new play by Evreinov called The Commune of the Righteous (Kommuna pravednykh), which draws on the biblical story of Noah and his ark. The play, written in a "heroic grotesque," is about how the idealist hopes of an intelligentsia tragically remote from real life "run aground" as they are dashed against the reality of a more worldly working class who do not share their quixotic idealism and are easily able to gain the upper hand. Most of the action of the play takes place on the deck of a "hermit ship" that houses an anarchic "commune of the righteous" inspired by a poet who has been nicknamed "the crazed one." One can't help speculating whether the play is not in part a dig at Mayakovsky as the author of Mystery-Bouffe, another free interpretation of the biblical legend of Noah's ark.3 Thus, effectively, Evreinov is announcing not just the end, but also the failure, of the ethos that inspired the cultural Renaissance of Petrograd during War Communism. Evreinov himself emigrated in 1925 when his troupe went on a European tour. Other fellow directors of the mass spectacle, such as Yury Annenkov and Dimitry Tiomkin, left the previous year (Alexandr Benois emigrated a vear later). Most of the would-be theatrical renovators remained, however, to experience a more fundamental shift in the dominant patterns of cultural life than the Revolution had as yet effected. In the mid-1920s, approximately 1924-1926, we can already find the contours of those patterns—institutional, ideological, and aesthetic—that in the 1930s were to re-emerge as defining a culture we call "Stalinism."4 The shifts around 1924 were so major that one may talk of the emergence of a post-NEP culture.5Of course it was not entirely the case that NEP had disappeared as a force in cultural life, but in literature at any rate stiff taxes and other factors conspired to reduce the number of private publishing houses, and especially the number of their titles.6 Moreover, some literary groups had begun to disavow the principles of pluralism and creative autonomy that they had insisted on just a few years before.7 An obvious starting point for this shift would be Lenin's death on January 21, which raised the possibility that the new leadership might effect a change in cultural policy. The direction this change was to take was not immediately apparent and was to emerge in increasingly heated debates conducted over the ensuing ten years. There were some disquieting signs from the very beginning, however. For instance, in Leningrad the censors became more active.8 A palpable sign of change after Lenin's death was the decree of the Petrograd Soviet on January 24th that the city should be renamed Leningrad.9 Zinoviev, the ambitious head of the Party in the city, had pushed the new name through immediately, hoping, presumably, to emphasize Leningrad's status as cradle of the Revolution—the "city of Lenin." The renaming of the city and the ensuing flood were superficial markers of change. Yet with their ominous resonances both events lend themselves to interpretation as signaling that perennially proclaimed "end of Petersburg," the end of a time when a distinctive ethos informed the city's cultural life, and the beginning of the dark days when a sort of "bronze horseman," or highly authoritarian central power (now located in Moscow), sought to impose its will on creative activity. Leningrad intellectuals, already taunted by the thought that they were passé, were being invaded by new cultural trends from Moscow that many found alien and threatening. These trends were not only Constructivism (which was often welcomed) but the self-styled "proletarian" or "revolutionary" cultural organizations that were militantly opposed to most of the trends that had dominated in the city over the past ten years. Around 1922 there had formed in Moscow a plethora of proletarian or revolutionary cultural organizations, each representing a different branch of the arts. In literature, the dominant organization wasVAPP (the All-Russian Association of Proletarian Writers, founded in 1921); in music, it was RAPM (the Russian Association of Proletarian Musicians, founded in 1923); and in art, it was AKhRR (the Association of Artists of Revolutionary Russia, founded in 1922). There had of course been other proletarian and revolutionary cultural bodies before (notably the Proletcult), but these new organizations were markedly more militant vis-à-vis others in their field; a Soviet literary historian aptly titled his book on the VAPP leadership Implacable Zealots.10 Each was actively committed to eliminating particular groups or trends from Soviet culture, especially the avant-garde and the modernists. VAPP's particular bête noire was the so-called fellow-traveler (poputchik), or, in others words, the uncommitted writer who was generally sympathetic to the Revolution but not yet won over completely to its cause. To VAPP's dismay, Trotsky had argued in Literature and Revolution (1923), influential in these years, that the proletariat were not sufficiently cultured to produce a world-class literature and hence the poputchiki would be the mainstay of Soviet literature during the current interim period before a classless society was achieved. Members of VAPP were outraged at the notion that bourgeois writers could be so much as tolerated in these revolutionary times and demanded hegemony for the "proletarians," by which they largely meant those associated with the Party or Komsomol. For those fearing an art of capitulation, the invasion of proletarian culture from Moscow was ominous because these groups generally equated revolutionary aesthetics with the traditional realism of the nineteenth century, against which had been directed the energies of the pre- and postrevolutionary avant-garde.11 AKhRR also amalgamated in its ranks or included in its many exhibitions members of several prerevolutionary highbrow artistic groups, including some from the World of Art who had originally risen in reaction against realism but were now offended by the avant-garde's nonrepresentationalism. In Leningrad, the threat of a general changeover in culture grew stronger as one by one branches of the militantly proletarian Moscow organizations were established there. LAPP, the Leningrad branch of the writers' organization VAPP, was formed in late 1922.12 AKhRR formed local branches in 1923, and by 1925 it had secured control of the Academy of Arts in Leningrad with the installation of Ye. Ye. Essen, its new director.13By 1924, Malevich was to remark bitterly, "[Leningrad's] art world is full of 'the spirits of the time of Pericles' who nurture hopes of 'Parthenonizing' [oparfenochit'] or 'Renaissancizing' [orenessansit'] this dynamic modern age, of "Turgenevizing' [oturgenit'] literature."14 With this changeover, youth became an even greater value than in the preceding two years, but now what was meant by "youth" was not young people in general but politically committed youth. "Worker youth" became a veritable slogan, but it contained the implication "Komsomol." That a given kind of art did not serve the young became in these years almost as valid a grounds for attack as the charge that it did not serve the workers; it was, for instance, under these terms that the high-minded, socially conscious Mobile Traveling Theater of Gaydeburov, one of the cradles of the movement for a people's theater, was vilified and forced to close in 1924.15 It was not just the Komsomol that was emerging as a major force in culture, but also the Party. Leading figures within it, such as Trotsky and Bukharin, had become more active on the cultural front than before, arguing that the Revolution's ultimate goals could not be reached without a massive cultural transformation.16 A defining feature of these years was a new militancy for a truly Soviet rather than just some wishy-washy "revolutionary" culture. By 1925 a new troika of slogans had come to dominate the articles in Leningrad's cultural journals: "Marxism," "sociology," and "workers" (or "workerization" [orabocheniyeD). Hardly new, they were now de rigueur and every player in the game of establishing a new culture had to invoke them and justify his or her position in terms of them. As a corollary, in cultural journals the two most frequently found negative labels were “apoliticism" and "aestheticism"; bald content was in (the correct content, of course). To ensure this in the theater, a temporary commission was formed to oversee the repertoire of the State theaters in Moscow and Leningrad whose members included the Party historian V. I. Nevsky, Lunacharsky, and Voronsky;17 also, senior representatives of the Party, trade unions, and proletarian writers' organizations were put on their repertoire commissions. A sign of the new times, in September 1924 a new journal appeared in Leningrad, the Worker and the Theater (Rabochiy i teatr), which, continuing through the 1920s, was to rival the Life of Art as the principal weekly cultural organ. Even in the Life of Art the weighting of traditional sections shifted, giving more space to the activities of the various proletarian cultural organizations. Similar shifts can be found in most fields; for instance, during the publishing year 1925-1926 there was a marked increase in the number of works by proletarian writers;18 scholars and cultural bureaucrats began to make studies of worker responses to plays, films, art, and literature, and architects and artists turned their attention to designing workers' homes, clubs, and even clothing. Such trends were particularly fateful for that cluster of Leningrad intellectuals loosely composing the Formalists and their disciples both among the Serapion Brothers and among the students and organizations attached to the Division of the Verbal Arts at GIII. They began 1924 feeling confident. Many of their articles appeared in the Life of Art and the Russian Contemporary, and they formed the Committee for Contemporary Literature. Their particular changeover in literary theory and practice never got very far off the ground, however; their names disappeared from the Life of Art, and the Russian Contemporary made only four issues before being forced to close down. Later that year the Formalists were subjected to sustained attacks by Marxists (hitherto, the main attacks had come largely from the right, including religious thinkers).19 GIII was also called to task for its inattention to that new troika "Marxism," "sociology," and "workers."20 In response, it hastily formed in 1924 a Circle for the Marxist Study of Art (at which Piotrovsky was invited to give lectures).21 Soon thereafter, it set up a Committee on the Sociology of Art, whose particular mandate was to "study contemporary Soviet art" and to try to involve in its work that valuable commodity "young students."22 The director even claimed that this committee was the "heart" of the Institute.23 GIII also set up a Section for the Study of the Arts of October (that is, of the mass spectacles, placards, and so on), which in turn set up a "permanent museum of Red October" at the Academy of the Arts, proclaiming that the displays would be mounted in accordance with something it called the "complex Marxist method."24 The "art of the circus tent" had been taken inside to the museums. The era of flamboyant revolutionary culture was waning; symptomatically, one of its colorful figures, the poet Sergei Esenin, committed suicide at the end of 1925 (he actually did so in Leningrad, having just "moved" there from Moscow to escape what he experienced as its stifling atmosphere). Yet one need not see Lenin's death as the cause of a major shift in cultural politics that took place at approximately that time. It could be argued that an event of late 1923 was more consequential. This event—or nonevent— was the failure of the German revolutionary uprising of October-November There had been too many failed revolutions, and this one delivered a coup de grâce to the long-nurtured expectations that an international proletarian revolution was imminent. Although Trotsky continued to insist that revolutions in Europe and the East were both essential and inevitable and would be followed by a confrontation with the capitalist hyena in America,25 few were able to sustain his faith. The sort of internationalism that had defined early revolutionary cultural endeavor was fast receding; there was even a backlash of anti-Westernism. In the new anti-Western climate, hopes for a cosmopolitan or sophisticated urbanist culture were particularly threatened. Symptomatically, the publishing house World Literature was closed in 1924, and in that same year Lunacharsky introduced a new slogan for the theater: "Back to [the Russian nineteenth-century dramatist] Ostrovsky!" Critics took this as their cue to argue that the "left" theater was manifestly illegitimate in revolutionary Russia because it did not develop out of national traditions but came from Europe, or worse still, from the infamous United States.26Even the Fine Arts Section of GIII, its most conservative in aesthetic terms, and its Moscow counterpart in GAKhN were attacked in 1924-1925 as "hotbeds of West European art" and subjected to purges on that basis, while AKhRR in its programmatic statements rejected "taking forms of art from the West ... such as Cézanne, Derain, and Picasso—and transplanting them into a soil that is alien to them both psychologically and economically."27 To some extent, militant anti-Westernism among Party and proletarian circles went along generational lines, with the younger generation usually the more conservative. The older leaders were more cosmopolitan in their outlook than a new, Komsomol generation that entered cultural politics through Party work during the Civil War and was at this point a rising force. One can sense this division in a moment during the Central Committee meeting of 1924 called to clear the air on the issue of "proletarian literature" when Trotsky discussed theoretical issues in terms of Dante and an Italian Marxist, but his opponents from VAPP replied with references to Vissarion Belinsky and the debates in which that pre-Marxist champion of a national school of socially committed "realist" literature was embroiled in the nineteenth century.28 The two generations were talking past each other. As revolutionary internationalism declined, the previously dominant historical models informing literature, film, and drama that figured progress over time in a distinctly Euro-centric purview lost currency. The new focus on Russia alone in official ritual, film, literature, and so on meant a loss of geographic scale. The temporal (historical) dimension gained correspondingly in importance. As compared with that of the earlier mass spectacles, however, this scale was also reduced; the grand sweep from ancient Greece through the present and beyond had been cut to a span of a mere century or so. Around this time the official genealogy of the Revolution was revised (a revision that stood for the next sixty years). The version that informed most cultural production charted the road to October not from ancient Greece or the French Revolution but from the Russian peasant revolts of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (Stenka Razin and Pugachev) as a sort of prelude, through the Decembrist uprising of 1825, to the 1905 Russian revolution. Sometimes other moments were added, such as the reigns of Peter the Great or Ivan the Terrible, but there were no non-Russian milestones. It might seem that cultural workers were hastily adjusting their models in response to a shift of policy made by Stalin (the doctrine of "Socialism in One Country" first aired publicly in an article he wrote in December 1924). In fact, it was Bukharin who first formulated this shift in policy; Stalin popularized it.29 Moreover, as was remarked in Chapter 6, a shift had already occurred among some intellectual circles to a more Russo-centric sense of identity, seen in events such as the Pushkin celebrations of 1921. Indeed, since around 1922, that is, at the same time as the "red Pinkerton"with its atemporal, Euro-centric narrative had been a model for a wide range of cultural production, there had been a growing vogue for works on Russian historical topics. This was particularly the case in workers' theaters, where the 1825 /1905 /1917 genealogy for the Revolution had structured many of the skits prepared for them, characteristically by Piotrovsky or one of his associates, but typically based on a conflation of earlier texts from writers such as Blok and Dmitry Merezhkovsky (the latter had emigrated!).30 By the mid 1920s, when this genealogy had assumed official status and the Party was even putting its historian (Nevsky) on theater boards, any Euro-centric model of revolutionary progress was precluded. Clearly, the movement for creating an Athens on the Nevsky, Piotrovsky's passion of slightly earlier times, was doomed. He and Radlov still sporadically staged reworked versions of the classical Greek theater, but their efforts were labeled "alien to a worker audience."31 Instead, a whole series of plays for factories was developed covering topics from the Russian past, not only revolutionary subjects, but also the history of Petersburg.32 The emphasis in cultural policy was no longer on iconoclasm but on creating new and enduring icons. Editorials insisted that mass spectacles for the revolutionary holidays were to be considered not ephemeral events, but rituals to be passed on to "future generations" to help give them a vivid and uplifting sense of revolutionary history.33 The audience was to be given "real history, not a tarted up version of the Old Regime fare of the fairground tent. . . ."34Lenin also gained a more central role in mass celebrations of revolutionary days, and by 1925 huge portraits of him became de rigueur. This shift to a more enduring iconography was a crucial development in the evolution of the genus "Stalinist culture." Parallel with the shift to historical subjects had come a shift in the dominant cultural field from theater to literature. Two Central Committee resolutions on literature, one of 1924 and especially that of 1925, functioned for some years as the ex cathedra pronouncements on culture in general.35 Moreover, around the mid-1920s emerged some of the key works to be singled out in the 1930s as models for socialist realism.36 Nineteen twenty-five was a particularly crucial year in the evolution of the new, official culture. That year F. Gladkov's novel Cement and S. Eisenstein's film The Battleship Potemkin appeared. Both were hailed by the powers that be as the long-awaited models for a Soviet culture, while works such as Marietta Shaginyan's "red Pinkerton" Mess-Mend, promoted so recently, faded from view. Potemkin had a gratifyingly proletarian and revolutionary subject—the mutiny of sailors on the Potemkin as a symbolic encapsulation of the 1905 revolution—and officialdom buried their prejudices against avant-garde endeavors for the moment to endorse it. Cement was even more promising in that it was a popular novel by a writer from the proletarian literary organization "Smithy"(Kuznitsa, actually a rival of VAPP). Its hero combines in his biography all the desirable givens: he is a factory worker, Party member, and a highly decorated hero of the Civil War. Hence the novel's appearance in a year when everyone was clamoringfor "workerization"was particularly timely. The novel was greeted in official quarters with the most inflated praise. Lunacharsky outdid his peers by pronouncing, "On this cement foundation we can build further."37Actually, Soviet culture did not get to build much "further" for some decades in the sense that Cement became the single most influential novel in providing the basic patterns for the conventional plot of Soviet literature of the Stalinist 1930s and 1940s—a cement “overcoat."38In the Stalin years it was the novel rather than the theater or film that emerged as the leading genre of official Soviet culture—its analogue to the Peking Opera for PRC culture—but we do see a shift in other genres in these years. Indeed, in 1925 Piotrovsky was already talking about the "novelization"of the theater.39 The crucial development in the direction of socialist realism was not "novelization" per se, however, but the emergence about this time of a formulaic biography informing both cultural products and political rhetoric that enacted the principal political myths of the Bolsheviks. Cement played a distinct role in this development, and hence its appearance in 1925 has to be regarded as an even greater milestone than the leadership's hyperbole claimed it to be Cement and Potemkin had an analogue in art, in this case contributions from the Leningrad figure Isaak Brodsky, who emerged in these years as the nearest thing to an official artist. Brodsky, with a prerevolutionary record of leftist sympathizing and consistent opposition to abstract and "decadent" art, largely devoted himself after the Revolution to creating an official iconography (primarily portraits of Bolshevik leaders). Two works of 1924-1926 established his position as artist laureate and the Russian Revolution's David, the Neoclassical official artist of the French Revolution. Both these works were singled out at the time as models for the new Soviet culture. The first was his epic canvas The Official Opening of the Second Congress of the Comintern (1920–1924), a huge commissioned work that depicted the Congress's six hundred Soviet and foreign delegates. Functionally, it was a sort of Tennis Court Oath, David's most famous revolutionary canvas (although in execution it was more reminiscent of the "architectural landscapes" of Neoclassical Petersburg done early in the twentieth century). The second, The Execution of the Twenty-six Baku Martyrs (1925) commissioned by Kirov, who was then head of the Party in Azerbaidzhan, was like the Oath of the Horatii (David's most famous Neoclassical work) in that it also illustrated the theme of civic duty as the higher calling.40 Brodsky joined AKhRR in 1923, and his popularity with prominent Bolsheviks is a major reason AKhRR flourished, especially in his native Leningrad. His works became centerpieces for the organization, which, together with various government agencies, arranged exhibitions of the paintings and their sketches in Moscow, Leningrad, and other major cities patronized by the Party leadership.41 Brodsky was particularly valued because he could be construed as standing in a direct line of succession going back to Repin, with whom he once worked and whom members of AKhRR identified as their model. The Soviet authorities were courting Repin to return from emigration in Finland with the hope that he might produce just such occasional paintings as did Brodsky (the closest they came to that was getting his son to do a commissioned work).42 They were courting Gorky as well, with whom Brodsky also had associations. Thus the young were no longer "muscling" the older generation aside. In many quarters, including the official, there was a tremendous premium on establishing a senior authority figure—ideally, one with a prerevolutionary pedigree—to function as emblem for each field in culture. This trend reemerged in the 1930s when Gorky assumed that function in literature, as did Nikolai Marr in linguistics. Thus it might be said that the flood of 1924 was a harbinger of the new hegemonic culture. Many Leningrad intellectuals—supporters of high art and supporters of left art alike—fought valiantly against its tide,43 but ended up as devastated as were the theaters in the flood. But clearly this account is too simplistic. In 1924-1926, for all the saber rattling of the proletarian groups and other militants, for all the political pressures to "workerize," and so forth, the country's culture was still essentially in transition and open-ended. After all, each of the three official models for the new culture— Cement, Fotemkin, and the art of Brodsky—represents a different school. Moreover, not all three models were to enjoy this status into the 1930s (Potemkin was by then out of favor and Brodsky had been eclipsed by Sergei Gerasimov). With the benefit of hindsight one can pick out the contours of socialist realism in the variegated landscape, but they were not so clear at the time. An important aspect of this open-endedness was the extent to which cultural groups in the two capital cities were in dialogue. The new Moscow cultural empire did not simply colonize Petersburg. When Leningrad branches were formed of the new Moscow proletarian organizations, often they stood for very different things from those of the parent organization in Moscow. A striking case of this would be LAPP (the Leningrad Branch of VAPP), which housed several factions, each espousing a position quite different from that of the "implacable zealots" of the VAPP leadership in Moscow: initially, LAPP was dominated by the "Cosmists," a group of utopian fantasizers, some of whom (the "Biocosmist" faction) saw in the Bolshevik Revolution a hope for achieving biological immortality;44 later, the association included the Komsomol literary group Changeover (Smena), which looked to a sort of international "urbanist" tradition that included among its models Baudelaire, Proust, and Gumilëv (a "white guardist")—a far cry from VAPP's models Belinsky and Tolstoy;45 and after 1926 LAPP was joined by the Moscow group thrown out of power in a recent leadership tussle in VAPP, that is, by ultra-leftist, even more implacable, zealots. Another, widespread form of dialogue with the emerging official culture to be found in Leningrad was the way intellectuals appropriated the new official genealogy for 1917 (1825 to 1905 to 1917) as a vehicle for exploring their own existential dilemmas and presenting their own programs. Around 1925 this practice was most evident because that year marked special anniversaries of the first two dates in the triad, the ene-urcrec annersarv of 1825 and the twentieth anniversarv of 1905. in eficial commemorations, 1825 was eclipsed by 1905, receiving very little coverage n the press or public rituals.46On the whole,avant-gardists foregrounded 1905in their work, too; for instance, the 1905revolution is the subject of Eisenstein's Potemkin. But among Leningrad intellectuals, including Eisenstein's erstwhile allies in FEKS, the topic of choice was events associated with 1825.47 For intellectuals to take a period one hundred years earlier as their paradigmatic time, one that is not temporally contiguous with the present but rather parallel at a century's remove, is to opt for allegorical rather than etiological potential. They focused on the movement from 1825 (and its buildup) to the succeeding decades under Nicholas I because they could engage in this mediated way the movement from a time of revolution to one of reaction. Eighteen twenty-five emerges in their works not just as a revolutionary high point, but more as a nodal point leading to the 1830s and 1840s, that is, to Nicolaevan Russia, which became a particular obsession of intellectuals around this time as an exemplum, generally presented in the grotesque mode, of stagnation, bureaucratism, obtuseness, and provincialism. The focus on 1825 could also be seen as intellectuals' immersing themselves in a time when they enjoyed more aristocratic status, a retreat in the face of rising anti-intellectualism to be found even in public ritual and culture (it is quite marked in Cement).48 The intellectuals' obsession with 1825 was most marked in literature. A good example is the Formalist Tynyanov's fictional account of the Decembrists in his novel Kyukhlya (1925). Kyukhlya concerns the life of Wilhelm Kyukhel'beker, a minor literary figure and peripheral and inept participant in the uprising who later died in Siberian exile after years in solitary confinement in tsarist prisons. With Kyukhel'beker as his ostensible focus, Tynyanov contrived to include in the novel an almost encyclopedic sweep of the literary intelligentsia of that time. Against this broad canvas he explored the theme of the intellectual who is out of step with, or a casualty of, his times ("vybyl iz vremeni"), a theme of obvious contemporary resonance that was taken up in other studies of Nicolaevan Russia from this time.49 Thus Tynyanov could be accused of biographism, along with the rest of the Formalist crowd working in literary theory at this time. They had earlier attacked the emerging Pushkin cult in Russia for its biographism. In the mid-1920s, however, whether in response to pressures to do scholarship with a more "sociological" methodology, or whether in the course of their own evolution, they became immersed in Russian literary history. The Leningrad Formalists Tynyanov and Eikhenbaum—and Shklovsky, who was now in Moscow but maintained close contact with his associates in Leningrad—produced several critical biographies of nineteenth-century writers, and also became interested in the literary and publishing politics and economics of that time. Thus they in a sense reverted to their roots in the Vengerov Circle (a famous study group Tynyanov and Eikhenbaum attended while students at Petersburg University and which pursued rigorous if somewhat conventional scholarship on Pushkin and his contemporaries), even though they had always defined themselves as Formalists against its approach to the study of literature. Indeed, the novel Kyukhlya itself can be regarded as a return on Tynyanov's part to the subject of his long paper "Pushkin and Kyukhel'beker" which he wrote for this circle but which was destroyed by fire in 1918.50 Ironically, in Kyukhlya Tynyanov was partly using biography as a vehicle to attack the creeping biographism of the times. One of his missions was to demystify the plaster saint Pushkin and also to provide a healthy antidote to the recent vogue in plays and films about historical figures (tsars and writers) for titillating detail and sensationalism. More important, Tynyanov's barbs in this book seem to be aimed principally-more than at extracultural, political targets—at defending the principles of perceptual millenarianism against AKhRR and other spokesmen for a tame or romanticized culture.51 Some key passages are effectively polemics for the crucial role to be played by "contingency" in any revolutionary culture and attacks on the cult of "precision" and "standardization."52Moreover, although the bumbling Kyukhel'beker is in the foreground of his novel, the writers Pushkin and Griboedov emerge unmistakably as its unofficial heroes whose work exemplifies preferred approaches. Thus Tynyanov is not only demythologizing but also simultaneously countermythologizing, much as he has taken the official genealogy of revolution—1825/1905/1917—but reinflected it. From the mid- to the late 1920s the debate about the nature of revolutionary culture was at its most intense. Hence not just "political interference" but also intra-intelligentsia theoretical rivalries were a major factor in the evolution of that culture. As the various parties debated what a "revolutionary"culture might be around 1925, there were some who were in the thrall of facts and the culture of "everyday life" (something analogous to Neue Sachlichkeit among the avant-garde of Weimar Germany)53while others sought a "monumental" culture of heroic pathos. The dominant positions in this debate can be found right across the proletarian/nonproletarian or Marxist/non-Marxist spectra. In other words, there was no correlation between participants' political positions and their aesthetic agendas. Within particular movements, and among adherents to particuiar :sms. notasly that elusive "realism," individuals took opposite positions in the debate. Thus the mid-1920s saw a shift to a more proletarian and tendentious art, but debates on the nature of Soviet culture were still fierce and its direction not yet set. The firebrands from organizations like RAPP, RAPM, and AKhRR posed the greatest threat to nonproletarian and experimental groups were they ever to be given much power, but at this point it was still an open question whether they would be or not. Significantly, the principal VAPP organ, On Guard (Na postu), which was intended to appear monthly, had trouble with funding and paper and was able to secure publication for only five issues for the entire period the journal ran between 1923 and 1925; by contrast, the principal fellow-traveler organ, Red Virgin Soil (Krasnaya nov'), appeared monthly and enjoyed the largest circulation of any literary journal. Moreover, in 1924 and 1925 Party leaders acted as defenders of the fellow-travelers against proletarian attacks, calling a meeting of the Central Committee Press Section in response to their petitions.54 The meeting's resolutions, which generally reasserted the principle that the proletarian associations could not exercise hegemony, were those documents that functioned for some years as the ex cathedra pronouncements on cultural policy in general. Bolshevik leaders were probably reluctant to endorse proletarian movements because they did not see them as sufficiently cultivated. Trotsky consistently withstood VAPP pressures to promote its writer Yury Libedinsky and label Pilnyak a pernicious bourgeois, calling Libedinsky's writings "the work of a schoolboy" who needs to do more work if he is to be taken seriously as a writer.55 Similarly, although Lunacharsky clearly felt obliged to praise Cement fulsomely, he was reluctant to suggest that it represented any final answer (writers must "build further"). Moreover, far from praising proletarian ventures only, Lunacharsky in his review articles on the cultural scene frequently singled out for commendation such works as N. Erdman's Mandat (first produced by Meyerhold) and the modernist composers Stravinsky and Prokofiev.56 The Party was far from a monolith at this time and in it cultural issues were hotly debated (as were economic and political issues). It was virtually a mirror of the cultural intelligentsia inasmuch as most factions in the intelligentsia's debates could find sympathizers somewhere in the Party hierarchy. AKhRR's battle with left art in Leningrad was largely a struggle to see who could find the most powerful patrons in the Party. The left artists had their patrons who resolved in their favor, but AKhRR was able to appeal to officials at a higher level.57 The problem of who and what (which groups, which approaches) the state, Komsomol, and Party would favor in culture had its own very practical aspects. The later years of NEP were a time of galloping unemployment for intellectuals. Yet the issue of which approach was to be favored was resolved not by the Party per se but, to a greater extent than has been recognized, by popular taste (which many Party functionaries also represented) The masses were not going to the very cultural institutions which, in theory, the Revolution had freed them to enjoy. The highbrow theater was perilously underattended and, as surveys at the time established, people weren't even going to the workers' theaters or reading proletarian literature58 (Cement's popularity, anomalous in those days, was undoubtedly a factor in its official endorsement). The bogeyman of intellectuals, proletarian culture, really represented a small fraction of cultural production at this point, and an even smaller percentage of cultural consumption. Everyone was watching American films. Nineteen twenty-five was not only the year of Cement and Potemkin, but also the year when such films by Douglas Fairbanks as Robin Hood, The Thief of Baghdad, and other Hollywood versions of the exotic adventure movie absolutely dominated the Soviet screen.59 The overwhelming majority of the new films shown at this time were from the United States, outnumbering even Soviet productions four to one.60Fairbanks and his actress wife Mary Pickford—the king and queen of the Western public—were the heartthrobs of the Russian populace, and when they visited Moscow in 1926 they were virtually mauled by frenzied mobs of fans. Such Western films represented to many of those in authority the filthiest of that muck in the "Augean stable" which an enlightened Soviet government had to clean out. Reviewers of Fairbanks' films were generally quick to point out the misguided representation of class relations in his historical romances.61Yet Soviet movie houses continued to show Western films. Moreover, those shown were far from foreign imports smuggled in as part of the laxness and state-sanctioned private enterprise of NEP. Most of them were part of a huge purchase made by the Old Bolshevik L. Krasin in 1924.62 Similarly, under state patronage prerevolutionary vogues and even institutions for exotic adventure literature were revived. In 1925 two popular mass journals were launched that were explicitly dedicated to providing Soviet versions of such fare "in the American style"—Thirty Days (Tridtsat' dney), which specialized in short stories and essays, and the Universal Investigator (Vsemirnyy sledopyt), which called itself a "monthly journal devoted to travel, adventure, and science fiction."63 Thirty Days had a profile very similar to that of Argus, a popular Petersburg jourrai of the 1910s, right down to having the same editor, V. A. Renigin. The Unicersal Investigator was edited by Popov, the former editor of the prerevolutionary popular journal Around the World (Vokrug Sveta),64 itself to be revived by the Komsomol in 1927. Such ambiguous actions on the part of the state in regard to the "Augean stable" are patent in perusing any issue of the journal the Life of Art from 1925. Frequently, on the front cover of a given issue would be a photo of Fairbanks, Buster Keaton, or some other Hollywood star, usually from his or her latest movie. Then, immediately inside the cover, the editorial would rail against this kind of art, and call for cleaning up the cinemas and producing healthy, proletarian art. The ensuing pages would more or Iess continue the theme, but the supplement at the end frequently carried movie chitchat about the latest exploits of the exotic Hollywood stars, and possibly of émigré figures such as Anna Pavlova and Chaliapin as well. Clearly, the journal had to sell, and material about the Hollywood stars would ensure that they did just that. As if to confirm this, an article in the journal that year pointed out that while programs with Soviet movies accounted for 27-30 percent of all showings in movie theaters, the returns on them were only 14–19 percent of the total.65 The Life of Art did, however, have to establish its credentials as a fighter for the cause of revolutionary proletarian culture (a cause that was probably genuinely espoused by the editor, at least). But the leadership was also aware that it was faced with a dilemma. While Lunacharsky dismissed The Thief of Baghdad as "rubbish," he went on to point out that purely didactic and agitational films are no antidote. Effective agitational movies will have to be "gripping" and "fictional"—like these Hollywood products.66 The Fairbanks films are dominated by the figure of Fairbanks himself, the larger-than-life swashbuckler who defies physical limitations to leap, swing, or even fly as he overcomes daunting obstacles and attains impossible goals-a Tarzan of the historical romance and a Superman before his time. As even some Soviet reviewers noted, Fairbanks is exuberant, fearless, always smiling and optimistic, and the epitome of robust youth and physicality (despite his forty years when he made The Thief of Baghdad).67 Frequently naked from the waist up or with his shirt half open to reveal a rippling torso, Fairbanks was dubbed "Mr. Electricity," a term that, in this instance, meant sheer pulsating energy rather than icon of the new technology. He performs breathtaking feats with great exuberance, but always for good causes, whether the cause be love (as in The Thief of Baghdad) or defending the oppressed (as in Robin Hood). Some historians of the cinema have analyzed Fairbanks's films in terms of their function of mediating the passage the masses must make to a corporate America.68 But his kind of action hero proved no less functional in the Soviet Union as a model for marrying the "boulevard" romance to the Soviet ideological parable. A version of this model can be found in Gladkov's Cement. Many contemporary critics and theoreticians thought that novelists should present realistic accounts of work on the factory floor, but in the adventure romance Gladkov had effectively found a better formula for "the production novel."Cement tells of how a cement factory that fell into disrepair during the Civil War is restored and brought back into production by a group of local enthusiasts led by the larger-than-life GlebChumalov. This hero achieves economic successes in that prosaic world of the provincial cement factory but is depicted in the style of the swashbuckler operating in exotic climes. Gladkov consistently identifies each step in the restoration with Chumalov performing some heroic, seemingly impossible physical feat in the natural world—a Fairbanks-like feat. Such feats—saltos—had greater potential than the Pinkerton for allegorical representation of spectacular political-cum economic-progress. This strategy was to become fairly standard in classical Stalinist culture where"men of action" perform tasks more quickly than seems at all feasible according to the dictates of science. In other words, though it is assumed that socialist realism and the dominant political tropes were established by the Party, popular taste for the adventure romance was undoubtedly a significant factor.69 The "red Pinkerton" had jettisoned its detective and been “reconfigured." The movement from Mick Thingmaster of Mess-Mend to Gleb Chumalov is the movement from the mastermind to the quintessential worker who scorns ratiocination and operates from his essential class nature. Gleb's world has no need for a Professor of Striding, for he has been drawn against the iconography of the Russian epic hero, or bogatyr', which gives him seven-league boots. If this, then, was the kind of fare (American, adventure, and exotic) that the majority of the populace preferred to digest in both film and literature, Gladkov's novel Cement came closer to resembling it than did Potemkin (and was much more popular at the time). Potemkin barely survived the 1920s as a model, whereas Cement enjoyed that status for decades, well beyond Stalin's death in 1953. In the mid-1920s, the singling out of largerthan-life heroes was anathema to large sections of the avant-garde intelligentsia. Thus Eisenstein in making Potemkin had tried to show the feats of the masses rather than individuals. His colleagues lionized Potemkin and loathed Cement.70But by the 1930s Cement with its titanic hero remained unchallenged as the "cement foundation" of socialist realism while Potemkin was eclipsed by new films about Russian and Soviet heroes. Another defining aspect of Stalinist culture that can be associated with Cement and this Fairbanks interlude is the fantastic transformation of space. If, in the "red Pinkertons" of recent years, the heroes had to go to Europe to save it (or, conversely, the yankees had to go to Petrograd), now in literature heroes made such progressions from the diseased to the whole, the drab to the magnificent, within their local space. There was no need for the journey in time or place as a frame for extraordinary transformation. The fantastic was in place, now. When, in Cement, Gleb first enters the factory after a long absence fighting in the Civil War, he passes through a surface area with piles of rubble, stale smells, and desultory workers—a prosaic and rundown world. But when he descends into the “austere temple of the engines" he sees the factory not as an everyday reality but as a kind of King Solomon's mine: "The diesel engines stood like black marble idols, bedecked with gold and silver . . . like altars demanding their sacrifice."71 This is no underground Metropolis, no Expressionist nightmare, and it anticipates a basic topos of Stalinist culture. On whose shores, then, had that "Noah's ark" bearing the intelligentsia's utopian hopes and schemes been dashed?And what was the nature of the "flood" that had swept so many of them away?--the demands for "marxism," "sociology," and "workerization"? or mass popular culture? The standard Western account of what happened in Soviet culture during the late 1920s, the time this narrative is now entering, generally chronicles a descent into ever blacker times. The problem with such accounts is that they reflect the adoption of the bad habits of Stalinist historiography, rendering it as a chiaoscuro with its logical telos, Stalinist culture. But cultural history is no socialist realist novel and has no swashbuckling, all-powerful heroes. All actors in it were negotiating a very complex landscape. Undoubtedly, if many of the leading figures in cultural life of the 1920s were to look back on that time from the vantage point of the late 1930s or 1940s they would, with the advantage of hindsight, see it somewhat differently from the way they saw it at the time. Any particular moment in ecohistory is constituted by different states and different velocities of change, all of which are hard to read at its present moment. Also, what makes an evolutionary change in a given species successful at one point may be the very feature that will cause that species' downfall in another. But in any case different species may evolve in quite various ways in response to a single new set of ecological conditions (such as a flood). With so many and such various "false starts," no single evolutionary line can be charted. The way a "flood" is interpreted depends on one's point of view. When during War Communism a flood was a favorite metaphor for revolution, it was often described in terms of removing the hardened scab of the stagnant and outdated—thus purification.72 If one were to look at the 1924 flood in Leningrad from the perspective of those who dreamed of a cultural "breakthrough," it could be seen not as an apocalyptic sign, but as the promise of a new beginning. The "scab" that had formed under the Old Regime was being removed, but what would emerge from under it? As the next chapters will show, many were not cast down by the flood qua pressures for "workerization," "youth," and a more "Marxist" and "sociological" approach, but were instead challenged by the task of providing a coherent account of a postbourgeois culture.