# PROMETHEANLINGUISTICS On December 19, 1926, Rykov, then head of Sovnarkom (the Council of Peoples Commissars), opened the Volkhovstroy hydroelectric station. Located near Leningrad and intended to remedy the city's chronic power shortages, Volkhovstroy also had tremendous symbolic importance as the first major realization of Lenin's dream of electrification, encapsulated in his famous formula presented to the Ninth Party Congress of 1920: "Communism Equals Socialism Plus the Electrification of the Entire Countryside." Thus the event was a guarantee of that Promethean dream which presented scientific progress as the emblem of revolution. A poem written for the occasion, Gennady Fish's "Current from the Volkhov," celebrates how the vapors from the murky swamps (a clichéd image from the myth of Petersburg) were "eviscerated" by a mighty current.1 Thus what Mess-Mend had foretold was realized: in the realm of the Bronze Horseman a mightier current—electricity—had triumphed over the untamed waters. Nature had bowed before culture. Lenin was far from the only Soviet figure who was captivated at this time by the magical possibilities of electricity and the promise of Volkhovstroy. Avant-gardist groups such as FEKS and the Constructivists took Edison and Volkhovstroy as their icons. Such enthusiasts did not wait until the project was finished, but began to photograph and film it obsessively even as it was being constructed;2 photographs were manipulated to give it a semimagical aura, establishing it as, in the words of the title of a film about the project for which Piotrovsky wrote the scenario, one of the "victors over the night" (pobediteli nochi). In making speeches officials fell over themselves in their efforts to find grandiose comparisons for Volkhovstroy (such as the pyramids of Egypt), and at every opportunity they took foreigners to view the site.3 Volkhovstroy had become an icon of Soviet technological, aesthetic, and political superiority. It also became a symbol for liberation from the past. In Edison's Woman, an agitational film scenario written by FEKS in 1923, Edison creates a robot that comes to Petrograd to save the city from the "cult of the past,"of "Petersburg."Once the light of Volkhovstroy is turned on, the old Petersburg disappears.4In official rhetoric and culture, the bringing of electricity (light, energy) became virtually synonymous with revolution. Thus in Gladkov's Cement the hero's principal task could not be fulfilled—the cement factory could not be restored—until a power station had been built. This sequence established a paradigm for representing the Promethean ideal in Soviet novels of the ensuing decades whereby a backward region is propelled into the modern age by the building of a power station. In the Stalin era, rapid industrial progress became the marker of ideological advance. In 1927, with the Stalinist faction who had pushed for rapid industrialization in the debates now dominant, Party policy made a decisive shift to giving industrialization absolute priority. Since Volkhovstroy was opened more or less on the eve of this shift, that event represented more for Leningrad than the ritual fulfillment of Lenin's directives now already erected into political myths. To build a power station on the nearby Volkhov river had long been considered crucial for that lapsed capital, the only way of saving it from its likely fate of becoming a rust-belt city—not just a political but an economic and industrial has-been.⁵ Inasmuch as Leningrad had traditionally been Russia's major industrial city and also the seat of the scientific-technological intelligentsia, the timely "electrification" of the city afforded it a second chance. The national goal of industrializing Russia gave the scientific-technological intelligentsia a renewed sense of the crucial role they might play in the country. In 1927 the heads of the various scientific bodies and the government's Industrial Bureau (Prombyuro) organized a series of conferences in Leningrad to discuss how to proceed with industrialization. They invited scientists and industrial managers to attend. They also arranged, under the auspices of KEPS, for research institutes to link up directly with the appropriate local factories so that these enterprises might benefit from the scientists' expertise.6 The Leningrad Institute Gipromez was assigned responsibility for planning the four most ambitious projects of the First Five-Year Plan. A perusal of the Leningrad press in 1927 yields a plethora of extravagant statements about the crucial contributions its city's scientists would make to industrialization and about the privileges and rewards they should receive as a result. One commentator, writing of Gipromez, waxed lyrical with the words: "It is with a feeling of joy that I leave this laboratory of our future. The cream of our technological expertise is located in it."7 Yet another crucible of a transformed world had been claimed. The tragic fact is, however, that the scientific intelligentsia of Leningrad could no longer be counted on to lead the country into that long-sought "leap out of backwardness." On the eve of the Revolution, Russian science and technology were world-class in many areas, but war, revolution, lack of foreign capital, and isolation had taken their toll. All of the major projects of the First Five-Year Plan were designed by foreign experts and used imported equipment (a partial exception being Dneprostroi, which used some generators designed and built in Leningrad). Even Gipromez, which masterminded the great construction projects, though it had a Russian director to be sure, comprised predominantly foreign experts. For the Volkhovstroy electric station, built before the plan years, some Sovietmade generators were used as a compromise (made in Leningrad).8 In 1927, however, the very year the Leningrad scientific intelligentsia were making extravagant claims for what they could do to transform the country, the dynamos of Volkhovstroy kept breaking down, seriously reducing the city's electrical power.9 Those sections of the avant-garde who sought in their work to marry science and the new art also experienced a blow with the power station itself. Its exterior (designed in 1923–1925) was eclectic Gothic, anticipating some of the styles typical of the Stalinist 1930s.10 Obviously, or so many thought then, there was a contradiction between the power station, a beacon of the technological future, and its passéiste Gothic casing. Many saw this as a travesty of revolutionary cultural ideals, but in the 1930s and 1940s, when Promethean ideals were married to conservative cultural models, this would be seen as a marriage of culture and science. Just two days before the lights of Volkhovstroy went on, another light of the avant-garde went off. On December 17, the Leningrad GINKhUK, the stronghold of such avant-garde artists as Malevich, Filonov, and Matyushin (and, until 1925, Tatlin), was closed down and merged by decree with its friendly neighbor institution, GIII.11 This closure and allied events might suggest that 1926 saw an acceleration of the process whereby a centrist, hegemonic, Muscovite culture assumed dominance over local Leningrad culture. Moreover, Leningrad was increasingly identified by those pressing for cultural revolution as not just an economic but also a cultural has-been, the symbolic home of an intelligentsia that was deemed bourgeois and passé; the city was considered -he ast bastion of non-Marxist, nonproletarian, and "nonsociological" intellectual movements. Thus, although L. Leonov was a Moscow writer of the 1920s who set his novels in Moscow or the provinces, when in 1924 he chose to write about a retrograde intellectual in "The End of a Paltry Person," he set the work in Leningrad.12 Far from alienated, however, many intellectuals saw this as a time of great opportunity; to them, it promised to be the creative period of Soviet culture. Moreover, although the two capitals remained cultural rivals with distinct profiles, to an increasing extent the changes were being called not by "Moscow," per se, but by institutions and figures that formed a Moscow/ Leningrad axis. Symptomatically, in 1925 Leningrad's principal cultural journal, the Life of Art, became an organ of both capitals, though it was still published in Leningrad. ## The Search for a New Cultural Theory Even before the Promethean fire at Volkhovstroy began to sputter, another was making promising beginnings, a fire conceived as Promethean although it was outside the fields of science and technology. Many intellectuals were focusing their attention on the possibility of a radical transformation (or revolution) centered not in the natural sciences but in the social sciences and the humanities. They sought a sort of metaphysical Volkhovstroy of cultural theory, one they believed would prove in its own way more effective than Volkhovstroy itself. Starting around 1925-1926, onefinds among Soviet intellectuals of leftist persuasion a sense that the Revolution had to finally come into its own. They looked for ways to forge an entirely new and comprehensive postrevolutionary culture. The Soviet Union was the first state to declare itself Marxist but there was little precedent in either history or Marxist writings for establishing what a Marxist, materialist, postrevolutionary culture might be. Those accounts that did exist were held by many to be primitive, eclectic, or otherwise inadequate. There was some pressure from on high to work out an academically respectable Marxist aesthetic; this was, for example, the burden of the leading address given by Arvid Pelshe, the head of the Department of Political Enlightenment, to its All-Union Conference in December 1925.13 The leftist intellectuals did not need officialdom to nudge them into producing an intellectually respectable account of the new culture. They felt confident that if only they provided such an account, the "progressive" forces of the world would follow their lead. There was some reason to believe this, given that prominent leftist theoreticians :n the West had begun making pilgrimages to the Soviet Union with ever greater frequency (such as Beniamin, whose friend Asja Lacis had begun publishing in the Life of Arf). To this end, in 1926 there was an attempt on the part of Glavnauka (The Central Scientific Administration) in Moscow to convene an international conference on the sociology of art, to be attended by prominent intellectuals from abroad. The announcement proclaimed: "We live at the very beginning of a new epoch defined by a renaissance in socialist thought." Much of the existing Marxist theoretical writing on culture is too amateur, eclectic, and simpleminded, it suggested, and thus the field needs professionalization.14 This conference was not to have the desired impact, but that did not deter the enthusiasts. During this time, the issue of what might be a Marxist, materialist theory of culture was debated with great intensity. A new central focus emerged in these debates—linguistics—a scholarly and hence seemingly unlikely discipline for revolutionary ideologues, but one that was seen as located at that crucial intersection of ideology, everyday life, and scholarship and therefore an essential component of any would-be comprehensive Marxist theory of culture. Within linguistics itself one finds reflected in the mid-1920s the general shift to a more Marxist or minimally "sociological" orientation in theory and practice and a correspondingly greater emphasis on "applied linguistics" and "psycholinguistics."15 Science was to be married to language, leading to the triumph of a Marxist, materialist linguistics over that cottage industry known as philology. In the scholarly sphere, the mid- to late 1920s saw a tremendous rise in interest in linguistics. At the national congress of the Academy of Sciences held in 1927, the opening address was given by the linguist Nikolai Marr, while senior members of the Academy whose work related more directly to the proposed scientific-technological revolution spoke only later.16 New institutes or departments devoted to linguistic questions sprang up in the capitals and the older ones experienced a rejuvenation. In the mid-1920s members of the Bakhtin Circle redirected their interests from literature and philosophy to the study of language. The new emphasis on the crucial role of language was not confined to scholarship. Around 1925, debates on cultural policy suddenly became obsessed with the question of what kind of language should be used in a particular genre, and what kind should be used by citizens (and especially proletarians) themselves. "Language" also supplanted "music" or "performance" as the shibboleth of revolutionary culture. The question was which "language," or which policy on language, could truly transform man. The Leningrad Formalists had for some years laid claim to the notion that their approach was putting the study of literature and language on a scientific footing for the first time, hence they might seem logical candidates for providing the definitive account of this. But by 1927 the sporadic Marxist campaign against that school was in high gear and Formalism was no longer politically viable. Indeed, the theories of language rising to prominence at this time were billed as more truly scientific—more materialist—and therefore better able than their ill-defined predecessors to combat the Formalist, idealist hyena. The various participants in this new movement to found a Marxist or sociological linguistics all took as their point of departure an attack on the Formalists. This common point of departure had strong institutional backing. In 1926, several institutes concerned with the humanities and arts formed into a powerful Moscow-Leningrad axis under the umbrella of a new body called RANION (the Russian Association of Research Institutes in the Social Sciences), which for the next few years continued to gobble up institutes in the two capitals to house in its empire, so that by the end of NEP these institutes numbered fifteen. RANION was originally conceived as an alternative to the Communist Academy, thus it represented fellow-traveling, leftist (including Marxist and Bolshevik) scholarship and was in a sense analogous to the Writers' Federation (FOSP).17 But when the Communist Academy and RANION adopted a militantly anti-Formalist position, the cluster of institutes they incorporated, forming a Moscow-Leningrad axis, made them a particularly effective actor in the campaign. In linguistics, the leading Leningrad institution in this movement was the Institute for the Comparative Study of Literatures and Languages of the West and East (ILYaZV), a RANION body. Founded in 1921 as a center for research and graduate training in linguistics and literature within Leningrad University, this institute housed most of the members of the Formalist circle and their associates and also many other reputed scholars, including Piotrovsky18 (in the late 1920s V. V. Voloshinov became a graduate student there). In 1925, however, the Institute was restructured and several additional linguistics sections were opened. Despite the continued presence of Formalists within its ranks, it then adopted a more militantly anti-Formalist stance, becoming at the same time more sharply focused on the task of working out a new sociological and Marxist theory of language and literature.19 The anti-Formalist profile is particularly palpable in ILYaZV's list of compulsory readings for all students in 1927, which comprises almost exclusively anti-Formalist tracts (the only exception being volume 10 of Plekhanov's works). The reading list of the sister institute in Moscow, the Institute for the History of Literature and Language, was very similar.20 The militantly anti-Formalist approaches to linguistics that in the mid-1920s were worked out at such institutes were many and various. I will isolate here only those that were to prove the most formative in the evolution of Stalinist culture. Thus I will not discuss one of the dominant trends, what I call "vulgar materialism," whose adherents took a physiological approach to the analysis of language, which was discussed in terms of "conditioned reflexes" and other Pavlovian categories; some of them formed at ILYaZV a Circle of Linguist-Biomechanists.21 This trend is of obvious interest in charting the evolution of Meyerhold's theories of Biomechanics, but its impact on cultural history pales before that of another which was less confined to the research institute but espoused by a wide range of political and cultural figures. Among the many theories of language advanced at this time, I am singling out a trend for which I have coined the label "Promethean linguistics." Promethean linguistics is to linguistics as scientism is to science; it is an attempt to generate a significance for a discipline that exceeds its professional bounds. That extraprofessional element is what made this unlikely field so important in the formation of Stalinist culture. Promethean linguistics cannot be described as a coherent movement, but rather as an identifiable position espoused by a range of powerful figures and their epigones, principally by Party ideologues, by representatives of the avant-garde, and by professional linguists. Among them, I am foregrounding Leo Trotsky; a subset of the Constructivist movement known as the Productionists,22 who emerged with particular strength around 1925 and whose chief spokesman on questions of language was Boris Arvatov (this was essentially a Moscow group, although most of Arvatov's articles on language were published in Leningrad's the Life of Art); and finally N. Ya. Marr, the infamous linguist whose school was to hold sway for most of the Stalin period. Trotsky was an early advocate of linguistic Prometheanism. His book Problems of Life (Voprosy byta: Epokha kul'turnichestva i yeyë zadachi), which appeared in late 1923, is a largely forgotten moment in Soviet cultural history; indeed, Trotsky's contribution is remembered more in terms of his Literature and Revolution. But the latter was largely an appraisal of the current literary scene whereas Problems of Life was virtually a domostroy, or manual, of revolutionary culture and became in the mid-1920s—especially in the Leningrad of Zinoviev—the authoritative text for cultural revolution. Trotsky's book addresses a variety of questions, including creeping bureaucratism, family morality, alcoholism, religion, and secular rituals. But it is more than a miscellany of essays; from the very outset it tackles the problem of providing a more comprehensive account of culture than is available in existing Marxist texts. The most crucial material on this is to be found in Chapters 6 and 7 (added for the second edition), called—by the activist who would mourn The Revolution Betrayed!—"Civility and Politeness as a Necessary Lubricant in Daily Relationships" and "The Struggle for Cultured Speech," respectively. Trotsky's concern for language went far beyond the need to express manners and civility. He contended, in a move defining for a Promethean linguist, that language is not just a means or a style to be used in expressing ideas but the heart of the ideas themselves. It is the key to culture because it is the very shape of consciousness (Arvatov took a similar position).23Consequently, if you changed the language people use, you could change the way they think. Moreover, he concluded, language reform is pivotal for any program of modernization and political progress, the twin aims of Soviet society. In Problems of Life he identifies the contrast between what he saw as retrograde, and correct language with that between "swamps and impassable roads," and the modern industrial utopia, effectively conflating in his negative term the myth of Petersburg ("swamps") and those impassable roads that both Marx and Lenin identified as impediments to forging the new society;24 just as the current of Volkhovstroy "eviscerated" the swamps, so the correct language would "eviscerate" all manner of obscurantism.25In effect, Trotsky identifies the use of standard, educated Russian with political progress and the Promethean ideal; what Gellner in Nations and Nationalism identifies as an effect of modernization whereby linguistic and cultural localisms and particularisms are eliminated as "high culture" becomes standard was to be its means.26 This, then, is the meaning of the term "linguistic Prometheanism," the idea that language can serve as the ultimate vehicle for the kind of transformation sought by revolution. Just as Prometheus transgressed epistemological boundaries and stole fire, one could, in order to give "fire" to the people, intervene in the natural course of language evolution and regulate it. The Productionists, a militantly utilitarian group, labeled this "linguistic engineering,"27and hence the Party ideologue A. A. Zhdanov at the First Writers Congress in 1934 partly cribbed from them when he defined Soviet writers as "engineers of human souls." Trotsky and the Productionists both identified folkisms, grammatical infelicities, and most other forms of substandard speech as tendencies in language that impeded rational and efficient patterns of speech and thought and should therefore be banned. This position can be seen as part of a broad reaction at this time against the cult of the peasantry and peasant speech.28 But they also railed against the other end of the linguistic spectrum, against using artificially bookish and long-winded expressions. Trotsky called the resulting spare and pared-down language "cultured speech," which he saw as marked by its "inner discipline."29 Thus the Bolshevik state was by his account to mandate the language of the classes it had ostensibly overthrown! Trotsky obviates this problem by maintaining that "the foremost elements of the workers regard such false simplicity [peasant language and other such substandard speech] with instinctive hostility, for they justly see in coarseness of speech and conduct a mark of the old slavery, and aspire to acquire a cultured speech. . . ."30 Trotsky and the Productionists insisted on "casting out of our speech all useless words and expressions" leading to "precision and correctness of speech"—a position that was clearly at cross purposes with the perceptual millenarian wing of the Russian avant-garde who favored the whimsical, chance, or eccentric.31 They wanted social and linguistic mores to be put on a more scientific basis, to be regulated and standardized. Their linguistic reforms were conceived as part of a general program for overhauling patterns of daily life that included rationalized communal living.32Thus they can be seen as a staging point on the route to Stalinist cultural homogenization. But what in the theories of the Productionists and Trotsky most anticipates that distinctive culture we call Stalinist (Trotsky!) is not its "totalitarian" impulse toward standardization in language. They did not want to mandate some invented new language for all, like Esperanto and other versions popular in Russia and the West in the 1910s and 1920s. Rather, they wanted society to adopt a standard language, a language crafted from the existing one by a process of rationalization. It is the values informing this process of standardization that can be most clearly associated with Stalinism. A crucial value for Trotsky and the Productionists was that their single standardized language would be not only rational but also, no less than the housing, hygienic. Trotsky, for instance, drew an analogy between the eradication of substandard language and physical hygiene: "The struggle against 'bad language' is a condition of intellectual culture, just as the fight against filth and vermin is a condition of physical culture."33 The implicit theoretical armature of all their claims for a revolutionary culture is a highly restrictive image of the body. The deep structure of their argument envisions society as a body that must be guarded to preserve purity. Their accounts betray a fear of pollution, of invasion, infection, or defilement by unclean or substandard elements. By the end of the decade when the first Stalinist purges began, apologists were equating "filth"and "vermin" with political deviance. In the mid-1920s, a new concern for sexual purity and hygiene became marked in the writings of a broad spectrum of actors in the sphere of culture and morality. Symptomatically, at the very time these various versions of linguistic Prometheanism were rising to prominence in cultural debate, a new movie studio was founded with a mandate to educate the masses with films that were to popularize scientific work and also serve social causes.34The two main movies made under this rubric were Abortion (Abort, 1924) and Syphilis (Sifilis, or Pravda zhizni, 1925).35 To be sure, syphilis, abortion, and some of the other projected topics such as gonorrhoea and tuberculosis have to do with very real social and public health problems of the time, but the choice of such topics is also indicative of the obsession with bodily purity Inasmuch as this purity was linked to rationality and overcoming superstitious folk culture, it seems fitting that, at the same time these films were being made, Vsevolod Pudovkin, then an emerging director, was working at Pavlov's institute in Leningrad on what was to have been his first film, The Mechanics of the Brain (Mekhanika golovnogo mozga, 1925–1926).36 Official social and cultural policy was becoming markedly more puritanical, as was reflected in the new marriage code (1926) and the growing attacks on Freud. At this time, a series of fictional works appeared that treated the theme of sexual libertinism among Soviet youth and overcoming bourgeois prejudices on that score.37 These sensational works gave rise to a heated press debate about the place of love and sex in the new society, with the works' detractors declaring the offending writers counterrevolutionaries who should be banned if not worse, and their defenders maintaining that the authors in question were depicting genuine social problems, if in exaggerated terms. Several members of the Party leadership took part in the debate, including Lunacharsky, who participated in the main debate, conducted in the Leningrad press. This question happened to coincide with the bitter ideological struggle over Trotskyism and related issues. Trotsky had enjoyed particular popularity among the student youth, and although his cultural policies werepuritanical,sexualas implicitly identified with his ideological deviar.ce Bodily, sexual,and linguistic purity was beinz idennñe creasinglv with ideological conformism. Conversely. marv centended tha: an individual who showed sexual license or used bad language could not be trusted politically (in Cement, which had come out as recentlv as 1925, an ostensibly positive Party boss was also a rapist, an aspect of the novel that was toned down in its later redactions). This reached such extremes that when authority figures invoked the slogan "workerization" as often as not it was used to mean incorporating squeaky-clean heroes in literature, plays, or films and having them talk in only the most comme il faut language. This fear of pollution by unclean or substandard elements is of course a variant of the fear of invasion by commercialized popular culture, which threatened the purity of the true culture, that we have seen as a fundamental trait of the Russian intelligentsia since before the Revolution. The pure and continent body had, then, become a controlling model for both political and discursive practices.39 The trend is of course far from unique to Russia. Stallybrass and White in The Politics and Poetics of Transgression analyze the phenomenon in terms of the normative model of the "classical body," which they see as "far more than an aesthetic standard or model... . In the classical discursive body were encoded those regulated systems which were closed, homogenous, monumental, centered and symmetrical. It began to make 'parsimony' of explanation and 'economy'of utterance the measure of rationality, thus institutionalizing Lenten rule as a normative epistemological standard." Everything excluded from these norms, they contend, everything marginal or low was figured as a kind of "grotesque body"that has "its discursive norms, too: impurity (both in the sense of dirt and mixed categories), heterogeneity, masking, protuberant distensions, disproportion, exorbitancy, clamor, decentered or eccentric arrangements, a focus upon gaps, orifices and symbolic filth. . . ."40 Trotsky and the Productionists can be counted among those who advocated making"parsimonyof explanation and economy of utterance the measure of rationality." Thus it is tempting to see the introduction of a "totalitarian" culture in the 1930s as a case study in the dynamic that Stallybrass and White discuss. In that sense, Boris Groys is right when in The Total Art Work of Stalin he argues that militant avant-gardists, such as Arvatov, were the secret legislators of Stalinist culture. But it is not actually Arvatov's particular version of Promethean linguistics that prevailed in the 1930s—let alone that of the "Judas Trotsky." Writers were to be "engineers," to be sure, but engineers of human souls, a very un-Productionist term. There was more than one version of Promethean linguistics, and another one was more defining for the culture of the 1930s. As powerful as the classical body theory may appear to be in its capacity to describe Stalinist culture, it leaves out a very important vehicle for the metaphor, and that is time-—growth. Trotsky and Arvatov tend to focus on an eternal present, but in Stalinist culture lines of descent were crucial. ## Nikolai Marr Lines of descent play a dominant role in the theories of a third "Promethean" linguist, Nikolai Yakovlevich Marr (1864-1934),41 which may cast light on why such eccentric theories as his became canonical in the 1930s. They were eccentric in some senses of the word used by Stallybrass and White in the quotation above, that is, the theories were noncanonical, hybrid, and ex-center, although not in the precise way Stallybrass and White mean ex-center, namely, as grotesque or parodic. Marr is best known for his Japhetic Theory. This theory was launched around 1908, when he published a treatise claiming links between the Georgian and Semitic languages. The theory's title comes from his having labeled Georgian and certain other languages from the Caucasus "Japhetic" after the third son of Noah, Japheth, while he identified Semitic with another son, Shem.42 Over time, he expanded his Japhetic theory, accommodating within its general contours more and more Caucasian languages. When, with first war and then revolution, his travel to the Caucasus for fieldwork became more difficult, Marr began casting his Japhetic net more broadly and ambitiously, adding first some languages that Indo-Europeanists found hard to accommodate in their schemes, such as Basque, Etruscan, and Pelasgian, and later Dravidian, Hittite, and others. As he extended his Japhetic Theory to an ever greater number of languages he saw as linked, Marr worked out progressively a comprehensive historical model for the evolution of all language. Its purview stretched from sea to shining sea, or more specifically from the Pacific Ocean in the Far East to the Atlantic, extending southward to incorporate some of Africa, and even potentially embracing some Native American languages.43 But his two main groups were the Indo-European family and the Japhetic, one which hitherto had been largely unknown or ignored, but which in his scheme had a central role. Many of the basic contours of Marr's Japhetic Theory had, then, been worked out well before the Revolution, but his theories did change fundamentally under Bolshevik rule. In 1925, he renamed his theory "The New Theory of Language"(novove ucheniye ob yazyke), although he sometimes still used the term Japhetic Theory. In 1926 and 1927 he published two collections of his essays as the canonical sources for the New Theory: Some Stages in the Development of the Japhetic Theory (Po etapam razvitiya Yafeticheskoy teorii, 1926) and The Japhetic Theory: The Program of a General Course on Linguistics (Yafeticheskaya teoriya: Programma obshchego kursa ob yazyke, 1927).44 The first of these was an anthology of Marr's recent essays, and the second comprises a series of lectures he gave to students. Thus the latter, both in its genre and in its subtitle, bears similarity to Ferdinand Saussure's path-breaking Cours de linguistique générale, which had been published in Russian translation in 1922. The similarity is intentional. Marr identified himself as a linguist who followed Saussure's stance against basing linguistics exclusively on written sources.45 The implication of his subtitle, however, is that he is presenting a further stage in the evolution of linguistic thought, in the tradition of, but superseding, the great Saussure. His was to be a truly materialist linguistics. Marr insists in his writings of the 1920s that the evolution of languages is in sync with, indeed determined by, the process of evolution in economics. He identifies three major stages in language evolution that correspond to Marx's three major stages of socioeconomic evolution. Moreover, he assigns language a place in the superstructure rather than the base;46 thus any major changes in language have to be a function of major socioeconomic changes. Such "vulgar materialism" might seem questionable, but more significant for the inquiry in this book is Marr's insistence that all languages are impending toward unification (just as are all classes and nations) and that ultimately, in the classless society, there will be a "single and unified language," what he calls a yedinyy yazyk, a language that will be more "precise"47 and will be spoken by all peoples. In this ideal of a single, spare, unified, and more precise language Marr's linguistic theories seem comparable with those of Trotsky and the Productionists. Moreover, like them, he insisted that language should be regulated and the process of unification speeded up.48However, and this is a crucial distinction, while Trotsky and the Productionists articulated their concern with bodily purity synchronically, in terms of keeping the body "pure" in an eternal present, Marr gave overwhelming emphasis to the diachronic or vertical aspect; he consistently outlined his theories in the terms of evolution. A key term in Marr's account of the dynamic of linguistic evolution toward yedinyy yazyk is "crossing" or "hybridization" (skreshcheniye). In canonical Marr, languages are said to have evolved not so much when tribes migrated or when one language group borrowed from another, but rather in a process akin to hybridization; when two tribes or other language groups were thrown together by common economic need or practice, their two languages were crossed, resulting in a single language. The more crossing that had occurred in the evolution of a given language, the higher a linguistic form it would represent.49Over time, this process would lead to total linguistic unification. Marr, then, foregrounded evolution as a place where a theory of change might be found. In this sense, he anticipated Stalinist culture, in which genetics plaved a key role in figuring revolution. It is no accident that manv of the authority figures of Stalinist culture worked on genetic issues (Michurin, Lysenko). Marr was himself the son of a botanist working in agriculture, hence he used in a more figurative sense the vocabulary of his father. But at the same time, like the good Oedipal son, he rejected genetics. Marr maintained that the history of linguistic evolution is not about bloodline or race, not even figuratively.50He insisted that the term "hybridization" has nothing to do with biology.51As he conceived it, hybridization involves a kind of fusion of two languages that occurs when there is a marked change in the economic-cum-social life of the two language groups causing a concomitant change in the sort of language they speak.52 There are, he insisted, no ethnic groups established by bloodline and no national languages.53 He substituted class for biology, maintaining that the language of one class will in its typological features be closer to the language of the same class in a different ethnic group than it will be to that of another class in the same ethnic group.54 Here Marr dovetailed with the legitimizing myths of Stalinist culture. The key myths had to do with replacing the bloodline as a value or system of reckoning with a line determined by political allegiance; Stalinist rhetoric gave priority to the "Great Family" (the state) as contrasted with the "little," or nuclear, family.55 Another defining feature of Stalinist culture anticipated in Marr is evolutionary impatience (to be seen in Lysenko, Michurin, and others). Marr urged a "creative"approach to linguistic evolution, guidingit and helping it to accelerate.56 Thus the "creator" in Marr is, as in the culture of High Stalinism, the man who defies natural evolution. In a speech of 1924 he proclaimed: "Down with the Venus de Milo!"57 This may sound like the opening salvo in a Futurist manifesto, but that is deceptive. Marr was not calling for the Venus de Milo to be dynamited as the typical Futurist would have in his time, but rather he was insisting that she yield her place on the throne of culture; radiant as she was, she had been eclipsed. The salvo is aimed at the regnant European school of linguistics, the Indo-European School, which had, since well before the Revolution, been his chief bugbear. But the target is broader than the Indo-Europeanists. In Marr's works of the 1920s, he rewrote the consensus account of Western civilization because his theory of language evolution established priority for the Japhetic peoples as providing the earliest cradle of language and civilization.58 He included in his account of the genealogy of Western civilization all the usual elements—Egypt, ancient Greece,and so on—and offered as its "creative center" the Mediterranean area (hardly original) but reconceived the account so that its original culture is Japhetic. Thus he adduced a new theory of origins whereby a previously unknown or marginalized group (the Japhetic peoples) became the center, the originals for all of Europe and, in an ever expanding purview, the world; center and periphery were transposed. The Venus de Milo, housed in the Louvre, is an icon of European cultural dominance, but Marr was questioning that assumption. She must yield her place as the "center" because she is not an achievement of the group with priority. Marr, phrasing this in terms of his own field, asserted that though the Europeans may have a superior technology, in linguistic thinking they are still in the nineteenth century.59 Such assertions fit well the needs of a regime that sought legitimation and put forth Promethean claims that local conditions made difficult to realize. Indeed, Marr associates the rise of Indo-European theory with the rise of European imperialism.60Here his theories are like those of the Formalists in that both enact revolution as an inversion of center and periphery. The scale of his inversion is more fantastic, but a more crucial difference derives from the fact that Marr's move against "the center" (hegemonic, West European culture) entails a countermyth of origins. Marr also renegotiates center and periphery within the great Russian empire. In his writings, he constantly urges that the ethnic minorities be given a voice and that their dialects not be discriminated against as "primitive" but be accorded respect equal to that of written languages. Thus he was an early voice for giving greater status to non-Russian elements in the empire, a process that saw its tentative beginnings in the 1920s (especially in the late 1920s, when the minority peoples of the Soviet Union finally gained a position of prominence in Soviet public rhetoric and many of them were given the alphabet for the first time). In Marr, we find what is in some ways a cult of the bastard, the mongrel, of racial indiscriminateness. Here there may have been personal motives since he was himself a mixture of an ethnic minority (the Georgians) and a foreigner (a Scot) in a Russian-dominated empire. He seems to have felt this situation most keenly in terms of language; in his autobiography Marr recounts how his mother, who spoke the Gurian dialect of Georgian, and his father, who spoke English, essentially did not understand each other. Hence an amusing aspect of his theories is that both the Gurian dialect and the Celtic have a place in the Japhetic family;61 as it were the entire theory is one great fantasy that enables mummy and daddy to speak to each other, if in some primordial past. Marr's theory of the "single language" purports to provide the route to true internationalisrn—so that all mummies and all daddies can speak to each other, and in the present. His recommendations would also seem to militate against Russian dominance; Marr consistently promoted the manifest virtues of linguistic internationalism (yedinyy yazyk) as the antidote to linguistic parochialism. But of course as long as the path to a"single language" is "regulated" in only the one country, the Soviet Union, the meaning of rejection of blood or tribal ties is creating a more cohesive state. Moreover, even as Marr seems to be rejecting the hegemonic status of Russian language and culture, certain of his statements shade over into some of the myths of Russian particularism popular at that time. He repeatedly urged linguists to look not at Greek and Sanskrit in their quest to understand literary evolution, but rather at such early Japhetic languages as Scythian (other favorites frequently listed in this connection include Sarmatian, Khazar, and Bulgarian).62Of course, these assertions are part of his attack on the Indo-Europeanists for whom Greek and Sanskrit were paradigmatic sources of examples, and also of his "Saussurian" campaign to have the "living language" be the focus of linguistics rather than dry and highly formalized studies of written languages.63But this foregrounding of the languages of the wild tribes of the Russian area such as the Scythians also suggests the curious inversion of the nature/culture hierarchy that is implicit in the slogan "Down with the Venus de Milo." Marr did not merely proclaim in that 1924 lecture "Down with the Venus de Milo," but added immediately, "Long live the hoe and hoe culture." Thus just as the genealogy of Prometheanism was being shifted, so were its ideals. He explained this strange predilection for the hoe by going on to say that only something that is truly grounded in material culture is of any value. The hoe is scarcely the "engineering" of Arvatov, nor are dialects such as Gurian particularly close to the "cultured speech" Trotsky sought; Arvatov and indeed most avant-garde leftist cultural groups at this time were absolutely opposed to using any folkisms. Marr seems to take an antimodernist position. In one of his articles he even entertains the lost civilization of Atlantis as a candidate for his Japhetic empire.64 It would seem that to Marr that which is primitive and from an earlier time—the hoe-—is more significant than that which represents a later stage of human development and greater sophistication, the Venus de Milo. But the inversion is not wholesale because Marr will not admit any hierarchy of primitive and cultured in his theory.65 All this seems strangely out of sync with the culture that erected Volkhovstroy as one of its icons. Marr's predilection for the oral and folk highlights some of the major ambivalences in Stalinist culture, which advanced as models both, so to speak, hoes and Volkhovstroys. Marr's theories come perilously close to representing yet another glorification of the Folk. Updating it for the October Revolution, he has the proletarians perform the messianic role which, in the past, most assigned to the peasantry, yet there is little sign of anything intrinsically proletarian in his account of them. Indeed, his frequent foregrounding of the Scythians, coinciding as it does with a time when Scythianism was a dominant literary movement in the Soviet Union, suggests that he may share that movement's antiurbanist bias.66 In Marr's writings the "single language" is always represented as a futuristic one. In his essay "On the Origin of Languages," for instance, he allows that by the time the single language emerged, sound language might be supplanted by "another technical means which enables humans to express their thought more precisely [tochno]."67Yet he gives the lion's share of attention in his account of linguistic evolution to the languages of traditional peoples. Before the Revolution, he did some work in archeology, but in the mid- to late 1920s he developed a particular line of inquiry, shifting the center of his attention from the vast range of languages to be accommodated in his theory—its "spatial sweep"—to accounting for language in its "prehistoric" phase, looking at the "paleontology" of languages, at the possibility of "prelogical" languages. Marr contended that before there was sound language there was kinetic or linear speech, a kind of speech defined in terms of gestures and mimicry.68 In this speech, the chief organ was not the mouth but the hand (sound was used chiefly for expressing emotion but not involved in a system of communication). True to his sociological-materialist method, he insisted that the emergence of this kind of speech presupposes acquisition of some labor processes, but as yet only with "natural implements" (for example, stones). The transition to sound speech he associates with the acquisition of manmade implements.69 Marr pronounced the hand the center of production and the center of presound language (gesture). At the same time, he identified it as the great 'creative agent." By elevating the hand to the status of hero of prelogical speech, he was able to make an identification between speech, labor (that allimportant value to the Marxists), and creativity. Indeed, even the development of reason he attributes to "ingenuity"(nakhodchivost') and “inventiveness" in doing manual labor processes, a finding that reinforces the then current biases in favor of practical reason over theoretical, of applied linguistics over “Formalist schemes," and so on. But these postulates are also strongly weighted in the direction of a romanticism of the uneducated classes as "creators." Moreover, even after that "revolution" that was the shift to sound speech, Marr claims, the imprint of linear speech was still felt in language. Indeed, "The ideological remains of linear speech are still with us."70 Some of these moves read today as singularly clumsy. Many, such as Lawrence Thomas, the author of the main monograph on Marr in English, have wondered if his transition in the 1920s to a more Marxist articulation of his theories was not a little forced or opportunistic, particularly given his meteoric rise to power then. Thomas also interprets Marr's move into the prelogical period as trying to get himself out of the dead end he had created in overextending the purview of the Japhetic Theory.71 Certainly, Marr's rise to power was extraordinary and not commensurate with his scholarly standing (there was no dearth of detractors before the Revolution). He had been a prominent member of the Academy of Sciences since before the Revolution and his seat of operations had always been Petersburg. In the mid-1920s, however, he began to head institutes and other organizations in both capitals and is therefore an example of the emerging bicapital, Soviet culture. In this way, Marr progressively gained a dominant position in the scholarly world, heading ever more institutes, and establishing his own Moscow-Leningrad power axis with bases in the Communist Academy, in a range of scholarly institutes under RANION, the university, and the Academy of Sciences. Nineteen twenty-eight, marked as the fortieth anniversary of Marr's scholarly career, appears to have been a watershed year in his official elevation. The leading Bolshevik historian and cultural bureaucrat M. Pokrovsky in a May article in Izvestiya proclaimed: "If Engels still lived among us, every student at an institution of higher education would be studying Marr's theories because they would enter the mandatory list of sources for a Marxist understanding of human culture."72 In the 1930s his power was to grow even more and "The New Theory of Language" was to become mandatory for all of linguistics, and allied fields as well. This extraordinary rise to power was not without its ugly incidents. The most famous of these was the losing battle against Marr waged by a founding member of OPOYaAZ, Ye. D. Polivanov, who was by the late 1920s the only linguist of stature to make a concerted public stand against him. Despite the many common points in the positions of the two linguists (such as an emphasis on nonwritten language and advocacy of the languages of the ethnic minorities),73Polivanov took absolute exception to Marr's theories, particularly to his anti-Westernism and the way he rode roughshod over the facts in his zeal for establishing his theories. The bitter struggle between the two was essentially resolved in a series of debates and lectures held between December 1928 and February 1929 at the Communist Academy, but they were weighted against Polivanov, who was blackballed from all scholarly enterprises in the two capitals. From then until his arrest (1937) and execution (1938), he was essentially in exile in Central Asia, where he was able to accomplish fruitful work on the local languages.74 One might be tempted to seize upon Polivanov's struggle as either another example where proletarian and Party hacks or their stooges terrorize unwitting non-Party or bourgeois intellectuals, leading sooner or later to their repression, or, more specifically, as a prime example of the persecution of the Formalists. At the time, Polivanov was obliquely made a hero in Kaverin's novel about his intelligentsia set, The Troublemaker (Skandalist) of 1929.75 But the problem is that Polivanov, although a founding member of OPOYaZ, was really only active in the group between 1915 and 1919 (in part because he was away from Leningrad for much of the 1920s). From 1926 to 1929 he served as head of the linguistics section of a Moscow institute within RANION (the consortium of institutes pitted against the Formalists), and in 1927 he was made head of its Linguistics Section. More important, Polivanov, a leftist even before the Revolution, joined the Party in 1919, worked some time for the Comintern, and joined the Bolshevik forces in putting down the insurgents at Kronstadt. He left Petrograd in 1921, a move that is often attributed to the hostility among his colleagues at the university to his support for the Bolsheviks.76 Polivanov always insisted that his linguistic theories were Marxist. Marr's Marxism, by contrast, is problematical. He joined the Party only in 1930, essentially after his triumph in Soviet linguistics was complete and Polivanov had been sent to rout. Until the late 1920s he had always insisted that although his theories coincided with the Marxist position, they were not specifically Marxist. Thereafter, he allowed that they might be Marxist, but did so very hesitantly and sometimes disclaimed this identification. Marr was born in the mid-1860s, and hence the formative years of his intellectual career essentially occurred before Marxism became an issue in Russia; by the mid-1920s, he was sixty. Thus his career provides a good example of what I am calling the "ecology of revolution," of how Stalinist revolutionary culture was neither sui generis nor "created" by the Party or Komsomol, and of how many prerevolutionary trends were modified, but far from obliterated, in the postrevolutionary period. When Marr's "New Theory of Language" was married to Marxism this illustrates a general phenomenon in the ecology of revolution as particular intellectual orientations find themselves in a new force field. Such an explanation does not necessarily imply repression, opportunism, or calculated moves. Actually, we need a slightly broader purview to look at the Marr phenomenon. In such a context, his socioeconomic theory of language development does not have to be written off as a crude attempt at accommodating the Marxists, but can be seen as an elaboration of some of the theories of A. N. Veselovsky (1838-1906), that grand old man of Russian literary and linguistic theory who died in Petersburg in 1906, precisely the time Marr was working out his first major move from purely philological scholarship to the Japhetic Theory. Indeed, one of Marr's many institutional bases of the 1920s, ILYaZV, was originally called the Veselovsky Institute. In other words, it was named for Veselovsky, who, although discredited in the 1940s as too "cosmopolitan," at this time provided a favorite frame of reference for critiquing the Formalists. Veselovsky was himself a leftist but no Marxist, and many of the scholarly agendas and positions he pursued were analogous to those taken up by Marr, including his championing of historical poetics, as distinct from a poetics that sought to adduce invariants. Also, Veselovsky developed a stadial theory of the history of language that is in its general contours quite similar to Marr's, while Marr's interest in prelogical language also has ample precedent in Veselovsky, who also worked on the paleontology of languages. We can look at Marr's theories in an even broader purview. Promethean linguistics in general and Marr's theories in particular can be seen as part of a European theory dating from at least the German Romantics, who believed that language is thinking (as they put it, "Die Sprache als Energie"). One of its grandsires was the German Wilhelm von Humboldt, who influenced such leading Russian theorists of language as Veselovsky, Aleksandr Potebnva, G. Shpet—and Vygotsky. Indeed, even the "hack" S. Danilov from the Communist Academy cited von Humboldt's statement "Language is the agent of human interaction" as the banner quotation for his pro-Marrist speech of 1928 made to the Department of Political Enlightenment (Politprosvet). At the same time, in this speech he pronounced Marr's theories the only possible version of a Marxist linguistics that showed how to "regulate the collective," but in this context he cited Trotsky (in 1928!) on the necessity of ensuring "hygiene" in language. The cectrine o: "hyoridicity" was itself an intellectual hybrid. There is another important extra-Bolshevik aspect to Marr's theories, in this instance having to do with his interest in prelogical language. This can be viewed as yet another version of that general tendency of the 1910s and 1920s which I have labeled "the Wagnerian project." Marr in his study of prelogical language and culture was particularly concerned with the relationship between physical gesture, sound, and music and with the whole question of rhythm. In other words, he was also attracted by the possibility of a truly syncretic culture in primordial times. Marr did not pursue these interests in isolation but in the late 1920s became a member of a study group that included L. Vygotsky, Luria, and Eisenstein.7 All of these men were committed to establishing a materialist account of such questions as language acquisition and the survival of primitive expressive forms in our languages of today. But their investigations did not focus on Marxist thought; they were largely conducted at the intersection of linguistics, new psychological theory (particularly that coming out of Berlin and including Freudianism),78 and aesthetic theories, in particular those of Nietzsche and Wagner and later theorists who were influenced by them. Eisenstein tried to uncover the gestural bases at the depths of the meanings of words and was particularly interested in Nietzsche's observations on this in The Birth of Tragedy.79 One can also see some of his theoretical and practical explorations into syncretism in some essays he wrote in the late 1930s and early 1940s in connection with his productions Alexander Nevsky and Ivan the Terrible.80 Marr died in 1934 but his school only grew in power, making it difficult to ascertain to what extent he was responsible for its canonization. Its sway came to an end in 1950, however, when Stalin joined a debate on linguistics in Pravda with three essays attacking Marr.81 The essays are of considerable interest for the question of cultural evolution because they contain a hybrid message. One of their chief functions was to debunk Marr's contention that language is part of the superstructure and changes as a function of changes in the base; this move freed much Soviet scholarship from an excessive economic determinism. But there are two other important moments in the essays. First, Stalin called the strangle hold that the Marr school enjoyed in linguistics an "Arakcheev-like" regime, thus likening it to the repressive military colonies set up by Arakcheev during the reign of Alexander I. This remark gave license to writers and intellectuals to attack all manner of "Arakcheev-like," overly authoritarian trends in intellectual life. Thus the critique of Stalinism that we associate with the thaws under Khrushchev actually began before Stalin died. In Not by Bread Alone (Ne khlebom yedinym), the most explosive book of the 1956 thaw, Vl. Dudintsev was in a sense taking his cue from Stalin when he attacked Stalinism for what he explicitly called the "Arakcheev-like" regimes in intellectual life. The second moment undercuts this impression of the essays as a milestone in liberalization. In Stalin's critique of Marr's theories, he used for "hybridization" the word skreshchivaniye rather than skreshcheniye. As is so often the case, the difference of a mere few letters spoke volumes: skreshchivaniye has negative connotations of interbreeding that are absent from skreshcheniye. In these articles, Stalin railed against Marr's notion that there can be no such thing as national languages and also attacked the Bund (a Jewish socialist group persecuted by the Bolsheviks). Thus the essays were in effect a call to greater "purity" of the line, and must be seen in the context of the anticosmopolitan campaign, the doctors' plot, and an increasingly rabid Russian chauvinism. Finally, we must ask why, if Marr so successfully served Stalinism, was he in the end denounced publicly by Stalin himself? One answer to this question may be found in a kernel of truth in Marr's own theories. History is always everywhere at work, even in a totalitarian state, and the Soviet Union found itself in a different historical moment when there was a need to realign once again the symbolic borders. In 1926, the very point when Marr, by his own account, had finalized his "New Theory of Language," the political power structure in Leningrad changed radically. Zinoviev, who had been Party head of the city ever since the capital was moved to Moscow in 1918, fell from power. As "socialism in one country" emerged as the de facto and then the de jure policy, he, in his other capacity as head of the Comintern, had become less important. But he ultimately fell from power because he had started to ally himself with Trotsky. In February 1926 the Central Committee sent a huge contingent from Moscow to Leningrad, and at the Thirteenth Extraordinary Session of the Leningrad Regional Party Conference the "new opposition" was routed. A new Regional Party Committee was elected, headed by Sergei Kirov, the former Party head from Azerbaidzhan who was considered a relative unknown who would be easier to manipulate. Leningrad is generally reckoned to have become, thanks to this comprehensive purge, the first Stalinist city. The "unknown" Kirov was in actuality already known to some Leningrad cultural circles as the person responsible for commissioning the memorial to the Baku massacre and the Brodsky painting commemorating it, commissions won by architects and artists who were anathema to the avantgarde. Nevertheless, Kirov, for all his Stalinist identity, was probably more enabling for the avant-garde than Zinoviev had been. Certainly in the initial years of his tenure in Leningrad the city regained some of its lost status as a cultural trendsetter Even as Marr's linguistics and allied movements directed at "a single, unified language" (yedinyy yazyk) were gathering political strength, there came another avant-garde response to the task of creating a truly revolutionary culture. This new wave, which essentially set itself up in opposition to that "single language," was centered in Leningrad. The dynamos of Volkhovstroy might break down, but the city's engines of cultural revolution were still churning.