# STRAIGHT TALK AND THECAMPAIGN AGAINST WAGNER In an article of 1928 Polivanov claimed that "the language of the Pioneer-Komsomol generation of today is quite different from that of the prerevolutionary intellectual or the average Russian of 1913." He contended, moreover, that the differences amount to not merely two dialects but two separate languages as that word is defined by linguists, that is, "in terms of mutual incomprehensibility." He went on to invoke a common trope of utopian writing in claiming that if someone had gone to sleep in 1913 and woken up in 1928, he or she would not be able to understand what was being said.1 One might contest Polivanov's view that the radical differences between the Russian spoken in 1913 and that of 1928 amount to two distinct languages. Nevertheless, he is accurate insofar as he is describing two generations that were separated by events so revolutionary that they often seemed unable to communicate with each other. In order to assess this shift in language we should turn to Bakhtin's contribution to the understanding of the sociology of language practices—the belief that we need to study not only languages but what he refers to as "images" of languages. Bakhtin notes that within the mass of data that linguists study as language, there are highly marked "social languages" that give a distinctive profile to particular generations, classes, professions, and so on, "a profile that by defining itself through semantic shifts and lexical choices can be established even within the boundaries of a linguistically unitary language . . . [It is] a concrete sociolinguistic belief system that defines a distinct identity for itself within the boundaries of a language that is unitary only in the abstract." Such a set of practices gives a recognizable face to a world view; it is, then, less a language than an image of language, "an image assumed by a set of social beliefs, the image of a social ideologeme that has fused with its own discourse, with its own language."2 The difference in language between 1913 and 12cFivanov is really a difference between images of language.It :s a csrse break. But it might also be described more broadly as a radical reonientation in the dominant image of culture itself to be found among certa:n mainstream and avant-garde intellectual groups in the second half of the 1920s. Although this shift could be seen as following the official agenda of "workerization," a more sociologically oriented scholarship and so forth, it actually had no necessary connection to the Party, the Komsomol, or the Revolution; analogous shifts can be found elsewhere in Europe at this time. This reorientation was toward foregrounding cultural forms that, in crucial respects, represent the opposite of those that obtained in the 1910s and the first half of the 1920s. Arguably, culture in the first half of the decade labored, consciously or unconsciously, under the shadow of Wagner, but in this period it began to emerge from under that shadow. That is not to say that in the early 1920s Wagner's music was imitated or revered—although it was to a certain extent—but more that what might be called the materiality of the word was downplayed in favor of such values as music (or the sound qualities of language), theatricality, spectacle, and monumentalism. The theater veered off decidedly in the direction of pantomime and bouffe, or alternatively of pageant-like "mystery," and some productions dispensed with words altogether. A good example of Wagnerism is the mass spectacles of the 1920s, which incorporated much pantomime. Because words used in the spectacles were often lost in the melee of thousands of actors on a vast open-air stage, the verbal text was of necessity kept to a minimum and largely involved choral recitation or singing. But the downplaying of the word was due to more than sheer necessity. In its place, music assumed a major role; the duel between the two classes locked in a revolutionary struggle was frequently represented in terms of a duel between two pieces or kinds of music. In The Storming of the Winter Palace, for instance, the triumph of the revolutionary forces was represented by having the Communist hymn the "Internationale" progressively drown out the music of the “Marseillaise," which was deemed bourgeois because it was associated with the French Revolution. During the early years of NEP, the verbal text had experienced a comeback. However, the official model of those years for organizing performance groups in workers' clubs, the so-called Unified (yedinyy) Artistic Circle, or YeKhK, was patently influenced by Wagnerian principles. In 1927, a sign of new times, YeKhK was debunked in an Agitprop (Department of Agitation and Propaganda) conference on the theater; in other words, the shift described in this chapter was felt very broadly, though not universally. At the center of this shift were a movement for opera reform and an allied movement in linguistics. That it should be focused in opera is not surprising. Even before the Revolution, theatrical activists had been particularly concerned with the Wagnerian agenda of conceiving a new interrelation among three key elements in opera—sound (or music), text (words), and bodily movement. Now they returned to the same problematic, focusing particularly on the interrelation between sound and word (or, in opera, between score and libretto). A parallel shift can be found in linguistic theory, one that set itself up in opposition to those who advocated a "single and universal language" (yedinyy yazyk). Whereas Promethean linguists had emphasized linguistic standardization, the emphasis in this new movement was on variegation and interrelation—between sound and word, between text and context, and so on. Thus the implications of this shift were not confined to opera or language use /linguistics. The shift can be seen as a marker of a broad cultural change that is best generalized in the following terms: in each of several discourses (literary and linguistic theory, the performing arts, and even music), there was a tendency to move away from formal categories that drew attention to their own abstractness in an attempt to capture more closely the actuality of spoken language. In each case this move was seen as a gesture toward a new image of language in the broader sense. This trend cannot be called a movement, just as Promethean linguistics cannot be called a movement. It is reflected in the work of very disparate groups and individuals, many of whom would scarcely have been prepared to see any common cause in their theories. Although some were active proselytizers, they did not go in for writing manifestoes or any of the other activities that had become standard for the many new movements that proliferated over the previous ten years or so. The anti-Wagnerian trend stood against a tendency, found in all areas of the arts at this time, especially art and architecture, to monumentalism, or exaggerated heroic pathos. In fact, it represents virtually the opposite of heroic monumentalism, that is, a paradoxical attempt at monumentalizing the trivial. I mean trivial here not in the sense of kitsch, but rather in the sense of privileging a discourse that had previously been marked as minor and mundane, the discourse of everyday speech, and particularly of nonstandard speech. The cult of everyday language can be seen as an effect of interest in two particular movements in contemporary Europe. These were, on the one hand, new developments in the Austro-German modernist theater and music then centered around Berlin, and, on the other, contemporary Francophone linguistic thought, and particularly the work of Saussure and Antoine Meillet. These disparate trends came together in Soviet Russia in a union facilitated by the peculiar historical and political conditions of that time. This interaction was fostered by such factors as the increasing cooperation of the German and Soviet military industrial complexes, but particularly by the founding in 1925 of VOKS (the All-Union Society for Overseas Cultural Links), an organization that sponsored not only the visits of Benjamin and other leading leftist intellectuals, but also concert tours, art exhibitions, and film showings both in the Soviet Union and in the West; the majority of all VOKS activities at this time involved movement back and forth between Berlin and the two Soviet capitals. Two particular VOKSsponsored events in Leningrad proved seminal for the new trend. ## The New Operas At the very end of the 1926-27 season the Leningrad Maly Opera House fitted in somewhat surreptitiously the premieres of two highly controversial new operas, Ernst Krenek's Leap over the Shadow (Der Sprung über den Schatten, or Pryzhok cherez ten') and Alban Berg's Wozzeck (Votsek). Both had premiered in Germany as recently as1925. Krenek's later opera Johniu spielt auf (Johnny Strikes Up [the Band], of 1925-26), which premiered in Germany in February 1927, was staged in Leningrad in 1928. These operas, which opened later in Moscow as well, were to have a major impact on the development of Soviet music and theater over the next few years. Their librettos feature characters from the lower classes of the city and its demimonde, a significant shift when compared with the aristocrats and rustics who had been the basic fare of opera, though their plots largely rehearse the recognizable themes of love, jealousy, imputed infidelity, and revenge. The impact of the new operas derives less from the new subject matter, however, than from their formal strategies. Writing about the premieres of 1927, Boris Asafiev, the leading Soviet champion of modernist music, listed among these operas'qualities their ability to convey the insistently everyday and nonheroic, what he referred to as "humdrum life in a humdrum town" ("seryy byt serogo goroda"). More significant in terms of innovation, however, was in his view the unusual structure of the operas, which were built on “chance conversations, unexpected meetings, words dropped casually in street language. . . and drunken ramblings."4The conductor Nikolai Malko developed these observations further in a succeeding article on Krenek's Leap over the Shadow, claiming that the operas represented a step forward beyond Prokofiev's Love of Three Oranges (which also premiered in Russia that year). The Love of Three Oranges, he said, mocked false operatic romanticism, and in so doing prepared the ground for these new operas, which are actually "preparing the . . . inevitable revolution." These works point to a way out of the "essentially antediluvian" condition of the current Soviet opera, he contended, because they actively confound the dominant opera traditions of Wagner and Strauss by eschewing "sentimental, sweet lyrics," "cheap love pathos," and beautiful arias. The new operas are deliberately antimelodic; nearly all their music is polyphonic, atonal, or polytonal; their sounds seem cacophonous, but this is because they are built on the principle of dissonance; the apparent confusion of voices is not as unsystematic as it might seem because it is controlled by a "strict rhythmic pattern."5 Before long, these operas were having their impact on Soviet music. The most celebrated instance of the influence of the new German operas on a Soviet is D. Shostakovich's The Nose (Nos), which is loosely based on the Gogol story and premiered in 1930. This opera, like so many other interpretations of Gogol made in this period, satirizes Nicolaevan Russia as an emblem of all that the avant-garde of the day abhorred: oppressive regimes, a bureaucratic cast of mind, and above all cultural philistinism. The musicologist I. I. Sollertinsky wrote in his review of the opera: "[Shostakovich] is perhaps the first among opera composers to make his heroes speak not in conventional arias and cantilenas but in living language, setting everyday speech to music. ... The opera theater is at a crossroads. The birth of Soviet opera is not far off."6Sollertinsky was of course wrong in claiming that Shostakovich was the first to use the "living language" in his opera. His dramatic claims for the significance of The Nose seem particularly inappropriate given that Sollertinsky became a close friend of Shostakovich's while the latter was working on the opera, and was one of those who collaborated in the writing of the libretto.7 His claim for the opera is also in a sense understated, however: The Nose was a sign that not just the opera but Soviet culture itself was at a critical crossroads; indeed, it seemed to many that the birth of an entirely new culture might not be "far off." Asafiev concluded his article on the new operas with the claim that their unusual compositional strategy was essentially "directed against high culture."This was certainly so in terms of the music, which was deliberately democratized; in the new opera, nonreceived, lowbrow forms and even instruments were used. Jazz, which when first introduced in the Soviet Union in 1922 was scorned as decadent and bourgeois, stormed the citadel of the opera. Subcanonical instruments were also incorporated in the operas'orchestra; for instance, Shostakovich included a baialaika in his score for The Nose. The most radical step of these new operas, however, was toward a new kind of libretto and a new relationship between libretto and music. Previously, a Wagnerian sense of this relationship dominated; in his Gesamtkunstwerk, or "total art work," all the elements—text, sets, acting, and so on— were ultimately subordinated to the music, which was itself controlled to a large extent by the principle of the leitmotif or recurrent musical signature, which was to play a large role in conveying meaning. Now it was the libretto that was to control the opera rather than vice versa. As Shostakovich himself stated in his introductory remarks to the first edition (1930) of the libretto (echoing what was by now a commonplace about the new opera), "The music in this work {spektakl'] is not an end in itself. Here the emphasis is on the presentation of the text."8 At the same time, there was a shift in the writing of librettos from the use of the literary language to the spoken vernacular. Here I mean literally the spoken vernacular, not some idealized version of the folk that essentially becomes part of the literary language. This shift necessitated the writing of an entirely different kind of music. When the libretto reproduced the actual patterns of vernacular speech, this militated against conventional musical form, which was geared to more idealized and regular verbal patterns more readily amenable to translation into melodic form. The privileging of conversational language led to music's imitating the patterns of that speech rather than vice versa. Shostakovich, in several of his scores for musical dramas and films from this time, had individual instruments parody the intonational patterns of everyday speech." In the new opera, the libretto was not synchronized with the music. Much of the effort in composition was directed at undercutting melodic expectations or at using a form of recitative that was nonsynchronous with the musical line. The new music was so difficult for a singer with conventional training, however, that many complained of "a campaign against the voice."10 Indeed, composers in their zeal took the attack on melodic music to an extreme. Thus in The Nose the main part was sung in a nasal voice effected by putting the hand over the nose. The downgrading of the musical component in opera took such extreme forms that when Radlov was appointed as an opera director in 1928, the lack of musical experience in his background was considered of no importance. Certainly he was not troubled by it for, in an article of 1930, he declared war on the kind of opera that is defined as "singing in costumes and wigs against a background of sets," and in which music is seen "as the only self-valuable element in the opera that presides over it magisterially as its essence and meaning." "Instead of the singer, equipped with the appropriate makeup and gestures,"he continued, "we will have a performer who . . . [makes] use of the entire intonational range [vsem intonatsionnym bogatsvom] from the spoken to the sung word. . . ."11 A sort of apotheosis of the Wagnerian trend is Meyerhold's production of Gogol's Inspector General, which premièred in December 1926 and was, by Meyerhold's own account, subordinated to the principle of "musical realism," by which he meant that musical forms such as the fugue and the leitmotif governed the rhythm of the production; the text, acting, and even the sets were all geared to the demands of these controlling forms. Also, some of the scenes in the play were wordless.12 Shostakovich was close to Meverhold and even lived in his Moscow apartment for a time (where he wrote some music for The Nose), but arguably, although both works use Gogol as a weapon to debunk petty bourgeois philistinism and the bureaucratic cast of mind, Shostakovich's approach is in many ways opposed to that of Meyerhold; whereas Meyerhold nominated "tragedy" as the genre of his production and explicitly rejected for it his old ideals of bouffe and the commedia dell'arte, Shostakovich looked to parodic grotesqueness, buffoonery, and laughter.13 A central means for such effects was the slippage between the music and the action, between the verbal text and the music, or between pompous, bookish, or clichéd verbalizing and "straight talk." The significance of this shift extends beyond the opera, and analogous shifts can be seen in many other branches of cultural activity. The ballet, one of the most unlikely mediums, was also being revamped to incorporate the word. Even that old chestnut The Nutcracker was totally reworked for a production of 1930 to "demonstrate a whole series of new forms [priyëmy], such as dances without music and word dances [tanets-slovo]."14 ## The Resurrection of the Word The new trends of 1926 and beyond sought a "resurrection of the word," but in a different way from the one Shklovsky and his Formalist and Futurist allies had sought. In Formalist analyses, words were frequently regarded only for their sound potential, or as "technique-fodder." At this later time, those who privileged the spoken language wanted to "make the stone stony" once again, but they believed they were doing so more literally than the Formalists. In this sense, their project can be seen as analogous to the new wave found in Germany from around 1925 which called for Neue Sachlichkeit, for basing art more in the actuality of the world, to give it, as Sachlichkeif is generally translated, "objectivity." The prerevolutionary Futurists in their quest to go "beyond sense" (za-um) wanted essentially to break through the constraints of "sense" (um) qua the stale conventions of language and even epistemology to reach an extrasystemic—revolutionary—meaning. Proponents of the newer trend, however, sought the opposite. They glorified discourse that was prior to such semantic conventions. They rejected an academic and dictionary attitude toward language and language that was clichéd and comme il faut, in favor of one that was richer and more variegated because it had not submitted to these constraints. Obviously, and as many theorists of this time such as Bakhtin stressed, some sort of conventionality or system in language is neither good nor bad but rather unavoidable if there is to be meaning There is no way to get beyond what Frederic Jameson calls "the prison house of language," and the Futurist quest for extrasystemic meaning was essentially utopian semantics. The avant-garde of the late 1920s were no longer interested in the sort of total iconoclasm one finds in the theory of trans-sense (zaum), which, in seeking meanings that cannot be communicated through the conventional system of semantics, is in danger of becoming a solipsism. The figures discussed here turned their attention to actual, nonbookish language, and particularly to oral and proletarian forms, because these forms did not have to be made up, as did zaum. Unlike zaum, they could communicate meaning readily, and yet they were, it was felt, a source that might truly “resurrect" language. Clearly, even before the Revolution members of the less transcendental wing of Russian Futurism, as represented in Mayakovsky, were also interested in incorporating in their writing nonreceived language, including street talk. However, with their emphasis on sdvig (displacement) and on breaking through to a new order of meaning by means of incongruous and unexpected juxtapositions—their mania for manipulation—they gave priority to the orchestration of such language forms over their materiality. The main group in Leningrad's literary avant-garde of the late 1920s, OBERYu (an acronym for the Society for Real Art, sometimes known in the West as the Russian Absurdists), marked an absolute distance from their Futurist predecessors in rejecting zaum and advancing actual, spoken speech as a remedy for a dead "literariness."15 "We are the poets of a new sense of the world and a new art," they declared in their manifesto of 1928. "We are the creators not only of a new poetic language but also of a new sense of life and of objects. .. . We broaden and deepen the meanings of objects and words but never destroy them. A concrete object cleansed of its overlay of the literary and conventional is made into something from the sphere of art." 16 It is not surprising to discover, then, that in the late 1920s Shostakovich and other composers in the movement for opera reform worked on new operas to librettos by Daniil Kharms and N. Oleynikov from the OBERYu set (the projects, unfortunately, came to nothing).17 A similar concern with authenticity in language can be seen in the new orientation in linguistics. Whereas earlier the members of the Formalist circles looked to linguistic methodology as providing a key for a more scientific way of studying literature, now many regarded linguistics as providing a key for renewal in culture generally, but rejected the Formalist emphasis on the literary language and written forms. Instead, in almost all schools of linguistics the emphasis was now on "applied linguistics," "speech culture" (rechevaya kul'tura), and "nonwritten forms" (bespis'mennost').18 In state-sponsored scholarship the importance of "actuality" (sovremennost') was constantly stressed as a priority so that even the study of traditional philological subjects was modified; those who worked on the language of the ancient Greeks, for instance, endeavored to reconstruct "living antiquity" (zhivaya starina) and its "sociological bases."19 The emphasis on the living word, or zhivoye slovo, was seen as not merely distinctive from the Formalist approach, but actively in opposition to it. This was clear even in the canonical attacks on the Formalists. For instance, an article by Bukharin of 1925 described Formalism as a phenomenon that was broader than the group of literary and linguistic scholars who have generally been given that name. He defined it as the impulse, whether found in linguistics, economics, jurisprudence, political theory, science, or elsewhere, to analyze the subject by reference to phenomena solely from within that field, without taking into account any other phenomena. What was called for, he contended, was a "new philology," a "renewed approach to examining the data," which would entail, in the case of literary and linguistic scholarship, a reorientation toward "practical life"and "living language," and toward studying the language of the proletariat.20 As was discussed in the last chapter, several different schools of linguistics were ranged up to combat the Formalist/idealist hyena, including a sort of vulgar materialism that took a physiological approach to the analysis of language, which was discussed in terms of "conditioned reflexes" and other Pavlovian terms and "biomechanics";21 and also versions of "vulgar sociologism" such as can be found in appropriations of Marr. Another approach, one characteristic of the broad trend described here, sought to be less "vulgarly" sociological in defining language in terms of its dependence on the social.22 This definition covers a range of positions, but in each account language proceeds not from system. or from individual expression, or even from the body per se, but from interaction. Meaning resides neither in the object, nor in the expressive subject, but between persons in the give and take of their dialogue. Its adherents stressed the immediacy of spoken language. In 1926 two works were published that were to define this new trend, R. Shor's Language and Society, which was to become an obligatory primer in all those institutes forming the anti-Formalist axis, and Bakhtin (Voloshinov)'s23 "Discourse in Life and Discourse in Art."24 Shor's work gives a highly schematized account of how different social classes produce different languages. The division of labor is the base on which the superstructure of linguistic differences is erected. Although oversimplified, the account draws on the latest linguistic thought in the West, citing primarily sources published between 1921 and 1923, with Saussure playing a leading role. Indeed, Saussure might have been bemused to discover that at that time the most militantly Marxist theoreticians of language claimed him as a materialist. Saussure was also an important figure for members of the Bakhtin Circle, who, after 1924—and under the impact of the new urgency that discourse formation assumed in these years—were seeking to rethink the Neo-Kantianism that had dominated their earlier discussions. In his 1926 essay Bakhtin (Voloshinov) essentially conflates the basic insights of his early texts, including "Author and Hero in Aesthetic Activity," with some of the more powerful work being done in linguistics. As a result, Saussure's privileging of abstract, systemic langue over the messiness of real spoken language, parole, is utterly overturned by Bakhtin (Voloshinov), who brings into the picture such previously marginalized factors as the intonation with which a particular utterance is pronounced. It is in this aspect that the new linguistics intersects with the movement for opera reform. Bakhtin (Voloshinov) in his work of this time on the way meaning is grounded in social interaction singled out the very phenomenon Radlov had stressed in his account of the new opera, that is, "the entire range of intonational possibilities." Radlov had said "from the spoken to the sung word"; the equivalent in Bakhtin's writings would be "from the spoken to the written word."Indeed, there was actually a link between the new opera and the Bakhtin school in that I. I. Sollertinsky, who, starting from the time when Shostakovich was working on The Nose became his intellectual mentor,25 was also at the time a member of the Bakhtin Circle. Intonation assumed importance in some Formalist writings as well, but there it was more a matter of sound patterns. In Bakhtin's studies, intonation stands in for the contextual basis or situatedness of meaning The emphasis on contextuality and situatedness that challenges Formalist assumptions was at the heart of a serious attempt to define a new, sociologically based poetics. As theoretical inquiry turned in this direction, there was a revival of interest in the theories of Veselovsky from the last century; the insistence on the situatedness of meaning that informed his "historical poetics," based on "concrete material,"was all too frequently used to beat the Formalists over the head26 (given that Veselovsky was also important for Marr, it should be clear that the "three" anti-Formalist approaches identified here are only constructs and the distinctions between them are not absolute). This was a time of millennial expectation, which was, paradoxical as it might seem, focused on everyday language, and particularly that of the masses. Enthusiasm for the language of the proletariat reached an all-time high in these years (fostered of course in part by the new emphasis on "workerization"). Scholars rushed around collecting and categorizing different examples of urban speech, looking particularly at such things as the patois characteristic of workers from different trades, for example, print workers, metal workers, and so on.27 Even the study of folklore was now insistently on the folklore of the proletariat.28 Thus when Propp's pathbreaking study of the morphology of the folktale came out in 1929, it was by then anachronistic compared with the new trends. (It was a product of the Formalist stronghold, GIIl, where most of the chapters were originally presented as lectures.) The new generation of writers who entered Soviet literature at this time experimented with writing in the language of the factory worker.29 Even OBERYu invoked the proletariat in its manifesto of 1928. This faith in the power of the language of the proletariat is a sort of analogue to the Romantic cult of the "folk" of the German 1820s. A few years earlier, Soviet literature had seen late-blooming echoes of this cult in Scythianism and allied movements of "peasant writers," but they were largely discredited and even actively persecuted at the end of the decade. The vogue for proletarian discourse, however, amounts to more than merely idealizing the culture of one group from the masses rather than another. Proletarian culture is more urbanist and cosmopolitan, or is at least conceived as being so. In it, one does not generally find the "kvass nationalism," as Belinsky called it, or the saccharine religiosity that in Russia have so often informed peasant-inspired writing. Street talk is meant to cut through such cant, to be direct and realistic. It should be added that at about this time in America the hard-boiled detective novel of Dashiell Hammett and others was being developed, a genre in which a sure mark of the heroic status of the detective protagonist was his ability for laconic and pithy street talk. frequently contrasted favorably with the bookishness or longwindedness of lesser or negative characters. How can a romanticism of proletarian straight talk be related to Shostakovich's opera based on Gogol's "The Nose," that is, on the language of an essentially preproletarian petty bourgeois? Actually, The Nose was untypical of Shostakovich's compositions from the late 1920s; most of them were on contemporary themes. For instance, a later work, The Bolt (1931), billed as "the first industrialized ballet," tells a somewhat hackneyed tale of worker sabotage in a factory, incited by a bourgeois. The ballet culminates in the necessary arrests, which lead in to a "dance-play" by the Red Army.30Another Soviet opera that premiered in the same year as The Nose, V. Deshevov's Ice and Steel, which features highly colloquial conversational recitatives and other techniques typical of the new opera, draws on a simplistic revolutionary plot concerning the Kronstadt Uprising whereby the young Komsomol firebrands Musya and Sanya prevail over conventionalized versions of the bourgeois, who are undermining proletarian solidarity among the sailors and hence contribute to the tragic mutiny.31 The weapons the figures in these new operas fire at the bourgeois blackguards are not just the guns of Kronstadt, but also what intellectuals such as Shostakovich believed to be even deadlier: the words of nonauthoritarian discourse. But such discourse is also available in nonproletarian, and even noncontemporary, sources. "The Nose" was far from the only text by Gogol to play a major role in the culture of the late 1920s. As one contemporary observed later, "Our age was in love with Gogol."32 However, this eyewitness was in the late 1920s a member of "the Changeover," a Komsomol group of self-proclaimed proletarians who looked, as the name of their group implies, to the "Great Breakthrough." Thus Gogol was the hero of the hour in an age of industrialization, and furthermore he was a hero among certain proletarian cultural groups no less than among the Formalists and other so-called bourgeois intellectuals. Here we must make a distinction between the cult of street "straight talk" and the more "Gogolian" project whereby a technique known as skaz is used to parody Soviet newspeak. An interest in skaz, or substandard oral narration, was marked already in the early 1920s. Clearly the phenomenon described here did not emerge out of the blue in 1926. There was, rather, a distinct evolution in the theory and application of skaz over the course of the decade. The Formalists of GIII took an interest in skaz early in their careers. However, in their initial studies of it, such as Eikhenbaum's "The Illusion of skaz" or "How Gogol's 'The Overcoat' Was Made" (both of 1918), this technigue for incorporating substandard, oral speech in literature is defined in terms of its theatrical and musical potential ("improvisation," "intonation" defined as sound patterns, references to the komediant, that is, to the actor in commedia dell'arte, and “pantomime gestures").33Indeed, the very term "illusion" in Eikhenbaum's title implies that skaz is a form of uslovnost'. By the second half of the 1920s, however, Eikhenbaum had shifted his account of skaz, and as other linguists and literary theoreticians such as R. Shor, V. V. Vinogradov, and Lev Jakubinsky delved deeper into the implications of skaz they developed a dialogic theory of language.34 Zoshchenko, the most famous master of skaz as parody of Soviet newspeak, began publishing in 1921, but his day was really the second half of the 1920s. when he became a household word and could not even move in the streets without being mobbed.35 Nineteen twenty-eight was the year of his greatest fame and greatest number of publications. In that year the institutions that published his work or books on him ranged from the proletarian mass series Deshëvaya biblioteka to GIII itself. Zoshchenko, like Gogol, was so popular partly because of the way he debunks officialese (in his case Soviet) and the bureaucratic cast of mind in petty officialdom. In this respect, there are parallels between what Shostakovich and Zoshchenko sought to do. Indeed, althoughZoshchenko is not known to have been involved in the movement for opera reform, another major practitioner of skaz from the 1920s, E. Zamyatin, collaborated on the libretto for The Nose (allegedly he wrote the third scene of act one).36 What Zoshchenko was doing in his stories was essentially reactive. His kind of appropriation of the speech of the semieducated of his day exposes the gaps in the officialese they parrot, the ignorance, cant, and ludicrousness of it: it also catches moments when overly formalized language systems constrain the "living language." Shostakovich used Gogol to similar ends, but at the same time his project was proactive. Like other figures working in different domains, such as Bakhtin, he was seeking to establish a different image of language (in the broader sense) that many of those involved in the project, in the nakedness of their naiveté, associated with throwing off the shackles of "bourgeois" or "petty bourgeois" discourse and aesthetics. They were also conducting a concerted campaign against yedinyy yazyk (the single and unified language that Marr, the Constructivists, and all too many others wanted to see mandated to all). In works such as Shostakovich's The Nose. the aim was r.ot so much to debunk Nicolaevan Russia, or authoritarian ard highlv oureaucratic regimes, or even to expose "petty bourgeois philistinism" meshchanstvo) per se. All this had been done a thousand times before. And as for Shostakovich's use of such techniques as parody, dissonance, and cacophony--all these had been perennials in the inventory of the avant-garde over the course of the 1920s. At this point, the old war horses were mustered under a slightly different flag. Among Shostakovich's stated purposes in choosing "The Nose" as his principal text for a new opera was to find the Gogolian text with the most "colorful" language, and this he believed was "The Nose."37 What he meant by "colorful language" was of course not just quaint folkisms or pithy expressions from a bygone age. Rather, Shostakovich had in mind the way the Gogolian text debunks the language of authority, just as his own music was intended to debunk the musical language of authority. This represents an expansion of the sort of project Zoshchenko undertook. But as Shostakovich's opera drew on the "wealth of intonational possibilities" as part of the inventory of techniques for debunking, it simultaneously pointed to the possibility of richer cultural expression in a liberated, "living" language.38 Thus, were one to seek to define this new trend, the use or nonuse of substandard language—street talk—would not be its most crucial feature. Street language in the romanticized conception of writers and librettists is essentially a trope for the forces that conspire to challenge and undermine "music." The issue is whether the materiality of the word will be given its due, or whether conventionalized, but now hackneyed and allegedly "petty bourgeois" (meshchanskiye), systems for achieving "beauty," such as the standard literary language, the principles of harmony, and overriding, music-like constructions, will prevail and thus keep back the “great breakthrough" to a new culture. As Kozintsev said at the time about Shostakovich's The Nose, in it "urban lore. . . stormed the citadel of the Aidas and Trovatores."39 Thus there was a strong iconoclastic element in the culture of this time, but the iconoclasm was not an end in itself; it was a necessary feature of the route to a new, postbourgeois culture. This can be seen in the case of a contemporary film, Eisenstein's October, made in 1927 to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the Revolution. The film opens with an iconoclastic act, the dismantling of an Imperial statue, and culminates in the storming of the Winter Palace. But the charge on the Winter Palace in this film was aesthetic no less than it was political. As Sergei Tretyakov wrote in the New Left Front (Novyy lef) after October was released: "The Winter Palace had to be taken twice. In 1917 it was demolished as a political citadel. Now it is time to demolish it as an aesthetic citadel. The ironic and destructively mocking manner in which Eisenstein shows all those tsarist-aristocratic monumental accoutrements—the Hermitage, the carpets, the porcelain, the pictures, and the statues—points the way for storming the aesthetic. But the storming of the aesthetic to be found in Eisenstein's work covers only one of the areas to be attacked, because the 'aesthetic Winter Palace' with its artistic philistinism [meshchanstvo] has spread over the whole country, penetrated into every apartment and become an ingrained habit."40 Thus in the film the objects in the Winter Palace that Eisenstein singled out are in heavy, bad taste, and smack of the very Biedermeier against which the entire film is directed. In October, after the insurgent masses have penetrated the Winter Palace, a small group of them finally breaks through into the tsar's apartments. Here they experience a moment of truth as they uncover boxes of military medals represented as sheer baubles, exposing the "masquerade" of giving one's life for the tsar in the Great War. And then they find the tsarina's bidet juxtaposed with an icon-like picture of the royal family receiving divine blessing: the tsar is not just a figure who sits on horseback in full regalia at a review of troops, but also one who engages in sex.41 The aim of such work was of course not just to debunk authority figures by using scatology. There is a difference between tearing down a statue of the tsar and penetrating into the tsarina's water closet, and it has to do with different levels of dehierarchization. The second is the more complex of the two and difficult to define, but we are helped in developing a theoretical account of what occurs by such works as Bakhtin's book on Rabelais, in which the body plays a central role.42In that work, Bakhtin describes how the sense of the body can be limited and formalized to exclude its ungainly protuberances, leaving a smooth and orderly surface (more or less what Stallybrass and White call the "classical body"). But in what he calls "carnival," the bodies intermingle and such protuberances take on a crucial role in enabling communication. While Bakhtin's account stands on its own as an analysis of carnival, it can also function as a metaphor for a pervasive concern of his writings in the early 1930s, the distinction between sanitized, authoritative speech and the myriad possibilities available in natural language. Those who looked to a new discourse were concerned not so much with annihilating the regnant aesthetic and linguistic conventions as with enlarging, demystifying, and democratizing them. Similarly, as writers, dramatists, and filmmakers branched out to include the bodily functions in their accounts of sacrosanct authority figures. they were essentially using the body as a metaphor for the general field of discourse. While most Constructivists were advancing a version of the "classical body" (stressing "hygiene," trying to ensure that the surfaces of their buildings be as clean as possible, trying to restrict movement to a rationalized minimum, and so on), the account of the body that informs the work of the many disparate groups that can be associated with this trend admits of its protuberances and orifices. It is thus not surprising that "The Nose" became the basis of a pathbreaking opera. As we know, the nose is the most visible of human protuberances—that is, when we are dressed—and is often interpreted as standing in for the male member.43 A postbourgeois culture is not necessarily Communist, let alone Bolshevik. This is amply demonstrated in the fact that members of the Leningrad avant-gardist group OBERYu were for a time co-opted, if peripherally, into the movement for opera reform, and, as many have remarked, their works were often informed by a religious consciousness.44 Also, an important aspect of this movement for opera reform in Leningrad was a sense of common cause with leading leftist figures in the musical and theatrical world of Berlin. For example, Brecht and Weill—who actually began their collaboration in 1927, around this same time—were well known to the Leningrad lobby for opera reform. Several of Brecht and Weill's compositions were put on at places such as the Academic Capella in Leningrad.45 Activists in the movement for opera reform in Leningrad visited Brecht, a great enthusiast of Soviet culture, in Berlin and reported back on Brecht and Weill's Mahagonny and The Threepenny Opera. Leningrad productions of these two operas were mooted, but the worsening cultural climate of 1930 (see Chapter 12) meant that they were nipped in the bud and it was only in Moscow that it was possible to stage a production of The Threepenny Opera.46 If one looks at the work of most avant-gardists, and here those who sought to create the new opera are no exception, one will be struck by the extent to which they were making what might seem to be conflicting gestures, to be participating both in heroic, propagandistic ritual and in "carnival," modes most see as antithetical. Moreover, these composers and the operas' directors frequently went from one mode to the other in works produced at the same time or even within the one work. Consider, for instance, Shostakovich, who at more or less the same time as he wrote his grotesque and playful opera The Nose composed a great deal of occasional music in the heroic mode (cantatas, symphonies) and also his ballet The Belt, which celebrates the new age in a major key and has a somewhat primitive, agitational plot about wreckers in the First Five-Year Plan.47 His colleague V. Deshevov's attempt at the"first Soviet opera," Ice and Steel, has (as already outlined) an equally primitive, agitational plot, and its first production under Radlov combined exaggerated revolutionary poses such as one finds in Chinese revolutionary operas with highly colloquial recitatives in the manner of Berg and Krenek, together with Constructivist musical simulations of factory sounds in the tradition of Arthur Honegger's Pacifica 231 and Darius Milhaud's Agricultural Machines (both then very popular in such circles). What does this mean? That the government was reluctant to sponsor "carnival" and that therefore the avant-garde were obliged to serve the propaganda cause in order to survive, or in order to make it possible for their more carnivalesque works to get a public airing? This was surely partly the case. But this confusion is also a marker of their romanticism. Essentially, both modes represent an attempt at getting out of ordinary time via a romanticized version of the other (the proletarian). Thus we find the two extremes of the iconoclasm /icon-creation spectrum, or to put it in terms of Mayakovsky's play, both "mystery" and "bouffe." It was also the case that many intellectuals at this time were extremely ambivalent about the Revolution, its culture, and their own role. While many supported "revolution" and, in those terms, the Bolshevik experiment as well—even Mandelshtam to some extent—they were tormented by its actuality.48 They were also tormented by a fear that they had become marginal, were as passé and pathetic as so much rhetoric of the time represented them as being. Such fears were perennials among Soviet intellectuals. Indeed, in some senses the entire society was haunted by a fear of being marginal—hence so many compensatory narratives (such as those we have seen by Marr, Shaginyan, and Tynyanov) whereby that which is marginalized or "peripheral" regenerates "the center." At the same time as the movement for a new opera was at its height in Leningrad a spate of novels appeared about the intellectual misfit of which the Moscow writer Yu. Olesha's Envy (Zavist', 1927) is the best known. Such fiction generally tells the tale of how some quixotic intellectual flounders in his encounter with Soviet reality. In this genre, as in so many others, Moscow and Leningrad represent quite different patterns. Not only were these novels about intellectuals overwhelmingly a Leningrad phenomenon, but the Leningrad variant, unlike its Moscow counterpart, was typically a Petersburg-centric roman à clef about the respective author's own set.49 These novels are ostensibly self-flagellating am.pors r::ter y literary intellectuals about their own kind. But, for all the grotesque caricature to be found in them, their authors are generally maneuvering in the Aesopian tradition to air the problems of the intellectual in such complex times (as emerges only after decoding). Some present a countermythology and countermartyrology (of the intellectual) as an answer to the myth of the proletarian hero which was fast becoming even more entrenched, but most remain obdurately ambiguous.50 Although ambiguity was very characteristic of intellectuals' stances at this time, it was not the case that they all felt alienated and retreated into an obsession with their own set. Avant-gardist groups in Leningrad had begun to consolidate forces and create a more cohesive lobby with a coherent agenda for revolutionary culture. Not only had some association formed between the lobby for a new opera and members of OBERYu, but around 1926 members of OBERYu started negotiations with Malevich about merging with his Suprematist group UNOVIS.51Another Leningrad school of perceptual millenarianism, that of the artist Pavel Filonov, was also gathering strength. In 1925, he and his students had formed into a Collective of the Masters of Analytical Art, and in 1927 this Collective was given public prominence when it received a commission to design the sets for a production of Gogol's Inspector General (by I. Terentiev) at Leningrad's Press House; they seized the opportunity and organized an exhibition of their own Analytical Art there as well. Though this work was attacked for its "pornographic" aspects and bald "physiologism,"52 the collective continued undaunted and Filonov was able to organize a further exhibition of his work in 1929. But the movement for a new opera, the allied reconception of linguistics, and such attempts at amalgamation emerged at a time when Soviet society was on the cusp of another "cataclysm," the cultural revolution of 1928- 1931.