# THESACRALIZATION OF EVERYDAY LIFE In 1927 the Revolution was ten years old. But even as the country was celebrating the anniversary of the old revolution, it was looking to the next great one. The second revolution was to involve a more fundamental restructuring of the country than had been achieved after 1917. The principal means were to be rapid industrialization and collectivization, but what concerns us here is its concomitant cultural revolution. This "revolution," or set of policies, attempted to turn the old order in culture on its head. In a speech to mark the revolutionary anniversary in 1929 Stalin proclaimed a bol'shoy perelom, or "Great Breakthrough," that would finally bring about an absolute rift between the old and the new.1 Nineteen twenty-seven to nineteen thirty-one were the peak years of a militant campaign to institute a collective, proletarian culture and also of the movement for a socialist architecture. Such features do not represent isolated events but are interrelated as aspects of a totalizing drive for a radically new way of life replacing the old, bourgeois one. I use the term "totalizing" rather than totalitarian because the latter implies that the culture is mandated from above and indeed imposed by force and terror. Although there was certainly no shortage of government direction in these years, and there were already large scale purges, to a remarkable degree Soviet culture was translating the visions of intellectuals into actuality. "Militarization" became a twin slogan with "industrialization" as shorthand for the priorities of the age (military preparedness became an obsessive concern in the wake of a war scare of 1927). Yet-and here we sense the utopian element in the age—neither could ultimately be seen as selfvaluable; the ultimate aim of the industrialization drive was not so much to turn out dynamos as to turn out the "new man." But what defines this age as utopian must be found above all in the radical privileging of place over time, that is to say, as in all radical utopias, there was a πe: : eace change, to create conditions so perfect that time ou.cas: s As the emphasis reverted once again to the trarsformaton o: m.an ar.d mass culture, the theater eclipsed literature in prominence anc :esuned its position as queen of the arts and principal focus of official po.icy: The signal of this shift was a meeting of Agitpropin May 1927devoted to the Soviet theater. During NEP, the two major Party pronouncements on culture— those of 1924 and 1925—had been on literature but their guidelines became binding for all the arts. Now, analogously, all cultural workers, Party and non-Party, including those in literature, were expected to follow the stenographic report of the 1927 Agitprop meeting as a sort of little red book of the new age.2 It is no accident that this conference was conducted in Agitprop whereas the pronouncements on literature issued from Central Committee meetings. The conference heralded a shift to a more instrumental conception of the function of culture and to a greater emphasis on agitation.3 It was also symptomatic of a return to greater theatricality and ritualization in culture generally. ## The New Mass Spectacle In these new times, the mass spectacle was rescued from the peripheral role it had been consigned to and pronounced the backbone of the new revolutionary culture. We associate the mass spectacle with the heady times after the 1917 Revolution, but what is not generally recognized is that by weight of sheer numbers it has to be considered the genre of the second cultural revolution even more than the first. During1929, the year of the "Great Breakthrough," in the major cities and even in their suburbs mass spectacle followed hot upon mass spectacle, with often as few as three days between them. By comparison, during 1920, their peak year during the first cultural revolution, there were only five in Leningrad and even fewer in Moscow. The difference here is not just one of statistics. The first revolutionary mass spectacles were meant to function as crucibles for transforming consciousness among the illiterate masses, to help break down the gulf between actors and audience, between cultural professionals and the masses. It was believed that if the masses participated in a ritual reenactment of revolution, they might experience a revolution of their very psyches. The utopian aim of breaking down the gulf between art and life that eluded realization then was in this later period taken to an almost farcicalextreme as the country attempted to take the mass spectacle out beyond its already vast stage to encompass all of life. The new mass spectacles, as examples of one of the cruder agitational genres, capture the defining features of Soviet culture in these years. One can sense the dominant structures of the new political culture in one of the first of the spectacles, which marked the revolutionary jubilee in 1927. This spectacle, with the somewhat unimaginative title Ten Years, was staged in Leningrad, which was still considered the originary site of the Revolution, but it was attended by Party heads who came from Moscow to officiate at the spectacles. Members of this spectacle's production team—Sergei Radlov, Adrian Piotrovsky, and N. V. Petrov as directors and scenarists, with Valentina Khodasevich as set designer—were all veterans of the mass spectacles of 1920. However, they chose to avoid duplicating the setting for that year's revolutionary jubilee spectacle, The Storming of the Winter Palace. Instead, they set their spectacle on the other side of the Winter Palace, that is, primarily on an expanse of the Neva River around the bridge from the Palace across to the Stock Exchange, but they also used such buildings on the river's opposite banks as the Peter and Paul Fortress and the Mint. As this list suggests, a striking feature of Ten Years, and one that typifies the mass spectacle of the late 1920s, is its monumental scale. A vast scale had been a desideratum of the earlier mass spectacles, too, but in them the scale had been measured primarily in terms of the number of participants and the size of the audience. Now, it was the spatial scale rather than human numbers that was to astound; the audience, at one hundred thousand, was comparable to the largest in 1920, while the cast was smaller—there were two thousand at most—and the majority of members were in a mass choir. The area taken up by the mass spectacle was truly astounding, however. The audience alone stretched over one and a half kilometers. Similarly remarkable was the sense of stage. The Storming of the Winter Palace had been largely set on two specially constructed stages on the Palace Square, with a bridge structure joining them. Ten Years was given its "stages," too, but they were not specially constructed ones. The set designer, Valentina Khodasevich, identified as the "proscenium" a large stretch of the Neva River between two bridges, while she called the "main stage" the Peter and Paul Fortress, with the Mint nominated as the "rear stage" and the Kronkversky Canal functioning as "wings." The auditorium, she claimed, was "the entire population of Leningrad."4 These Leviathan dimensions were a marker of the utopian character of the spectacle itself. They also rendered impractical the earlier conventions for the mass spectacle with its huge cast of amateur actors (who could of course be neither heard nor seen across such vast distances). Instead, the spectacle was transformed into a sort of son et lumière piece tra: made e:ensrve ise of searchlights, sirens, fireworks, cannonfire, and above ali nuge canners and figures representing the main actors in the Revo.ution wr:en were transported on boats (the Revolution's enemies were said to be "two stories high").5 The mass element in the spectacle was largely realized in a huge choir and orchestra, both made up by combining worker musical groups.6 Commentators pointed to these features in claiming that the spectacle met the central demand of the times: industrialization. This mass spectacle was said to show the way for the "industrialization" of the theater, in which "the main principle of the staging is to shift the center of gravity from living forces [zhivaya sila] to mechanical devices."7 As the director Radlov put it, "The [acting] troupe comprises torpedo boats, launches, factory smokestacks, tugboats, pulling boats, emblems in light, and letters picked out in fire," and he went on to boast of how much larger his cardboard representations of the actors in the Revolution were by comparison with actual human figures.8 As luck would have it, the weather that November night was inclement, with the characteristic "Petersburg" rain and fog, which proved a poor ally of the industrialized theater. Some of the searchlights could not be seen in the fog, and the fireworks were too damp to ignite so that some of the most striking effects did not work. Also, the telephone connections between the directors' bridge and their far-flung network of participating groups kept breaking down, throwing coordination off.9 Nevertheless, the directors proclaimed Ten Years the model for future spectacles.10Members of this team went on to produce the principal mass spectacles of both Leningrad and Moscow in 1929-1930.11 Industrialization in the mass spectacles became an important element both formally (in terms of techniques and apparatus used) and thematically Most mass spectacles had as their centerpiece a mighty machine or construction. These figures were not there merely to affirm success in industrialization; the machine or giant industrial complex had become for many intellectuals the master metaphor for the new organization of Soviet society, a model for the way all the parts might be integrated into a whole.12 Thus the sense of human nature and of the function of people and culture in society was a very mechanistic one. When the machine became the master metaphor, as a corollary people generally receded in significance against the vast panorama of industrialization. In literature, the image of the individual emerges as one of a swarm of industrious ants dwarfed by the giant construction project.13 Similarly industrializing the mass spectacle did not just mean enhancing the "scale" of the dramatis personae but also an extra degree of abstraction. Actors in history were increasingly represented not by individual human actors but by mummers (chuchelo-maska) and especially by huge cardboard figures and massed choirs.14 This reduced significantly people's represented role in history, and especially their role in the Revolution, which still functioned as the paradigm of history. The conventions for depicting the Revolution itself changed radically (compared with the paradigms of 1920), as is clear in Ten Years.15 In this spectacle, the need for the masses to mobilize for revolution is conveyed in a sequence that presents in symbolic, capsule form the twin slogans of industrialization and militarization; searchlights pick out factory smokestacks (as in Eisenstein's October), and then a siren signaling danger sounds from a torpedo boat. The searchlight illuminating center stage sweeps upward, and all becomes dark. But "suddenly"the searchlight sweeps down again and out of that darkness it focuses on a steam launch on which a "dazzlingly bright red shield" depicts the "radiant" (svetlyy) silhouette of Lenin, who then proceeds slowly, against the current, from one end of the Neva stage to the other. Torpedo boats fire 360 rounds of ammunition, and a conflagration of "blazing bonfires" is simulated on the Neva. The Revolution has been won.16 This revolutionary apotheosis utilizes fire and light, two of the oldest and hence most multivalent symbols of political and religious ritual. It is interesting to note, for instance, their centrality in German Nazi ritual of this time. But in this case, as in many of the mass spectacles of this time, the fire of revolution represents primarily a scorching fire that destroys the old, making way for the new. The cutoff between old and new had of course been a paradigm of revolution in Soviet culture all along. In the earlier mass spectacles, the passage to Communism was less abrupt and proceeded through a long series of revolutionary uprisings of ever greater magnitude and ever greater degrees of success; hence, the dominant temporal model was linear (although time was divided into a series of Great Times, or peaks, with lulls or troughs in between). In the new mass spectacles, changes occur suddenly, without linear historical development. Most typically, events shift back and forth thematically from war to industrialization to revolution.17 But there were also frequent travesties of chronology. For instance, in the May Day antireligious spectacle staged by Radlov in 1929 the central event, the trial by medieval monks of Giordano Bruno, was, as newspaper reports described it, interrupted in a bizarre way:"Suddenly,something unexpecteassof Young Pioneers invaded the trial and drove out :he ces This example was but one of many from that tire wrere changes are not only without historical motivation, but actually entail a tempora. reversal such that recent times act upon the past. This reversal is in its own way represented in Ten Years when the Revolution occurs as Lenin proceeds against the current, which could be taken as a symbolic reversal of the flow of time. One reason for such temporal reversals in political rituals was the extraordinary emphasis laid in official rhetoric on the present moment and the considerable pressures placed on writers and all others to treat only “current issues." So great was the emphasis on the present that it provided the template for the past. Indeed, at a meeting in Narkompros of 1927 to set policy in the theater a delegate defined the demand to treat "contemporary themes" as"illuminating the past from our present point of view."19 To a marked degree, the past was expunged from the purview. Films about industrialization made at this time typically used a version of the phoenix myth whereby, to quote from a review of a Leningrad film of 1930, A. Room's Plan for Great Works (Plan velikikh rabot, actually the first Soviet sound film), "the outlines of the new world appear out of the ashes of the Civil War."20 A striking example of this phoenix myth is Happy Street (Shchastlivaya ulitsa), a feature film of 1930 about the iconic Soviet revolutionary factory, Red Putilov (located in Leningrad), that was directed by the former FEKS member Sergey Yutkevich. In representing the Revolution, it focuses on Yudenich's White Guard attack on Petrograd in October 1919 and the role of the Putilov workers in defending the city. When the workers prepare to meet the foe, as part of a sort of scorched-earth policy they burn down some of the buildings on Happy Street where the factory stands (a historical fact), and "with them all that is rotten."And so, now, where Happy Street once was there rises up Tractor Street "with its totally new way of life."2i The notion that a fire will destroy the old and bring about a total break between past and present was so pervasive in the political culture of the late 1920s that in the press the workers were sometimes referred to as the "fire victims" (pogorel'tsy) who are building on the ashes of the revolutionary fire the great cities of a new world.22 Of course, the historical models informing these mass spectacles do not allow for society to pass from the old to the new merely by incendiarism, as Futurism sometimes seemed in danger of suggesting. Historical change had its agents, even though the masses were represented as playing a very reduced role in it. In the new mass spectacle, it is Lenin who makes the Revolution—or the Revolution is Lenin, as we saw in Ten Years. Similarly, in Room's film Plan for Great Works the principal motivation for the way the industrial utopia arises out of the ashes is a "monumental figure of Il'ich with his arm stretched out."23 Lenin is not a mere historical actor, but of a totally different order of humanity from that of ordinary citizens. Consequently, it is really only Lenin who can go back into history (or forward). He is both extrahistorical and a maker of history, and so he represents something like the Aristotelian category of the God. Consequently, the Young Pioneers who invade the trial of Giordano Bruno are not individual actors in history but symbolic representatives of Lenin, as are all other collective agents of his will. In this way, the mass spectacles of 1927–1931 personalized a very complex and impersonal historical process in one figure, Lenin. This is a general human tendency, but it has been hyperbolized in this case. It is a cliché in talking about Stalinist ritual that it was religious in nature. Essentially, what we find in these rituals of the late 1920s is the structure of a conversion experience. The past evaporates as the "born again" subject experiences a totally new reality. If it is a conversion experience, however, it is one of a singular kind. This is most strikingly apparent in "Industrialization Day," a festival staged in August 1929. For this festival, untypically, there was no mass spectacle to mark the day's climax. Its "celebration" was a workday made out of the ordinary because every single worker worked— or so it was said—including even chronic laggards and absentees; furthermore, the workers performed prodigious feats in the workplace, giving the press ample material for ecstatic reports. The aim of "Industrialization Day"was to replace a particular religious festival, the Transfiguration of the Lord. Part of the rationale for sending everyone out to work was to help keep them out of church and out of the taverns, a practice adopted in this year for undermining most of the major religious holy days.24At the end of the day everyone was to go out into the streets for a festive promenade. The festival was primarily intended to show how "the ordinary work day" (trudovye budni) can become what was called "a great festival of industrial transformation" (the word used for "transformation," preobrazheniye, is also the one for "transfiguration," as in the name of the religious feast day they were replacing), a great "prototype for communist labor forged by the proletariat."25 As this example shows, much public ritual in these days was directed toward conferring on the ordinary the status of the extraordinary. Industrial labor could function as the ritual observance of a kind of new religion and was seen as the route to salvation. For social deviants and the unreconstructed bourgeois, it was believed, the experience of laboringon production could bring about a complete transformation in their identities, enabling them even to overcome class allegiances. That doctrine justified the labor camps in these relatively early and modest years of the Gulag system. "Industrial Day" is a particularly grateful example of the mass festival of the late 1920s because it entails radical displacement of the site of action. Instead of having actors performing for an audience, the audience has been turned into the actors. Thus, the space of ideology has been expanded beyond the limits of a stage, even a stage as enormous as the Neva River, and has invaded the workplaces of the city. The space of high ritual is not a temple or even a theater but a place of the most prosaic reality. Moreover, the space of the ritual has been extended into leisure time. This points to the totalization. This new mass festival provides the missing link between the aesthetics of festival and the aestheticization of everyday life that can be perceived in the movement from ideology organizing the masses in theatrical events to ideology organizing the masses in every aspect of their lives. The "cameraization" represented by the cornerstone of NEP policy for the mass theater, the (now discredited) Unified Artistic Circle, or YeKhK, has been overcome. Time was flattened out, but in compensation space gained both in importance and in extension. The culture of the late 1920s provides manifold examples where society tried to get out of ordinary time by foregrounding an extra-ordinary space. It seems to have been seeking a new space that might be adequate to the new time, and thereby trying to extend the scope of effect. The underemphasis on time contrasts with revolutionary culture during War Communism, which charted an ascending progression through the ages culminating in the Revolution (mirrored in new architectural projects, such as Tatlin's tower, many of which are articulated in a vertical spiral26). The shift in spatial imagery was not just a matter of inverting perspective. The dominant metaphors were generally articulated horizontally rather than vertically, a shift that enacts a reorientation in societal values. In the culture of the late 1920s one finds an extreme horizontality in orientation, reflected in trends such as the tendency toward designing new model towns that stretch out in long and impractical ribbons or curves of settlement, and in the emphasis on the far-flung construction site or outer, workers suburb as the locus of regeneration for workers and intellectuals alike. It is also found in an extreme democratism that flattened the traditional hierarchies to the point where they were virtually inverted, and a militant empiricism.27 ## Socialist Architecture and Collectivist Zeal Reforming domestic architecture was a major aspect of the ritualization of space at this time. Architects and town planners were given a key role in transforming the country. Their stock agents of transformation were the "socialist town" (sotsgorod), which meant an entirely new town or workers' suburb designed to create a "healthy environment," not just in the literal sense of clean air and so forth, but principally in the sense that it maximally conduced to collective, socialist mores and work habits, and the "communal house" (dom-kommuna), which represented a sort of socialist town in miniature, realized within the confines of a gigantic apartment house for workers or a complex of residential and service buildings. Neither of these concepts was new. Indeed, there had been sporadic attempts to establish residential communes since 1918, and over the course of the 1920s several new worker neighborhoods had been built in various towns. Even more had been planned. The difference was that in approximately 1929-1930 the idea of totally transforming the Soviet city into a socialist town became a key concept of cultural policy. According to the values of the time, the new industrial project, no matter how gigantic, could be nothing without the accompanying socialist town or suburb as symbol and enabler of the new life that the industrial complex had been built to achieve. Thus, for instance, Magnitostroi, the icon of socialist construction, was inconceivable without its town, Magnitogorsk. This movement for erecting socialist towns and communal houses is generally associated with Constructivism. Indeed, much of the theory of the "commune house" was articulated during NEP by Constructivists such as Alexei Gan and especially Mosei Ginzburg; also, the Constructivists gave prominence to the idea of the communal house when in 1926 they organized a competition to design one conducted by their journal Contemporary Architecture (Sovremennaya arkhtitektura). As the communal house was conceived by Constructivist theoreticians, it was to be a "social condenser," a term that received its most classical formulation in an article by Mosei Ginzburg of 1927.28 The theory of the social condenser rests on the assumption that architecture can influence the psychological development of the masses by functioning as an active force for social change. The Constructivists believed that by placing workers and their families in an environment in which the majority of social and domestic functions (human interaction, pol:ca.a. -emet. study, entertainment, cooking, housework, chd-are ar s ad een communalized, in an environment where the avou: o::he sui.jing itself was designed to encourage collective human interaction. those verv same families would shortly be transformed into model Soviet citizens steeped in the new socialist way of life. The corollarv of this view. argued as early as the first major Constructivist tract, Aleksei Gan's Constructicism of 1922, was that if one left Soviet towns and domestic architecture as they were, that is, left intact the "staunch allies of counterrevolution," this would only conduce to a bourgeois consciousness in Soviet citizenrv and frustrate efforts at transforming the country into a socialist societv.29 By the time of the First Five-Year Plan with its militant proletarianism, such views were given even more extreme formulations; for instance, in 1929 the Constructivist group OSA in its "Theses on Housing" rejected altogether the idea of including apartments in socialist residential architecture on the grounds that they are "a material manifestation of petty bourgeois ideology."30 In Ginzburg's 1927 formulation of the theory of the social condenser, he developed the "flow diagram" for analyzing and minimizing a worker's movements around his apartment and compared it with the conveyor belt that connects the various subassembly sites within a factory. Once such "scientific"analyses had been made, he contended, the "basic spatial structure" of a dwelling could be devised. And with this model in place, architecture would become an active force for social change; “in the habits and attitudes of the mass population, low-voltage activity and a weak consciousness would be focused through the circuits of these 'social condensers' into highvoltage catalysts of change."31 Ginzburg is using "condenser," a term that denotes the apparatus where change occurs in a variety of physical processes, such as condensation of steam, in the specific context of electricity (where it means an apparatus for accumulating or increasing the intensity of an electrical charge). Thus he is implicitly identifying his theory with Lenin's famous maxim of 1920: "Communism equals socialism plus the electrification of the entire country." But the particular electrical apparatus Ginzburg chose as his central trope, the condenser, provides the added implication that the effect of the social condenser will be not merely to convey "electricity" but to intensify it, thus the end sought was not merely a more proletarian society, but also a society that had stepped up to a higher intensity of living. Through its byt, that is, through the ordinary and everyday, society would, paradoxically, attain the extraordinary. Thus the dominant approach to architecture at this time involves applying to domestic architecture something like the principles for NOT (Nauchnaya organizatsiya truda, or the Scientific Organization of Labor, a Soviet movement favored by Lenin during War Communism which applied Taylorist ideas in the workplace).32 Indeed, the plan years represent a high point in the history of NOT in Soviet culture. Taylorist theory was being applied not just in the workplace but to every area of life, even the most banal. In the place of NOT, a new term was coined, NOZh, the Scientific Organization of Life.33 It is probably no accident that this acronym is also the Russian word for a knife. At this time the idea of the scientific organization of life was inseparable from the notion that in order to achieve it one had to destroy the old, whether by taking a metaphoric "knife" to it, or by destroying all in a cleansing pyre. Figuratively, these years were to be a time of slash and burn. But in the landscape thus purified a totally new culture was to be erected. This was an uncompromising age of totalism. Every aspect of the traditional city was to be transformed (communalized, proletarianized) so that, in theory, in leisure, in work, and even in their daily ablutions, individuals would be living the collective, postbourgeois existence. Between 1929 and 1930 the movement to transform the landscape of the Soviet city assumed such fantastic proportions that it had clearly gone beyond the bounds of "proletarianization," "industrialization," or even the "scientific" organization of the dwelling space; it had taken off from its beginnings in Constructivism and town planning. One can sense the element of the fantastic even in the area of scale. In the early 1920s, competitions for designing collective dwellings usually stipulated that they should be for around thirty families, but by 1929 projects were being approved for new communal houses for twenty-five hundred.34 The communal house was to be a "cell" of a future utopia. In 1930 that long-standing admirer of Campanella, Lunacharsky (ousted as Minister of Enlightenment in the fall of 1929 but nevertheless intoxicated with the spirit of the times), gave a public address on the theme "Restructuring Life and Art" in which he announced that "the time has come when the utopias of Fourier and Moore can get their practical application." Now that Lenin's campaign for electrification has given us this potential, he continued, we must "build towns in such a way that it will be impossible to live in them in the old ways."35 Many of the new architectural projects of 1929-1930 seem to have less to do with Marxism than with Fourier (who was one of several utopians published during War Communism by the Petrograd publishing house World Literature). Most of the communal houses designed in the Sove: Ur:on at this time took the collectivist zeal of the age to an extreme. reduc:ng te the barest minimum not only privacy but even the possibility of performing some action at a different time from the other inhabitants. The designers seem to have taken a leaf from Zamyatin's dystopian novel We (Mv, 1920), with its strictly regimented day, inasmuch as something like his "Table of Hours" determines all activity in the communal house, right down to the "private hours" (times forsex). It was fairly standard to build these communal houses without kitchens—"Let's be rid of the kitchen stench"was the common cry, the stench being seen not only literally, but in terms of the distasteful obscurantism of the old individualistic lifestyle.36In the socialist town built around a new hydroelectric station at Dubrovsk in the environs of Leningrad, not merely were there no individual kitchens, but there was no way to eat except in the cafeteria in a different building located on the way to work; bachelors did not have individual rooms, but slept in sleeping rooms housing ten; individuals were not allowed to keep their outer clothing in their rooms, but had to keep it in a locker room near the entrance; and all leisure activity was to take place in two large rooms, one for "noisy" activities, the other for quiet.37 Someone like Zamyatin might conclude that such plans were intended to reduce workers to being mere production machines who lead totally regimented lives. The champions of the socialist town and communal house, however, saw them as leading not to the workers' greater enslavement, but to their emancipation. The well-designed town would enable workers to become less the mere slaves of the machine, as Marx had dreamed. In Trotsky's Problems of Life (1923), he recommends that in order to achieve a rationally organized lifestyle, the Soviet citizen's day be divided up into three equal portions of eight hours: eight for sleep, eight for work, and eight for eating, leisure, and so on. In the press of these years, however, one frequently finds a new ratio for the average day with a shortened workday so that workers can indulge in "creative" cultural activity.38 A typical account of future life in the projected dwelling complexes spelled out this ratio as seven hours for sleep and seven for work, because "for at least ten hours" the worker, having been liberated from domestic cares, will want to be "above all in the library, the museum, studying, in the gymnasium or sports field, at mass festival promenades, at the popular musical theater, art gallery, or movies." The author concluded, "[We must have] TEN HOURS A DAY OF IMPROVING LEISURE!"39 This outline seems all too reminiscent of the sewing artel in N. Chernyshevsky's What Is To Be Done? (1863) whose workers live communally but also take part in improving activities in their leisure time. But the proposals of the late 1920s did not prove to be merely dreamy schemes. The vogue for collective living was particularly marked among radical intellectuals, who throughout the 1920s banded together to build communal houses or student hostels, or organized themselves into spontaneous communes. In other words, many of these communal arrangements were not, as Zamyatin anticipated, imposed on intellectuals by the state, but were examples of their zeal and idealism. It might have been more accurate to say that the communes were imposed by the intellectuals on the workers, who were conceived as would-be intellectuals.40 By the late 1920s the conception of the worker as would-be intellectual involved a limited sense of what being an intellectual means. The word "culture" was generally applied in a very reduced sense as compared with what the Kulturträger of War Communism had in mind. Often, for instance, it was virtually synonymous with sport; a huge sports stadium was generally the centerpiece of the new Houses of Culture. In this period, an entire spectrum of cultural activists conceived the culture of the future in terms of synchronized bodily movement or eurythmics; Meyerhold advocated in an address to a Leningrad audience of 1929 that the "theater of the future" would have "theatricalized sporting games" to be staged in huge stadiums like other sports,41 while the state organized mass sporting "Spartakiades." As in Nazi culture, there was an emphasis on bodily strength and health, sport and coordination to rhythm; an individual's body became an organic analogue to the powerful machine as an expression of might and indomitable will. This is apparent, for instance, in a sequence from the film Fragment of an Empire (Oblomok imperii), made by the Leningrad director F. Ermler in 1929, in which monumental men, naked from the waist up, perform tasks as super machines. As bodily movement in mass formations returned to prominence, so did the question of theater design. Most theater activists, particularly Meyerhold, became involved in this question and urged an end to the small theater serving a local audience. They recommended instead that huge mass theaters which essentially conflate the functions of the sports stadium and the theater be erected in their place. In Leningrad's GIII, researchers at the theatrical laboratory, under the rubric "industrialization of the mass theater," were working on a model for a "theater of the future" with seating for ten thousand; it was to "utilize all the contemporary architectural and technological achievements," and in so doing might even incorporate "real towns."42 Thus when Valentina Khodasevich, the set designer for Ten Years, declared one and a half kilometers of the Neva and the adjoining buildings her "stage," and all of Leningrad her "audience," her claim was, by the standard of those times, relatively modest. Those who worked on the "theater of the future" insisted that it would not provide "art in the old sense," for in it "the theater bursts out into the streets like a raging river during a flood and art dissolves in the mighty surge of creativity. . . ."43In other words, the dreams of the theater activists since before the Revolution that they might break down the borders between theater and life seemed on the verge of realization. In the new culture, with its mass spectacle using the city as its “stage,"and its ordinary working day billed as a "festival day," the theater had truly burst beyond the footlights at last. The utopian architecture and town planning that distinguish this era in Soviet culture are in their own way symptomatic of the dominance over cultural forms of highly ritualized mass theater. The communal house or socialist town can be seen as a ritualized space, a sort of stage set for a cast of two thousand to act out everyday life, complementing the mass spectacle itself, where extra-ordinary life is enacted on an equally massive scale. In both cases, there is no temporal movement involved in this ritualized action. The communal house and the socialist towns are like a machine in that in them a limited number of processes are repeated in a synchronized way; thus one gets a perpetuum mobile, but no development. This is the true meaning of what Ginzburg called the "social condenser." Even selfdevelopment, the apparent aim of such institutions, does not represent development so much as process: the machine of the architectural structure processes its inhabitants, who are actors in a limited sense, as they are also actors in a limited sense in the mass spectacle or mass choir. Thus the boundary between literature and life was shifting. Life was now nonhistorical insofar as it had been textualized. No one was going anywhere because all were locked in a fixed unity like a text. The Constructivists had attempted initially to turn the factory into a piece of art, but this transformation was to have been more comprehensive. It might be said, as Boris Groys has argued, that reality was to become a sort of ballet or Gesamtkunstwerk. Here we also are reminded of Siegfried Kracauer's concept of the "mass ornament"44 or of the applicability to the Soviet case of Walter Benjamin's remark that fascism "logically amounts to . . . an aestheticization of political life."45 In the culture of 1927-1931 one finds an impulse toward homogenizing all elements in society in a Gesamtkunstwerk in which, as in the Wagnerian scheme, "music" predominated; in other words, the campaign against Wagner had a very tenuous hold. In the late 1920s, music emerged as one of the dominant art forms for mass culture. Where before it had largely remained the preserve of the highbrow with its institutions left virtually intact in their prerevolutionary forms, now it assumed a central role in many of the accounts of the cultural revolution and became one of the principal battlegrounds as rival factions within the intelligentsia, Party, and state each sought to implement its own program; RAPP's counterpart in the sphere of music, RAPM, though founded in 1923, essentially assumed prominence only in these years. While bourgeois institutions such as the opera and symphony did not disappear during 1929-1931, the entire orientation of Soviet music began to change, guided by the slogan "music for the masses" (muzyka-massam), which became the name of a new national organization founded in 1929.46 In 1929, also, there were highly publicized purges in the Moscow and Leningrad conservatoria that sought to rid them of recalcitrants still wedded to the bourgeois model who resisted the ideal of a mass music. As music was forcibly democratized, the mass choir became a mainstay of Soviet musical life, playing a major role in all mass spectacles and also in the newly organized musical olympiades and numerous singing festivals in sports stadiums.47 In official rhetoric music became, together with architecture, one of the principal sources of metaphors for describing the new society to be ushered in after the cultural revolution. As, for many in the late 1920s, stroy (structure) and perestroika (restructuring) became axiomatic ideals, much of the culture was informed by a homology among the machine, the collective producer of music (for example, an orchestra or massed choir), the military unit, and the architectonically perfect factory or dwelling (dom-kommuna). One can see this, for instance, in M. Tsekhanovsky's film Pasifik, made in Leningrad in 1931, which is an attempt to translate into the medium of the screen a musical composition by Arthur Honegger, Pacific 231 (1923), celebrating the locomotive. Tsekhanovsky used dissolves, superimpositions, and other montage techniques to identify the movements of a locomotive's wheel and driving axle with the movements of the musicians in the orchestra as they played the Honegger piece.48 Music and architecture were not just sources of metaphors for perestroika, but seen by many as crucial agents of it. A key element in the alleged efficacy of both for perestroika was rhythm. It was the pattern of articulation, the rhythm that citizens were said to acquire as they were subjected to a particular architectural structure or musical composition, which would help restructure their psyches. Lunacharsky in his address to the First Musical Conference in 1929 (held in Leningrad to celebrate the shift to "mass music") presented as a model for social organizat:on a s prny ef movement and labor"and went on to define the role of music :n. :ne new society as "capturing the spirit of our time" and giving it "order." His statement seems virtually modeled on the principles of organization for Radio City in Shaginyan's Mess-Mend (this particular emphasis on the "symphony" probably has something to do with the somewhat maverick emphasis that fig ures such as Bakhtin and Sollertinsky placed on "polyphony"in their writings of this time). The "order" offered by music, or more generally rhythm, bespeaks a centripetal pattern of organization with some "conductor" or other figure(s) at a central point establishing the rhythm for the entire orchestra.50 It is perhaps no accident that in the imagery of films made at this time there is a marked tendency to foreground the morphological patterns of some machine organized on a horizontal axis but with a central part controlling the revolutions or movements of all others. Thus, in Dziga Vertov's The Man with a Movie Camera (1929), the central motif (replicated in other imagery) is the textile machine with a revolving spindle and assorted bobbins and spools rotating around it, their movement controlled by the rotation of the central spindle; this image is in turn related isomorphically to the action of a machine for editing film (hence art and technology are as one). But it was not just Constructivists who used such imagery. Most films from this time foreground electric poles, train lines, telephones, or some other products of the technological age that radiate out from the urban centers to their peripheries. Often the heroes follow them in their journey from the village or provincial town to the capital or industrial center and then return with a tractor, a Party directive, a technical manual, or some other magical agent to transform the local world so that it may pulse with the same rhythm as "the center." Such imagery celebrates the introduction of a planned economy, which entailed a shift to a more centripetal pattern in economic life. Other recent developments in the country, such as the spread of radio overcoming its celebrated tyranny of distance, were likewise center-reinforcing phenomena. Even the purges (a feature of the Plan years) seemed to feel honor-bound to follow a centripetal pattern. Within Leningrad they progressed over the course of 1929 from the main Party Committees to the borough committees, to government bodies, and so on, until by late December they had worked their way all the way down to the bakeries: "The Class Enemy is in the Bakeries" became a rubric.51 Bread and baking played a central role in 1917. Not only were the bread lines the immediate cause of its first revolution, but the bakery is more or less the locus of the "female cook" whom Lenin at that time envisaged as "ruling the state." This second cultural revolution was to be her coming-out party. In general, however, the "female cook" was not the main loser at this time. In the purges (in Leningrad especially), besides Party officials intellectuals and engineers were major targets. These two categories might seem to be crucial plavers in the industrialization effort. They also potentially represent that category in Plato's Republic the philosopher-kings, or in other words enlightened legislators—the kind of figures to whom Vernadsky and other liberal intellectuals in the years immediately preceding the Revolution wanted to give a greater role in running the country. Lenin's own conception was not so far removed when in his famous speech about electrification he talked of a future time when the legislators would be not professional politicians but "engineers and agronomists," that is, practical experts.52 The contradictions between the intellectual/engineer's enhanced role and his being a prime target for repression evaporate if one assumes that the "female cook" will become the "engineer"/ philosopher-king while the superseded, bourgeois usurpers to such a title whose hearts pulsate with a different rhythm will, in turn, be shown the gates of the city. This was more or less the scenario that underwrote many of the purges. Actually, the Soviet state was a little more charitable and these so-called has-beens—or more literally "former people" (byvshie lyudi) (note how both the past and the present are represented in the present)—were given a chance to reform in places of exile or incarceration on the periphery. Many Leningraders who were deemed socially alien were taken to a camp on the Solovetsky Islands in the far north or to the Baltic-White Sea Canal project. Their (forced) labors on the canal and the miracle of the regeneration were attested to by individual convicts, and also by several of the town's most distinguished writers, in a glossy book later presented to Party delegates at the Seventeenth Party Congress in 1934.53In this book we read of one "former person," the engineer Magnitov, who finds that at the White Sea Canal he begins to develop a quicker pulse and faster thought processes and reflexes. "He begins to take on the new tempo, to adjust his reason to it, his will, and his breathing." The authors of the sketch report: "Engineer Magnitov thinks of the old engineer Magnitov, and for him that person is already alien. Magnitov calls that person 'him.'"54 The "female cooks" were ruling the state to a farcical degree, a single, unified language and a single rhythm were mandated to all, and the "transmission belts" carried this rhythm out from the center to the farthest-flung corners, all this the dastardly deed of the Party and other co-conspirators such as the NKVD. Actually, I would argue that is was not entirely so. For a start, the Gesamtkunstwerk was never very fullv achieved. rot ever during the cultural revolution (or the Great Terror of the mid-13s: those transmission belts were never as dominant in actuality as Constructivist works implied. It was not really the case that the Party or the state imposed models of collective living on the populace. The Party and the government saw the mass spectacle and the dom kommuna as the route to achieving such eminently practical ends as increased productivity, political socialization, and solving the housing shortage. Intellectuals were the more utopian by inclination and many of them saw such collective ventures as the route to the aestheticization of life. We see here a kind of synchronization of art and politics, though of a more complex kind than the clichéd version whereby the Party controls the intellectuals as, virtually, puppets on strings. The Party eventually proved to be opposed to the extreme collectivism of the dom kommuna, which they began to label, by analogy with politics, a "left deviation" or "leftist excess" (levyy zagib or levye peregiby).55Yet it was not the case that "the state" or "the Party" killed the movement for the communal house and socialist town. Predictably, most of those built proved a failure, a failure that was in some measure due to good old flux as residents grew up, got married, gave birth, died, and above all divorced.56 It was just such banal things that undermined the perfect choreography necessary for such large-scale collective living and caused many a communal house to fall apart. One always has to ask oneself how ineluctably tied to Marxism or even socialism the socialist towns and communal houses were. After all, the "bourgeois" architect le Corbusier was in the 1920s the main mentor for Constructivist architects and also designed several major Soviet projects (including an attempt at radically redesigning Moscow).57 The socialist towns might also be seen as implementations of the dreams of the early 1910s of those who advocated the garden city or some other kind of planned workers' settlements. Indeed, one of the ways proposed for marking the three-hundredth anniversary of the Romanov dynasty in 1913 was to build a model town for workers in the environs of Petersburg. In some senses, the mass spectacles and communal houses of the years 1929-1930 represent a version of some of the agendas and ideals of disparate groups of intellectuals from the period immediately preceding the Revolution. In them, we can see the ideals of the Preservationists who sought government support to create a perfectly designed environment with massive complexes constructed to ensure an "overall harmonious interconnectedness of all . . . component parts." Such principles are not so remote from those that guided Constructivist architects and designers in the 1920s.58 If one considers that in the culture of the late 1920s the concept of these "component parts" was extended to include people, one might say that at this time such aims seem to come together with the programs of the theater activists who pinned hopes for humanity's salvation on a renovated theater in which the masses were to participate rather than be passive spectators. Additionally, the centrality of rhythm in the rhetoric of both Soviet officialdom and the Constructivists is reminiscent of the emphasis on rhythm during the prerevolutionary years by so many of these theater activists, ranging from Meyerhold to the Russian followers of Dalcroze (Dalcroze, it will be recalled, had been invited to Hellerau by idealists who were setting up a model workers' town and believed his work on rhythmic movement to music might be a crucial ingredient in enabling the workers to realize their true identities as proletarians). There are many such specific similarities, but the main point is that the culture of this time seems to have realized—or perhaps taken to an extreme—these groups' common aims of transcending the mundane and banal (or the commercial and petty bourgeois) and attaining a greater intensity of experience in religious-like and generally communal rituals (Ginzburg's "social condenser" was in a sense a metaphor from the technological sphere for this scenario). What was truly daring about the cultural experiment of the late 1920s, however, was its paradoxical assumption that through the common such a remarkable self can be achieved. Accounts of cultural transformation lay stress on regularity, rhythm, the masses—the ordinary. As we see in the case of the engineer Magnitov who intensified the pace of his rhythms and was transformed, regularity was represented as miracle. Thus in the culture of the late 1920s the Revolution was respatialized, an event that points forward to the 1930s, when space was even more highly ritualized. Although in this chapter the basic pattern of spatial articulation in the late 1920s has been identified as centripetal, in fact centrifugal patterns were no less characteristic. The economic and political life of the country was directed at ever greater centralization (central planning, and so on), suggesting a centripetal pattern, but at the same time the fundamental principle of the cultural revolution was radical hierarchy inversion (a centrifugal pattern). The implications of that agenda, if taken to the extremes some sought, are a transvaluation of values. It was the vertigo of that possibility that drove many intellectuals between 1927 and 1931 to attempt the ultimate in cultural revolutions.