# THE ULTIMATE CULTURAL REVOLUTION Recall that in 1918, as part of the decorations for the first anniversary of the Revolution, the artist N. Altman had made a huge banner for the Winter Palace with the lines from the "Internationale": "He who was naught shall be all." But thus far, though many others had blazoned forth this slogan, its implications had not yet become reality. During War Communism, the first revolutionary phase when Altman had erected this banner, the state had looked to the regeneration of the masses through high culture, and intellectuals were expected to devote themselves to this cause. During NEP, Soviet society had retreated even further from the ideal of a single, "proletarian" or "peoples'"culture and in large measure established de facto separate cultural institutions for highbrow and mass culture. The cultural revolution of the First Five-Year Plan was essentially the only time in Soviet history when such slogans were taken literally, a time when utopian zeal drove true believers to attempt an entire series of such paradoxical inversions. But these inversions also rendered more problematical any centripetal model for the organization of society. During the Plan years, the hierarchy reversal was so radical that not merely were the lowly ("naught") to be elevated, but canonical culture (the heritage of the past) was deprecated. Those who enjoyed a privileged position in society by dint of their alleged access to Knowledge and Culture intellectuals—were to be thrust down the ladder. As recently as February 1927a national meeting of scientific workers in Leningrad had made grandiose claims about their indispensability as scientific experts, but by 1930 a meeting of intellectuals concluded that the common worker who is closer to socialist construction knows more than the engineer.1 The role of intellectuals was radically reconceived. In some of the cruder formulations, it was now defined as one of effecting a rise in the level of production.² All professional cultural workers' "expertise" or "creative genius" was devalued as an obdurate "individualism" that must be "broken,"³ for it was considered that they had acquired more of the tools and skills for their particular branch of cultural production than the workers only as a result of social injustice; workers had been systematically denied access to them but were manifestly superior to any professional cultural workers because they were closer to the mysteries of the production process itself. The intellectuals' job was to hand over those tools. In a volte-face, they were transformed from gods to servants. They were to organize libraries in factories and kolkhozes, run their theaters, art circles, clubs, and newspapers, train beginning writers, artists, and actors from the ranks of the workers, lecture to them, organize exhibitions for them, help collect archives and oral history from them, compose slogans and appeals to them, and if after all this they had time for their own "creative" efforts, these were to consist of production sketches that essentially functioned either as a conduit of information from worker to worker, or as purely agitational pieces.4 As intellectuals were reduced increasingly to a service role, he who had been peripheral in the running of cultural life became a legislator. Rather than intellectuals' taking the masses under their wing, as during War Communism, individual workers and also factories were asked to undertake shefstvo (a supervisory role) over cultural institutions. This was a progressive process, but it culminated in 1930, when, for instance, Leningrad's Red Putilov factory was among those asked to supervise the National Federation of Soviet Writers,⁵ while the artistic councils of major cultural institutions in Leningrad (for theater, music, and film) were reformed as two hundred and fifty workers and fifty worker correspondents (rabkory) were assigned to them.6 In the theater, the arbiter of value was no longer the professional critic but the factory audience.7 As the factory became the locus of the legislators, there was, in effect, an inversion in the hierarchy of place. The factory became the new cathedral, library, university, public monument, and opera house all rolled into one. The old factories were most likely to be located not in the center of any town-—where the cathedrals, libraries, and statues were—but at its periphery, while the new industrial complexes were to be built in far-flung places. Thus at the same time so much of cultural production was structured by a centripetal spatial model, it was challenged by a radically centrifugal model that represented "the center" (of the town) as a condemned/ polluted / retrograde space, full of intellectuals and bureaucrats, unlike the periphery, the locus of the laboring workers. "The outskirts" (okraina) emerged from obscurity as the favorite term for designating by place that which was preferred as the new culture; thus, for instance, subcanonical music. now :avored over the canonical, earned that status as "the music of the .ain refers not only to the outskirts of a town, but also to the periphery of the country; in this period the national minorities first emerged on the Russian cultural map on any scale. In these years, it was felt that representatives of the tainted-but-redeemable sociological categories (bourgeois intellectuals and trained professionals) should be sent to a place of labor on the periphery as the necessary route for their regeneration. Some were sent to exile or labor camps as social aliens; in the more common and more benign version they were assigned to a factory, collective farm, or construction site where they might serve the new class and imbibe some of its ethos. The movement was both voluntary and coerced. Some likened it to the Populist movement of the early 1870s and called it a "movement to the people,"9 although it should not be romanticized since the last years of NEP saw rampant unemployment among intellectuals and the "brigades" of cultural workers provided a welcome opportunity for income. Editorials spearheaded this centrifugal trend, calling for decentralization of culture. There was even a move to make Kuzbass (one of the raw industrial cities of the Urals) into the cultural center of the entire country.10This pattern stands in contrast to that of the immediately preceding years when one finds, particularly in the writings of the Moscow-based avant-garde, a cult of Moscow as the purported center of Soviet, and even world, culture. Writers such as Mayakovsky then urged that all turn their "gaze [vzglyad] to Moscow" (and specially to them).11 As a virtual corollary, Leningrad became in their accounts the apotheosis of all that is doomed, retrograde, or repressive—a "swamp."12 In order for the cult of Moscow to emerge, Petersburg /Leningrad as the rival claimant to the status of symbolic national center had to be eliminated. But the slaughter of Leningrad in avant-garde culture was largely a ritual one;13 the concrete historical reality of the city had become increasingly irrelevant in articulations of the myth. Thus Eisenstein's October (1927-1928) which treats the Bolshevik Revolution in Petrograd, opens with the dismantling of the statue of a tsar, but the particular statue shown was actually located not in that city as its presence in the film implies, but in Moscow. Indeed, for this movie Eisenstein did much of his filming of "Petersburg" in Moscow. The tendency to build up Moscow as some sort of mecca and to deprecate Petersburg/Leningrad as its antithesis waned as the country moved into the Plan years themselves. While many in the avant-garde still urged that the entire world turn its gaze to Moscow, and to use imagery that was essentially centripetal in its organization, the analogues of a centralized polity, the more marked trend during the Plan was to reverse this. Leningrad grew in stature again. It could lay considerably greater claim than could Moscow to the title of industrial city and many considered it a preferable headquarters for the new, proletarian culture. The city's factories with their revolutionary pedigrees and emphasis on heavy metal industries became major symbols of the age. It even had its factories located on the mandatory "outskirts"; most of them stretched in a ribbon at the north end of the Vyborg side (across the river from the city's center), while the famous Red Putilov factory was in the Moscow-Narva district far to the southwest.14 Hence there was a series of moves to make Leningrad a national center for mass festivals or home of a new institute of proletarian art.15 The traffic pattern between the two rival cultural centers, Moscow and Leningrad, which during NEP had become overwhelmingly one-way (from Moscow to Leningrad), was substantially reversed. The new and revolutionary no longer came to Leningrad from Moscow with a time delay. However, in most instances the new cultural paradigms from Leningrad were for a proletarian, mass culture. For instance, the First All-Union Musical Conference (1929), which launched the movement for "music for the masses,"and most of the first musical olympiades, were held in Leningrad. Leningrad could also boast taking the leadin developing new mass spectacles, the first Soviet sound movies (both documentary and feature),16 some of the critical national meetings called to decide the direction of revolutionary culture, and even a new journal for training proletarian recruits for literature, Literary Study (Literaturnaya uchëba). As Leningrad regained stature on the cultural map of the country, there was also a de facto shift in its symbolic status and a reaccentuation of the myth of Petersburg. The tenacity of that myth in the Russian imagination was such that even in this ostensibly most Soviet of cultural revolutions one senses its lingering power in providing tropes for the sweeping changes taking place. This trend received some impetus because Stalin in his address to the Central Committee of November 19, 1928, used the example of Peter the Great to describe the mighty transformations the Plan promised,17 although the parallels with the building of Petersburg have their own logic apart from (or perhaps informing) Stalin's invocation of Peter. Most of the gigantic construction projects of the First Five-Year Plan lent themselves to an identification with the myth of Petersburg because they entailed the massive transformation of semiwilderness (a "naught"), the taming of waters with canals and hydroelectric schemes, and the triumph over adverse natural conditions—the triumphereor:echnology) over nature. One could even speculate whether the mvtr itseif did not have some effect on the outcome of debates over which sites should be developed as giant industrial complexes since the far-flung and completely undeveloped ones generally won out over those that were to have been located in more settled places (it should be noted that these choices were also influenced by the theories of the American economist Alfred Weber, who contended that industrial complexes should be located near sources of raw materials, rather than of labor).18 This new appropriation of the Petersburg myth did not mean that the city itself was suddenly re-evaluated from a "swamp" to a positive place. But in order to represent Leningrad in a positive way there had to be a major shift away from seeing the city as full of statues and grand canals to seeing it as dotted with smokestacks, the new statues of an industrial romanticism. Thus Soviet rhetoric began to insist that there were two Petersburgs, the old Petersburg, which must be destroyed completely, that is, monumental Petersburg as oppressive Imperial capital, and the new Petersburg as an industrial city and hothouse of the new culture. But the two were also said to have separate locations. As Shklovsky remarked at the time: "Peter[sburg] is creeping to its periphery and has become like a bagel-city [actually bublik] with a beautiful but dead center."19 Thus in a range of ways the cultural revolution entailed taking very literally that old slogan from the "Internationale." This "revolution," in its extreme expressions, entailed a movement away from all kinds of canonical thinking: geographical, institutional, in the way professions were constituted, anthropological, and so on. Culture in this period reached one of the outer limits in plaving down the aesthetic. Moreover, all of these shifts were essentially in sync because they were masterminded by the great centrifugal spatial model whereby the locus of value was shifted from the center to the periphery. In almost every area of cultural life one sees a shift from the "central" (normative, authoritative, canonical, of a lofty position on some hierarchy) to the "peripheral" or noncanonical: instead of the famous writer, it was to be the worker or the peasant correspondent; instead of highbrow instruments and music it was folk music or jazz and noncanonical instruments such as the accordion and the balalaika;20instead of the cultural institution undertaking shefstvo over the factory's cultural life, the factory was to undertake shefstvo over the culturalinstitution, and so on. Even textual space was mapped in these years by analogy with social space; the so-called bol'shaya forma or (literary) "long form" such as the novel was to be supplanted by the much shorter malaya forma, that is, by such marginally literary genres as, in literature, the highly journalistic ocherk, or sketch, or, in drama, the agitka, or agitational dramatic sketch; analogously, in all cultural productions instead of individual heroes (the bol'shoy chelovek) as characters, there were to be mvriad "little men"—the collective of common workers. From the avant-garde Constructivists to the movement for worker writers there was an emphasis on factual writing and showing how "little men" performed simple tasks that tended to result in shapeless and fragmented works as practical details crowded out plot development or heroization.21 This general de-emphasis on plot also accompanied a reaction against adventure genres in literature; such terms as “detective" or "adventure" became standard negative terms in criticism. But "he who was naught shall be all," while dramatic and appealing, is in the last analysis vague. At best, only a tiny minority in society could qualify for the categories "naught" or "all." Above all, how might the lowly become "all"? In culture, such a dramatic turn involves obvious problems of sheer professional expertise (even in 1917 Lenin's opponents liked to ridicule his model of the "female cook"). Not surprisingly, no sooner did Glaviskusstvo, the main body supervising cultural matters, assign two hundred and fifty workers and fifty worker correspondents in Leningrad to sit on the boards of most of the city's major cultural bodies than they had to turn around and set up courses to train these workers in cultural competence.22 And then the question arises: Who should train the Great Unwashed, and in what will they be trained? And in what sense can a worker who has completed training be said to be able to legislate, unmediated, from the factory floor? Needless to say, there were also vicious battles about who could be considered the "he" who could inherit the "all," and also about what this "all" might be. These arguments split the radical intelligentsia, and Leningrad became the major battleground where the issue was fought out. The story of TRAM, an acronym for the Leningrad Theater of Worker Youth (Teatr Rabochey Molodëzhi), of its meteoric rise to power and national prominence in the years 1928–1931 as an extremist agent and emblem of the cultural revolution, provides an excellent case study that focuses the dynamic and the vicissitudes of the period as a whole. ## TRAM Rides the Roller Coaster of Cultural Revolution TRAM, a Komsomol theater for workers, had existed for most of NEP as a minor cultural institution.23 After the Agitprop conference of late 1927 on the theater, however, and especially during the initial years of the Five-Year Plan when industrialization and cultural revolution were cornerstones of official policy, TRAM attracted the attention of the state as a theater totally devoted to the work lives and mores of the proletariat. Indeed, it was in many respects the theater of the historical moment. During the late 1920s, as never before or since, the Komsomol played a leading role in guiding Soviet culture, and TRAM was riding on the crest of its wave. A Komsomol theater of worker youth could not miss.24 Actually, in the late 1920s there was no shortage of Komsomol and worker theaters to claim this historical moment as theirs, but TRAM proved one of the few truly viable ones in the sense that it was able to turn agitational dramas about factory life into pithy, rollicking, and enormously popular productions (no mean feat).25 It also appealed to the cultural bureaucrats. In June 1928 the theater went on a highly successful tour to Moscow, where its performances impressed the heads of both Glavpolitprosvet and its parent body, Narkompros (that is, Pelshe and Lunacharsky), and its standing in the theatrical world began to increase even more dramatically.26 By 1929, TRAM had emerged from its modest beginnings to become a major force in the Soviet theater. It had already begun to sprout branches in cities like Moscow and Baku, but after the Moscow tour of 1928 the movement took off, expanding to seventy branches by 1929,27and three hundred by 1932.28 "Cells" of TRAM, or tramyadra, were established in all the major Leningrad factories and then throughout the country.29It also expanded its empire into the other arts, sponsoring IZORAM in the fine arts in 1928, followed shortly by KINORAM (or KRAM) in film, MUZORAM in music, and BALETRAM in ballet.30 In late 1929, as the November 7th anniversary approached, TRAM formed an alliance with three other leftist and agitational theaters known as the Revolutionary Front, or Revfront.31The four theaters met on November 3rd at TRAM headquarters (together with invited guests from the press, the Party, and the government) and drew up and signed a "revolutionary contract" according to which Revfront took upon itself the task of eradicating from Soviet culture all vestiges of the traditional theater, leaving the stage free for a truly revolutionary, proletarian, mass agitational theater such as those they represented. In practice, this meant eradicating primarily the academic theaters, that is, places such as the Bolshoi, the Mariinsky, the Bolshoi Drama Theater, and the State Theater (the former Alexandrinsky). Among them, Revfront wanted to abolish above all its absolute bête noire, MKhAT (the Moscow Arts Theater), as, allegedly, quintessentially bourgeois. After signing their "contract" in an atmosphere of elation, those present at the meeting streamed out of the hall to form columns and march to Ostrovsky Square in front of their closest local target, the Academic Theater, where with loudspeakers mounted upon trucks they staged a confrontational protest against "academic art," shouting the slogan "The Liquidation of MKhAT as a Class."32 TRAM was in a position to take this revolutionary stance because of its proletarian revolutionary purism. Its director, Misha Sokolovsky (1901- 1941), one of those Komsomol activist firebrands who refused to ever wear a tie and insisted on being called "Misha," the most informal version of his name,33had from the theater's very inception zealously guarded TRAM's profile as strictly worker and Komsomol.34 On his stage, he would claim, "the working lad plays himself,"and thus in a sense both acts out and even realizes his own transformation in the very act of helping transform his peers.35Originally, the theater was conceived as being strictly amateur and used only full-time workers. Here we see lingering from War Communism a romanticism of the eternally amateur theater as the formula for social transformation found in the theories of Platon Kerzhentsev and others. Now, however, the notion of the "people's theater" has been rigidly confined to the proletarian and Bolshevik. The plays were by the workers and Komsomols, of the workers and Komsomols, and for the workers and Komsomols (at every performance there would be a huge block of cheap seats reserved for Komsomol organizations). The young authors who wrote TRAM's plays (together with the "collective"), such as Arkady Gorbenko, Nikolay Lvov, and Pavel Marinchik— names not to be found in any literary encyclopedia—all allegedly came from a worker milieu and were completely inexperienced as writers. As TRAM gained power and prestige, it began to advance ever more inflated claims about the role it would play in forging the new man and the new society, insisting that it be seen not as just a theater but rather as "the Agitprop of the Komsomol,"36 or even as an entire social movement of youth, called "tramism" (tramizm).37 When Revfront was formed, it published a declaration contending that theatrical circles had to be replaced by "agitational-propagandistic brigades."38 Thus when, on November 3, 1929, the members of the four theaters making up Revfront, led by TRAM, lined up on Ostrovsky Square facing the Academic Theater and insistently chanted their demand "The Liquidation of MKhATas a Class," this incident had all the makings of a black day in that black vear. From TRAM's very inception in 1925, it had taken as its slogan the famous lines from the "Internationale" "We shall build a new world, our world /He who was naught shall be all."39Now, with their new slogan "The Liquidation of MKhAT as a Class," they were essentially implying that the institutions such as MKhAT that had previously enjoyed the status in the cultural sphere analogous to that of the kulak in the village, those who had been "all" by virtue of their purported monopoly over that currency called culture, should now be "naught." Potentially, this incident has all the signs of being yet another onslaught by the underprivileged on the position of the educated and professional classes, yet another purge of an intellectual institution as part of a twin campaign for "proletarianization" and Party / Komsomol hegemony, and hence comparable with the purges at this time in the Academy of Sciences, the conservatoria, publishinghouses, and countless other institutions. At the same time, TRAM's claim for hegemony might seem to have been informed by a crudely mechanistic sense of the function of culture, its only utility being what it might achieve as a form of agitation or as a means of raising economic yields. Thus we seem to have a scenario where Culture's very existence is threatened by primitive propaganda. All these conclusions are valid, but they do not tell the whole story. In many senses, the campaign by Revfront with TRAM at its head was not a moment when the Great Unwashed confronted the cultural elite, nor when Soviet power attempted to destroy culture, but more a matter of internecine warfare within the intelligentsia, a category which at that time included a lot of Party and Komsomol officials. For a start, although TRAM was originally founded as an amateur theater, in the 1927-28 season a decision had been taken to go professional and its members had been given extensive theatrical training. As TRAM became more professional, however, it seems to have become more militant vis-à-vis the established theaters and, in consequence, more directly those theaters' rival.40 One of the major motives in the Revfront demonstration seems to have been its four theaters' frustration at seeing little improvement in the chronic paucity of material and administrative support they received from the cultural bureaucracy in a year when official rhetoric would seem to suggest that they were the theaters of the hour; in the months immediately preceding the demonstration their subsidies had been cut,41 while Stanislavsky and Nemirovich-Danchenko, the ideologues of what they called the "bourgeois" theater, were reinstalled as unchallenged directors of MKhAT. When Revfront stood on Ostrovsky Square, it was in a sense an exercise in that ultimate utopianism of intellectuals who took too literally the words "he who was naught shall be all." "The Liquidation of MKhAT as a Class" can be seen as a direct translation of this—their—slogan into the sphere of the theater. The demand that the new theater be by, for, and of the proletariat is a purist interpretation of the inversion of cultured and uncultured The emphasis on propaganda and the immediate concerns of the workers reverses the conventional hierarchy whereby art with its claim to aesthetic value was seen as the highest form of communication and the purely propagandistic or journalistic was seen as lower. Also, the turn to local and current topics represents a shrinking of horizons as compared with those of "high art." Yet the reality of TRAM did not quite conform to its claims to be exclusively a workers'theater. While histories of TRAM allege that its authors were untutored workers who came to the theater straight from the factory floor, further examination reveals that many of them had already established themselves as career Komsomol cultural workers or had previous experience in a theater or theater school (both are true of their director, Sokolovsky42). Others in the theater did not even fit the mold of the Komsomol activist. The acknowledged "godfather" of TRAM, technically head of the Literary Artistic Section but in practice its chief theoretician and mastermind—and its chief spokesman on Ostrovsky Square—was no raw worker youth but Adrian Piotrovsky. Piotrovsky was not the only exception to this rule that TRAM was to be the pure working-class theater. The Theater Department of GIII was essentially a Svengali of TRAM, and TRAM's Musical Section, MUZORAM, was headed by Shostakovich, who composed the music for several of its plays, as did V. Deshevov; both came, like Piotrovsky, from a background in the professional classes and with higher education—in this case from the Conservatory—and both were heavily influenced by contemporary Western music.43 Other avant-gardists were associated with other theaters in Revfront; for instance, Filonov and Malevich did work at different times for the Red Theater.44 "The Liquidation of MKhAT . . ."was in a sense the agenda of the prerevolutionary theater activists, champions of uslovnost' against the bourgeois "realist" theater. To some extent, TRAM can be seen as part of the diaspora from Meverhold's studio on Borodinskaya. Many of its leaders, such as Piotrovsky, Sokolovsky, and Shostakovich, had in the past had some association with Meyerhold and the movement for a peoples' theater, while two other leaders of that movement, Radlov and V. Soloviev, had been among those who began giving the TRAM actors theatrical training in 1928.45As masterminds of TRAM, however, they emerged as direct rivals of Meyerhold with their own extremely ambitious agenda for theatrical reform. TRAM, Piotrovsky, Deshevov, and Shostakovich were also central players in the movement for opera reform. Indeed, as Revfront was formed (on November 3, 1929) rehearsals were well under way for Shostakovich's The Nose, which was to premiere in January.46Yet while, even in this period, Meyerhold was making public statements (including in Leningrad) praising the Wagnerian opera for the way it resolved the relationship between word and music,47 TRAM was being praised by the theoreticians of the new opera for the anti-Wagnerian way its productions orchestrated that relationship.48 There were no actual operas in the TRAM repertoire, but music played a central role in all its productions, which were typically satirical comedies or melodramas interlarded with musical numbers, or outright operettas. The leaders of TRAM frequently called their plays "musical dramas,"using the term most often adduced by the proponents of opera reform to categorize the genre of the revamped opera.49 In some respects, TRAM's aims can also be seen as a development of the basic program of the Russian avant-garde from even before the Revolution. Like them, TRAM wanted to transform not just the external behavioral patterns of the audience members but their mindsets as well. The first step toward this was, as with the Russian Futurists and Eisenstein, to shock the audience into paying attention by presenting all manner of contradictions, incongruities, radical "displacements" (sdvigi), and "montage."50 TRAM, however, starting from its production of Molten Days (Plavyatsya dni) in May 1928, attempted more radical kinds of incongruity. In this play, incongruity was to be found not just in imagery or language but in plot, characterization, and temporal sequence.51Members "rejected" the "single and integrated psychic image"as a "fiction" together with the notion that characters should be individualized. The directors sought to break down the identification between actor and character by having their actors critique their roles even as they were acting them (here we see how their theories come close to Brecht's concept of alienation).52 They aimed to present a conflicted and multilayered account of reality such that no single and coherent account of anything should be presented; its opposite should always be there simultaneously.53 A TRAM script was to present no conclusions to its audience as a guarantee of true collectivity (no overriding voice). There should, the group maintained, be no finality, a characteristic they identified with a Marxist account of the dialectic whereby all would be in a state of contradiction, of becoming. There was even to be no final version of the script. The cast and director were to keep working on it collectively not only as they rehearsed but after the play premiered (until at least the third or fourth performance, and even then the version was to be considered only provisional).54 Thus in a TRAM play each identity projected was to be relentlessly undermined in manifold ways, and there was to be no explicit message. But how could such complex and confusing plays meet Agitprop's central stipulation in its decrees on drama of 1927 that plays be readily accessible to the masses and effective as propaganda? The answer given by the theoreticians of TRAM was that their theater was truly radical because the synthesis of the manifold contradictions inherent in a TRAM play's text and staging should be made not on stage, but in the consciousness of the audience. The audience was to be the author.55 TRAM, then, tried to overthrow the most fundamental conventions of theater, and with them, the way in which its audiences perceived reality. Its primitive and pedestrian melodramas and comedies of the factory floor had, willy-nilly, to become the agents of epistemological revolution—very weighty baggage for such a medium to bear. The theorists of TRAM liked to insist that their spectacles did not feel bound by any genre,56 and even that the parent TRAM was not a canonical exemplar. Yet if one reads the texts of their productions, one is struck by the extent to which the majority represent variations on stock favorites of the lowbrow theater such as the family melodrama or the comedy of errors, in which, to be sure, the setting is generally the workers' hostel or holiday camp, but the characters' workday lives are minimized to make such a graft possible; the factory or blast furnace simply looms up larger than life for the triumphant finale.57 Are, then, the claims of TRAM theoreticians to be a-systematic and a-generic deluded? In any event, TRAM's noisy campaign came to naught and it was unable to storm the citadel of High Culture. Within a year of its dramatic challenge, it was under serious attack, and by 1931 it had been reduced to a minor player on the cultural scene.58 This "denouement" hardly seems surprising given that, during the Plan years, one after the other contenders for the title principal theoretician or exemplum of the new culture experienced a rapid fall from grace. In 1925 the Party, in its pronouncement on literature, had advocated relative pluralism in cultural trends, as long as all were sympathetic to Bolshevism. But the prevailing mood in culture at this time demanded that among all the trends claiming to represent the new culture, one must be named. Explanations of TRAM's demise are often made in terms of cultural politics. Such explanations foreground its losing battle against its main rival and arch opponent as chief legislator of the new revolutionary culture, RAPP. Both groups were riding high on the wave of Komsomol culture, which both represented. A struggle between these two mastodons within the Komsomol was probably inevitable. Their rivalry came to a head during 1929-1930. As the confrontation intensified, each group attempted to expand its empire, incorporating a broader sweep of cultural organizations. RAPP poached into TRAM's territory, the theater, adopting MKhAT, the flagship of "realism" in art, as its chosen vessel for proletarian theater. TRAM, for its part, began in 1929 to organize its commune as a center for discussions on what should be the new socialist culture.59 Then in 1930 it encroached directly on RAPP's domain, literature, adding to the members of Revfront a dissident faction within RAPP itself, Litfront.60 Litfront was based in Leningrad and in 1931 the RAPP leadership decamped there for an infamous national convention that was in effect the final showdown (for them, victorious) with this opposition within its ranks. By late 1931 TRAM was a very reduced force politically. Thus the rise and fall of TRAM and Revfront could be explained in terms of political intrigues, factional politics, lobbies, and power plays. It should be noted, for instance, that Revfront was formed soon after Lunacharsky, the long-standing supporter of the conventional "academic" theater, was ousted as Commissar of Enlightenment (in the fall of 1929) and replaced by A. S. Bubnov, who was determined to "proletarianize" more radically.61 Also, TRAM and, ironically, RAPP as well, ultimately lost out because of their megalomaniacal claims, which stood in the way of the Party's own ambitions for hegemony.62But literary politics cannot provide a complete explanation of their demise because they in themselves represent surface manifestations of more fundamental developments. TRAM was essentially the theater of the hour for the years of the First Five-Year Plan and the cultural revolution, but it did not wear well as the country entered the 1930s. ## Anti-Westernism In the closing phases of the cultural revolution, there was a shift in the dominant Soviet attitudes toward two things TRAM particularly valuedcurrent Western trends and the proletarian. TRAM's "westernizer" stance became increasingly problematic as the country became more obsessed with defining the borders between "us" and "them." The attitude toward the West had always been fraught, but it was in some senses even more so during the Plan years because of the West's increasing importance at a time of industrialization and modernization. For all the decade much of Soviet intellectual life had been heavily influenced by new directions or theories from Germany: Expressionism, Neo-Kantianism, the new physics, and aesthetic theory (Heinrich Wölfflin), to name just a few. Indeed, though Mayakovsky in 1927 might summon his coileagues in the international avant-garde to turn their "gaze to Moscow." in reality Soviet leftist intellectuals and avant-gardists had their eves trained on Berlin: in the theater, there were some for Max Reinhardt and others for Erwin Piscator, but what was happening on the Berlin stage was always a landmark around which the Soviet avant-garde oriented themselves; the movement for opera reform came from there, not to mention trends in art (the Bauhaus), film, and music. The only major exception seems to have been in literature, where in the late 1920s the Soviets had stronger links with contemporary French and Anglophone trends.63 In some ways the Plan years saw an intensification of this Western trend. The country was visited, as never before or since (until recently), by a major influx of foreign workers, technological experts and equipment—and avantgarde architects;64 many came as starry-eyed volunteers, fleeing a doomed and collapsing West after the Great Crash of 1929 and bent on building the socialist tomorrow. Soviet experts also went to Detroit, Deerfield, and such places to study Western technological achievements and organization. Yet at the same time, in this militantly proletarian age the recurrent anxieties about ensuring cultural purity in the face of a bourgeois West needed to be alleviated. Though for many the terrain encompassing "us" definitely stretched at least to Berlin, now it was necessary to re-examine such assumptions. Should one differentiate between two "Berlins," just as there were now two Leningrads, one the Berlin of bourgeois culture and theory, and the other the Berlin of leftist proletarian culture, or even, since the latter movement split at about this time as the result of bitter fighting, of Communist proletarian culture? Thus many intellectuals, including the theoreticians of GIII, had to recant because their orientation had been to non-Communist German theoreticians. There was also a movement to fuse the cultural effort in Soviet Russia with Communist and proletarian groups in Germany. This was particularly so in the theater65(TRAM, for instance, formed an alliance with a German counterpart): proletarian groups from each of the two countries toured analogous theaters in the other; there was an attempt to found a single "[proletarian] international theater"; alliances and "socialist competitions" were formed between Soviet and German leftist cultural bodies; and terminology and names from the milieu of German Communist culture (such as Rotfront and Jung-Sturm) were adopted by Soviet proletarian theaters and other cultural bodies.66 This trend for identification became mutual; Brecht began to write a play about Lenin, and when Piscator, who had been scheduled to come to Leningrad and direct a production, was arrested in Germany he announced that if war were to break out between his country and the Soviet Union he would fight for the latter.67 Despite TRAM's emphasis on its links with German proletarian culture, in this later phase it proved out of sync with the times because it was heavily influenced by Western modernist trends and fell afoul of an anti-Westernist campaign that began even as Revfront was forming. In 1929 there began a series of attacks against prominent non-Party intellectuals couched in terms of their suspected Westernism,68 including a particularly virulent one on the Leningrad Formalists that led to a purge of the Department for the Verbal Arts in GIII, their stronghold. By the end of the year this anti-"Formalist" campaign had extended its purview to include such representatives of the avant-garde as Eisenstein, Meyerhold—and Piotrovsky, Shostakovich, and Sokolovsky.69 In November 1930, TRAM's Svengali, the Theater Department of GIII, which had been spared in the 1929 purge, was singled out and "reorganized" in a purge.70 Nineteen thirty, the height of this campaign, was the time when RAPP, in a strong position by virtue of its Russo-centric aesthetic, exacted its revenge on the masterminds of TRAM for their hubris in challenging it. Taking advantage of TRAM's weakened position, RAPP emasculated that organization and added it to its empire. TRAM, in an effort to preserve its position, disavowed its "godfather,"Piotrovsky, at a national meeting of TRAM organizations in February 1930,71and bowed to pressures to draw closer to RAPP and the Theater section of the Communist Academy in Leningrad (which was then headed by the RAPP leader Libedinsky).72The Communist Academy was on the march at this time and since 1929 it had been absorbing a large number of leftist cultural bodies, including many institutes formerly allied with RANION.73 Unfortunately, it was not only the anti-"Formalist"forces that used this moment to make vicious attacks. Piotrovsky in turn lashed out at Meyerhold.74 The avant-garde under pressure also began to recant. As these disavowals rolled off the assembly line in 1930-1931, one after the other the theoreticians of the avant-garde theater from GIII confessed that they had "suddenly" realized how much their thinking had been influenced by German theorists.75 The anti-"Formalist" campaign of 1929–1931 was not only informed by a xenophobic reaction against Western modernism but also directed at the question of "norms." In the attacks, Eisenstein, Piotrovsky, Shostakovich, Filonov, and others were not just reproached for falling prey to Western bourgeois tendencies, an accusation they were prepared to recant on (even earlier the theoreticians of the new Soviet opera had started to insist that it had outgrown Western influences).76 In the attacks, less emphasis was given to the priority these figures give to form than to the absence of conventional structure in their work (Formalism!), and their disregard for conformist taste and the comme il faut (their "pathological anatomy")." A typical vicious journal attack on the "Formalists," one delivered in the militantly proletarian Leningrad journal the Worker and the Theater in February 1930, was headed "Let Us Put an End to Formalism, Bad Taste, and Lack of System,' all three being equated as "prime values of bourgeois art theory."78 These qualities (attributed to the West) were perennial bugbears of Soviet criticism. As yet, however, such articles were not to have the status of ex cathedra pronouncements (as became the case in the mid-1930s), but were more salvoes in the most intensely fought battle of the day, the battle over norms. It is no accident that in the same issue of the Worker and the Theater as contained the above-mentioned attack on Formalism, I. I. Sollertinsky (one of the principal ideologues of the new opera) published his programmatic account of Shostakovich's The Nose under the rubric "'The Nose' Is a Long-Range Weapon."79 Similarly, the campaign against Piotrovsky did not result in his expulsion from TRAM; he continued to work in the theater and to direct its productions and, despite consistent attacks on "Formalists" in film, he remained the artistic director of the Leningrad Film Studio (originally the Leningrad Factory of Sovkino), a post he held from 1928-1937. There were casualties of this campaign, however. Mayakovsky, another representative of leftist avant-gardism forced to join RAPP in 1930, committed suicide that December. At the time, he was working on a production in the Moscow circus of his play about the 1905 revolution, Moscow Is Burning (Moskva gorit), directed by Radlov, in which he, the erstwhile Futurist who in the manifesto of December 1912 had called for "throwing Pushkin . . . off the steamship of modernity," had his oppressed intellectuals gravitate toward that very bard's statue. ## The Major Shift to the "Great Culture of Bolshevism" Thus the anti-Formalist/ anti-Westernist campaign of around 1930 was a major setback for TRAM (and particularly for its allies in GIII) but not its nemesis. Around 1931, however, a series of events occurred whose overall impact amounted to the dismantling or reversal of the distinctive culture of the Plan years—and the consequent diminution of TRAM's presence in culture. The most crucial reversal was on the official policy of "leveling" (uravnilovka), or treating all as equal in the workplace and in wage scales. This effectively called a halt to dreams that "he who was naught shall be all." In most aspects of Soviet life there was a reaction against the extreme emphasis on the low and "peripheral." The move to greater hierarchization in Soviet society translated into a shift away from the common workers and their labor as the main subject for cultural production. But it also returned to the intellectuals some of their erstwhile status and promised that the standards and conventions of their caste would henceforth receive less battering. In the sphere of culture, the campaign was used as an occasion for regularizing and improving conditions in the various professions and the system of royalty payments. At the national plenum of Rabis, the Union of Cultural Workers, held in Leningrad in October 1931, five days were spent on this issue.80When the Writers Union was founded in 1932, its principal initial concerns had to do with improving the material position and social status of its members. It is no accident that the same Rabis plenum discussed the inadequacies of the characteristic "short forms" of Plan culture and recommended a new emphasis on "long forms." The age of the agitational sketch was coming to an end and literature was reclaiming its traditional place as queen of the arts, a status returned her during 1931-1932. A new slogan of 1931, "The Great [bol'shaya] Literature of Bolshevism," was used as a signal to halt the battering that traditional professional standards had received in all areas of culture. The country was finding worker mores a less compelling subject for its theater, and hence TRAM had lost much of its original purpose; its clumsy attempts at adjusting to new trends were deemed by critics pedestrian and boring. By the second half of 1931, TRAM had already disappeared from view in the cultural press by comparison with the preceding two years or so when it remained at the center ofattention and controversy (in the mid-1930s, the remaining TRAM theaters were superseded by Theaters of the Leninist Komsomol). The demise of TRAM can also be seen as an effect of the moment when the inherent paradoxes and ambiguities of the Plan years were resolved. Those vears had been a very liminal time, a time when the dominant cultural patterns were both centripetal and centrifugal. Thus in some instances rather than cultural organizations undertaking shefstvo over a factory, or vice versa, one found a situation of mutual shefstvo. The city of Leningrad can be seen as both locus and icon of ambivalence in a liminal age. Was it a "center"? the periphery? the stronghold of the old intelligentsia? or of the revolutionary proletariat? Was it the home of the ancien régime or of the new? Likewise, one has problems in trying to define TRAM. Was it a workers' theater? the Agitprop of the Komsomol? or a sandbox for intellectual romantics? TRAM (and Revfront) of 1929 as a marriage between avant-garde experimentalists bent on transforming the landscape of culture, on the one hand, and theatrically gifted workers, on the other, was bound to come unstuck, since the partners were ill-matched in so many ways. Shostakovich, for instance, had to work overtime on the worker youths of TRAM to persuade them that the new music was more truly proletarian than the more melodious and schmaltzy revamped Tchaikovsky and Mussorgsky peddled as "revolutionary music" by RAPP's counterpart in music, RAPM. In a sense, 1930 represents the year the marriage began to fail. The next year a bitter Shostakovich responded to the attacks by giving notice that he would not serve the country any more as an "applied composer." In language reminiscent of Brecht's attack on the opera as "culinary," he condemned such hackwork as aimed at "pleasant digestion" (it is to be noted that he started work on his opera Lady Macbeth in that year).81 Around 1931 the root ambiguity of the Plan years was resolved: the entire country in all its many aspects—political, social, symbolical, and culturalbecame unambiguously centripetal and hierarchical in its organization. But then, who or what set this new direction? Undoubtedly two major landmarks in the fundamental shifts that year were Stalin's famous speech in June to a meeting of industrial managers that reversed the policy of "leveling,"82 and his letter published in Proletarian Revolution (Proletarskaya revolyutsiya) in October which attacked one of that journal's articles of the previous year (by Slutsky) about Lenin's role early in the century vis-à-vis the German Social Democrats. The terms of this latter attack had immediate bearing on the great debate about revolutionary historiography in the 1920s, and the related debate about "revolutionary" representation, between those who contended that it should be based on actualities and those who contended that the Marxist-Leninist account of history should guide the historian's pen. Stalin took particular exception to the way Slutsky insisted that more documentation was needed for studying the issue of Lenin's relations: how could one need documents to evaluate a figure of the stature of Lenin ("The editors should raise the study of the history of Bolshevism to a more appropriate, high level")! In effect, Stalin made it clear that Party leaders are ipso facto exemplary and cannot be accorded mundane or negative traits.83 In this essay in Proletarian Revolution Stalin also took the anti-Western trend further and undermined the theory of the "two Berlins"; he drew a qualitative distinction between German Communists (Rosa Luxemburg) and Bolsheviks, favoring the latter.84 From approximately this time, it was not enough to be leftist or even Communist to be acceptable in Soviet Russia. One should note the humiliation that year of the European avantgarde architects (such as le Corbusier) in the competition to design the Palace of Soviets, an event that is conventionally taken as the end of the international avant-garde's happy marriage with Soviet power. As it were, Stalin put his thumb on the page of Proletarian Revolution and the whole country did a turnabout—from the cult of "little men" to the cult of "big men," from having close links with Western leftist avant-gardism to cultural autarchy, and so forth. This situation may seem similar to that in the nineteenth century when the tsar allegedly drew a line arbitrarily between Moscow and Petersburg and that became the route for the rail-line, even though it meant taking the line through bogs and other needlessly difficult terrain. Once Stalin's "thumb" hit the page, once the revolutionary culture had been named, all the other contending versions became non- or antitrends. Stalin's letter can be seen as one of a series of landmark occasions—the most notable being the Central Committee's 1925 ruling on Soviet literature, the anti-Formalist pronouncements of 1936, the Zhdanovist decrees and attacks of 1946, and Stalin's articles on linguistics of 1950—where pronouncements from "the highest levels," often from Stalin himself, appear to set a new direction for Soviet culture, thereby excluding from it other vital trends advocated by leading intellectuals. But in most such cases, including this one, the ex cathedra pronouncement represents not a shift but the endorsement of one position in a very heated debate. The Stalin article appeared toward the end of 1931,thus it represents the most authoritative formulation of tendencies that were already marked. Moreover, the cultural shifts to be observed in 1931 did not occur in a single moment but evolved over time. Stalin's remarks, unlike the lines for the railway, were not arbitrary. They reflect the general responses to a particular nexus of circumstances the country found itself in at that time. For example, 1931, annus horribilis as it has been called, was a crisis year in the West. The Party was alarmed at the rise of fascism in the West and Japanese incursions into Manchuria in the East, and responded with a policy of greater economic autarchv, making cultural autarchy more probable. Additionally, the Party was affronted bv the meeting of the Second International that year in Vienna; hence a shift on the pages of Pravda over the course of the year from articles in praise of German Communists to articles denouncing them. Finally, and most crucialiv. 1931 was that critical moment when the First Five-Year Plan was winding down and the Party was planning the second. It was a time of stocktaking when the quixotic nature of extreme democratism and its costs in practical terms were becoming all too apparent. Some have suggested that it was not Stalin who initiated the debunking of "leveling," but Sergo Ordzhonnikidze, who in November 1930 had been made head of Vesenkha (effectively the ministry of industry) and was anxious to deliver85—but perhaps it is pointless to speculate about priority: Stalin in his function as absolute authority promulgated changes, but their roots were “deeper." The economic stocktaking of that year was accompanied by ideological stocktaking as well; in Pravda, together with articles on production and foreign affairs came an unusual number of articles on ideological and philosophical issues. They were partly occasioned by the anti-Trotsky campaign, but were symptomatic of a need to normalize after the upheavals (cataclysms) of economic, social, and cultural revolution. The Plan years might have been a liminal time, but liminality cannot be sustained, as Victor Turner, one of its chief theoreticians, has pointed out.86 How viable could the new culture be if, characteristically, it placed hyper emphasis on the "periphery,"the noncenter—the "naught"? So many of its programs seem a sort of reductio of the movement to take the theater out onto the streets; as it was put at the time,"The theater bursts out onto the street like a river during a flood . . .," representing it as a spontaneous act. But if the theater really empties out onto the streets, if the bounds of the theater become fuzzy, you lose theater (culture) as a distinctive institution. Also, as the bounds between spectacle and spectator are broken down, there are no subjects. A genre means restraints, borders. As the center is emptied out, where is the source of authority?—is it the worker? In a sense, during the Plan years the zealots of cultural revolution went to the edge almost literally—they followed the path to the "periphery" to its outer limits. To some extent, state policies did so as well. In the theater, policies came closer than before or since to "Liquidat[ing] MKhAT as a Class," but each time they did so, segments of the public or the cultural bureaucracy panicked and a reverse trend set in. In 1929, for instance, the Leningrad State Theaters were taken off the budget of Narkompros (after Lunacharsky, their patron, was "retired"), but not for long.87 And then in 1930 the Bolshoi Drama Theater, the theater Gorky and others founded shortly after the Revolution to bring high culture to the masses, was dropped from the roster of subsidized state theaters, but the decision was revoked after a public protest.88 In a highly centralized society such as the Soviet Union a mass exodus to the "periphery" becomes a necessary gesture if one is to reorient the culture. Certainly it is a gesture that has been made each time Soviet culture has rethought itself, although it is difficult to ascertain in each instance whether the gesture was aimed consciously at reorienting the culture. Such inversions can be found in the post-Stalin era when cultural production acquired a new symbolic geography based on the assumption that the only way of recovering from the blow delivered by the revelations of Stalinist infamy made at the Twentieth Party Congress in 1956 was to leave the corrupt "center" for a construction site or other such place on the periphery where individuals might discover an untarnished expression of the Communist ideals that would help them find a new faith and values and enable them as well as the country to return to a recuperated "center." Later, under Leonid Brezhnev, and particularly in so-called village prose, the questing hero (or author) was to push farther out from the center to some remote village where he might find intact not a Communist ethos but the truly Russian (pre-Soviet) one, a topos that underwrote the religious and nationalist revivals and even led directly into perestroika (the cultures of non-Russian ethnic groups soon followed suit, a prelude to their quest for national selfdetermination).89 Under Gorbachev, however, a new "periphery"was found as an antidote to such a potentially xenophobic locus; the preferred icon became the provincial town presented as a model for a more pluralistic and federalist society with its modest local associations and market promising greater weight for civil society and an antidote to Communist big brotherism. The actors in the cultural life of the Plan period were, analogously, "going to the edge," not to find a permanent new locus, but to find new borders (norms) as they undertook this journey. There can never be a period when the "periphery" is all. For a start, there is really no such place as "periphery" because it is not bounded and can be defined only negatively, as "noncenter." If all is periphery, there are no bounds or norms. Thus, any period when periphery is a dominant value can only be liminal at best (hence in a sense TRAM's demise was inevitable because they had staked so much on "decentering"). Moreover, any theory of decentering is itself a new center, as one saw in the 1980s and early 1990s in the new "Postmodernist" orthodoxy. As the cultural revolution of the First Five-Year Plan progressed, one saw to an increasing extent the next phase of the dash to the "periphery," that is, attempts at defining norms and boundaries. Symptomatically, as early as 1930several institutes of RANION identified the question ofgenre as the linchpin of their inquiries and together founded a special commission to oversee the reorientation of their institutes to this focus.90This project anticipates the major work on genre theory done in the 1930s by figures such as Lukács and Bakhtin. The return to genre had ramifications extending beyond literary or theatrical forms. As Bakhtin has explored in his theory of the chronotope, at the heart of any literary genre is a particular understandingof the nature and interconnection of space and time (a chronotope), an understanding that defines not only the genre of a particular time but in some senses that time as well.91The return to an interest in genre coincided with new spatial and temporal models. The rejection of the principle of "leveling" meant that there was a reorientation toward the vertical, which brought with it a new emphasis on the dimension of time. As literature and plays were reordered around sequences of events in time, biographism returned, including biographies of major historical figures.92 The Senyas and Musyas, those faceless "little men" who were the mainstay of literature and theater during the Plan years, retreated from center stage. In their place came figures who represented the Party leader; Kaverin and some other intellectuals matched this trend with hagiographic biographies about "heroes" of their own caste.93 As plot and historical subjects returned, heroic adventure experienced a revival in literature. In 1931 the principal Leningrad cultural journal, the Worker and the Theater (having absorbed the Life of Art after 1929), began to feature an entirely new type of cover with photographs not, as before, of worker theatrical collectives or cultural leaders, but of wild and frequently Asiatic horsemen. This trend had been prepared for in cinema, which during the Plan years had been somewhat out of sync with literature and drama and had in many films presented a different version of the periphery—not the construction site with its ant-like swarm of toilers, but the exotic steppe of the Civil War or prerevolutionary underground as the setting for adventure.94Such exotic orientalism is, as Edward Said and others have shown, frequently the flip side of imperialism. In the 1930s (and especially the 1940s) the Soviet Union was to emerge as a more nakedly imperialistic power, and though the "orientalist" aspect of the trend had largely faded by then, engagement with the wild and untamed, a swashbuckling-like heroism, became the mainstay of culture. Soviet society might around 1931 have, de facto, abandoned the ideal that "he who was naught shall be all," but its literature continued to present parables of this process. Writers had learned a bitter lesson from the Plan years, however—that sketches about "little men" and their practical tasks make for unreadable literature that piles up in warehouses but has little demand. As Gladkov had shown with the great success of Cement, this tale had to be recast in an adventure plot that transformed the factory floor or kolkhoz field into an epic canvas. In heroic struggles with elemental or elemental-like forces, "he who was naught" became that "all," which by then in the national Imaginary meant the form of the Bolshevik leader. Novels were generally set in some peripheral location, but as the hero triumphed over the overwhelming odds there he also completed a symbolic journey from that periphery back to the "center." The best known of the films from the late 1920s about revolutionary engagement in exotic settings is V. Pudovkin's Storm over Asia (originally called The Heir to Genghis Khan [Potomok Chingiz Khana], 1928), set in the Buriat Mongol steppe. In its famous ending the hero, Bair, a Buriat Mongol youth, escapes from the British, who have tried to set him up as a puppet leader, and joins the local revolutionary uprising. As the expeditionary forces pursue him a great storm blows up, overwhelming the British, who are blown back in retreat while Bair and his people meld with the storm and drive them out. The original screenplay by the Formalist Osip Brik provides for a more elaborate version of this ending. The hero escapes on his horse and rides furiously over the steppe, through Mongol hamlets, across rivers, and over mountains. As his pace quickens he sees a mirage in the distance. He presses his pace even more and as he draws closer he sees it is a town. Moving now at breakneck speed he rides to meet it and the mirage is revealed to be the gleaming city of Moscow.95 This proposed ending with its cult of Moscow was arguably rejected because it was ahead of its time, but it prefigures the shape of culture to come. As the wild horseman gallops over the steppe to meet the shining mirage, the audience gets both its cowboy movie and those monumental panoramas of stately (tsarstvenno-velichavyy) buildings the Preservationists sought. Just as in 1913 "all of Paris" was captivated by the elemental, "Asian-daring" dancing of the Polovtsians in Prince Igor, so could all of the Soviet Union be captivated by the daring physical exploits of its new heroes. As they made their journey to Moscow (symbolic or actual), they mediated the gap between high culture and low, between agitation or status quoaffirming rituals and entertainment. The periphery, now even more than during the Plan years the locus of novels and films, became more "wild," but thereby, paradoxically, it became more tame. As heroes breached the gap between center and periphery, they also proclaimed an end to the period of "abnormal science"—and hence, in effect, of revolution.