# EPILOGUE: THE THIRTIES Stalinist culture did not appear overnight. Nor was its evolution linear, gradual, and incremental. A more appropriate model for the pattern of intermittent periods of extremism is that of "punctuated equilibrium," a model proposed for natural evolution by theoreticians including Stephen J. Gould. They have argued that in many instances evolution is not an even process but is marked by periodic cataclysms or spasms that tend to make superfluous or weaken a spectrum of possibilities and to advance others. What remains after such spasms is changed as well thereby.1 This book has charted two such "punctuations"—the period of War Communism and the time of the cultural revolution. In the 1930s, another can be found in the time of the Great Purge, the "terror" of 1936-1938.2 One might characterize the pattern in terms of an alternation of peaks and valleys, or of revolution (extremism) and normalization. The "valleys," the intervening times, are, though less dramatic, also critical in the evolution of Stalinist culture. The peaks largely determine which among those possibilities represented in the valleys will go and which will be advanced, but generally a more formative period is the time of recovery and consolidation between cataclysms (or "peaks"). One such "valley" can be found in the wake of the cultural revolution. The day the Literary Gazette reported Gorky's return to the Soviet Union in May 1931, it published his article "Concerning Work with Language."3 It might have been expected that Gorky would mark his triumphal return at such a critical time with a major political statement, but reform of the language of literature was for him a crucial priority; indeed, his crusade was to prove one of the most fateful moments for Soviet culture. The following year, 1932, all independent writers' organizations were abolished as a single Writers Union was established with Gorky as its head. This shift, first orchestrated in literature, was progressively replicated in every field (music, architecture, film, and so on) and the new policies for literature—socialist realism—set the model for the other arts. Theater was no longer queen. In 1934, when the Writers Union held its First Congress and the doctrine of socialist realism was being finalized, Gorky was still crusading for language reform. In January 1934, as delegates were attending the Seventeenth Party Congress, he was conducting one of his most crucial power struggles—this time with a block of writers headed by Fëdor Panfyorov. Panfyorov was at that time an extremely important writer: he was one of two delegates to the Congress from the literary sector, and his novel Bruski, a saga of collectivization, was one of the two literary works presented to all the Congress delegates (the other being the infamous Belomor Canal book about the regeneration of convicts through labor on the canal).4 Gorky and Panfyorov were, at this critical moment, arguing about language, or more specifically about whether the extensive use of substandard folk language in literature (a characteristic of Panfyorov's Bruski) represents, as Gorky termed it, "language pollution," and as such should be excluded from Soviet literature. Panfyorov was supported in this argument by the Old Bolshevik author A. S.Serafimovich and several other prominent writers.5The issue was laid to rest when M. P. Yudin, the nonliterary, Partyappointed head of the Writers Union's Organizational Committee and the other spokesman on literature at the Seventeenth Party Congress, supported Gorky at the Committee's plenum in March 1934.6 A debate about language is never innocent. It is no wonder this one was put to an end by statements from on high. Starting from such earlier disputes as that between Lomonosov and Tredyakovsky in the eighteenth century, or the series involving Admiral Shishkov, Karamzin, Pushkin, and others that heralded the emergence of modern Russian literature early in the nineteenth, debates on language have tended to mark interstitial times in Russian cultural history. In the Soviet period, the impact of such debates became decidedly more political. Consider Stalin's famous essays on linguistics of 1950 that reversed the base / superstructure model in this sphere and ended the sway of Marr's school in linguistics; in so doing, they set in motion, or were a sign of, a major reorientation in Soviet culture that was intensified during the thaws under Khrushchev. Arguments about language are often arguments about authority and system. As was said in a Literary Gazette editorial when the canonical theory of socialist realism was being worked out: "The struggle for cultured language [kul'tura yazyka] is at the same time a struggle for the language of socialist culture and even more broadly a struggle for socialist culture in general."7 A similar position was taken by the Party spokesman at the First Writers Congress, A. A. Zhdanov, who in his speech to the Congress (a canonical source for the theory of socialist realism) stated: "In order to be an engineer of human souls one must struggle actively for cultured language [kul'tura yazyka]. . . ."8 Thus "cultured language" was a cornerstone of socialist realism, together with "Party-mindedness" (partiynost') and the "positive hero." Socialist realism was also defined negatively, by a list of taboos, the key constraint being the parameters of language. Gorky mandated that all dialecticisms and substandard expressions be kept out of Soviet literature. Thanks to his policies, the "living speech" of the urban proletariat so idealized in the late 1920s by writers, linguists, and reformers in the theater and opera was now expunged with particular zeal. Writers were expected to follow what were allegedly "folk" models for their positive heroes. In practice, however, their characters were to speak an incongruously bookish language. The significance of language reform extends beyond the question of what kind of language could, and what could not, be used in literature. Gorky not only mandated this kind of language as opposed to that; he mandated an image of language and thus also a function. In so doing, he essentially proscribed its noncanonical, demystifying, eccentric aspects, thus eliminating one of meaning's polarities as Ricoeur has defined them (see the Introduction). The boundaries for "bouffe," as distinct from "mystery," became narrower and conventionalized. Socialist realism has thus with some justice been called a form of classicism, that is, a normative system that emphasizes purity, restraint, and decorum. Socialist realism was, then, essentially a version of what Stallybrass and White call cultural "Lenten rule." Together with the insistence on linguistic purity went a rejection of "naturalism" (sex and other intrusions of the baldly physiological); Gorky also condemned these aspects of Panfyorov's novel.9 The new language policy for literature seems comparable to the one advocated in the mid-1920s by such Constructivists as Arvatov, who also used the metaphor of the "engineer," and by Trotsky, who recommended "cultured speech" too. There was a significant difference, however. Trotsky's and Arvatov's agendas for language reform had as their master norms utility, science, and technology—makinglanguage dignified and efficient, and eliminating rhetoricizing flourishes and other such "redundancies." Gorky's emphasis was on avoiding the prosaic; his model was the language of epic, rhetoricized language. The institutionalization of socialist realism saw the return to a standard inventory of models as a pillar of Soviet culture.10 But socialist realism did not mean a return to the same canon that had heiù swav before the Revolution. The claim to canonicity of works bv Aleksand: Fadevev, Gladkov, and others, which were repeatedly cited as models, had a verv different basis from that which had assured such predecessors as Pushkin, Dostoevsky, and Tolstoy a place in the prerevolutionary canon. In the new canon, the grounds for inclusion, while allowing some aesthetic criteria, were predominantly political; the primary function of all cultural products was now legitimization of the status quo. In a sense, the mad dash to the "periphery" made by TRAM and others in the period of cultural revolution had been a necessary preliminary step to such a radical recentering of the canon away from the old giants. The institutionalization of the new Soviet culture—the paradigm shift—had been preceded by what Kuhn might call a period of "abnormal science." But what was Gorky's role in this?In the initial postrevolutionary period he had been chief advocate of the Petrograd intelligentsia, attacking the government for its excessive violence and its cavalier attitude toward the nation's cultural treasures and then negotiating on their behalf, persuading the state to fund institutions and cultural enterprises that maintained them morally and physically. But now he had become an apologist for the purges and allowed himself to head an organization that ensured direct state control of literature. One popular explanation of this apparent volte-face is that Stalin duped Gorky into returning and assuming such a role; another is that his career was spent in the West and he had to return in order to regain the stature and style of life to which he had become accustomed. There are, however, elements of continuity in Gorky's later actions that make them seem less of an absolute reversal. For instance, much of the initial activity of the Writers Union had to do with ameliorating the lives of writers (increasing royalty payments dramatically and constructing privileged apartment buildings, dachas, and "houses of creativity" for writers in idyllic vacation sitesl). In that sense, Gorky's role as head of the Writers Union is analogous to the one he assumed in civil war Petrograd as a Lorenzo the Magnificent, a patron extraordinaire of intellectuals. More important, as head of the Writers Union Gorky was able to institute the kind of culture he had advocated after returning to Russia from exile in 1913, and also during War Communism in projects such as the Bolshoi Drama Theater, which sought to provide high culture and "tragedy"for the masses, or his various encyclopedist ventures. The debate over the kind of language that should define Soviet literature was, then, a critical moment in the evolution of Soviet culture. But it did not, in this instance, involve a conflict between avant-gardists and traditionalists, or between the Party or Party hacks and true intellectuals or dissidents. Rather, it was a struggle conducted almost exclusively within the Partycum-proletarian literature camp. However, a similar battle could have taken place within the avant-garde as well. But we must ask ourselves the question: do these events show that the Party did in fact set the direction for Soviet culture circa 1934? And, if so, was the Party (through Yudin) supporting "its man" (Gorky) or was it, rather, supporting a particular image of language, a particular understanding of culture? The answer to the latter question has to be both: the invitation to Gorky to head Soviet literature was based on certain assumptions about the kind of literature (and culture generally) that his stewardship might foster. But the answer to the first question is more complicated. Gorky was able to argue for "Lenten rule" in literature because many of the values he espoused had been internalized by the Party. To argue as to whether it was Gorky or the Party who made socialist realism, or Stalin, or someone else, is to overpersonalize. The shift to Lenten rule and the positive hero, the twin pillars of socialist realism, should not be attributed to the agency of Gorky alone (although one can see ample precedent for them in his earlier writings), or of Stalin, but can be seen in the context of that major societal shift mentioned in Chapter 12 from the cult of the "little man" and minor genres to the "big" or "great" man and great literature; Gorky himself made a similar shift in his own writings of 1931 as compared with those of the period of the cultural revolution.12 Moreover, at about the same time analogous shifts can be seen in the work of many European intellectuals. When the new canon was formed the old canon was not jettisoned, as the erstwhile Futurists might have advocated. Rather, it was adjusted to the new age. Some of its more "naturalistic" and "obscurantist" figures and works were blackballed, such as Dostoevsky, whom Gorky had long attacked for these qualities, especially in polemical articles of 1913.13 The expurgated old canon was given a place in a teleological account of literary evolution toward a culmination in socialist realism. A milestone in this process was the literature occasioned by the Pushkin Anniversary in 1937.14 In 1937, the blackest year of the Great Terror, the one-hundredth anniversary of Pushkin's death was marked throughout the country on an unprecedented scale: every small town, every kolkhoz, and even the most minor enterprise was obliged to honor Pushkin with lectures, readings, performances, and scholarly efforts from citizens of all educational and social levels. Pushkin was used in 1937, as in 1921 when the intelligentsia themselves organized the first major Soviet commemoration of the poet's death, as the official progenitor of a Russian national tradition and guarantor/ emblem of its linguistic and aesthetic norms. By 1937 these norms had been nominated"socialist realism,"but in both irs:ances te: were conservative in aesthetic inclination.15It is no accident that Berois s :ustrations for The Bronze Horseman were republished for this event. aiong with several other Preservationist texts (even though the authors had often emigrated). In both commemorations of Pushkin's death there were elements of intellectual patriotism, which by 1937 had taken a nakedly imperialistic course. Even as, in 1937, so many Russian intellectuals were setting out in the diaspora of the Gulag—most, if we are to believe Evgenia Ginzburg's memoirs, with Pushkin in their hearts—16 the bard was making his own journey across the major linguistic barriers of the Soviet Union as he was translated into the languages of ethnic minorities. In many cases, these minorities were newly literate, in others they had recently acquired a Cyrillic alphabet to replace the roman one given them in the late 1920s by, among others, Polivanov (Marr's vanquished opponent then in Central Asian exile). Pushkin was the name of the Russian intelligentsia, but in the late1930s he also became the name of Russian cultural hegemony and imperialism.17 It was an edited version of Pushkin that was advanced when the state proclaimed him "ours"18—Pushkin the bard of Lenten rule and a Neoclassical tradition, not the Pushkin noted by others as an irreverent, irrepressible, and even bawdy poet. Mandelshtam had yearned for a time when "we shall gather again in Petersburg" and the"buried sun"could rise. This anniversary was a cruel parody of that long-awaited moment, but it was welcomed by many. The celebration of classical Pushkin pleased the aesthetic majority and the expurgated image of the bard projected in 1937 remained tenacious indeed, although some of the cruder political claims made for Pushkin in that year—such as that in spirit he was with the kolkhoz system—were soon jettisoned. Even under Gorbachev, when a noncanonical account of Pushkin was suggested the response from many intellectuals was outrage at the sacrilege.19 A Veshch' editorial of 1922 had, under the title "The Rear Guard Triumphant," complained that an "art of capitulation," an "academic art," had triumphed in revolutionary Russia.20 In reality, however, the true triumph of academic art occurred in the 1930s. Pushkin was far from the only author from the canon celebrated then. Symptomatic of the triumph was the revival in 1938 of Meyerhold's production of The Masquerade, by Pushkin's self-proclaimed successor, Mikhail Lermontov. The term "revival" is in this instance fairly accurate given that the Golovin sets and the Glazunov score were used "as much as possible" as they had been in 1917.21 Yuriev, the twenty-fifth anniversary of whose acting career had been honored at the 1917 premiere, played the central role of Arbenin once again, inappropriate though it now was for such a geriatric actor. During the cultural revolution, Yuriev had been viewed by the theater activists of Leningrad as a retrograde actor; the director of the Academic Theater had eased him out and he had taken umbrage and retreated to Moscow to return only in 1932, when Revfront and other such threats to "academic art" were a thing of the past.22 The production of The Masquerade preserved the pomp of the old sets, so decried at the time for their lavish extravagance, but not the bite of the original endeavor, which had been directed at transforming humanity via the theater. No doubt, however, this revival particularly suggested itself in this period of high Stalinism because the Golovin sets celebrated Imperial Petersburg and its Empire style. In the original (prerevolutionary) production, the sets were meant to suggest a ghostly veneer masking a corrupt and degenerating Imperial power, but now they could dazzle with the promise of a great tradition already being resurrected. The Academic Theater where The Masquerade was staged was the very place Piotrovsky and Revfront had picketed with the slogan "The Liquidation of MKhAT as a Class." But few of the theater activists from the 1920s seemed to be pursuing that cause now (it would have been a trifle foolhardy given that its Stanislavsky had been elevated to the status of absolute authority figure within theater, a role comparable to that of Gorky in literature and Marr in linguistics). Already by the 1931-32 season Radlov, one of the activists for the new opera, was presenting the Wagner ring cycle at his theater using the old Benois sets.23 For most of the 1930s, he was to make his mark as a director of Shakespearean plays.24 The revival of The Masquerade had been intended to save the career of Meverhold, who was invited to direct it because he was under attack and his own theater had already been closed. But this invitation represents a sad reversal of the situation when he first directed the play in 1917, then believing that with such productions he as director might save his audience. Meyerhold had fallen victim to a particularly virulent anti-Formalist campaign that had been launched in a Pravda article of January 20, 1936, attacking Shostakovich's opera Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk District. This campaign, soon to be followed by the Great Purge, can be seen as one of the "cataclysms" that made the ensuing years a "peak" time in Soviet cultural evolution. The Pravda article, "Muddle instead of Music,"condemned the opera as "leftist art," which with its "deliberately dissonant, confused stream of sound... denies for the theater simplicity, realism, comprehensibility of imagery, and the natural sounds of words" and is riddled with "rotten naturalism." "Leftist distortion in opera." it contnzeć s:ems om the same source as leftist distortion in painting, poettv ejucator and science. It also concluded that Lady Macbeth represents a transiation into opera and music of "the most negative features" of what it terred "Meverholditis."25This target emerged more stronglv a week later when another Pravda article condemned Shostakovich, this time for his ballet The Limpid Stream (Svetlyy ruchey), but the attack focused primarily on the libretto written by Piotrovsky in cooperation with Leningrad's leading choreographer F. Lopukhov, which was condemned for following the principle of uslovnost' and using puppet-like figures rather than realistic representations of its kolkhoz worker characters from the Kuban; symptomatic of this cavalier attitude toward realism, the article continued, was Shostakovich's reuse in this ballet of some music from his industrial ballet The Bolt.26Thereafter was orchestrated a general public discussion on Formalism and naturalism in art. The "discussion" of the parameters extended to most branches of the arts, and one after the other many of the most famous avant-gardists and modernists were obliged to come forward and disavow their previous work (although many dragged their feet on this, particularly in Leningrad).27 Meyerhold was a particular focus of the campaign. On December 17, 1937, Platon Kerzhentsev, then head of the State Committee on the Arts, which largely orchestrated this discussion, published an article about Meyerhold's theater in Pravda entitled "An Alien Theater"(Chuzhoy teatr), an event that heralded the theater's closing early in 1938 (Kerzhentsev signed the order).28 Kerzhentsev was, ironically, the author of The Creative Theater, which, with its slogan of "the eternal studio" where the audience could say not “I am going to see something" but rather "I am going to participate in something,' functioned throughout War Communism as the little red book inspiring the directors of the mass spectacles and other programs for realizing a truly people's theater (he was also considered generally sympathetic to Meyerhold's work). Hence the need to save Meyerhold by having him direct The Masquerade. But all such attempts, including magnanimous gestures by his erstwhile opponent Stanislavsky, were in vain: he was arrested in June 1939 and shot as an enemy of the people in 1940; his wife and leading actress, Zinaida Raikh, was brutally murdered in their apartment shortly after his arrest.29 Yuriev was officially credited with The Masquerade's production.30 Among those who had fought for a revolutionary, people's theater, Meyerhold's fate was far from unique. Kerzhentsev was himself purged the same year as he signed the order to close Meyerhold's theater (1938). Piotrovsky was also arrested in that year, even earlier than Meyerhold. Already in the Remand Center in Leningrad, an eyewitness, the poet N. Zabolotsky, reported, this visionary who had hoped to bring "Aeschylus' fiery soul" to the proletariat "had lost all human semblance in his grief, paced about the cell, scored his chest with a nail, and at night he did shameful things right in front of everyone in the cell";31he died in captivity that year. Radlov, regrettably one of those who had attacked Meyerhold, his erstwhile mentor, during the anti-Formalist campaign of the mid-1930s, was spared until the 1940s. During the war, in ambiguous circumstances he and his wife were taken to France by the German occupying forces, and on their return to Russia both were sent to the camps; she perished there in 1949, while he survived to die in 1958.32 There is an element of the arbitrary in who succumbs in a purge and who is elevated. Whereas Meyerhold was shot and Piotrovsky imprisoned, other actors in the heroic saga of theater reform in the 1920s (such as the Proletcult director A. A. Mgebrov) found an honored place in the Academic Theater, where The Masquerade was revived.33 Shostakovich quickly recovered his status as a leading if embittered Soviet composer. One finds a similar pattern in literature. A prominent category of those who suffered during the purges of intellectuals in the Great Terror (1936-1939) was those who in the 1920s had been of a leftist or proletarian orientation, such as the leaders of RAPP, that is, Piotrovsky and Meyerhold's erstwhile archenemies. But while some leaders of RAPP were purged (Averbakh, Kirshon) and Libedinsky, who had gone to Leningrad in the late 1920s to set proletarian culture straight there came under suspicion and never recovered his status in literature, the RAPP leader Aleksandr Fadevev was elevated in 1939 to First Secretary of the Writers Union, a post he held until Khrushchev came to power (he committed suicide in the wake of the anti-Stalinist revelations). At the same time Kaverin, that staunch champion of perceptual millenarianism, was in the 1930s to produce one of the classics of socialist realism, The Two Captains (Dva kapitana, 1938), without "capitulating" substantially (after Stalin died, he plaved an active role in literary destalinization, and in the 1970s and 1980s was a patron of "alternative" and dissident culture). And as for the Preservationists, while Benois, Dobuzhinsky, and some other leaders were in emigration, Benois's nephew E. Lanceray designed murals and ceiling panels for several iconic Stalinist buildings (the metro, the Hotel Moscow, the Palace of Soviets, and the Bolshoi) and went on to win a Stalin Prize for this work in 1943. Although the patterns in purging individuals may have been inconsistent, the far-reaching effects of the anti-Formalist campaign of 1936 in restricting the parameters of Soviet culture should not be underestimated. The two Pravda articles are unsigned—and hence all the more authoritative—but they clearly emanated from the highest levels (speculation has it that they issued either from Stalin or from Zhdanov). Allegedly, this entire series of events began when Stalin went to see Lady Macbeth and was outraged by the cacophonous music—it is said that his box was unfortunately over the percussion instruments. Was this major shift in the direction of Soviet culture, then, due to the arbitrary whims, tastes, or reactions of a potentate? Here we have a situation comparable with the one Tolstoy discusses in War and Peace in which it is unclear whether a battle was "lost" by Napoleon because of this or that strategy, or military hardware, or degree of troop preparedness. Or was it "lost" because on that day Napoleon woke up with a cold? Obviously, when official cultural policy is made so radically restrictive more than Stalin's reactions to a specific opera are involved (though they may well haveserved as the immediate cause of the chain of events). The attack on naturalism and Formalism in the name of simplicity, accessibility, the natural, and the real has countless precedents in the cultural history of the Soviet Union and, mutatis mutandis, of prerevolutionary Russia and Europe. Similar attitudes inform Gorky's formulations for socialist realism and also the anti-Formalist campaign of 1929-1930. The Party leaders did not invent these attitudes and policies, but rather had them implemented with singular rigor. The policies reflect prejudices widely found among Soviet intellectuals. The linguistic and visual puritanism of socialist realism proved persistent and generally outlived Stalin himself, as well as socialist realism. The ban on scatology, on so-called nepristoynoe slovo, was one of the last fortresses of Stalinist culture to fall, an event that really happened only after the Berlin Wall itself had gone.34 Nineteen thirty-six to nineteen thirty-eight was a time of extremism, a time when trends already apparent in 1931, such as Gorky's language strictures and their broader ramifications, were intensified and applied to the elimination of other trends and figures. It was a "peak" time. Somewhat analogously, in the preceding "peak" time of 1928-1931 such doctrines as "workerization," already established in 1924-1925, were applied more rigidly than ever before. The struggle of Gorky between 1931 and 1934 to ensure that the language of high culture was used in Soviet literature can be seen as a struggle for normalization after a time of revolutionary extremism. That this was a period of normalization can also be seen in the fact that, starting with the formation of the Writers Union in 1932, the various branches of intellectual activity acquired their own separate guilds or unions. The goal of a single culture embracing all of the arts had been abandoned. Another sign of normalization was the partial retreat from the ideologically based extremism of the cultural revolution. Symptomatically, the Communist Academy was closed down and merged with the Academy of Sciences. With the publication of "Muddle instead of Music" and the ensuing anti-Formalist campaign, however, the policies that were intended to normalize intellectual activity were implemented with "catastrophic" force, eliminating a sizeable number of options for the culture's future evolution. This pattern of "punctuated equilibrium" did not cease in the 1930s. The 1940s saw another bout ofextremism in the anticosmopolitan campaign. Since the central thrust of state cultural policy in the 1940s was to secure the norms of socialist realism, however, "Stalinist"culture in its classical form had essentially evolved by the mid-1930s. Stalin's interest in culture was not an arbitrary whim. He shared the intellectuals' faith in its transformative powers. But culture also functioned as a means of aggrandizement and legitimation. This was effected in part by cultural myths, but also by the myth of culture itself. Stalin had pretensions to expertise in a range of cultural fields and frequently acted as an arbiter in them while members of the Party leadership were pillars of high culture. Habitués of the Bolshoi, they could, from March 1936, watch operas such as Quiet Flows the Don by a composer with the felicitous name of [Ivan] Dzerzhinsky, hastily put on as a counter to Shostakovich's Lady Macbeth. Ouiet flowed the Don, and quiet flowed Soviet culture. Soviet culture flowed quietly in the sense that the central tension between monumentalism and iconoclasm had been resolved. Potentially iconoclastic tendencies were censored out. This was largely the meaningof the anti-Formalist campaign with the Pravda article on Lady Macbeth calling for "simplicity." Yet, as this book has argued, for all the "totalitarian" xenophobia of the Stalin era, Western popular culture continued to be a major player throughout the 1930s. Its influence was particularly marked in film and music. Effectively, there was a division within culture into two bailiwicks: literature dominated by its titular head, Gorky, and film dominated by its titular head, Boris Shumyatsky. The reign of Shumyatsky, who sought to found a Hollywood in Soviet Russia, is best known for the Busby Berkeleystyle, propagandistic musicals produced under him by Grigory Alexandrov (who in the 1920s had been Eisenstein's assistant director) in which the star was Alexandrov's wife, Lyubov Orlova, the heartthrob of the 1930s. Soviet film, which at that time attracted some of the best writers and composers, was closely implicated in the mania for the popular song that everyone recalls as the hallmark of those days.35 Jazz and romances were thriving at the height of Lenten rule. Thus Soviet culture of the 1930s may have been totalitarian, but it was far from homogenous or relentlessly grim. It became more "monolithic" in the 1940s when film conventions drew closer to the literary, but that was also the time when the culture lost much of its capacity to generate new paradigms as the state sought with particular zeal to safeguard the canons of socialist realism. In the 1930s, however, many intellectuals had not given up all hope that they might pursue the Great Experiment. The framework in which it was to be conducted became ever more circumscribed, the perils of pursuing it ever more dire, but with the perspective of Nazi Germany to the West and increasing leftism among intellectuals in France and Central Europe, some hope could still be found.36 One of the principal focuses of new work was that old project "music," perhaps a reason why the "signal" article of the anti-Formalist campaign was addressed to a musical work (Shostakovich's Lady Macbeth). Music was extremely important in the culture of the 1930s. Examples range from Stalin's own fantasies of being an opera connoisseur and perhaps even a talented performer (one of the many facts of his biography that suggests the way his self-image may have been influenced by intellectual fads) to the role of military music and popular songs in consolidating allegiance. Many of the most talented intellectuals undertook serious work on producing films in which music played a crucial role. Music, opera, and musical theater were for them not just a means of livelihood; they were key vehicles of a regenerative project. Thus in many instances from the 1930s, as intellectuals worked on the music of films, lines of continuity from avant-garde experiments of the 1920s (especially from Leningrad) met "Stalinist" propagandistic projects closely supervised from above.37 The lingering dream of a new wholeness to come from music can be seen in several of the most propagandistic films of the 1930s, such as the Vasiliev "brothers" Chapaev (1934), Kozintsev and Trauberg's Youth of Maxim (1935), and even films by those FEKS leaders erstwhile co-conspirator from the early 1920s, Eisenstein, who in his own accounts of making Alexander Nevsky (1938) and Ivan the Terrible (Part I, 1944) foregrounds his quest for an "inner synchronicity between picture and music" along the lines of the Greeks, Nietzsche, and Wagner, a "single wholeness and higher unity."38 The famous Stalinist musicals of the 1930s and the popular musical theater of that time used material that derived not only from America but also from experimental work for a new musical theater done in Leningrad in the late 1920s.39 Several of these shows, though essentially light musicals or revues, were staged in Leningrad's Academic Maly Opera Theater, one of Radlov's bases and the place where the new opera was launched in the Soviet Union. Some were produced by theater activists who had directed the mass spectacles (such as N. V. Petrov, before the Revolution a compere at the intellectuals' Stray Dog Cabaret); others by a director of Soviet highbrow theater Nikolai Akimov. Even Shostakovich tried his hand (in fact some of his compositions for one musical, Declared Dead [Uslovno ubityy], of 1931, were recycled for later works, including Lady Macbeth40). The key roles in these productions were played by Leonid Utësov and I. O. Dunaevsky, the two leading names in Soviet popular music of the 1930s and the two most responsible for the music in the Alexandrov films.41 Paradoxically, then, literature, run by an intellectual (Gorky), was more restricted than film, run by one of the proverbial "Party hacks" who were appointed to administer some area of culture even though they were not particularly educated and had no cultural experience (Shumyatsky had been a Party worker in Siberia before going to Leningrad as one of the "Stalinist" contingent of 1926 sent there to clean up that "Trotskyite" stronghold). These few sketchy examples that bespeak the extremely complicated evolution and function of music and popular song in the films of the 1930s show that, however much the state bullied and applied censorship, it was not able to eradicate completely the agendas of intellectuals who found ways of prosecuting them, if in drastically reduced forms. These cases also illustrate how difficult it is to answer the question who made "Stalinist" culture (the regime? the intellectuals? particular groups? popular taste? or even Western trends?), or to suggest any kind of linear progression in its "evolution," or predictable trajectories through the 1920s and 1930s for individual actors in its "making." It is also worth noting that although the Party nomenklatura frequented the Bolshoi, they also loved jazz and popular music; Utësov was a personal favorite of Stalin. Analogously, was socialist realism propaganda doggerel, or was it an attempt, however jejunely realized, at translating intelligentsia ideals into actuality? Sooner or later one has to ask the accursed question of Soviet cultural history, that old Leninist maxim "Who whom?"—in this case not who will get whom, but rather, who influenced whom? Although members of the Stalinist regime unquestionably created a new force field for culture, might it not be the case that the myths and models by which they were operating and which they were mandating to intellectuals had been influenced by ideas generated by intellectuals themselves? The specific mix of narrative norms and practices that composed "Stalinist culture" was "made" as—a banal truism—a particular cultural ecosystem entered a particular historical moment. In the 1930s, the momentous upheavals of the purges notwithstanding, the Soviet Union had clearly passed through its revolutionary phase and was in a period of national consolidation. ## Moscow: Capital of a Colonizing Power During the 1930s, the Soviet Union established itself as a nation. In this process, it confronted a paradox. On the one hand, it was already a relatively old and long-established nation. But, on the other, the country had in some senses colonized itself; the Bolsheviks had formed a colony out of Russia. When a new nation is formed, typically its leaders or intellectuals seek to establish a new and unique identity for the country and hence feel the need to give it a unique or new language. For example, when Indonesia became independent it sought a single national language where there existed only a host of languages and dialects, so it invented Bahasa Indonesia, a language that as such did not exist, but is made up from an amalgam based primarily on a Sumatran-cum-Malay dialect. The development of socialist realism is in effect an aspect of nation building in the 1930s—providing new myths of cultural identity and a new "language." Like Bahasa Indonesia, socialist realism did not exist before it was instituted (in this instance before the term was coined in 1932), but it did not emerge ex nihilo. It was put together as an amalgam of previously existing theories and practices, many of them associated with revolutionary or proletarian culture. The next defining act in establishing a cultural identity for the new nation, one that occurred at about the same time, was the creation of the myth of Moscow, the nation's capital. Although the city had since 1918 functioned as the seat of power in an increasingly centralized state, it was not yet inscribed on any scale into official myths. In some senses, therefore, the Petersburg era came to an end around 1931. A great nation needs a capital adequate to its stature. Hence the "dead" center of the "bagel" cities that so many fled so resolutely in the dash to the periphery of the Plan years had to be revitalized. The center had to be repurified (social deviants were to be expelled), but it also had to be recast. This process began in 1931 at the June Plenum of the Central Committee. when members decided to replan all the major Soviet cities with the ion's share of money and resources allocated to Moscow. The remaking of Moscow was partly an effort to redress a period of neglect, to repair and modernize the capital and its system of transportation. But the urban revitalization was conceived as the nodal moment in the new direction the country would take; the First Five-Year Plan was entering its last phase and the Party leadership was already stocktaking and planning the second. In official speeches and Pravda editorials of that year (1931), a particular historical model based on architectural tropes provided the framework for the various new policies proposed: allegedly, with the Revolution, the leadership had cleared away the old; during the 1920s, and particularly with the industrialization and collectivization during thePlan, they had built the "foundation" of the new society; and now it was time to erect the "socialist building" (zdaniye).42As Party leaders expanded on this new model, however, they concluded that it was time to rebuild Moscow as the "model" for the new socialist cities of the country, and as a model for proletarians and Communists throughout the world who would be inspired to follow it. Outlines ofwhat such a rebuilding would entail effectively reversed the model of compromised center/ purer periphery (okraina) that had underwritten so much cultural production during the Plan years; rather than transpose the center of cultural life to the "periphery," those implementing the changes would further purify the "center" as a domain of culture; there was to be a ban on building industrial plants in Moscow, and the number of residential buildings in its central areas was to be substantially reduced.43 In the rhetoric surrounding these new proposals, actual building and practical considerations are conflated with ideological models. Drawing on the fact that Marx and Engels had used terms from construction for their primary model for society—base / superstructure—Party rhetoric used the building of Moscow as the central figure for, and legitimation of, the increasing "bolshevization"(colonization) and centralization (or some would say "totalitarianization") of the country. With the ban on further industrialization of the capital, the romance of the proletarian was beginning to wear thin. Now frequently the adjective "socialist," or more particularly "bolshevik," was interpolated in places where one might have expected to see "proletarian."44 Even bol'shoy, as in such new catchphrases as "the big man" or "great literature," sharing as it does a common root with "bolshevik" (originally coined to give the illusion that Lenin's faction was the majority in the Party), suggests a model citizenry and culture marked by its loyalty to the colonizing regime. At this time one also finds in rhetoric increasing reference to the principle of partiynost', which can be somewhat crudely translated as "Party-mindedness" but essentially meant active loyalty to the new regime. The downplaying of "proletarian" also meant de-emphasis on the class basis of historical progress—bolshevization rather than sociological bouleversement. Significantly, the Great Unwashed were now not to occupy the center of the new capital, as had occurred on a symbolic level in the mass spectacles of 1920 and in actuality in resettlement policies of the 1920s, but rather to be at least partially redirected to the suburbs. If the Party no longer had such a clear class mandate to lead, however, it had, as if in compensation, to promote itself as extraordinary, the most common meaning of bol'shoy (big, great). Actually, the main speech to the Plenum about urban revitalization invoked the Leninist maxim "Every female cook should rule the state," but now it was used to introduce proposals in the more domestic context of providing nurseries, children's playgrounds, and so on. The new society was to be achieved by paternalistic munificence rather than by revolutionary seizure; speakers outlining proposals for urban revitalization foregrounded the Party's concern with workers' "well-being." The Party presided very literally over the rebuilding of the capital. Lazar Kaganovich, a member of the leadership (he was first secretary of the Moscow Party Committee from 1930–1935 but also a manager of collectivization) who made the main speech at the Plenum on the rebuilding of Moscow, functioned as institutional head of the enterprise, his remarks the locus classicus. In 1933 Stalin created an architectural review board, Arkhplan, also headed by Kaganovich, who was given the power to amend any proposal submitted for approval. In effect, Kaganovich became the great patron of architecture. In the 1910s the Preservationists had sought just such a patron, and their style of architecture (Neoclassicism) was now favored. As the center of Moscow was remade and aggrandized, the city finally became the symbol for the nation. There was no architectural pathos left in Leningrad; indeed, although some gestures were made toward rebuilding it as a "model" city, its model was to be the new Moscow. As Moscow grew in status, Leningrad's erstwhile role as center of the Russian intelligentsia was increasingly undermined. In 1934, the Academy of Sciences' headquarters and many of its institutes were moved to Moscow. This decimated the city's scholarly community. It is, however, only the most dramatic instance of the Petersburg diaspora, a diaspora that began immediately after the Revolution and continues to the present day as emigration, purges, and the lure of the money and power available in the capital have chronically leached the city's intellectual community. The problem for the city's intellectuals was not only the fact that they were losing their talent and resources, however, but also the fact that their city—"Petersburg"-functioned as a symbolic home of alternative culture (or cultures). Virtually every time there were major campaigns against creative intellectuals, figures from Leningrad were singled out as the negative paradigms. For instance, the anti-Formalist campaign of the mid-1930s hit many of the most prominent figures in Leningrad cultural life. But this was to be the pattern. In the next major campaign, in 1946, some of the city's leading writers, including Akhmatova and Zoshchenko, and literary journals (Zvezda, Leningrad) were scored in an attack by the Party's spokesman on ideological matters, Andrei Zhdanov (Leningrad was closed down and Zoshchenko and Akhmatova could publish little until the Khrushchev years). Was Petersburg, then, to return to the "nothingness" from which it arose, as some versions of the Petersburg myth had insisted it would? Actually, even while, in the 1930s, the cultural reserves of the old capital were fast being depleted, in many senses "Petersburg" (as opposed to Leningrad) experienced a resurgence. Petersburg had played, and would continue to play in manifold ways, a major role in the formation of Stalinist culture. AsMoscow was rebuilt it was turned into a Petersburgian city; it was "clad in granite" (as Pushkin had described Petersburg in The Bronze Horseman), its waterways were "tamed," and it was given monumental buildings together with those other features so sought after by the Preservationists of the 1910s—clear spaces, grand vistas, and imposing facades45 (another city redesigned in the late 1930s, Novorossiisk, was explicitly intended to be yet another "Northern Venice"). The original proposals called for "straighten[ing] out the . . . crooked streets and lanes," "to broaden them and eliminate that jumble [pëstrota, a negative label for the Preservationists]. . . of structures there at present."46Thus in that old battle between Moscow and Petersburg, two cities whose characteristic street formations stood for radically opposed world views, Petersburg had won. But it might also be said that "straightening out" crooked lanes (the iconic Moscow streets) was a standard gesture of modernization (under which the myth of Petersburg can be subsumed); that and building broad streets (better for troops to march up) were also standard moves of imperial or militaristic powers. Hitler had a comparable plan for rebuilding the center of Berlin as a monumental city, but it was largely unrealized.47 Central Moscow was substantially rebuilt, though most of the grandiose plans for public buildings were never executed. The funding required was simply not there and in the 1930s some of the more banal projects, such as the Hotel Moscow, were built while the more ambitious were not. The projected colossi of the new Moscow which were never built, such as the Ministry for Heavy Industry, should not be seen as merely cases where ambition outran the pocketbook. In the Stalinist 1930s, architecture, the building of a new city grander than any thus far realized and embodying the fundamental ideals, was a key trope. While literature reigned supreme as the art form—the flagship of Soviet culture—and film and popular song functioned as auxiliaries more consciously targeted at popular audiences, architecture, the architectonics of spatial arrangement, was the iconic—ideal—cultural form that underwrote all three. So many novels and films of this time include a fleeting segment involving a vision or even the construction of a fantastic city that emerges phantom-like ex nihilo (or from the rubble created by an orgy of dynamiting) and is often gleaming white. Such scenes had their visionary, mirage-like quality because, as with the grandiose plans for public building in Moscow, they were not representations of reality but more proleptic rhetorical devices. They were both a promise of the great and glorious future as yet not totally realized and a template, a guiding model. As proleptic devices, they are also anticipated in Zhdanov's capsule definition of socialist realism made at the First Writers Congress: “A combination of the most matter of fact, everyday reality and the most heroic prospects." Let us return here to the horseman speeding toward Moscow, the projected ending of Pudovkin's Storm over Asia, discussed at the end of the last chapter as a paradigm for the new conventions emerging in Stalinist culture of the 1930s for reconciling center and periphery. In this projected ending as in so much subsequent cultural production, the new Soviet citizen is yearning, impending, toward the "heroic prospects" Zhdanov stipulated; their symbolic embodiment is Moscow and its buildings. In Pudovkin's film, a gleaming city is a beacon that orients the horseman as he keeps quickening his frenzied pace. As he presses his pace to an absolute extreme, the beacon is revealed to be the city of Moscow. At that point he has, as it were, entered into a hyperspace that transforms the familiar terrain of the Central Asian steppe (somewhat as a plane or rocket might in theory attain such a high speed that it would first break the sound, and then, ultimately, the light barrier). Many of the more visionary Russian thinkers from before the Revolution, such as Nikolai Fyodorov, spoke of "overcoming time" (preodoleniye vremeni). The rocket engineer Konstantin Tsiolkovsky wanted to reach, in the words of his science fiction novel first published in full after the Revolution, "beyond the earth" (vne zemli) to that "freedom" that is not undermined by gravity's pull. Here, of course, the model also intersects with the perceptual millenarianist scenario of a journey at breakneck speed to a radical otherness—or of the Scythians' call to "renounce time" and hurtle across the steppe, wild and free (see Chapter 1). A crucial difference between the Stalinist paradigm and these earlier models, however, is that the gesture is no longer centrifugal; it is centripetal and the route is not "wild and free," but charted, or planned. Indeed, by the 1930s it was not just intellectual visionaries who spoke of "overcoming time." Stalin in a famous speech of 1931 said that the country was behind the West by fifty to one hundred years but would make up the gap in ten (his formulation was thus less extravagant and more pragmatic than the intellectuals').4s In the 1930s, the city of Moscow functioned as a kind of hyperspace that had transcended time and was hence of a different order of reality from that of familiar parts (Stalin, its human counterpart, was also of a different temporal order—of being, rather than becoming—and so was depicted in film and art as static and vertical or, if moving at all, doing so at an exaggeratedly slow and deliberate, monument-like pace). But the capital also had a very real, concrete, and even banal existence. Architecture is in some senses the most concrete and material of all art forms, but at the same time—as architectonics—one of the most abstract. It functioned in Stalinist culture much like the icon in Russian Orthodox culture in that it had simultaneous existence in two orders of reality, both sacred and profane. Like Alice's looking glass, it reflected an image and yet was also a portal. Thus some architecture already in place functioned no less than the visionary designs as emblems and legitimators of the new order. In this respect, Alexandrov's hit musical The Circus (Tsirk, 1936) provides paradigmatic moments. In the film, the hero and heroine first come together as they compose a song at the grand piano in a stateroom of the Hotel Moscow; its opening line is "Broad is my native land." This song went on to enjoy a curious status as simultaneously one of the most popular songs of the decade and also, de facto, an auxiliary national anthem. In subsequent shots from the film, first the Kremlin looms into view on one side of the hotel, and then the Bolshoi on the other. As it were, the two buildings flank the site where the song is composed as guarantors of its political and cultural legitimacy (and hence of the new nation-"native land"—that the song extols). Architecture guards the sacred. But at the same time it also guards an enhanced profane. When the Kremlin appears, it is at the window of the heroine's luxurious stateroom, and the Bolshoi looms into view while some characters are eating frivolous cream cakes in the hotel's roof garden; in other words, both buildings rear up in the background as patrons of the new good life. Yet both these buildings are emblems not of the new Moscow, but of the old. Moscow did not get a new center. On the contrary, the gigantic Palace of Soviets that was intended to recenter the capital was never built and its traditional center (the Kremlin) was reinforced as the symbol of the nation and its leaders. Similarly, the Great Tradition of Russian culture had been revived, to be seen in such examples as the restaging of The Masquerade, something that was unthinkable during the cultural revolution.49 But it might be said that the revival of Masquerade, now without its Meyerholdian bite, was a kind of second-order masquerade, a masquerade of a masquerade, and as such a sort of synecdoche for Stalinist culture. It might seem that, with the "Petersburgization" of Moscow and the return to prominence of the Academy of Sciences, together with the emphasis on heavy industry, defense, and modernization, Peter the Great (the founder of the Academy of Sciences) and his values had triumphed over "obscurantist," retrograde Moscow. This triumph of a secular order where the arts and sciences flourished had been prepared for in the cultural revolution; one of its principal thrusts had been against religion and the church. But this triumph of the values of "Peter" was deceptive. Or, rather, only one meaning of Peter had been comparably achieved—Peter as Imperial potentate. The new Moscow, like Petersburg, was largely designed using Neoclassical or Renaissance models as an Empire style. Nikolai Punin had, in his laudatory article on Tatlin's tower of 1920, declared that thereby the traditions of the classical and the Renaissance had been reduced to "ashes," but their resurgence should not be read merely as the victory of Stalinist entropic forces over the avant-garde. In fact both Tatlin and Malevich (especially in his portraits of 1932-1934) had themselves begun to draw inspiration from the Renaissance; already in 1929-1932 Tatlin had worked on Letatlin, an individual (as the name implies) flying machine closely linked to the famous project of Leonardo. In Moscow's new architecture the Empire style was not maintained consistently; it also appropriated Russian national and Gothic styles, although the Neoclassical predominated.50 The adoption of Neoclassical models suited the historical moment but its strictures were never followed with rigor (the famous wedding cakes, actually erected in the late 1940s and 1950s, in effect conflate the classical, Gothic, and national traditions, but another, unacknowledged model is the new architecture of New York and Chicago). The buildings erected in Moscow are full of needless ornamentation (Albrecht Speer's designs for Berlin realize more consistently the Neoclassical ideals). Essentially, each style was favored for its monumental potential and because it had a suitable pedigree establishing heroic precedents. The apparent revival of Neoclassicism and the setting up of Arkhplan to oversee the more systematic rebuilding of the capital and other major cities suggest the possibility that some of the agendas and ideals of the prerevolutionary intellectuals were now being realized after that "hiatus" of revolutionary upheaval (even though, admittedly, Arkhplan resembled the old Imperial Chamber more than it resembled a branch of the Ministry for the Arts). Perhaps, to invoke this book's central trope of "ecology," many of the old "flora and fauna" had essentially survived the "cataclysms," though of course they had undergone mutations. The Soviet Union was now entering an obsessively citational period, but the constant need to establish precedent also tended toward a more conservative culture; does recycled but "reframed" material represent "continuity" or "change"? Often, in a pattern somewhat akin to the one Fernand Braudel outlines in On History, the changes amounted to the "resurfacing" of dormant paradigms. One can also find marked continuities. Any account of the movement from the 1920s and the 1930s made in terms of (predominant) "continuity" or (predominant) "change" is inadequate to the dynamic, however. Though many features of High Stalinist culture had been present before, under the impact of the new historical conditions there had been significant restructuring and reinflection of these features. As we saw in the example of the most famous Neoclassical artist, David, who served in succession the aristocracy under Louis XVI, the successive leaders of the French Revolution, and then Napoleon, Neoclassicism is often the name of a marriage between political power and the intellectual elite. In a state as highly politicized as the Soviet Union was in the 1930s, style cannot be all, The shift in that decade to new styles in art, architecture, and literature can be seen as surface manifestations of a shift to a new function for culture, and hence for intellectuals as well. As the Russian intelligentsia went into the Revolution, they hoped to function as Hermes figures who might mediate between the language of a higher truth and that of the imperfect world around them. Many were particularly attracted by the possibility that they might act as the great demystifiers. Now, however, their role was closer to that of the comprador. By comprador I mean that special institution that emerged in the era of European economic domination in Asia. The comprador was the non-European who mediated between the local people and the European commercial enclave. He spoke two languages, the vernacular (his own language) and that of the particular European community he served. Originally, he spoke the European language only haltingly. Over time, he became increasingly fluent in it By the 1930s, the typical Soviet intellectual had become a comprador in that his task was to mediate between the language of high culture, which he spoke "natively," and that of his masters, the language of ideology and power. At first, he might speak the latter imperfectly, but in time the successful comprador passed more and more for a member of the elite group. He could enjoy many of its privileges (cream cakes), but only as long as his linguistic skills proved useful. Earlier, in 1921, the intellectuals' turn to Pushkin after a bout of revolutionary extremism had been a kind of reculer to the old values and standards and a show of intelligentsia solidarity during what Eikhenbaum had called a "moment of truth"when they feared that "history"might be passing them bv. What the intelligentsia did not realize then was that though the Soviet state they so feared was to be an oppressor, it was also in some senses to be their savior (particularly for those who felt that the Great Tradition was threatened). This paradoxical message was received most loudly in the 1930s. The state's role as oppressor is all too evident in tales such as the story of the Meverholds' fate. But as savior it would stem the tide of historical evolution, inflating artificially the numbers of intellectuals, according them a highly privileged role in society, insulating them in unions of creative workers, institutes, and publishing houses (all bankrolled by the state), and staving off the devolution of nineteenth-century literature as compared with the West, where the grand old novel and other such cumbersome baggage of earlier eras had been downgraded. Above all, the state would save them from the market, from reckoning with flux. Small wonder so many of the Romantic Anticapitalists of Central Europe were burrowing away in the institutes of Moscow during the 1930s. In this respect, the real "moment of truth" would come not with the entrenchment of the Soviet regime in the 1930s and beyond, but with its dissolution and the turn to a market economy after the system's collapse in the 1990s. But what of the intellectuals' original projects and dreams? Clearly, the Hermes role had been pre-empted by Stalin, who was now represented as the one who, uniquely, could "see, really see." But did Stalin pre-empt this role, or was he inscribed into it by "hacks"? And again, one might trace a line through the mass spectacles of the early 1920s and the work on the new opera to some of the musicals of the 1930s, but of course a clearer line led to the parade on Red Square, which was in some senses those spectacles apotheosis. In the 1930s, the mass ritual celebrating a revolutionary anniversary (May Day or November 7) no longer included a theatrical centerpiece but mostly comprised what Siegfried Kracauer has called the "mass ornament" (physical culture formations often organized arour.d barners. portraits, slogans, or fetishized objects symbolizing political. mi.itarv er industrial achievement). This was not in itself the most telling difference, however. If in the spectacles of the early 1920s "the people" were to be transformed by a ritual enactment of transgression, by occupying the space of the hegemonic classes, now they were to process across Red Square, past the reviewing stand, and on beyond it as rapidly as possible. For all its "ornamentation," the parade was essentially a candidate for the world's longest receiving line; it was an act of homage. An analogous pattern is to be found in that other sacred ritual, viewing Lenin's body in the mausoleum (which, after a long wait in line, was seen for only a matter of seconds as the viewer filed past). The parade was a ritual affirmation of the "center" (locus of power) rather than an act of iconoclasm or demystification. "The people" were never really to occupy that hegemonic space. In actuality, had they tried to climb the stairs (of the reviewing stand), as had the oppressed classes in The Mystery of Liberated Labor, they would have been shot. The reviewing stand-cummausoleum was placed outside the Kremlin walls and only a chosen few from "the people"—primarily heroes of aviation, sports, culture, or production—were taken inside for an actual meeting with the great leader, which was itself generally represented in rhetoric as an epiphanic moment. Such rituals reaffirmed the central hierarchy of the new society vested in a symbolic hierarchy of place. The leadership's place was at the center; the place of the "people" was at the periphery (most socialist realist novels are set there), and the parades and formalized meetings represent a brief moment of contiguity—not really even meeting—between center and periphery (they have to be as brief as possible lest the aura of the center dim). Their function is, as with the mass spectacles of the 1920s, to transform the participants (generally in proportion to their getting closer to the great leader); they are to be inspired to return to their place at the periphery to work to make it as much as possible like the center, to make it less peripheral. The division between center and periphery is nevertheless absolute and untransgressable. In scenarios such as that projected for the ending of Storm over Asia, the exemplary citizen might make a frenzied "ride" toward the capital (perform extraordinary feats) in an effort to bridge the gap, but he will never actually reach "Moscow." Like the perceptual millenarian, he can enjoy the thrill of the dramatic quest, but he will never be oppressed by the enigma of arrival. Thus, in essence, these rituals were neither centripetal nor centrifugal events. They neither enacted revolution as an explosion that eliminated the hegemonic center, nor enacted it as a centripetal event whereby the "periphery" takes over. The ritual was closer to enacting another agenda shared by many intellectuals in the prerevolutionary period who saw the panacea for the profane not in terms of revolution, not even in rituals of revolution, but in terms of elevating the intelligentsia to a greater status enabled by consolidating a center, a pure culture, unsullied by commerce and secured by norms. When Moscow was redesigned in the 1930s, an important aspect of the transformations, much heralded at the time, was to clean out the stalls and petty shopkeepers (lavochniki). The intellectuals had finally found a "Christ" who would drive the moneychangers out and purify the polis as a temple of that secular religion called culture. But the city's status as preserve of the sacred was a chimera (a masquerade), as was their sacerdotal role in it. They were kept by the center, but only as compradors. Just as Nietzsche was disillusioned with Bayreuth and mourned the way Wagner's original conception had been profaned by an "imperialist"mentality, the intellectuals could see their ideals for culture realized in only the most bowdlerized version as an imperial sublime. Culture served power rather than vice versa. And there was blood all around.