## NOTES ## Introduction: The Ecology of Revolution 1. David Remnick, Lenin's Tomb: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire (New York: Vintage Books, 1984), p. 332. 2. Gennadiy Gor, "Zamedleniye vremeni," Z, no. 4 (1968), p. 179. 3. The novel saw three main redactions: the first was published in the journal Sirin between 1913 and 1914, the second in Berlin in 1922, and the third in Moscow in 1928. 4. Andrei Bely, Petersburg, trans. Robert A. Maguire and John E. Malmstad (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978), p. 2. 5. The original name, Sankt-Piterburkh, was actually Dutch. 6. Among the major interpretive studies of this myth are Yuri M. Lotman, "The Symbolism of St. Petersburg," in The Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture, trans. Ann Shukman (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990), pp. 191-202, and the articles in Semiotika goroda i gorodskoy kul'tury: Peterburg, an issue of Trudy po znakovym sistemam, XVIII (Tartu, 1984), esp. its version of the Lotman article and V. N. Toporov, "Peterburg i Peterburgskiy tekst russkoy literatury (vvedeniye v temu)," pp. 4–29. 7. The noted scholar of the Petersburg myth N. Antsiferov documents the many discrepancies between the myth and historical fact in his Byl' i mif Peterburga (Petersburg: Brokgauz i Efron, 1924). 8. See Edward Shils, "Center and Periphery," in Center and Periphery: Essays in Macrosociology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975). 9. See Carl E. Schorske, "The Idea of the City in European Thought: Voltaire to Spengler," in Oscar Handlin and John Burchard, eds., The Historian and the City (Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. and Harvard University Presses, 1963), pp. 95-114. 10. Clifford Geertz, "Centers, Kings, and Charisma: Reflections on the Svmbolics of Power," in Sean Wilentz, ed., Rites of Power: Sumbolism. Ritaa!. Po!itics since the Middle Ages (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 1985). p. 30. 11. The most influential text in this development was N. M. Karamzir s Memoir of Ancient and Modern Russia (Zapiski o drevney i novov Rossiicrca 11. 12. N. Antsiferov, Dusha Peterburga (Petersburg: Brokgauz i Efron, 1922), p. 27. 13. During the 1920s, most major works of fiction involved some reworking of the Petersburg myth. Examples range from Ye. Zamyatin's dystopian novel We (My, 1920), then banned from publication, to F. Gladkov's socialist realist classic and prototype of the production novel, Cement (Tsement, 1925). 14. Donald Fanger, Dostoevsky and Romantic Realism: A Study of Dostoevsky in Relation to Balzac, Dickens, and Gogol (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1965). 15. Lewis Mumford, The City in History (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Jovanovich, 1961), p. 49. 16. This was the position taken by many in the avant-garde (see Chapter 1) and also by writers such as Boris Pilnyak in The Naked Year (Golyy god, 1922). 17. Brodsky's essay "A Guide to a Renamed City" (1979, reprinted in Joseph Brodsky, Less Than One: Selected Essays [New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1986]) provides one of the most eloquent accounts of the meaning of "Petersburg" and its fate in the Soviet period. See also Yevgeniy Rein, "Sotoye Zerkalo: Zapozdalye vospominaniya," Z, no. 12 (1991), esp. pp. 189–192, 193, 195. 18. Thomas Mann, "Tod in Venedig," in Thomas Mann, Gesammelte Werke, vol. IX (Berlin: Aufbau-Verlag, 1955), esp. pp. 489, 490, 508, 524–525, 529. 19. James H. Bater, "Between Old and New: St. Petersburg in the Late Imperial Era." in Michael F. Hamm, ed., The City in Late Imperial Russia (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986), pp. 58–60. 20. Peter Stallybrass and Allon White, The Politics and Poetics of Transgression (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1986), for example, p. 145. 21. Fernand Braudel, On History, trans. Sarah Mathews (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980), esp. pp. 3–4. 22. See Braudel's statement "But the step [for the historian] from bright surface [events] to murky depths—from noise to silence-is difficult and dangerous" (ibid., p. 39). 23. Capital is available in different redactions, but see Chapter 15 in the Penguin Classics edition of 1990 (trans. Ben Fowkes), p. 493. 24. Zeev Sternhell, with Mario Snajder and Maia Asheri, The Birth of Fascist Ideology, trans. David Maisel (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994), pp. 5, 6,7,3. 25. See Michael Löwy, "Naphta or Settembrini? Lukacs and Romantic Anticapitalism," New German Critique, no. 42 (Fall 1987), esp. p. 18. 26. G. Lukács, "Über den Dostojewski Nachlass," Moskauer Rundschau (March 1931). 27. See Robert Sayre and Michael Löwy, "Figures of Romantic Anticapitalism," New German Critique, no. 32 (Spring-Summer 1984), pp. 42–91. 28. See Aleksey Kruchënykh's "Heights" (Vysoty), first published in The Croaked Moon (Dokhlaya luna, Moscow, 1913). 29. Richard Pipes, Struve: Liberals on the Right, 1905–1944 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980), pp. 67, 79–80, 180–184, 190; Alfred J. Rieber, Merchants and Entrepreneurs in Imperial Russia (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1982), pp. 261, 277–278, 297, 319–322. 30. See, for example, E. J. Hobsbawm, "Intellectuals and Communism," Chapter 4 of Revolutionaries: Contemporary Essays (New York: Pantheon Books, 1973). 31. See Alexander Bogdanov, Sotsializm nauki (Moscow: Proletarskaya kul'- tura, 1918), p. 15. 32. See, for example, Siegfried Kracauer, "Der kleinen Laden Mädchen gehen ins Kino," Frankfurter Zeitung, March 11-19, 1927; O. Kameneva, "Plany budushchego," Zi, no. 6-7 (1919), p. 74; Lenin in State and Revolution uses the terms meshchanskiy and melkoburzhuaznyy with even greater opprobrium than burzhuaznyy; V.I. Lenin, "Gosudarstvo i revolyutsiya," in N. Lenin (V. Ul'yanov), Sobraniye sochineniy, vol. XIV (Moscow and Petrograd: Goz. izd., 1921), pp. 311, 316, 323, 324, 355. 33. See Katerina Clark, "Not For Sale: The Russian /Soviet Intelligentsia, Prostitution, and the Paradox of Internal Colonization," in Gregory Freidin, ed., Russian Culture in Transition, a special edition of Stanford Slavic Studies, vol. VII (1993). 34. This term was coined by Friedrich Meinecke in 1912. See Wolfgang J. Mommsen, Max Weber und die deutsche Politik, 1890–1920 (Tübingen, 1959), pp. 188-206. 35. V. I. Lenin, What Is To Be Done? (Chto delat', Stuttgart: J. W. H Dietz, 1902). 36. Fritz K. Ringer, The Decline of the German Mandarins: The German Academic Community, 1890–1933 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969), esp. p. 7. 37. See also Noel Annan's remarks on the "aristocracy of the intellect" in nineteenth-century Britain, in Leslie Stephen: The Godless Victorian (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1984), esp. p. 3. 38. See, for example, Walter Gropius's "Programme of the Staatliches Bauhaus in Weimar" (April 1919). 39. See the article by F. F. Zelinsky (the moving force behind Hermes), "Antichnost' i klassicheskoye obrazovaniye," Ge, no. 1 (January-July, 1918), pp. 17–34. 40. Katerina Clark, "Political History and Literary Chronotope: Some Soviet Case Studies," in Gary Saul Morson, ed., Literature and History: Theoretical Problems and Russian Case Studies (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1986), esp. pp. 232-233. 41. Nadezhda Mandelshtam writes in her memoirs of how Radlov tried to recruit her husband for his group; Hope Abandoned, trans. Max Hayward (New York: Atheneum, 1970), p. 120. 42. Boris Groys, The Total Art of Stalinism: Avant-Garde, Aesthetic Dictatorship, and Beyond, trans Charles Rougle (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992). 43. Paul Ricoeur, Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation, trans. Denis Savage (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1970), p. 27. 44. Karl Marx, Das Kapital (Berlin: Dietz Verlag, 1989), p. 791. ## 1. Revolution as Revelation: The Avant-Garde 1. See Gail Harrison Roman and Virginia Hagelstein Marquardt, eds., Avant-Garde Frontier: Russia Meets the West, 1910-1930 (Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 1992) 2. Katerina Clark, "The Avant-Garde and the Retrospectivists as Players in the Evolution of Stalinist Culture,"in John Bowlt and Olga Matich, eds., Laboratory of Dreams (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1995). 3. Walter Benjamin, "Surrealism: The Last Snapshot of the European Intelligentsia," Reflections, trans. Edmund Jephcott (New York: Schocken Books, 1986), pp. 179–180. 4. See the memoirs of L. Zheverzheyev in Mayakovskomu: Sbornik statey (Leningrad, 1940). 5. See Aleksey Kruchënykh, "Novye puti slova" (a possible source of the term zaum), in V. Khlebnikov, E. Guro, and A. Kruchënykh, Troye (Petersburg, 1913), pp. 23–33. 6. V. Shklovsky, "Iskusstvo kak priyëm," in Sbornik po teorii poeticheskogo yazyka (Petrograd, 1917), p. 7. 7. Ibid., pp. 7, 8. In a footnote to the latter quotation Shklovsky refers to a similar point he made in Voskresheniye slova. 8. Ibid. 9. V. Shklovsky, Voskresheniye slova (Petrograd, 1914); A. Parnis and R. Timenchik, "Programmy 'Brodyachey sobaki,'" in Pamyatniki kul'tury: Novye otkrytiya 1983 (Leningrad, 1985), p. 221. 10. See, for example, his essays of 1929: "The Cinematographic Principle and the Ideogram" and "A Dialectical Approach to Film Form," in Sergei Eisenstein, Film Form: Essays in Film Theory, trans. Jay Leyda (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1949). 11. Paul C. Vitz and Arnold B. Glimcher in their Modern Art and Modern Science: The Parallel Analysis of Vision (New York: Praeger, 1983) explore the interdependence of developments in modern art with explorations in science and psychology done in the wake of the Kantian revolution (see csp. pp. 248-249). 12. Robert Motherwell, ed., The Dada Painters and Poets (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989), pp. 192, 306. 13. See, for example, V. Khlebnikov and A. Kruchënykh's "Slovo kak takovoye" (1913). 14. Mariorie Perloff, The Futurist Moment: Avant Garde, Avant Guerre, and the Language of Rupture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986), esp. Chapter 2. 15. André Breton, Nadja (Paris: Gallimard, 1964), pp. 71-73. 16. Margaret Cohen, Profane Illumination: Walter Benjamin and the Paris of Surrealist Revolution (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993). 17. Benjamin, "Surrealism," p. 180. 18. Breton, Nadja, pp. 22, 19–20. 19. Ibid., p. 20. 20. Dragomanov in Skandalist is associated with the culture of the circuses (a central item in many of the agendas for theatrical reform; see Chapter 4), smokes opium, and also lives in such squalor that he is surrounded by rats—the creatures of the sewers. Arkhimedov in Artist Unknown is bohemian in a less colorful way but absolutely unable, by conventional standards, to care for himself or his infant child. p. 37. Matyushin also defined it as "[conventional] beauty"; M. Matyushin, 21. V. Kaverin, Skandalist ili vechera Leningrad: Priboy, 1929), pp. 62–63. 22. V. Kaverin, Khudozhnik neizvesten (Leningrać: Izdatel stvo pisateley v Leningrade, 1931), p. 149. 23. See Yu. Tynyanov, "O Khlebnikove," Sobraniue proizvedeniy Veiemira Khlebnikova, vol. I (Leningrad: Izdatel'stvo pisateley v Leningrade, 1929), p. 20; Kaverin, Khudozhnik neizvesten, p. 61. 24. See Jeremy Howard, The Union of Youth: The Artists' Society of Petersburg (Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press, 1992), pp. 6, 202. 25. The Prologue was by Khlebnikov, the music by Matyushin, and the sets and costumes by Malevich. 26. Katherine Lahti has written an analysis of Vladimir Mayakovsky: A Tragedy, as a Nietzschean text ("Mayakovsky's Dithyrambs," a dissertation presented in the Slavic Department of Yale University, 1991). 27. This event is also a playful allusion to the Futurist V. Kamensky, who became an aviator and crashed. 28. Cited in Charlotte Douglas, Swans of Other Worlds: Kasimir Malevich and the Origins of Abstraction in Russia (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1976) "Russkiye kubo-futuristy," K istorii russkogo avangarda (Stockholm: Hylaea Prints [Almqvist and Wiksell], 1976), p. 152. 29. Pobeda nad solntsem, opera by A. Kruchënykh, music by M. Matyushin (Lausanne: l'Age d'homme, 1976), p. 36. 30. Elizabeth Dalrymple Henderson, The Fourth Dimension and Non-Euclidean Geometry in Modern Art (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983), esp. Chapters 1, 2, and 5. 31. Note, for example, Kaverin's short story "The Eleventh Axiom" (Odinnadtsataya aksioma), which won a prize for fiction in Leningrad in 1920. 32. See Die Geburt der Tragödie (Munich: Wilhelm Goldmann Verlag, 1959), p. 37, Section 1. 33. Cited in R. Duganov, "'Mir pogibnet, a nam net kontsa!' ili teatr naiznanku," Foreword to Pobeda nad solntsem (Moscow and Vienna, 1983), pp. 3–4. 34. Kruchënykh, Pobeda nad solntsem, p. 8. 35. See V. I. Lenin's Materialism and Empirio Criticism (1908). 36. V. Kaverin, "E. T. A. Gofman: Rech' na zasedanii Serapionovykh brat'yev posv. pamyati E. T. A. Gofmana," Kir, no. 7 (1922), p. 24. 37. M. V. Matyushin, "Ne iskusstvo, a zhizn'," Zi, no. 20 (May 22, 1923), p. 15. 38. N. Punin, "Gosudarstvennaya vystavka," Zi, no. 22 (June 5, 1923), p. 5. 39. "O knige Metsanzhe i Gleza Du cubisme," Som, no. 3 (Petrograd, 1913), pp. 25–34. 40. A. Kruchënykh, "Novye puti slova," Troye (Petersburg, 1913) 41. Yu. Annenkov, "Gibel' bogov," Zi, no. 14 (April 4, 1922), p. 3. 42. Since about 1919 Einstein had functioned in Russia as an emblem for the new science. The list of publications on him noted in a bibliography in Kir in 1922 was so long that it had to be continued in the next issue (no. 9-10, pp. 29–34; no. 11–12, pp. 26–32). 43. K. S. Malevich, "Pis'ma k M. V. Matyushinu," in Ye. F. Kovtun, Yezhegodnik rukopisnogo otdela Pushkinskogo doma na 1974 god (Leningrad: Nauka, 1976), Pp. 192, 185 (letters of June 1916 and September 17, 1913). 46. V. Shklovsky, "Ob iskusstve i revolyutsii," Ik, no. 17 (March 30, 1919), p. 2. See also his Khod konya (Moscow-Berlin: Gelikon, 1923), pp. 36-42. 47. Kruchënykh, Pobeda nad solntsem, p. 19. 48. Paul Carter, The Road to Botany Bay: An Exploration of Landscape and History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989); V. S. Naipaul, The Enigma of Arrival (New York: Knopf, 1987). 49. Breton, Nadja, p. 166. 50. Ibid., p. 179. 51. Ye. Zamyatin, "O literature, revolyutsii, entropii i prochem" (1923), published in Pisateli ob iskusstve i o sebe (Moscow: Krug, 1924). 52. The Russian title for this Commissariat, Prosveshcheniye, or "enlightenment," conflates its dual jurisdictions, Culture and Education. 53. D. P. Shterenberg, "Teoreticheskiye osnovy novoy programmy Svobodnykh gosudarstvennykh masterskikh," in "Otchët o deyatel'nosti Otdela Izobrazitel'nykh Iskusstv Narkomprosa," Ii, no. 1 (1919), p. 53. 54. Irving Howe, Introduction to Literary Modernism (London: Fawcett Publications, 1967), p. 15. 55. V. Mayakovsky, "Kaplya dëgti," in Vzyal: Baraban futuristov (Petrograd, December 1915). 56. When Malevich died of cancer in 1935, for example, he was buried in a coffin of his own Suprematist design. Note also that, even at the height of attacks on "Formalism" in 1931, Kaverin did not recant, as did Shklovsky, but avowed the principles of his set at a public debate. Compare V. Shklovsky, "Pamyatnik nauchnoy oshibki," Lg, no. 4 (January 27, 1930); "Diskussiya o 'Perestroyke pisateley poputchikov,' " Nlp (July 1931), p. 23. 57. In the 1920s Shklovsky drew closer to the Constructivist position and was satirized by Kaverin in 1929 as the eponymous Troublemaker for his failure to keep the ideals of their set. 58. Peter Alberg Jensen, Nature as Code: The Achievement of Boris Pilnjak (Copenhagen: Rosenkilde and Bagger, 1979), p. 65. 59. The Naked Year also has a specific association with Petersburgin that, though it was completed in 1920, it was only when Pilnyak went to Petrograd to stay with Gorky in 1921 that he was able to publish the novel, which first appeared in 1921 extracts in the journal of the House of Arts there and then in book form in 1922 in a publishing house where Gorky had influence; Gary Browning, Boris Pilniak: Scythian at a Typewriter (Ann Arbor: Ardis Press, 1983), pp. 17–21, 222–223. 60. R. Ivanov-Razumnik, Skify, no. I (Petersburg, 1917), pp. x, xi. 61. Note also the recurrent use of "I suddenly saw" ("Ya vdrug uvidel") in Zamyatin's We, which is in some respects an attack on avant-garde utopianism articulated in terms of a futuristic city-state that is drawn using many of the conventions of the myth of Petersburg and with several key features reminiscent of Petersburg itself. 62. Boris Pilnyak, Golyy god (Berlin-Petersburg-Moscow: Izd-vo Z. I. Grzhebina, 1922), p. 68. 63. Ibid., p. 70. ## 2. Imperial Petersburg, 1913 1. The Russian calendar was, until the reform of 1918, thirteen days behind the Western calendar. 2. My account of the Jubilee ceremonial is, unless otherwise indicated, taken from "21-e yanvarya v Peterburge," Bv, February 21, 1913 (eveningedition), pp. 2-4. 3. "Na ulitsakh," R, February 22, 1913, p. 4. 4. "Massovye aresty i obyski," Bv, April 19, 1913 (morning edition), p. 2; "K arestam sredi uchashchikhsya," Bv, April 23, 1913, p. 2; "Zabastovka 1-go maya i demonstratsiya rabochikh," Bv, May 1, 1913 (evening edition), p. 2. 5. Bresko-Boyanovskiy, "Russkiy sezon v Parizhe," Bv, May 12, 1913 (evening edition), pp. 7-8. In fact, the costumer Nikolai Roerich dressed them (inappropriately) in a combination of the Yakut and the Kirghiz national dress. 6. See I. M. Zdanevich, "Doklad o futurizme," R, no. 97 (April 9, 1913), p. 2. 7. "Uezzhayut," Bv, May 2, 1913 (evening edition), p. 5. 8. A. Rostislavov, "Madonna Benua," A, no. 4–5 (1916), p. 83. 9. See "Amerika-roller-rink," R, no. 44 (February 14, 1913), p. 6; "Nochnaya zhizn' v N'yu-iorke," Bv, April 12, 1913 (evening edition), p. 5. 10. Another possible term would be Retrospectivism. Here I regard Preservationism specifically as the movement for reviving "Old Petersburg" and as such a branch of the general Retrospectivist movement. 11. Richard Wortman, "Moscow and Petersburg: The Problem of Political Center in Tsarist Russia," in Sean Wilentz, ed., Rites of Power: Symbolism, Ritual, and Politics since the Middle Ages (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1985), pp. 244–271. 12. See Alois Riehl, Überbegriff der Philosophie (1872), and Heinrich Wölfflin, Kunstgeschichtliche Grundbegriffe (1915). 13. A. Benois, "Zhivopisnyy Peterburg," Mi, no. 1 (1902), p. 3. 14. Ibid., p. 2. 15. Vladimir Gippius, "Dusha reaktsii," R, no. 60 (March 3, 1913), p. 3. 16.See "21-ye fevralya 1913 g.," Bv, February 21, 1913 (evening edition), p. 2. It is important to note that leading members of the lobby for a Neoclassical revival in Petersburg, Lanceray, Fomin, and Shchuko, originally submitted designs for the decorations to the Jubilee Commission but they were rejected as too costly; hence the decorations were designed by relative unknowns, though in the same style. A. R-v, "Khudozhestvennye vesti," R, no. 35 (February 5, 1913), p. 5. 17. Georgiy Lukomsky identifies staticheskoye chut'yë as a defining feature of Neoclassicism; see his "Novyy Peterburg [mysli o sovremennom stroitel'stve]," A, no. 2 (1913), p. 9. 18. "Russkaya khudozhestvennaya letopis' 1913 g.," A, no. 2 (1913), p. 62. 19. L. Rudnitsky, (lead article, untitled), Istoricheskaya vystavka arkhitektury (Petersburg, 1911), p. 32. 20. D. Filosof, "Iskusstvo nikomu ne nuzhno," R, no. 5 (January 6, 1913), p. 3. 21. Benois, "Zhivopisnyy Peterburg," pp. 1–2. 22. See Rudnitsky, Istoricheskaya vystavka, p. 34. 23. Ibid., pp. 32, 33. 24. Hugh Honor, Neo-classicism (Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books, 1977), pp. 20, 40, 113, and 123. 25. Many of the clichés of Neoclassicism resurfaced later as clichés of Stalinist, socialist realist literature in identifying the positive hero as an emblem of political consciousness. See Katerina Clark, The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981), esp. pp. 57–63. 26. On Apollo, see "Phoebus, Apollo, or Mussagetes: The Position of Apollon in Russian Modernism," a dissertation presented by Dennis Mickiewicz at Yale University, 1967. 27. Lukomsky, "Novyy Peterburg," p. 37. 28. Immediately below this picture, the main article, by L. Rudnitsky, begins to discuss the perelom of Peter the Great (Istoricheskaya vystavka, p. 7). 29. Lukomsky, "Novyy Peterburg," p. 7. 30. Ibid., p. 37. 31. Sergey Gorodetskiy in one of these articles, "Nekotorye techeniya v sovremennoy russkoy poezii," adduces the architect as a metaphor for the Acmeist: A, no. 1 (1913), pp. 46, 50. 32. A. Rostislavov, "Disput o zhivopisi," R, no. 83 (March 26, 1913), p. 5. 33. Rudnitsky, Istoricheskaya vystavka, p. 34. 34. Akademiya nauk. Institut istorii, Istoriya Leningrada, vol. III, 1895–1917 (Moscow and Leningrad: Akademiya nauk, 1956), p. 916. Also see the illustration in Selim O. Khan-Magomedov, Pioneers of Soviet Architecture, trans. Alexander Lieven (NewYork: Rizzoli, 1987), p. 25. 35. Lukomsky, "Novyy Peterburg," p. 14. 36. For example, the Imperial family undertook to finance the World of Art when it seemed in danger of folding in 1900. 37. Rudnitsky, Istoricheskaya vystavka, p. 9. 38. Ibid., pp. 6, 8. 39. Others commonly involved include Count Zubov, who then headed what became the Institute for the History of the Arts (see Chapter 6), Prince S. Volkonsky, the leading exponent of the Dalcroze method (see Chapter 3), and P. P. Gavdeburov, the head of the Traveling Mass Theater (see Chapter 4). See Sergey Makovskiy, "Ministerstvo iskusstv," A, no. 2–3 (1917), pp. ix-vi; A. R-v, "Khudozhestvennaya letopis'," A, no. 2–3, pp. 65–69, no. 4–5, p. 73, no. 6–7, pp. 75–78 (1917). 40. Anita Brookner, Jacques-Louis David (London: Chatto and Windus, 1980), p. 117. 41. Benois, "Zhivopisnyy Peterburg," p. 2. 42. These characteristics are to be found among other Neoclassical movements, such as the Birmingham Lunar Society. in A: no. 2 (1915), p. 63; no. 2–3 (1917), p. 64; no. 6–7 (1917), pp. 80, 84. 55. For example, Marius Petipa's production of Sleeping Beauty and M. Fokine's Le Pavillion d'Armide of 1907, for which Benois designed the sets. 43. Kendall E. Bailles, Science and Russian Cultitre in an Age of Revolutions: V. I. Vernadsky and His Scientific School, 1863-1945 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990), p. 106. 44. My account of Vernadsky and his circle is largely taken from Bailles, Science and Russian Culture, esp. pp. 10–12, 16, 18, 27–31, 49, 81, 84, 92, 99–100, 125, 139, and 140. 45. Actually, Sorokin was himself a fiery Socialist Revolutionary but his local mentors in sociology were, like Vernadsky, pillars of the Kadet Party (or of the Liberal Party). 46. "Chlen g. Soveta V. M. Andreevskiy o reforme kalendarya," Bv, March 1, 1913 (morning edition), p. 4. 47. See D. Ovsyaniko-Kulikovskiy's articles on "Nauka i demokratiya": R, January 1, 1913, p. 3; January 15, p. 5; March 10, p. 3. 48. A. Benois, "Chemu mogla byt' Akademiya Khudozhestv v nastoyashcheye vremya," Trudy Vserossiyskogo s"yezda khudozhnikov v Petrograde dekabr' 1911-yanvar' 1912, vol. III (Petrograd, 1915), p. 95. 49. These features come very close to the account A. Benois gave in 1913, writing in his weekly column for Rech', of what his group stands for: A. Benua, "Printsipy 'Mira iskusstva,' " R, no. 10 (January 11, 1913), p. 2. 50. Ernst Gellner, Nations and Nationalism (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1983), esp. pp. 35, 39, 54, 92, and 117. 51. See S. Rossiyev, "Paskha v starom Peterburge," Bv, August 13, 1913 (evening edition), p. 3; Ross, "Pervoye maya v starom Peterburge," Bv, March 6, 1913 (morning edition), p. 2. 52. See "V Pirogovskom obshchestve," Bv, February 22, 1913 (morning edition), p. 2. 53. V. I. Lenin, "Gosudarstvo i revolyutsiya," in N. Lenin (V. Ul'yanov), Sobraniye sochineniy, vol. VIX (Moscow and Petrograd, 1921), p. 354. 54. For examples of this, see A. Rostislavov's "Khudozhestvennaya letopis'," 56. I am grateful to Mark von Hagen for pointing this out. 57. Rostislavov, "Khudozhestvennaya letopis'," A, no. 6–7 (1917), p. 82. 58. See Sergey Makovskiy, "Ministerstvo iskusstv," A, no. 2–3 (1917), p. xi. 59. Mark Etkind, A. N. Benua i russkaya khudozhestvennaya kul'tura (Leningrad: Iskusstvo R.S.F.S.R., 1989), pp. 287–288. 60. See Rostislavov, "Khudozhestvennaya letopis'," A, no. 1, pp. 35–37, no. 2–3, p. 68 (1916). 61. See K. E., "Otkrytiye 'nashego teatra,' " Bv, February 20, 1913 (evening edition), p. 4. ## 3. Masquerade 1. B. Filippov, Kak ya stal domovym (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1974), p. 41. 2. See R. Yurenev, Sergey Eyzenshteyn: Zamysly, Fil'my, Metod, Part 1, 1898– 1929 (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1985), p. 25. 3. Konstantin Rudnitsky, Meyerhold the Director, trans. George Petrov (Ann Arbor, Michigan: Ardis Press, 1981), p. 143. 4. V. Meyerhold, O teatre (Petersburg: Prosveshcheniye, 1913), p. 182. 5. See "Luna-Park," Bv, April 23, 1913 (evening edition), p. 4; "U rampy," Bv, May 24, 1913 (evening edition), p. 6. 6. N. N. Dolgov, "Razgadka trëkh yedinstv," Yeit, no. 5 (1913), p. 71. 7. "U rampy," Bv, May 11, 1913 (evening edition), p. 6. 8. See two anthologies of 1908 generally regarded as classic sources for this new orientation: Kniga o novom teatre (Petersburg: Shipovnik), and Krizis teatra. 9. There was, of course, a wide range of variations. Wagner, for instance, conceived the renovated theater as a transcendental space. 10. For example, Molière's Don Juan in 1910 (à la the court of Louis XIV) and Calderon's The Constant Prince in 1915 (à la seventeenth-century Spain). 11. Wagner's operas were also very much in vogue. 12. See Friedrich Nietzsche, Die Geburt der Tragödie aus dem Geiste der Musik (Griechentum und Pessimismus) (Munich: Wilhelm Goldmann Verlag, 1959), Pp. 58–59, Section VIII. 13. See Bernice Glatzer Rosenthal's Introduction to Nietzsche in Russia, Bernice Glatzer Rosenthal, ed. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982) pp. 11, 16. 14. V. I. Lenin. "Gosudarstvo i revolyutsiya," in N. Lenin (V. Ul'yanov), Sobraniue sochineniu. vol. XIV (Moscow and Petrograd: Gos. izd., 1921), p. 318. 15. Karl Marx, Der 18te Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte (New York: Deutsche Vereins-Buchhandlung von Schmidt und Helmich, 1852), p. 18, Section I; see also pp. 76, 100. 16. Nietzsche, Die Geburt der Tragödie, Section VIII. 17. A. Potëmkin, "U Aysedory Dunkan," Bv, January 5, 1913, p. 4. 18. Nietzsche, Die Geburt der Tragödie, p. 134, Section XX. 19. I. Rabinovich, "Na rekakh vavilonskikh," Tii, no. 1 (1917), p. 8. 20. Anastasiya Chebotarevskaya, "O teatral'nykh disputakh," Lkta, no. 2 (1914), p. 60. 21. Marx, Der 18te Brumaire, p. 71, Section V; for Louis Bonaparte as Lumpenproletarian, see p. 82, and for other intellectuals and literati as bourgeois or petty bourgeois hirelings, see pp. 46, 104. 22. See A. Bogdanov: Elementy proletarskoy kul'tury (Moscow: Gos. izd., 1919), pp. 38–39, 49; Mir novyy (stat'i 1904–1905), 3rd. ed. (Moscow: Giz, 1920), p. 28; and Sotsializm nauki (nauchnye zadachi proletariata) (Moscow: Proletarskaya kul'- tura, 1918), esp. pp. 15–16, 26. See also A. V. Lunacharsky, "Pushkin," I, no. 34 (February 12, 1922); Fëdor Kalinin, "O metodakh raboty v Proletkul'takh," G, no. 4 (1920), pp. 10–13. 23. See Nietzsche, Die Geburt der Tragödie, p. 122, Section XVIII. 24. Ibid., Section IX. 25. A. Benois, "Zhivopisnyy Peterburg," Mi, no. 1 (1902), p. 2. 26. Georg Fuchs, "Zadachi nemetskogo teatra," A, no. 11 (1910), p. 50. 27. N. Evreinov, "Obshchestvennyy teatr na vzglyad poznavshego iskusstva i teatra dlya sebya," Os, no. 8 (1915), p. 21; A. A. Mgebrov, Zhizn' v teatre, vol. II (Moscow and Leningrad: Academia, 1932), p. 193. 28. Nietzsche, Die Geburt der Tragödie, Section VII. 29. See Mark B. Adams, "The Soviet Nature-Nurture Debate," in Loren R. Graham, ed., Science and the Soviet Social Order (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990), p. 98. 30. Cited in A. A. Gvozdev and Adr. Piotrovsky, "Petrogradskiye teatry i prazdnestva v epokhu voyennogo kommunizma," in Istoriya sovetskogo teatra (Leningrad, 1933), p. 96. 31. These latter groups in many respects defined themselves against Nietzschean Wagnerism. As the name "Apollon" imples, they generally opted for one side of the famous Nietzschean dichotomy and gave art and architecture priority. 32. Zigfrid Ashkinazi, "Bayreytskie vpechatleniya," Yeit, no. 5 (1912), pp. 75– 78. 33. "Teatr i muzyka," R, December 6, 1913, p. 7. 34. See, for example, the caricature in Tii, no. 6 (1914), p. 137. 35. V. Soloviev, "'Maskarad' v Aleksandrinskom teatre," A, no. 2–3 (1917), p. 72. 36. Ibid., pp. 74-75; Friedrich Nietzsche, Die Geburt der Tragödie, Nietzsches werke, vol. I (Stuttgart: Alfred Kroner Verlag, 1921), p. 128, Section 14. 37. Soloviev, "'Maskarad' v Aleksandrinskom teatre," p. 75. 38. See, for example, "U Aysedory Dunkan," Bv, January 5, 1913, p. 4. 39. V. Soloviev, "K voprosu o teorii stsenicheskikh kompozitsiy," Lkta, no. 4–7 (1915), pp. 171–178. 40. See Nietzsche, Die Geburt der Tragödie, Nietzsches werke, vol. I, p. 90, Section 8, p. 179, Section 21; for music as a universal language, see p. 140, Section 16. 41. Litotes, "Obshchestvo revniteley khudozhestvennogo slova," A, no. 4-5 (1916), pp. 87-88. Note that neither of the two leading translators of classical Greek drama, I. F. Annensky or Radlov's mentor, F. F. Zelinsky, had attempted this. 42. See Yevgeniy Znosko-Borovskiy, "Teatr bez literatury," A, no. 7 (1912), pp. 22–33; and Z. Ashkinazi, "Teatr Vagnera," Yeit, no. 6 (1913), pp. 77–119. 43. Cited in Yu. Slonimskaya, "Novosti russkoy teatral'noy literatury," Yeit, no. 3 (1911), p. 96. 44. Aleks. St., "K istorii tipa P'yerro (O vozmozhnosti voskresheniya pantomimy)," A, no. 10 (1912), p. 50; Z. A. Stark [Zigfrid], "Renessans baleta," Yeit, no. 3 (1911), p. 109. 45. " '1914' Allegoricheskoye deystviye knyazya S. M. Volkonskogo," A, no. 1 (1915), p. 67. 46. Kn. Sergey Volkonsky, "Ritm v istorii chelovechestva," Yeit, no. 3 (1912), p. 6; "V zashchitu aktërskoy tekhniki," A, no. 1 (1911), esp. pp. 23–24. 47. Kn. Sergey Volkonsky, "Prazdnestva v Gellerau," A, no. 6 (1912), p. 6. 48. Kn. Sergey Volkonsky, "Iz knigi 'Vyrazitel'nyy chelovek stsenicheskogo zhesta (Po Del'sartu),' "A, no. 7 (1912), p. 35. 49. Volkonsky, "Prazdnestva v Gellerau," A, no. 6 (1912), p. 47. 50. Meyerhold, "Primechaniya," O teatre, p. 186. 51. Ibid., pp. 152, 154. 52. Ibid., p. 160. 53. Ibid., p. 149. 54. "Disput o teatre," R, December 23, 1913, p. 3. 55. Compare a series of reports (generally titled "Studiya: Klass Meyerkhol'da"): Lkta, no. 2, pp. 62–63, no. 4–5, pp. 12–97, no. 6–7, p. 122 (1914); no. 1–3, pp. 132–134 (1915); no. 1, p. 100, no. 2–3, pp. 144–146 (1916). 56. See Meyerhold, O teatre, p. 185. 57. Ibid., p. 183. 58. Ibid., pp. 148, 204. 59. "Teatry i muzyka," R, no. 337 (December 9, 1913), p. 6. 60. Meyerhold, O teatre, p. 162. 61. "Futurizm v teatre (Futuristicheskiy manifest. Perev. M. P.)," Tii, no. 5 (1914), pp. 108–110. 62. "Studiya: Klass Meyerkhol'da," Lkta, no. 2 (1914), p. 63. 63. See Meyerhold, O teatre, p. 159. 64. Ibid., p. 163; see also p. 162. 65. Ibid., p. 156. 1920), p. 2; V. Shklovsky, "Tema, obraz i syuzhet Rozanova," Zi, no. 697699 (March 19–21, 1921), p. 1. pp. 1–2; "Iskusstvo tsirka," Zi, no. 284–285 (November 4-5, 1919), p. 1; "Razvërtyvanie syuzheta (roman-drama)," Zi, no. 348 (January 21, 1920), p. 1. 68. For example, S. Radlov's "Osnovy teatra," appearing in Zi, nos. 361, 362, 363, 364 (1920), is sandwiched between two major texts by Shklovsky, "Razvërtyvanie syuzheta (roman-drama)" (nos. 348, 355) and "Kak sdelan 'Don Kikhot'" (nos. 373, 375, 376). 69. V. Shklovsky, "O psikhologicheskom rampe," Zi, no. 445 (May 7, 1920), p. 1. 70. For instance, B. Eikhenbaum's "Illusion of skaz" (Illyuziya skaza, 1918) analyzes this literary technique in terms of "improvisation," "mimicry," "gesture," sound play, and even the komediant, the actor in commedia dell'arte; V, Shklovskv, "Literatura i kinematograf," Zi, no. 142 (August 21, 1919), pp. 1-2, and "Iskusstvo tsirka," Zi, no. 284–285 (November 4–5, 1919), p. 1. 71. S. Volkonsky, "Ritm v stsenicheskom iskusstve (Doklad Vserossiyskomu s"yezdu khudozhnikov)," A, no. 3 (1912), p. 60; Soloviev, "'Maskarad' v Aleksandrinskom teatre," p. 75. 72. V. Shkloysky. "Iskusstvo kak priyëm," Sborniki po teorii poeticheskogo yazyka, II (Petrograd, 1917), pp. 3-14; S. Eisenstein, "Montazh attraktsionov," L, no. 3 (1923), pp. 70–75; Meyerhold, O teatre, pp. 166, 168–169. 73. Meyerhold, O teatre, pp. 156–157. 74. Ibid., p. 173. Compare Nietzsche, Die Geburt der Tragödie (Munich: Wilhelm Goldmann Verlag, 1959), pp. 155, 157, Section 24. 75. R. D. Timenchik, "Ob odnom pis'me Anny Akhmatovoy," Z, no. 9 (1991), pp. 165-167. 76. Meyerhold, O teatre, pp. 161, 162. 77. V. Kurbatov, "Teatral'nye prazdnestva i teatry Pavlovska," Yeit, no. 1 (1911), pp. 1–18. 78. Meyerhold, O teatre, pp. 158, 160; see the Epilogue to "Lyubov' k trëm apel'sinam," in Lkta, no. 1 (1914), p. 47; Vl. S., "Petrogradskiye teatry," A, no. 2 (1916), p. 45. 79. See S. Volkonsky, "Krasota i pravda na stsene," A, no. 4 (1911), pp. 64–66; Georg Fuchs, "Zadachi nemetskogo teatra," A, no. 11 (1910), p. 50. 80. Marcel Mauss, "A Category of the Human Mind: The Notion of the Person, the Notion of Self," trans. W. D. Halls, in Michael Carithers et al., eds., The Category of the Person: Anthropology, Philosophy, History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), pp. 4–23. 81. This was particularly true for the avant-garde. See Camilla Gray, The Russian Experiment in Art, 1863–1922 (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1970), p. 194; Wiktor Woroszylski, The Life of Mayakovsky, trans. Boleslaw Taborski (New York: Orion Press, 1970), pp. 88, 131. ## 4. Theater and Revolution in the New Republic 1. M. B. Keyrim-Markus, Gosudarstvennoye rukovodstvo kul'tury: Stroitel'stvo Narkomprosa (noyabr' 1917-seredina 1918 gg.) (Moscow: Nauka, 1980), pp. 115, 124, 131, 140, 147, 167. 2. Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Commissariat of Enlightenment: Soviet Organization of Education and the Arts under Lunacharsky (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970), pp. 129–130. 3. The House of Arts and the House of Literati are not covered here in the depth they deserve, partly because of such existing studies as Barry Scherr, "Notes on the Literary Life of Petrograd, 1918–1922: A Tale of Three Houses," Slavic Review, vol. 36 (June 1977), pp. 256–267, and Martha Hickey, "The Petrograd House of Arts, 1919–1922: Legacy of a Literary Community" (manuscript). 4. N. Altman, "Vospominaniya," extract reprinted in Agitatsionno-massovoye iskusstvo. Oformleniye prazdnestv. Sovetskoye dekorativnoye iskusstvo. Materialy i dokumenty, ed. V. P. Tolstoy, comp. I. M. Bibikova and N. I. Levchenko (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1984), p. 65. 5. See L. Pumpyanskiy, "Oktyabr'skiye torzhestva i khudozhniki Petrograda," Pl, no. 35 (January 5, 1919), pp. 11–14. See also M. V. Dobuzhinskiy, "Bomba ili khlopushka: Beseda dvukh khudozhnikov," Nz, no. 83 (May 4, 1918). 6. See Agitatsionno-massovoye iskusstvo, pp. 80-96. 7. The Imperial theaters were renamed State theaters after the Revolution, and on January 1, 1920, they became Academic theaters. 8. See Vasiliy Bespalov, Teatry v dni revolyutsii. 1917. Teatral'nye memuary (Leningrad: Academia, 1927), pp. 111–119. 9. Actually, even the former Imperial theaters were liberalized somewhat. For instance, they mounted productions of Stravinsky's Petrushka and Solvey (originally to have been directed by Meyerhold), both unthinkable before the Revolution. 10. See O. Kameneva, "Na s"yezde po vneshkol'nomu obrazovaniyu: Zasedaniye teatra,"Vt, no. 26 (May 14–16, 1919), p. 4. 11. Mark von Hagen, Soldiers of the Revolution: Soldiers' Politics and State-Building in Soviet Russia, 1917-1930 (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1990). 12. VI. V-skiy, "K istorii Krasnoy armii," PP, no. 248 (November 4, 1920), p. 3. 13. "Vserossiyskiy s"yezd po vneshkol'nomu obrazovaniyu: Rezolyutsiya s"yezda," Vo, no. 6–8 (1919), p. 18. 14. See "Pedagogicheskaya sektsiya," "Ob"yasnitel'nye zapiski k proyektu polozheniya o 'Vol'noy filosofskoy akademii,' " "Institut zhivogo slova," Vtonkpp, no. 1 (September 19, 1918), pp. 12–15. 15. See A. Polynin, "Ulichnyy teatr," Vopzitil, no. 1 (September 18, 1918), p. 3. 16. Christian J. Taylor, Futurism: Politics, Painting, and Performance (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Research Press, 1974), p. 29. 17. A good example of the latter would be the Institute for the Living Word (Institut zhivogo slova), founded in Petrograd under the auspices of PTO on November 15, 1918, which organized classes in declamation and other oral skills and public readings by highbrow intellectuals; see "Otkrytiye Instituta zhivogo slova," Ig, no. 2 (1918), p. 59. For mass work see P. P. Gaydeburov, "Tvorcheskaya igra," Vo, no. 6–8 (1919), p. 35. 18. In 1918, 1,230 books were published in Petrograd, a considerable decline if compared with 8,420 in 1912, and there was a similar decline in book publishing in Moscow; see Vl, no. 4–5 (1920), p. 12. 19. N. Evreinov, Teatr kak takovoy (Spb.: Sovremennoye iskusstvo, 1913), pp. 27, 29. 20. Ibid., pp. 29, 34–36. 21. N. Evreinov, "Kazhdaya minuta—teatr," Teatr dlya sebya, vol. I (Spb., 1915), pp. 69–83. 22. Evreinov, Teatr kak takovoy, p. 29. 23. V. Shklovsky, "Drama i massovye predstavleniya," Zi, no. 688–690 (March 9–11, 1921), p. 1. 24. See A. A. Gvozdev and Adr. Piotrovsky, "Petrogradskiye teatry i prazdnestva v epokhu voyennogo kommunizma," in Istoriya sovetskogo teatra, vol. I (Leningrad: GIKhL, 1933), pp. 100–104, 106, 127–128. 25. A. Remizova, Kul'turno-prosvetitel'naya rabota v RSFSR (1921-1925g.) (Moscow: Nauka, 1962), pp. 15-23, and Keyrim-Markus, Gosudarstvennoye rukovodstvo kul'tury, p. 81. 26. Lynn Mally, Culture of the Future: The Proletkult Movement in Revolutionary Russia (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990). 27. See Fitzpatrick, The Commissariat of Enlightenment, p. 112. 28. Gorky and Andreeva emigrated in 1921, as did others active in TEO, such as F. Zelinsky. Other members of TEO associated with the Left Socialist Revolutionaries included K. Erberg and Ivanov-Razumnik. 29. See Tii, editorial, no. 1 (1918), p. 4. 30. A. Lunacharsky, "Sotsializm i iskusstvo," in the anthology Teatr. Kniga o novom teatre. Sbornik statey (Petersburg: Shipovnik, 1908), p. 37. 31. "Zasedaniye kollegii Otdela teatrov i zrelishch," Zi, no. 11 (November 12, 1918), pp. 4, 5; "Teatr v krasnoarmeyskoy srede," Vt, no. 44 (December 2–7, 1919), p. 12. 32. Gvozdev and Piotrovsky, "Petrogradskiye teatry i prazdnestva," p. 110; "K vvedeniyu besplatnykh zrelishch v Peterburge." Vt, no. 78-79 (January 4, 1921), p. 18; L. Nikulin, "Peterburgskiye pis'ma," Vt. no. 89-90 (May 1, 1921), p. 12. 33. See, for example, V. I. Lenin, "Iz doklada o partiynoy programme 19-ogo marta; VII s"yezd RKP(b) 18–23 marta 1919 g.," in N. I. Krutikova, ed., Lenin o kul'ture i iskusstve (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1956), pp. 67–68. 34. See V. I. Lenin, "Gosudarstvo i revolyutsiya," in N. Lenin (V. Ul'yanov), Sobranye sochineniy, vol. XIV (Moscow and Petrograd: Gos. izd., 1921), pp. 311, 321, 327, 328, 332, 333, 339, 369, 370, 379, 393. 35. Romain Rolland, Le Théâtre du peuple (Paris: Libraire Hachette), pp. 54, 86-106; Cecil W. Davies, Theatre for the People: The Study of the Volksbühne (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1977); Eugene von Erven, Radical Peoples' Theater (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988). 36. A. Polynin, "Ulichnyy teatr," Vopzitil, no. 1 (September 18, 1918), p. 3. 37. See, for example, K. A. Muratova, "M. Gor'kiy i sovetskiy teatr (1918–1921 gody)," in Iz istorii russkikh literaturnykh otnosheniy, xviii-xxvv (Moscow: Akademiya nauk, 1959), p. 300; "Khronika," Zi, no. 88 (February 28, 1919), p. 2; "Pto," PP, no. 70 (March 30, 1919); "Soobshcheniye: Pechal'nye rezul'taty konkursa (29 yanvarya-4 fevralya, 1920 g.," Vt, no. 50 (1920), p. 14; "Konkurs melodramy (Ot zhuri konkursa na melodramu)," Zi, no. 178 (July 2, 1919). 38. See S. Garin, "Geroicheskiy teatr," Zi, no. 417–418 (1920), p. 1. 39. See, for example, M., "O knige: Utrennik v malom zale Konservatorii," Zi, no. 589 (October 2, 1920), p. 1. 40. A. Lunacharsky, "Revolyutsiya i krizis teatra," Vt, no. 4 (1919), pp. 5–6; "M. Gor'kiy o kinematografe," Vt, no. 30 (June 3–8, 1919), p. 10. 41. Ibid.; "Instsenirovki istorii kul'tury," Vt, no. 36 (October 7–12, 1919), p. 14. 42. Of the two genres, Gorky favored tragedy, and Lunacharsky melodrama, although each supported both genres. 43. A. Blok, "Bolshoy dramaticheskiy teatr v predstoyashchem sezone," Dela i dni Bol'shogo dramaticheskogo teatra (Petrograd: Bol'shoy dramaticheskiy teatr 1919), p. 10. 44. See A. Lunacharsky, "O repertuare," Vt, no. 33 (September 14–21, 1919), pp. 4–5. 45. Vyacheslav Ivanov, "K voprosu ob organizatsii tvorcheskikh sil narodnogo kollektiva v oblasti narodnogo deystva," Vt, no. 26 (May 14–16, 1919), p. 4; "O Vagnere," Vt, no. 31–32 (June 9–15, 1919), pp. 8–9. 46. Lunacharsky, "Sotsializm i iskusstvo," pp. 37, 30, 28, 26. 47. Note that he still cites Wagner as an authority in his Teatr i revolyutsiya (Moscow: Giz, 1924, p. 12); see also Fitzpatrick, The Commissariat of Enlightenment, pp. 152–157. 48. Quoted in P. P. Gaydeburov, Literaturnoye naslediye. Vospominaniya, Stat'i, Rezhissërskiye eksplikatsii. Vystupleniya (Moscow: Vserossiyskoye teatral'noye obshchestvo, 1977), p. 40. 49. See B. Filippov, Kak ya stal "domovym" (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1974), Pp. 80-82. 50. See A. A. Mgebrov, "Proletarskaya kul'tura," G, no. 2–3 (1919), pp. 23–24. See also Viktoriya Chekan (his wife and collaborator), "Poyezdka teatral'noy areny Proletkul'ta na Zapadniy front Krasnoy Armii," G, no. 2–3 (1919), p. 29, and N. G. Vinogradov-Mamont, Krasnoarmeyskoye chudo: Povest' o teatral'no-dramaticheskoy masterskoy Krasnoy armii (Leningrad: Iskusstvo, 1972), esp. pp. 31, 53, 78–79, 125. 51. "Teatr vol'noy komedii," Zi, no. 554–555 (September 11–12, 1920), p. 2; "Khronika," Zi, no. 557 (September 15, 1920), p. 1; "K godovshchine Oktyabr'skoy revolyutsii," Zi, no. 553 (September 10, 1920), p. 1 (here D. Tyomkin is listed as chief director of the re-enactment; compare Nik., "Vzyatiye zimnego dvortsa," Zi, no. 596–597 (October 30–31, 1920), p. 1). 52. V. Meyerhold, "Zadachi khudozhestvennogo prosveshcheniya," Vt, no. 80–81 (January 1921), p. 7. 53. For example, Zori: "Na kursakh masterstva stsenicheskikh postanovok," Ig, no. 2 (1918), pp. 58, 59; "Otchët o dvukhmesyachnom semestre Instruktorskikh kursov po obucheniyu masterstva stsenicheskikh postanovok (21 iunva-23 avgusta 1918)," Vtonkpp, no. 1 (1918), p. 23. Biomechanics: "Proyekt polozheniya o 'Shkole aktërskogo masterstva,'" compiled by L. S. Viv'yen and V. Meyerhold, Vtonkpp, no. 1 (1918), pp. 24–29. See also "Doklad V. V. Tikhonovicha" and "Rech' V. E. Meyerkhol'da," in "Na s"yezde po vneshkol'nomu obrazovaniyu. Zasedaniye teatral'noy sektsii," Vt, no. 28 (May 17–20, 1919), p. 5. 54. Valeriy Bebutov, "Vs. Em. Meyerkhol'd," Vt, no. 68 (September 21–26, 1920), p. 3. 55. "Petrograd," Vt, no. 7 (February 18–19, 1919), p. 5. 56. "Dramaticheskiye shkoly: Proyekt prepodavaniya dramaturgii na 'Kursakh Masterstva Stsenicheskikh Postanovok,'" Vtonkpp, no. 2 (1919), p. 47; "Primechaniya," in. A. Z. Yufit, ed., Russkiy sovetskiy teatr 1917-1921: Dokumenty i materialy (Leningrad: Iskusstvo, 1968), p. 356. 57. "Teatr studiya," Zi, no. 14 (Nov. 15, 1918), p. 4; no. 15 (Nov. 16, 1918), p. 4. S. Radlov, "Vospominaniya o teatre narodnoy komedii," publikatsiya P.V. Dmitriveva, in Minuvsheye: Istoricheskiy Al'manakh, no. 16 (Moscow-Petersburg: Atheneum Feniks, 1994), pp. 80–101. 58. See Richard Schechner, Drama, Script, Theater, and Performance: Essays on Performance Theory (New York: Drama Book Specialists, 1977), pp. 36–39. 59. See N. Punin, "Vmesto predisloviya," in A. Lunacharsky, Rech'proiznesënnaya na otkrytii Petrogradskikh gosudarstvennykh Svobodnykh khudozhestvennouchebnykh masterskikh 10-go oktyabrya, 1918 g. (Petrograd: IZO, 1919), p. 6. 60. Stenka Razin (staged for the Baltic Fleet), Zi, no. 315 (December 11, 1919), p. 4; S. Radlov, Stat'i o teatre, p. 7; N. Punin, in "O forme i soderzhanii," Ik, no. 18 (April 1919), p. 1. 61. This position was even shared by Lunacharsky. See his "Vmesto vvedeniya" to the first issue of Igra in 1918, esp. p. 1. 62. "A. S. Aleksandrov: Po afishe Zhokey-nayezdniki pod upravleniyem Aleksandra Serzh," in Yevg. Kuznetsov, ed., Sovetskiy tsirk, 1918–1938 (Leningrad and Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1938), pp. 92–101. C 63. "Peterburg. Peterburgskiye pis'ma. VIII," Vt, no. 54 (February 24–29, 1920), p. 14. 64. Frantisek Deak in his article "Two Manifestoes: The Influence of Italian Futurism in Russia," Drama Review, vol. XIX. no. 4 (December 1975), pp. 88-92, draws attention to the influence of Italian Futurism on the contemporary work in Petrograd of Yu. Annenkov in the Hermitage Theater, founded in July 1919 on Meverhold's initiative. Since he describes Annenkov's work in some detail we will not discuss it here. It is worth noting, however, that Annenkov, who was also an artist, worked as either artistic director or director on three of the famous mass spectacles of 1920—The Storming of the Winter Palace, The Mystery of Liberated Labor, and Toward a World Commune. 65."Dramaticheskiye shkoly," Vtonkpp, no. 2 (1919), p. 48; "Kursy Masterstva Stsenicheskikh Postanovok," Vtonkpp, no. 2 (1919), p. 59; Katerina Clark, "Aleksei Remizov in Petrograd, 1919–1921: The Bard of the Peoples' Theater," in Greta Slobin, ed., Aleksei Remizov: Approaches to a Protean Writer, U.C.L.A. Slavic Studies, vol. 16 (Columbus, Ohio: Slavica, 1987), pp. 261–276. 66. M. Pustynin, "Teatr shumnogo segodnya," Vopzitil, no. 9 (September 28, 1918), p. 3. 67. This is a well-known moment about which many have written. See A. Fevral'skiy, Pervaya sovetskaya p'yesa: 'Misteriya-buff' V. V. Mayakovskogo (Moscow: Sovetskiy pisatel', 1971), esp. pp. 52–88. 68. M. Gorky, "Trudnyy vopros," Dela i dni Bol'shogo dramaticheskogo teatra, pp. 7-9; A. Lunacharsky, "Kakaya nam nuzhna melodrama," Zi, no. 58 (January 14, 1919), pp. 2–3. 69. Compare Gorky, "Trudnyy vopros," p. 7; Lunacharsky, "Kakaya nam nuzhna melodrama," pp. 2–3. 70. Rolland, Le Théâtre du peuple, pp. 68, 113–116. 71. Gvozdev and Piotrovsky, "Petrogradskiye teatry i prazdnestva," p. 100. 72. See "Posledniy god," Zi, no. 57 (1919), p. 2. 73. "Raboty obshchegorodskoy kul't-prosvetitel'noy konferentsii," PP, no. 125 (June 16, 1918), p. 4. 74. See "Plany budushchego," Tii, no. 6–7 (1918), p. 74. 75. "Uluchsheniye sborov v teatrakh," Zi, no. 59 (January 13, 1919), p. 3. 76. See, for instance, the debate of 1918 over whether to nationalize the theaters (reported in I, no. 235 [1918]); P. Kerzhentsev called for their immediate nationalization, but his position represented an extreme—O. D. Kameneva, then head of TEO, was against it and Lunacharsky pointed out that it would strain the state budget. 77. See I. Vybra, "Svoboda i diktatura v iskusstve," Ik, no. 9 (February 16, 1919), p. 2. 78. Adr. Piotrovsky, "Diktatura," Zi, no. 584–585 (October 17–18, 1920), p. 2. 79. R. D. Timenchik, "Ob odnom pis'me Anne Akhmatovoy," Z, no. 9 (1991), pp. 165-167. 80. A case in point would be Radlov's translation of Plautus' “The Brothers Menaechmus" (Bliznetsy). See "Obshchestvo revniteley khudozhestvennogo slova,"A, no. 4–5 (1916), p. 86; S. E. Radlov, "'Menekhmy' Plavta na stsene Zimnego Vodevilya i v Narodnom Dome v Petrograde," Ge, no. 1 (1918), pp. 116–117. 82. "V petrogradskikh teatrakh," Vt, no. 26 (1919), p. 9; "Poyezdka v Kronshtadt v dni godovshchiny," Vt, no. 43 (November 25–30, 1919), p. 14. 83. N. N. Evreinov, Teatral'nye inventsii (Moscow: Vremya, 1922), p. 8; Adr. Piotrovsky, "Teatr vsego naroda," Zi, no. 456–457 (May 20–21, 1920), p. 1. ## 5. Petrograd: Ritual Capital of Revolutionary Russia 1. Evreinov was assisted by A. R. Kugel' and N. V. Petrov, the artistic director was Yu. P. Annenkov, and G. I. Varlikh was responsible for the music. 2. This is the version of the response presented in "Stat'ya neustanovlënnogo avtora 'Vzyatiye zimnego dvortsa' (vpechatleniya)" (November 9, 1920), reprinted in "Massovye prazdnestva," a section in A. Z. Yufit, ed., Russkiy sovetskiy teatr 1917-1921: Dokumenty i materialy (Leningrad: lskusstvo, 1968), p. 273. There is some evidence that the event was not an unqualified success, however. For instance, although 100,000 sounds like an impressive audience, there was apparently seating for 170,000 on Palace Square, and an air show earlier in the day proved a much more popular event; see "Obshchiy plan torzhestv," PP, no. 249 (November 5, 1920), p. 2; "Vmestimost' mest zrelishch," PP, no. 250 (November 6, 1920), p. 2. 3. There are several different accounts of what happened in this mass spectacle. Compare "Libretto instsenirovki 'Vzyatie zimnego dvortsa'," in "Massovye prazdnestva," pp. 272-273 (also pp. 273-276), and Frantisek Deak, "Russian Mass Spectacles," Drama Review, vol. XIX, no. 2 (June 1975), pp. 7-22. 4. For a more comprehensive account of the mass spectacles of War Communism, see James von Geldern, Bolshevik Festivals, 1917-1920 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993). 5. The same issue of Vestnik teatra that announced that Meyerhold was to head TEO also published an account of a meeting to discuss staging future mass spectacles in Moscow, suggesting that Meyerhold's earlier experience with them may have been a factor in his appointment; see "K priyezdu V. E. Meyerkhol'da: Naznacheniye V. E. Meyerkhol'da zaveduyushchim TEO," Vt, no. 68 (September 21–26, 1920), p. 3. 6. In addition to The Storming of the Winter Palace, these were The Mystery of Liberated Labor, performed for May Day, The Blockade of Russia (June 20), For a World Commune (staged for the delegates to a meeting of the Third Communist International on July 19), and an abridged version of the last mentioned staged on August 2. The major exception to the rule that the casts and audiences kept getting bigger would be The Blockade of Russia, which was staged in a specially constructed ampitheater that seated only 4,000; its cast was 750. 7. "K oktyabr'skim torzhestvam," PP, no. 240 (October 26, 1920), p. 1; N. Evreinov,"'Vzyatie zimnego dvortsa': Stat'ya glavnogo rezhissëra," Km, no. 4 (November 15, 1920), p. 5 8. V. Mavakovsky, "Prikaz po armii iskusstv," Ik, no. 1 (Petrograd, December 7, 1918), p. 1. These slogans were also used as banner headings for the journal. 9. Ibid.; V. Mayakovsky, V. Kamensky, and D. Burlyuk, "Dekret no. 1 o demokratizatsii iskusstv," Gf (March 1918); P. Kerzhentsev, Tvorcheskiy teatr, 3rd. ed. (Moscow: VTsIK, 1919), pp. 73-74; E. A. Speranskaya, ed., Agitatsionnomassovoe iskusstvo pervykh let oktyabrya (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1971), p. 88. 10. Kerzhentsev, Tvorcheskiy teatr, p. 80. 11. Ibid., pp. 42, 45. 12. Ibid., pp. 35, 37, 40, 41, 42, 45, 49. 13. Ibid., p. 38. 14. Tvorchestvo Fransua Rable i narodnaua kul'tura srednevokov'ua (Moscow: Khudozhestvennaya literatura, 1965) is largely based on Bakhtin's dissertation, "Rable v istorii realizma," written in the early 1940s and defended in 1946. 15. M. Bakhtin, Rabelais and His World, trans. Hélène Iswolsky (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1984), p. 7. 16. Kerzhentsev, Tvorcheskiy teatr, p. 70. 17. Adr. Piotrovsky, "Khronika leningradskikh prazdnestv, 1919–22g.," in Massovye prazdnestva (Leningrad: Academia, 1926), pp. 75–76. 18. Adr. Piotrovsky, Za sovetskiy teatr! Sbornik statey (Leningrad: Academia, 1925), pp. 8, 21. 19. Ibid., p. 21. 20. "Teatr i revolyutsiya," IPs, no. 85 (April 21, 1920), p. 1. 21. "Misteriya osvobozhdënnogo truda," in Russkiy sovetskiy teatr 1917–1921, pp. 263–264. See also Deak, "Russian Mass Spectacles," pp. 7-10; "K prazdnovaniyu pervogo maya," IPs, no. 93 (April 30, 1920), p. 1; and "Pervomayskaya misteriya 'Gimn osvobozhdënnogo truda,' " IPs, no. 96 (May 3, 1920), p. 2. 22. Jean Jacques Rousseau, Politics and the Arts: Letter to M. D'Alembert on the Theatre, trans. Allan Bloom (Illinois: The Free Press of Glencoe, 1960), p. 126. For an example of a later invocation of the Rousseau model, see Romain Rolland, Le Théâtre du peuple (Paris: Libraire Hachette, 1933), pp. 154–155. 23. See, for example, Mona Ozouf, Festivals and the French Revolution, trans. Alan Sheridan (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1988), esp. pp. 249-250. 24. Friedrich Nietzsche, Die Geburt der Tragödie, Nietzsches Werke, vol. I (Stuttgart: Alfred Kroner Verlag, 1921), p. 65, Section 4, p. 171, Section 20. 25. The first of these was Sverzheniye samoderzhaviya (The Overthrow of Autocracy), first staged under the direction of N. G. Vinogradov-Mamont in a riding manege in March 1919 and repeated many times; see N. G. Vinogradov-Mamont, Krasnoarmeyskoye chudo: Povest' o teatral'no-dramaticheskoy masterskoy krasnoy armii (Leningrad: Iskusstvo, 1972). Another was Krovavoye voskreseniye (Bloody Sunday), staged for the January 9 anniversary from January 9–22, 1920, and directed by Adrian Piotrovsky; see "9-oye yanvarya na petrogradskoy storone," IPs, no. 23 (January 15, 1920), p. 6. 26. In Moscow several spectacles were planned for a large field outside town but they never materialized. Some did, however, take place on Red Square—that is, most of those spectacles that took place were staged at the very heart of the old regime's symbolic geography. 27. Eisenstein made a study of some of the mass spectacles of Petrograd and also organized agitational theatrical work while in the Red Army; see R. Yurenev, Sergey Eyzenshteyn: Zamysly, fil'my, metod, Part I, 1898–1929 (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1985), pp. 28–34. 28. Other obvious examples of the symbolic use of the stairs would include the parodic scene in Eisenstein's October (1927) when Kerensky ascends the marble staircase of the Winter Palace, and the ending of Vs. Pudovkin's The End Bv, August 17, 1913 (morning edition), p. 6. N. G. (successive articles), "Vzyatie Azova: Zrelishche pod otkrytym nebom," of Petersburg (also 1927), when, after the battle of revolution, a little old lady ascends them. 29. Specifically, K. Mardzhanov, N. Evreinov, N. V. Petrov, S. Radlov, A. Piotrovsky, and Yu. Annenkov. 30. For example, those playing the interventionists in The Blockade of Russia 31. B. Smerala, "Pravda o sovetskoy Rossii: O prazdnestve 'Gimn osvobozhdënnogo truda' ('Misteriya osvobozhdënnogo truda')," in Russkiy sovetskiy teatr 1917–1921, p. 265. 32. René Fülöp-Miller, Geist und Gesicht des Bolschewismus (Zurich, Leipzig, Vienna, 1926). 33. Kerzhentsev, Tvorcheskiy teatr, p. 30 34. See D., "Spektakl' na vode," Bv, August 12, 1913, p. 5; Anchar', D. V. and 35. See A. L. Alekseyev-Yakovlev, Russkiye narodnye gulyaniya (Leningrad: Iskusstvo, 1948), esp. pp. 144, 166. 36. V. P. Lapshin, Khudozhestvennaya zhizn' Moskvy i Petrograda v 1917 godu (Moscow: Sovetskiy khudozhnik, 1983), p. 389. 37. Piotrovsky, Za sovetskiy teatr!, p. 21. 38. "V Politprosvetupravlenii," IPs, no. 85 (April 21, 1920), p. 1. The Mystery of Liberated Labor, for instance, was sponsored by the Political Department of the Petrograd Military District, and the Krasnoselsk version of For a World Commune by the Military Reserves, while the earlier version of that spectacle and The Blockade of Russia were sponsored by PTO. 39. Oliver M. Sayler, Our American Theater (New York: Benjamin Blair, Inc., 1971), p. 236. 40. S. Radlov, "Elektrofikatsiya teatra," Stat'i o teatre 1918-1922 (Petrograd: Tsentral'noye kooperativnoye izdatel'stvo, 1923), pp. 15–23. 41. See Marx's The Civil War in France and Lenin's State and Revolution (1917). hareva (Petrograd: Parus, 1917; first edition, 1908); R. Rollan, Narodnyy teatr, introd. Vyacheslav Ivanov (Petrograd and Moscow: TEO, 1919; first Russian ed., 1910). 43. Piotrovsky, Za sovetskiy teatr!, pp. 21–22; Yevg. Kuznetsov, "Komissar teatrov," in Mariya Fëdorovna Andreyeva: Perepiska, Vospominaniya, Stat'i (Moscow: Gos. izd., 1961), pp. 418–420. 44. N. Eyreinov, Proiskhozhdeniye dramy. Pervobytnaya tragediya i rol' kozla v istorii vevë vozniknoveniya. Fol'kloristicheskiy ocherk (Petersburg: Petropolis, 1921). 45. Zelinsky himself played a minor administrative role in the early days of the Soviet theater (he sat on several TEO committees, including the Repertoire Committee) before emigrating in 1921. 46. Adr. Piotrovsky, "Chetvërtyy god," Zi, no. 602–604 (November 6–8, 1920), p. 1. 47. "Khronika," Zi, no. 85 (1919), p. 2. 48. "Salamanskiy boy," Zi, no. 114 (April 9, 1919), p. 3. 49. Piotrovsky, Za sovetskiy teatr!, p. 23. 50. Adr. Piotrovsky, "Teatr vsego naroda," Zi, no. 456–457 (May 20–21, 1920), p. 1. 51. Unless otherwise indicated, my information on the tower comes from Nikolav Punin, Pamyatnik III Internatsionalu: Prouekt khud. V. Ye. Tatlina (Petersburg: Izd. IZO v NKP, 1920). However, there are different versions of these glass forms. For example, V. Shklovsky in "Pamvatnik Tret'yemu Internatsionalu" (Zi, no. 650–652 JJanuary 5-9, 1921}, p. 1) describes the lowest glass volume as a cylinder housing the "International Sovnarkom," and the upper volume as a sphere housing ROSTA. 52. Punin, Pamyatnik III Internatsionalu, p. 2. 53. Ibid. 54. Ibid., p. 4. 55. Ibid., p. 3. 56. Ibid., p. 4. 57. In Vladimir Tatlin and the Russian Avant-Garde (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983), John Milner has explored a number of ways this potential can be seen in the tower (pp. 151–180). ## 6. NEP and the "Art of Capitulation" 1. "Blokada Rossii konchayetsya," V, no. 1–2 (1922), pp. 1–3. 2. "Torzhestvuyushchiy oboz," V, no. 3 (May 1922), p. 2. The Piotrovsky remark comes from his article "Perelom," in Zi, no. 1 (January 3, 1922), p. 13. 3. See, for example, Stephen Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet Experience: Politics and History since 1917 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), esp. pp. 75–76; Richard Stites, Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Dreams and Experimental Life in the Russian Revolution (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989), p. 225. 4. See Michael Fox, "Glavlit, Censorship, and the Problem of Party Policy in Cultural Affairs," Soviet Studies, no. 6 (1922). See also Christopher Read, Culture and Power in Revolutionary Russia: The Intelligentsia and the Transition from Tsarism to Communism (London: Macmillan, 1990). 5. Karl Schlögel, Jenseits des Grossen Oktober: Das Laboratorium der Moderne Petersburg 1909-1921 (Berlin: Siedler Verlag, 1988). 6. I. E. Barenbaum and N. A. Kostyleva, Knizhnyy Peterburg-Leningrad (Leningrad: Lenizdat, 1986), pp. 326–346. 7. "Rabota Gosudarstvennogo Izdatel'stva v Peterburge za 1920 god," Kir, no. 1 (1921), p. 26. 8. L. Meshcheryakov, "O chastnykh izdatel'stvakh," Pir, no. 2 (1922), pp. 129-131; Jeffrey Brooks, When Russia Learned to Read (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), p. 156. 9. "Khronika," Zi, no. 28 (July 17, 1923), p. 26. 10. Katerina Clark, "The 'Quiet Revolution' in Soviet Intellectual Life," in Sheila Fitzpatrick, Alexander Rabinowitch, and Richard Stites, eds., Russia in the Era of NEP: Explorations in Soviet Culture and Society (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991), pp. 210–230. 11. UNOVIS continued to exhibit but was a diminished presence. The Scythian movement folded in 1924. For other groups and institutions of War Communism that folded, see Ya. Lifshits, "Peterburgskive pis'ma (7 ivunva 1922)," Nrk, no. 4 (1922), p. 25; Barry Scherr, "Notes on the Literary Life of Petrograd, 1918–22: A Tale of Three Houses," Slavic Review (June 1977). pp. 256-267. 12. For example, the emergence of the Constructivist movement. 13. See Katerina Clark, "The City Versus the Countryside in Soviet Peasant Literature of the Twenties: A Duel of Utopias," in Abbott Gleason, Peter Kenez, and Richard Stites, eds., Bolshevik Culture (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985), pp. 175–189. 14. A. A. Mgebrov, Zhizn' v teatre, vol. II (Moscow and Leningrad: Academia, 1932), p. 386. 15. See, for example, "Iz instruktsii Vserossiyskoy tsentral'noy oktyabr'skoy kommissii o poryadke prazdnovaniya IV godovshchiny Oktyabrya," I, no. 33 (October 1921), p. 4. 16. See D. Shcheglov, "O Yedinom Khudozhestvennom Kruzhke, o metodakh i perspektivakh," Zi, no. 22 (June 5, 1923), p. 20; A. Zlat, "Iskusstvo i rabochiye kluby," Zi, no. 26 (June 26, 1923), p. 22; Yedinyy khudozhestvennyy kruzhok: Metody klubno-khudozhestvennoy raboty (Leningrad: Izdatel'stvo knizhnogo sektora GOBONO, 1924). 17. A prime example of this can be seen in Meyerhold's production of The Trust D. E. (see Chapter 7). 18. See, for example, D. Shcheglov, "Neskol'ko mysley o khudozhestvennoy rabote i o rabochikh klubakh'," and [unsigned], "Rabochiy repertuar,"Zi, no. 21 (May 29, 1923), pp. 19–20. 19. Zlat, "Iskusstvo i rabochiye kluby," p. 22. 20. A. Piotrovsky, "Molodaya dramaturgiya," Zi, no. 12 (March 18, 1924), p. 3. 21. A. Lunacharsky, "Khudozhestvennaya politika sovetskogo gosudarstva," Zi, no. 9 (February 26, 1924), p. 2. 22. "Teatral'nyy god," editorial, Zi, no. 1 (January 3, 1922), p. 1; A. Piotrovsky, "Nashi katakomby," Zi, no. 4 (January 23, 1922), p. 2. 23. See Larissa A. Zhadova, Malevich: Suprematism and Revolution in Russian Art, 1910-1930 (London: Thames and Hudson, 1982), p. 96. 24. Istoriua Leningradskogo universiteta, 1819-1969: Ocherki (Leningrad: Izdatel'stvo Leningradskogo universiteta, 1969), pp. 225–328. 25. See Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Commissariat of Enlightenment (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970), Chap. 5. 26. See Katerina Clark and Michael Holquist, Mikhail Bakhtin (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1985), Chaps. 4 and 5. 27. Even after the Institute was nationalized, Zubov continued to play some role in running its affairs until he was arrested in 1924. He was released and emigrated in 1925. 28. The formation of the Division in some senses represented the realization of the agenda of left art presented in a slogan of its mouthpiece Iskusstvo kommuny as "Let Us Organize a Division of the Verbal Arts!" (December 7, 1918), p. 2. See Halina Stephan, "Lef" and the Left Front of the Arts, Slavistische Beitrage, vol. 142 (Munich: Verlag Otto Sagner, 1981), pp. 9–10. 29. N. Strel'nikov, "Pozdno—luchshe, chem nikogda," Zi, no. 20 (May 13, 1924), pp. 7–8. 30. It seems probable that Bakhtin gave one of the public lectures there, as is indicated in his Work Book. Although Michael Holquist and I state in our book Mikhail Bakhtin that this entry in the Work Book is false, I have come to reconsider this position and entertain the possibilitv that a lecture of June 28, 1924, listed in GIII's report as having been given by N. N. Bakhtin, was actually given by Mikhail, since its topic, "Problema 'geroya' v literaturnom proizvedenii," seems close to what he had been working on in recent years. N. N. Bakhtin gave other lectures at GIII, on the childrens' theater, his area of expertise. 31. Compare the activities, subjects broached, and lectures given in GIII with those of GAKhN, reported, for example, in BG, no. 1 (1925), pp. 46-62; no. 2–3 (1926), pp. 57–60; and no. 4–5 (1926), p. 91. 32. One famous, though short-lived, example would be the Economist (Ekonomist), to which the sociologist Pitirim Sorokin contributed. 33. See, for example, the attacks on Mysl', "idealists," F. F. Zelinsky, and others in virtually every issue of Kniga i revolyutsiya from 1922. 34. "V Petrogradskom teatral'nom otdelenii," Zi, no. 4 (January 22, 1924), p. 27. 35. N. Punin, "Zangezi," Zi, no. 19 (May 15, 1923), p. 10; V. Tatlin, "O 'Zangezi,' " Zi, no. 17 (May 8, 1923), p. 15. 36. In Western historiography, this position is generally associated with the Serapion Brothers, discussed in the next chapter; "Serapionovye brat'ya o sebe,' Lz, no. 3 (1922), pp. 25–31. What is less generally recognized is that their position was far from unique for early NEP. See P. Medvedev, "O 'Sodruzhestve' (k 4- letiyu gruppy)," in Sodruzhestvo: Literaturnyy al'manakh (Leningrad: Priboy, 1927), pp. 286–296. 37. Sergey Radlov, "Sud'by teatra za vremya revolyutsii," Zi, no. 42 (October 24, 1922), p. 2. 38. A. Lunacharsky, "Khudozhestvennaya politika sovetskogo gosudarstva," Zi, no. 9 (February 26, 1924), p. 3. See also N. Bukharin, "O khudozhestvennoy literature i politike RKP (Rech' na soveshchanii TsK RKP o literature)," Zi, no. 36 (September 2, 1924), pp. 2–3. 39. For material on the new universities, see Akademiya obshchestvennykh nauk pri TsK KPSS, Sovetskaya intelligentsiya (istoriya formirovaniya i rosta 1917–1965 gg.) (Moscow: Mysl', 1968), p. 104, and D. P. Konchalovskiy, Vospominaniya i pis'ma (ot gumanizma k Khristu) (Paris: Libraire du cinq continents, 1971), pp. 158-161. 40. Figures such as A. Volynsky, Ye. Zamyatin, and K. Chukovsky took prominent roles in running the Petrograd branch of VSP. 41. This circumstance is quite clear in the many articles about the situation of Soviet publishing that appeared in Pechat' i revolyutsiya in these years. See, for example, no. 1 (1921), pp. 9–42. 42. An exception to the rule that the cultural journals of NEP came out of the two capitals would be Sibirskiye ogni, founded in 1922, which helped launch the careers of several young writers. 43. Krasnaya nov', for instance, had a hitherto unprecedented circulation of fifteen to twenty thousand in its first year, although this declined to eight thousand during 1922, before settling down to ten to twelve thousand for some years. 44. Petrograd was still the capital for scholarship and research, particularly in the natural sciences, and an overwhelming majority of works in this field came out of that city, as can be sensed by looking at the sections reviewing scientific literature in Pechat'i revolyutsiya. 45. Zvezda's circulation was around three thousand, increasing by the end of 1926 to five thousand, but that could not compete with Novyy mir, with a circulation of fifteen thousand. 46. El. "Itogi IV-ogo Vserossiyskogo s"yezda rabotnikov iskusstv," Zi, no. 20 (May 22, 1923), p. 16. 47. "Ekran," Zi, no. 31 (August 5, 1923), p. 5. 48. "Khronika i ruchnye zametki," Nrk, no. 1 (1922), p. 35. 49. For music, see Igor' Glebov (pseud. of B. Asaf'yev), "Russkaya muzykal'- naya zhizn' v 1921 godu," Zi, no. 1 (January3, 1922), p. 3. In theater, Meyerhold's Moscow productions dominated the horizon. 50. B. Eikhenbaum, "Retsenziya na sborniki V. Rozhdestvenskogo i Ye. Polonskoy," Ku, no. 7 (1921), p. 42. 51. Mikh. Spassovskiy, "Akademiya khudozhestv: Yeyë proshloye i nastoyashcheye," Ar, no. 1 (1923), pp. 72–76. 52. Victor Turner, The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure (Chicago: The Aldine Press, 1969), esp. pp. 112–113, 128–133. 53. Sergey Radlov, "Sud'by teatra za vremya revolyutsii," Zi, no. 42 (October 24, 1922), p. 2. 54. For a fuller account of the "Pushkin Days" see John Malmstad, "Mikhail Kuzmin: A Chronicle of His Life and Times," in M. A. Kuzmin, Sobraniye sochineniy, vol. I (Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1977), pp. 256–257. 55. See also D. Segal's account of Akhmatova's role immediately after the Revolution in his" 'Sumerki svobody': O nekotorykh temakh russkoy yezhednevnoy pechati 1917–1918 gg.," Minuvsheye: Istoricheskiy al'manakh, no. 3 (Paris: Atheneum, 1987), pp. 131–195. 56. V. N. Sazhin, "Neudavshiysya proryv nemoty (o nevyshedshem nomere 'Literaturnoy gazete' 1921 goda)," in Pyatye Tynyanovskiye chteniya (Riga: Zinatne, 1990), pp. 162–167. See also Lo, no. 2 (1992). 57. See, respectively, V. Khodasevich, "Pamyati predka," Ye. Zamyatin, "Pora," and N. I., "Iz Moskvy," articles summarized in V. N. Sazhin, "Neudavshiysya proryv nemoty." 58. B. Eikhenbaum, "Mig soznaniya," Ku, no. 7 (1921), pp. 10, 17. 59. Ye. Zamyatin's dystopic novel We (My, 1920) is a cousin of Brave New World and 1984, but in this instance the critique of the utopian society with its overbearing state is refracted through clichés from the myth of Petersburg, and the novel has a Pushkin figure as its martyred hero (R-13). 60. See, for example, A. Bogdanov, Elementy proletarskoy kul'tury (Moscow: Gos. izd., 1920), p. 49; P. Bessal'ko, "O forme i soderzhanii," G, no. 4 (1918), p. 4; V. Mavakovsky, "Radovat'sya rano," and O. M. Brik, "Khudozhnik-proletariy," Ik, no. 2 (December 15,1918), p. 1; A. Lunacharsky, "Lozhka protivoyadiya," Ik, no. 4 (December 29, 1918), p. 1. 61. Cited in Edward J. Brown, Russian Literature since the Revolution (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1982), p. 31. 62. Pushkinskiy dom acquired a permanent home only in the postrevolutionary years and also expanded its purview to all of Russian literature; see "Pushkinskiy dom pri Rossiyskoy akademii nauk," Kir, no. 1 (1920), p. 61; M. G., "Pushkinskiy dom," Niyer, no. 2 (1921), pp. 23-25. 63. Igor' Glebov, "Kamernye kontserty starogo Peterburga," Zi, no. 14 (April 4, 1922), p. 1; Professor Mikhaylovskiy, "Staryy Peterburg," Kp, no. 7 (1923), p. 6; Obshchestvo 'Staryy Peterburg' 1921–1923 (Petersburg, 1923), esp. pp. 11-16. 64. Rusticus, "Poeziya starogo Peterburga," Zi, no. 17 (May 2, 1922), p. 5. 65. See Peterburg: Avtobiografiya A. P. Ostroumovoy, Vstupitel'naya stat'ya Al. Benua (Petersburg: Komitet populyarizatsii khudozhestvennykh izdaniy pri Rossiyskoy akademii istorii material'noy kul'tury, 1922). 66. Lit, "Vnimaniye 'okhrany' pamyatnikov iskusstva i stariny," Zi, no. 19 (May 15, 1923), p. 18. 67. "Khronika," Zi, no. 4 (January 30, 1923), p. 15. 68. N. Punin, "Ot svyashchennykh mogil ruki proch'!" Zi, no. 12 (March 27, 1923), p. 8. 69. "Obshchenatsional'nye Pushkinskiye pominki," Vl, no. 2 (1921), p. 15. 70. "Khronika," Pir, no. 3 (May-June, 1924), pp. 286-287; "Khronika," Nk, no. 3–4 (1924), p. 5. Vyacheslav Ivanov was brought up from Baku to be one of those presiding over the celebrations, a service that apparently enabled him to emigrate afterwards. 71. N. Punin, "Vystavka pamyati Khlebnikova," Zi, no. 26 (July 3, 1923), p. 14; I, "Vystavka . . .," Zi, no. 27 (July 10, 1923), p. 19; "Khronika," Zi, no. 25 (June 26, 1923), p. 24. Note the hagiographic elements in N. L., "Poet vremeni," Zi, no. 37 (September 19, 1922), p. 7. 72. "Khronika," Zi, no. 39 (October 3, 1922), p. 3. Radlov was closer to the Tatlin / Altman / Punin camp at the Myatlev House than to the opposing Malevich camp. See Sergey Radlov, "Sud'by teatra za vremya revolyutsii," Zi, no. 42 (October 24, 1922), pp. 1–2. 73. Pavel Filonov, "Deklaratsiya 'mirovogo rassveta,' "; P. Mansurov, "Deklaratsiya,"; M. V. Matyushin, "Ne iskusstvo, a zhizn',"; K. Malevich, "Suprematicheskoye zerkalo," Zi, no. 20 (August 26, 1923), pp. 13–16. 74. N. Punin, "Zangezi," Zi, no. 20 (May 15, 1923), p. 10. 75. See O. Brik, "T. n. 'formal'nyy metod,' " L, no. 1 (1923), pp. 213–215. 76. S. Radlov, "Slovesnaya improvizatsiya v teatre," Zi, no. 9 (March 1, 1922), p. 4; V. Tatlin, "O 'Zangezi,' " Zi, no. 17 (May 8, 1923), p. 15. 77. B. Eikhenbaum, "O Shatobriane, o chervontsakh i o russkoy literature," Zi, no. 1 (1924), p. 3. 78. D. Vygodskiy, "Stikhi 1923 goda," Zi, no. 1 (1924), p. 5. 79. See Katerina Clark, The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981). 80. N. N., "Radostnoye barokko," Zi, no. 18 (May 9, 1922), p. 4. 81. N. L., "Poet vremeni," Zi, no. 37 (September 19, 1922), p. 7, and N. Punin, "Zangezi," Zi, no. 20 (May 22, 1923), p. 11. ## 7. Revolutionary Culture Meets the Jazz Age 1. The city was renamed Leningrad after Lenin's death in January 1924, and hence was called Leningrad at the time of this premiere. However, because this chapter covers primarily the period before the city was renamed, for consistency's sake, I will refer to it throughout as Petrograd. 2. Actually, Ehrenburg had refused to adapt his novel The D. E. Trust (Trest D. Ye. Istoriya gibeli Yevropy, 1923) for Meyerhold, and the play combines elements from not only the Ehrenburg novel but also Bernhard Kellermann's story "The Tunnel." 3. This was not the first time Meyerhold used jazz on stage; he had already used it for The Magnanimous Cuckold in 1922. 4. See S. Frederick Starr, Red and Hot: The Fate of Jazz in the Soviet Union, 1917–1980 (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983), pp. 45–46. 5. Gayk Adonts, "Novyy vid pornografii," Zi, no. 37 (1923), pp. 1–2. 6. A. Gvozdev, "Postanovka 'D. Ye.' v 'Teatre imeni Vs. Meyerkhol'da,' "Zi, no. 26 (June 24, 1924), p. 6. 7. Starr, Red and Hot, pp. 51, 52. 8. Gvozdev, "Postanovka 'D. Ye.,' " p. 5. 9. M., "Meyerkhol'd o proshlom i budushchem russkogo teatra," Zi, no. 27 (July 1, 1924), pp. 11–12. 10. Valentin Parnakh, "Novye tantsy," "Dzhaz-band," V, no. 4 (1922), p. 25. 11. S. Mokul'skiy, "Novaya postanovka Meyerkhol'da ('D. Ye.' Podgayetskogo)," Zi, no. 27 (1924), p. 11. 12. "Obshchestvo izucheniya zapadnoy kul'tury," Zi, no. 577 (October 8, 1920), p. 1. 13. For instance, A. Tolstoy's play The Revolt of the Machines (Bunt mashin) is from K. Capek's R.U.R. Piotrovsky's Padeniye Yeleny Ley is in fact from Kaiser's Gas, though Piotrovsky has given his protagonists Greek names. 14. B. Eikhenbaum, "O Shatobriane, o chervontsakh i russkoy literature," Zi, no. 1 (January 1, 1924), p. 3. 15. "Ob izdatel'skoy strategii," Zi, no. 38 (September 16, 1923), p. 26. 16. "Sevzapkino v 1923 godu," Zi, no. 1 (January 2, 1923), p. 23. 17. Richard Taylor, The Politics of the Soviet Cinema, 1917–1929 (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1979), p. 75. 18. [unsigned], "Okno v Yevropu," Zi, no. 1 (January 1, 1920), p. 2; "Meri Pikford, Duglas Ferbenks i Charli Chaplin yedut v Moskvu," Zi, no. 23 (1924), p. 3; "Khronika," Zi, no. 8 (February 21, 1922), p. 7. 19. "Khronika," Zi, no. 37 (September 9, 1924), no. 31, (July 29, 1924), p. 23. 20. "Pis'mo Romanu Yakobsonu," V, no. 1-2 (1922), p. 5. Shklovsky himself was soon obliged to flee the Soviet Union for Berlin (in March 1922) but negotiated to return in 1923. 21. A. S. Oslinovskiy and A. F. Kononkov, D. S. Rozhdestvenskiy (Moscow: Prosveshcheniye, 1974), pp. 95-96; Akad. A. I. Yoffe, Moya zhizn' i rabota: Avtobiograficheskiy ocherk (Moscow and Leningrad: Tekhniko-teoreticheskoye izdatel'stvo, 1933), p.24; Erenfest-Yoffe: Nauchnaya perepiska (1907–1933 gg.) (Leningrad: Nauka, 1973), pp. 150–175, 184–186, 203. 22. See, for example, S. Efis, "D. S. Rozhdestvenskiy—uchënyy i organizator," in Vospominaniya ob akademike D. S. Rozhdestvenskom: K 100-letiyu so dnya rozhdeniya (Leningrad: Nauka, 1976), p. 69; Oslinovskiy and Kononkov, D. S. Rozhdestvenskiy, p. 95. 23. G. Ertsikovskiy, "Sovremennaya aviatsiya," Sz, no. 1 (1922), pp. 180-182; "Sovremennyy kontsert,"Sz, no. 1 (1922), p. 187. 24."Institut istorii iskusstv," ZptGiS, no. 51 (February 23, 1924), Pp. 6–7; A. Gvozdev, "Nechto o zritele, prospavshem 7 let," Zi, no. 28 (July 8, 1924), p. 6. 25. See Chapter 6. In Marietta Shaginyan's novel Mess-Mend to be discussed later in this chapter, such Russophile trends are parodied as the "Society for Russia and the Samovar," issue I (Moscow: Giz, 1924), p. 28. 26. See Gvozdev, "Postanovka 'D. Ye.,' " pp. 5–6. 27. Marietta Shaginyan, for instance, felt this when she wrote Mess-Mend between October 6 and December 23, 1923; see L. Skorino,"Obgonyaya vremya," in Marietta Shaginyan, Mess-Mend (Moscow: Pravda, 1988), p. 430. 28. See A. Piotrovsky, "Mysli avtora," Kp, no. 1 (1923), p. 14; Ye. R. D. R., "Kino shagayet," Zi, no. 14 (April 1, 1924), pp. 10–11. 29. F. Scott Fitzgerald, "Echoes of the Jazz Age," reprinted in Arthur Mizener, ed., The Fitzgerald Reader (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1963), pp. 323–331. 30. Ibid. 31. See Viktor Shklovsky, "Drama i massovoye predstavleniye," Zi, nos. 688–690 (March 9, 10, 11, 1921), p. 1. 32. See, for example, Ye. Zamyatin, "O literature, revolyutsii, entropii i prochem" (1923), published in Pisateli ob iskusstve i o sebe (Leningrad: Krug, 1925). 33. Other members were Ye. Polonskaya, I. Gruzdev, L. Lunts, M. Slonimsky, N. Nikitin, N. Tikhonov, and V. Pozner. Their mentors were Gorky, Shklovsky, and Ye. Zamyatin, a list that in itself bespeaks the heterogeneous nature of their literary orientations. 34. Lev Lunts, "Na zapad!" B, no. 4 (1923), p. 262. 35. Ibid., p. 259. 36. V. Kaverin, Ocherk raboty (Moscow: Sovetskaya Rossiya, 1964), p. 19. 37. Lunts, "Na zapad!" pp. 267–269. 38. Others include a rather precious literary group known as "the Islanders" (Ostrovityane) whose members included K. Vaginov, S. Kolbas'yev, and N. Tikhonov. See also Boris Lavrenev, "Vmesto predisloviya," Krusheniye respubliki Itl' (1925). 39. I. Oksënov, "Proza 1923 goda," Zi, no. 1 (January 1, 1924), pp. 6–7. 40. B. Eikhenbaum, "O Shatobriane, o chervontsakh i russkoy literature," Zi, no. 1 (January 1, 1924), p. 4. 41. It should be noted that in Shklovsky's "Art as Technique" though the message is radical, the examples come principally from Russian literature of the nineteenth century. 42. "Gotovitsya k pechati," N, no. 1 (1921), p. 267. 43. Viktor Shklovsky, "Razvërtyvaniye syuzheta," Sborniki po teorii poeticheskogo yazyka (Petrograd, 1921), p. 56; B. Eikhenbaum, "O'Genri i teoriya novelly," Z, no. 6 (1925). 44. "Otdel slovesnykh iskusstv," in Gosudarstvennyy institut istorii iskusstv, 1912–1927 (Leningrad: GIII, 1927), p. 24. 45. V. Kaverin, "Vstrechi v krasnoy gostinoy," Sobesednik: Vospominaniya i portrety (Moscow: Sovetskiy pisatel', 1973), p. 58. 46. See V. Kaverin, The End of the Gang (Konets khazy, 1925), and V. Shklovsky and Vs. Ivanov, Mustard Gas (Iprit, 1925—also called Iperit when published in Lef). 47. D. S. Likhachëv, "Zametki k intellektual'noy topografii Peterburga pervoy poloviny dvadtsatogo veka (po vospominaniyam)," in Semiotika goroda i gorodskoy kul'tury: Peterburg, Trudy po znakovym sistemam, XVIII (Tartu, 1984), Pp. 76-77. 48. "Literaturnaya khronika," Zi, no. 8 (February 21, 1922), p. 7. 52. "Bazarnaya literatura," editorial, Zi, no. 4 (January 22, 1924), p. 1; Dukh Bankvo, "Velikiy glukhonemoy," Zi, no. 2 (January 8, 1924), pp. 21–22. 53. "Zapreshcheniye ektsentricheskikh tantsev," Zi, no. 34 (August 19, 1924), p. 24. 54. See Paul Josephson, "Scientific Contacts between Germany and the Soviet Union in the Twenties," a paper presented to the Annual Convention of A.A.A.S.S. in Boston, November 1987. 55. See the open letter the group (also led by M. Kuzmin, K. Vaginov, and A. Radlova) sent to the German Expressionists: "Privetstviye khudozhnikam molodoy Germanii ot gruppy emotsionalistov," Zi, no. 10 (March 13, 1923), p. 8. 57. A. F. Britikov, "Detektivnaya povest' v kontekste priklyuchencheskikh zhanrov," in V. A. Kovalëv, ed., Russkaya sovetskaya povest' 20-30-kh godov (Leningrad: Nauka, 1976). 58. A., "Revolyutsionnaya opera," Zi, no. 37 (September 9, 1924), p. 23; N. Mal'kov, " 'V bor'be za kommunu' ili 'Vzorvavshayasya bomba,' "Zi, no. 40 (September 30, 1924), pp. 5–6. 59. See B. Eikhenbaum, "O. Genri i teoriya novelly," Z, no. 6 (1925); see also K. Fedin's review of A. Piotrovsky's Padeniye Yeleny Ley—"Gaz," Zi, no. 46 (November 21, 1922), p. 3. 60. Yuri Tynyanov, "O literaturnom fakte," L, no. 2 (1924), pp. 101–116, esp. p. 103; Eikhenbaum, "O. Genri i teoriya novelly." 61. Carol Avins, Border Crossings: The West and Russian Identity in Soviet Literature, 1917–1934 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983), p. 55. 63. M. Shaginyan, "Kak ya pisala 'Mess-Mend,' " in Sobraniye sochineniy (1935), p. 377. 64. N. Meshcheryakov, "Yanki v Petrograde," Zi, no. 7 (February 12, 1924), p. 14. 65, Shkloysky and Ivanov, Mustard Gas (see "Literaturnaya khronika," Zi, no. 43 [October 21, 1924], p. 19). 66. Skorino, "Obgonyaya vremya," p. 436. 67. F. Britikov, "Detektivnaya povest'," p. 434. 68. Jeffrey Brooks, When Russia Learned to Read: Literacy and Popular Literature, 1861-–1917 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), p. xvii. 69. Jim Dollar [Marietta Shaginyan], Mess-Mend ili yanki v Petrograde, issue V (Moscow: Gos. izd., 1924), pp. 179–180. 71. Ibid., p. 181. 72. As we will see in the account of the linguistic theories of N. Ya. Marr in Chapter 9, the term yedinyy was not at this time an innocent one. 73. Mess-Mend, issue V, p. 183. 74. See Shaginyan's account of this in M. Sh., "Dollar: Yego zhizn' i tvorchestvo," in Mess-Mend, issue I, pp. 7–10 75. Mess-Mend, issue III, p. 222. 76. Films were more likely to be centered in Moscow; in fact when A. Tolstoy's Aelita was made into a film (directed by Ya. Protozanov), the setting was changed from Petrograd to Moscow. 77. Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed., enlarged (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970), esp. pp. 3–22. 78. This position is most cogently formulated in Tynyanov's introduction "O Khlebnikove" to Sobraniye proizvedeniy Velemira Khlebnikova, vol. I (Leningrad: Izdatel'stvo pisateley v Leningrade). 79. Eikhenbaum in his article on O. Henry discusses how O. Henry parodied the clichés of the adventure story as a first step in developing new narrative techniques; see "O. Genri i teoriya novelly." 80. See Shaginyan's preface to her revised edition: Mess-Mend, ili yanki v Petrograde. Roman-skazka (Moscow, 1960), p. 340. 81. G. Kozintsev and L. Trauberg, "Yeshchë odno D. Ye.," T, no. 7 (1923), p. 13. 82. Ibid., p. 13; Grigoriy Kozintsev, Leonid Trauberg, "Vneshtorg na Eyfelovoy bashne, ili printsip sego dnya (ektsentriki o sebe)," Kp, no. 4 (1923), p. 15; G. Kozintsev, "Glubokiy ekran," Sobraniye sochineniy v pyati tomakh, vol. I (Leningrad: Iskusstvo, 1982), pp. 52, 54–56; V. Shklovsky, "O rozhdenii i zhizni FEKSov," in V. Nedobrovo, FEKS: Grigoriy Kozintsev, Leonid Trauberg (Moscow-Leningrad, 1928). 83. Grigoriy Kozintsev, "A. B.! Parad ekstsentrikov," in Grigoriy Kozintsev et al., Ekstsentrizm (Ekstsentropolis [byvsh. Petrograd], 1922), pp. 3-5. 84. Ibid. 85. Ibid.; Kozintsev and Trauberg, "Vneshtorg na Eyfelevoy bashne, ili printsip sego dnya," p. 15. 86. This can be seen in their early play Vneshtorg on the Eiffel Tower, the title of which invokes Cocteau's Wedding Party on the Eiffel Tower, although the play is less a self-reflexive piece about the nature of art and its relation to reality (as was Cocteau's play) than a zany version of the standard plot about how the Soviet Union saves Europe and wins the world for a greater tomorrow. 87. Kozintsev, "Glubokiy ekran," p. 55; “Pis'mo k L. M. Kozintsevoy-Erenburg [1922]," in Grigoriy Kozintsev, Sobraniye sochineniy v pyati tomakh, vol. III (Leningrad: Iskusstvo, 1983), p. 170. 88. L. Trauberg, "Otdel'nyy vzglyad na Lopukhovu," Izbrannye prizvedeniya, vol. I (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1988), pp. 308-400. 89. M., "Meyerkhol'd o proshlom i budushchem russkogo teatra," pp. 11–12. 90. V. Shklovsky, "Tema, obraz i syuzhet Rozanova," Zi, nos. 697–699 (March 19, 20, 22, 1921), p. 1; V. Shklovsky, Khod konya (Moscow and Berlin: Gelikon, 1923), p. 38. V. Erlich suggests in Russian Formalism: History-Doctrine. 2nd revised ed. (The Hague: Mouton and Co., 1965), p. 55, that the Formalists tended to overstate their ideas for the purposes of polemic, and in keeping with the "timbre" of their generation. 91. F. Starr in Red and Hot chronicles the radical shifts as Soviet officialdom and critics tried to negotiate this particular dilemma. 92. V. Shklovsky, "Iperit (otryvok iz romana)," L, no. 3 (1925), p. 70. 93. See Eikhenbaum, "V poiskakh zhanra." 94. Here I have in mind particularly the Vengerov Circle at Petersburg University (see Chapter 8). ## 8. The Establishment of Soviet Culture 1. See, for example, "V Leningradskom teatral'nom upravlenii," Zi, no. 40 (September 30, 1924), p. 20; "Na pomosch'!" Zi, no. 41 (October 7, 1924), p. 2. 2. "Istoricheskaya doska" and "Navodneniye v 1824 godu," Kg, no. 217 (September 24, 1924), p. 1, p. 2, respectively. 3. N. Yevreinov, "Kommuna pravednykh," Zi, no. 41 (October 7, 1924), pp. 3-5. The play was subsequently renamed Korabl' pravednykh (The Ship of the Righteous), a title more closely echoed in Olga Forsh's thinly fictionalized account of the House of Arts during War Communism, Sumasshedshiy korabl': Povest' (Leningrad: Izdatel'stvo pisateley v Leningrade, 1931), which also uses the "Noah's ark"metaphor. Another institution in the play, the Society for the Protection of Animals, appears to have been a dig at another Gorky-founded intellectual institution, Kubuch (the Committee for the Improvement of Conditions for Scholars). 4. A case in point would be the formation of the Federation of Soviet Writers (FOSP) in 1925–1926, which in many respects anticipates the formation of the Writers Union in 1932-1934 (for example, incorporating most factions but excluding the extreme "left" and "right," and a platform for ameliorating writers'living conditions). 5. This was not true in all fields. Popular music was a particular exception. 6. V. S., "Knizhnyy rynok v 1925 godu," Nk, no. 3–4, (1925), pp. 24–25. 7. "Pisateli privetstvuyut oktyabr': Sodruzhestvo," Zi, no. 45 (November 7–10, 1925), p. 7. 8. See K. Fedin's letter to Gorky in Gor'kiy i sovetskiye pisateli, Literaturnoye nasledstvo, no. XXV (Moscow: Akademiya nauk, 1963), p. 474. 9. "Ne Piter, A Leningrad. Pis'mo tov. Zinov'yeva Petrosovetu" and "Traurnyy plenum Petrosoveta," Kg, no. 18, January 24, 1924 (evening edition), p. 1, p. 2, respectively. 10. S. Sheshukov, Neistovye revniteli: Iz istorii literaturnoy bor'by 20-kh godov (Moscow: Moskovskiy rabochiy, 1970). See also E. Brown, The Proletarian Episode in Russian Literature, 1928–1932 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1953), and H. Ermolaev, Soviet Literary Theories, 1917–1934: The Genesis of Socialist Realism (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1963). 11. See "Klassiki-poputchiki-proletpisateli," editorial, Nlp, no. 5-6 (March 20, 1927), p. 5. 12. Ye. Yefremov, "Tvorcheskiy byt LAPPa," Zi, no. 15 (April 7, 1929), p. 7. 13. Ye. Ye. Essen, "Oktyabr' i rabotnik iskusstva," Zi, no. 45 (November 7-10, 1925), p. 19. 14. K. Malevich, "Otkrytoye pis'mo gollandskim khudozhnikam Van-Gofu i Bekmanu," Zi, no. 50 (December 9, 1924), p. 13. 15. See Il'ya Ionov, "Regalii Peredvizhnogo teatra," Zi, no. 6 (February 5, 1924), p. 5. (It later reopened before closing for good in 1927.) The case of art is more complicated. AKhRR's activists were almost all young, however, many of them being art students in the Komsomol movement, a pattern that was particularly marked in its Leningrad branches; see V. S. Ginger, "Yacheyka AKhRR v Akademii Khudozhestv," in AKhRR. Assotsiatsiya khudozhnikov revolyutsionnoy Rossii. Sbornik vspominaniy, statey, dokumentov, comp. I. A. Gronskiy (Moscow: Izobrazitel'noye iskusstvo, 1973), pp. 136-151. 16. See, for example, L. Trotsky, Voprosy byta: Epokha kul'turnichestva i yeyë zadachi, 2nd ed. (Moscow: Krasnaya nov', 1923), pp. 3–4. 17. "V Narkomprose," Zi, no. 26 (June 30, 1925), p. 22 18. G. Lelevich, "Attestat zrelosti," Zi, no. 52 (December 21, 1926), p. 8. 19. An entire issue of Pechat' i revolyutsiya (no. 5) was devoted to the debate. See also L. Trotsky, Literatura i revolyutsiya (Moscow: Krasnaya nov, 1923), Chapter 5. 20. See, for example, S. Isakov, "Krivaya trëkh I," Zi, no. 30 (July 22, 1924), pp. 5-6. 21. "V Insitute istorii iskusstv," Zi, no. 10 (March 4, 1924), p. 21. 22. "Sotsiologicheskoe izucheniye iskusstva," Zi, no. 8 (February 24, 1925), p. 23. 23. F. I. Shmidt, "Rossiyskiy institut istorii iskusstv," Zi, no. 6 (February 10, 1925), p. 5. 24. "Institut istorii iskusstv," Zi, no. 45 (November 7–10, 1925), p. 35. 25. This position is set out most cogently in his book West and East (Zapad i Vostok: Voprosy mirovoy politiki i mirovoy revolyutsii) (Moscow: Krasnaya nov', 1924). 26. V. Vsevolodskiy, "'Levyy' teatr sego dnya," Zi, no. 6 (February 5, 1924), p. 6. 27. Shmidt, "Rossiyskiy institut istorii iskusstv," p. 4; "Ocheredniye zadachi AKhRR," Zi, no. 22 (May 27, 1924), p. 5. 28. See L. Trotsky, "O khudozhestvennoy literature i politike RKP (Rech' na soveshchanii pri TsK RKP o literature)," Zi, no. 34 (August 19, 1924), p. 4. 29. For an account of this, see Robert C. Tucker, Stalin as Revolutionary, 1879–1929: A Study in History and Personality (New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1973), esp. pp. 373–392. 30. See the account of "Tri dnya" in Adr. Piotrovsky, "Khronika leningradskikh prazdnestv 1919-22 g.," in Gosudarstvennyy institut istorii iskusstv, Massovye prazdnestva: Sbornik Komiteta sotsiologicheskogo izucheniya iskusstva (Leningrad: Academia, 1926), pp. 58–60, 78–79, 84; "Rabochiy repertuar," Zi, no. 21 (May 29, 1923), p. 20; and"Oktyabr'v rabochikh klubakh," Zi, no. 43 (October 30, 1923), pp. 13–16. 31. N., "Novaya postanovka Akdramy," Zi, no. 37 (1924), p. 23; Gr. Avlov, "'Lyzistrata,' " Zi, no. 42 (October 14, 1924), p. 11. 32. "ORIS (Obshchestvo revniteley istorii)," Zi, no. 4 (January 26, 1926), p. 21; V. B., [review of] "D. Shcheglov, 'Spektakl' v klube,' " Zi, no. 4 (January 26. 1926), p. 22. 33. "Revolyutsionnaya data. 1905," editorial, Zi, no. 51 (December 22, 1925), p. 1. 34. Gayk Adonts, "Istoriya ili balagan," Zi, no. 23 (June 9, 1925), p. 2. 35. Voprosy kul'tury pri diktature proletariata (Moscow and Leningrad: Giz, 1925), p. 137. 36. Two of them, Gorky's Mother (Mat', 1906) and D. Furmanov's Chapaev (1923), had been published earlier; Gladkov's Cement appeared in 1925, and although A. Fadevev's The Rout (Razgrom) did not appear until 1927, some chapters were published in 1925. 37. Lunacharsky, "Dostizheniya nashego iskusstva," Zi, no. 19 (May 11, 1926), p. 4. 38. See Katerina Clark, The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual, Appendix (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981). 39. Adr. Piotrovsky, "O novykh dramaturgakh," Zi, no. 4 (January 20, 1925), p. 12. 40. "Khudozhnik I. I. Brodskiy," Zi, no. 52 (December 23, 1924), p. 21. Unless otherwise stated, my information on Brodsky comes from Isaak Izraylevich Brodskiy: Stat'i, pis'ma, dokumenty (Moscow: Sovetskiy khudozhnik, 1956), Pp. 100-118. 41. "Izo Gubpolitprosveta," Zi, no. 15 (April 14, 1925), p. 29. 42. Isaak Izraylevich Brodskiy, pp. 313-318. 43. See the attacks on AKHRR of Filonov, Punin, and even Petrov-Vodkin in "Disput ob AKhRR'e v Dome Iskusstv," Zi, no. 45 (1926), pp. 4–5, or K. Malevich's "Otkrytoye pis'mo gollandskim khudozhnikam Van Gofu i Bekmenu," Zi, no. 50 (December 9, 1924), p. 13. 44. The Biocosmists were influenced by N. N. Fëdorov. For the centrality of the Cosmists, see "Literaturnaya khronika," Zi, no. 8 (February 21, 1922), p. 7. 45. See V. Blyumenfel'd, "Proletpoety LAPP," Zi, no. 50 (December 15, 1925), p. 4; G. Gor, "Zamedleniye vremeni," Z, no. 4 (1962), esp. pp. 175–176, 182, 188. 46. Compare the coverage accorded the two in the same commemorative issue of Zhizn' iskusstva for 1925, no. 51 (December 14–17); Adr. Piotrovsky, "1905 god v sovetskoy dramaturgii," Zi, no. 51 (December 14–17, 1925), p. 7. 47. See, for example, two films made by Kozintsev and Trauberg with Tynyanov as the scenario writer, The Overcoat (Shinel', 1926) and SVD (The Club of the Big Deed, or Soyuz velikogo dela, 1927). 48. See B. Brodyanskiy's account of the October Revolution celebrations in Leningrad in 1925, "Shagi tysyach," LP, no. 257 (November 10, 1925). 49. See V. Zil'ber [Kaverin], "Sen'kovskiy (Baron Brambeus)," in Russkaya proza (Leningrad, 1926); and V. Kaverin, Baron Brambeus (Leningrad: Izdatel'stvo pisateley v Leningrade, 1929). 50. B. Kostelyanets, "Primechaniya" to Yuri Tynyanov, Sochineniya v dvukh tomakh, vol. I (Leningrad: Khudozhestvennaya literatura, 1985), p. 506. 51. Here I am disagreeing with the position taken by A. Belinkov in his book Yuriy Tynyanov, 2nd ed. (Moscow: Sovetskiy pisatel', 1965). See Yuriy Tynyanov, Kyukhlya, in Sochineniya v dvukh tomakh, vol. I (Leningrad: Khudozhestvennaya literatura, 1985), pp. 76, 138–139, 185, 200. 52. Tynyanov, Kyukhlya, pp. 138–139, 171. 53. One could even view the celebrated shift in the Formalists' work from totally disregarding extraliterary factors to writing about the historical and social context of literature (literaturnyy byt) in this broader context, rather than explaining it purely in terms of political persecution (this shift is usually placed in 1927, but actually occurred slightly earlier, as can be seen, for instance, in the announcement of September 1925 that Eikhenbaum was "working on essays about the history of the formation of the naturalist novel to be called [Byt] in Literature" ("Leningrad. B. Eykhenbaum," Zi, no. 36 [September 8, 1925], p. 31). 54. Voprosy kul'tury pri diktature proletariata (Moscow and Leningrad, GIZ, 1925), p. 137. 55. See Trotsky, "O khudozhestvennoy literature i politike RKP," pp. 2–5; L. Trotsky, Problems of Life, trans. Z. Vengerova (London: Methuen and Co., 1924), p. 24. 56. Lunacharsky, "Dostizheniya nashego iskusstva," p. 4; no. 20 (May 18, 1926), p. 12. 57. See V. S. Ginger, "Yacheyka AKhRR v Akademii khudozhestv," in AKhRR, pp. 136-151. 58. "Khronika," Rit, no. 3 (October 2, 1924), p. 20; A. Bek, "Litso rabochego chitatelya," Rit, no. 6 (1925), p. 16 (literature); Zi, no. 7 (1924), p. 22 (theaters). 59. The Thief of Baghdad came to Leningrad for a three-week season, starting March 31; see "Leningrad," Zi, no. 10 (March 10, 1925), p. 28. Robin Hood came in September and was shown simultaneously at two of the main Leningrad theaters, the Picadilly and the Parisiana; see "Sevzapkino," Zi, no. 37 (September 15, 1925). 60. An article in the Life of Arl of July 1925 reports that, over the preceding nine-month period, of the 183 new films shown in Leningrad, 103 were from the United States, and only 25 from the Soviet Union; see Vlad. Nedobrovo, "Devyatimesyachnyy balans kinoekrana," Zi, no. 27 (July 7, 1926), pp. 10-11. 61. Vl. N[edobrogo], "Robin Gud'," Zi, no. 38 (September 22, 1925), p. 23. 62. A. Slivkin, "Tov. Krasin i kino," Zi, no. 49 (December 7, 1926), pp. 2–3. 63. See the advertisement for the journal in Zi, no. 19 (May 11, 1926). 64. "Literaturnaya khronika," Zi, no. 48 (December 1, 1925), p. 18. 65. I. Traynin, "Kolichestvo i kachestvo kino," Zi, no. 44 (November 3, 1925), p. 14. 66. A. V. Lunacharsky, "Kino—velichaysheye iz iskusstv," KP (December 15, 1926). 67. See A. Belogorskiy, "Sila Feyerbenksa," Rit, no. 29 (July 21, 1925), pp. 18–19. 68. Larry L. May, Screening out the Past: The Birth of Mass Culture and the Motion Picture Industry (New York: Oxford University Press, 1980). 69. It should be noted that at the First Writers Congress of 1934 the official speech by S. Marshak (who was not a Party member and had even acted as patron of the OBERYu (see Chapter 10) and other less-conformist writers), presented (authoritatively), immediately after Gorky's opening address, although ostensibly on children's literature, essentially defined socialist realism as travel and adventure literature, a formula that he said he derived from readers' letters about the literature they preferred. This account anticipates much of the fiction of the 1930s; see "Sodoklad S. Ya. Marshaka o detskoy literature," Perviy s"yezd pisateley: Stenograficheskiy otchët (Moscow: Ogiz, 1934), pp. 20, 33. See also V. Kirpotin's address on drama, in which he makes a similar recommendation (on p. 378). 70. O. M. Brik, "Pochemu ponravilsya 'Tsement,'" Nlp, no. 2 (1926), Pp. 31-32. 71. Fedor Gladkov, Tsement, Kn, no. 1 (1925), p. 18. 72. For example, in B. Pilnyak's Golyy god (1922). ## 9. Promethean Linguistics 1. See the photo and poem in Kp, no. 1 (1927), p. 1. Gennady Fish graduated from GIII in 1924. 2. See "Rabochiye delavshiye Aelitu," K-n (Leningrad), no. 35 (September 30, 1924), p. 14; cover photo, Lg, no. 23 (December 15, 1924). 3. Il'ya Ionov, "Rabochiye, bud'te agitatorami za kino," Zi, no. 45 (November 7–10, 1925), p. 10. 4. Grigoriy Kozintsev, Sobraniye sochineniy v pyati tomakh, vol. II (Leningrad: Iskusstvo, 1984), pp. 178–189. 5. L. Stepanov [Skvortsov-Stepanov], Elektrofikatsiya RSFSR v svyazi s perekhodnoy fazoy mirovogo khozyaystva (Moscow: Gos. izd., 1922), pp. 288–304; G. Tsiperovich, Budushcheye Petrograda, Eko ocherk s predisloviyem G. Zinov'yeva (Petrograd: Gos. izd., 1922). 6. See, for example, "Nauke—na pomoshch' industrializatsii strany (Ob"yedinenie Leningradskikh uchenykh)." Report of a larger than usual meeting of KEPS, Kg, no. 50 (February 22, 1927), p. 3; "Nauchno-proizvodstvennye konferentsii," Kg, no. 97 (April 12, 1927), p. 2. 7. Mak, "Laboratoriya budushchego," Kg, no. 74 (March 20, 1927), p. 3. 8. Information provided by Stephen Kotkin and R. W. Davies in conversation with Katerina Clark at the conference entitled "Industrialization and Change in Soviet Society," held at Ann Arbor, Michigan, April 22-24, 1988. See also Edward Hallett Carr and R. W. Davies, Foundations of a Planned Economy, 1926–1929, vol. I (London: Macmillan, 1969), pp. 405, 411. 9. See "Dve iz shesti," Kg, no. 49 (February 21, 1927), p. 3. 10. It was designed by O. Munts. See V. E. Khazanova, Sovetskaya arkhitektura pervykh let oktyabrya (Moscow: Nauka, 1970), p. 15. 11. There had long been tensions between Malevich and Tatlin, and Tatlin left in October 1925. 12. L. Leonov, "Konets melkogo cheloveka," Kn, no. 3 (1924). 13. "Itogi vsesoyuznogo soveshchaniya pri Glavpolitprosvete 10-13 dekabrya v Moskve: Doklad t. Pel'she," Zi, no. 1 (January 5, 1926), p. 1. 14. Pavel Novitskiy, "Nauchnaya konferentsiya po sotsiologii iskusstva," Zi, no. 37 (September 14, 1926), pp. 4–7. 15. It was during this phase that A. Luria and L. Vygotsky joined forces in Moscow in "a small group of scholars who were charged with reconstructing Russian psychology in order to bring it into line with the goals of the Revolution." A. R. Luria, The Making of Mind: A Personal Account of Soviet Psychology trans. Michael Cole and Sheila Cole (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979), pp. 28, 39–40. 16. "Khronika," Pir, no. 2 (1927), p. 225. 17. RANION was originally formed in 1921-1922 in a coalition of social science and humanities institutes at Moscow University. For its convoluted subsequent history see G. D. Alekseyeva, "Rossiyskaya assotsiatsiya nauchnoissledovatel'skikh institutov obshchestvennykh nauk (RANION)," in M. V. Nechkina et al., eds., Ocherki istori istoricheskoy nauki v SSSR (Moscow: Nauka, 1966), pp. 233–237. 18. Its faculty and graduate students included V. V. Vinogradov, B. M. Eikhenbaum, Yu. Tynyanov, V. A. Zil'ber [Kaverin], and L. Ya. Ginzburg. See "Kratkiy otchët o rabote Nauchno-issledovatel'skogo Instituta sravnitel'nogo izucheniya literatur i yazykov Zapada i Vostoka pri Leningradskom Gosudarstvennom Universitete za 1925–1926 g.," Yail, vol. I, no. 1–2 (Leningrad, 1926), pp. i-xx. 19. See N. V. Yakovlev, "Leningradskiy institut yazyka i literatury," Nr, no. 4 (1927), pp. 17–25. 20. "Usloviya priyëma v aspiranty nauchno-issledovatel'skikh institutov (RANION)," Pzm, no. 5 (1927), p. 235. 21. See, for example, S. M. Dorogayev (head of the Kruzhok yazykovedovbiomekhanistov and of Laboratoriya fiziologii rechi at ILYaZV), "Fiziologicheskiye i sotsiologicheskiye elementy v uchenii o rechi cheloveka," Yail, vol. III (1929), pp. 259–309; "Khronika," Lim, book 2, (1928), pp. 148–149. 22. This group included the Taylorist A. Gastev, the original Constructivist theoretician A. Gan, Osip Brik, and N. Chuzhak. 23. L. Trotsky, Voprosy byta: Epokha kul'turnichestva i yeyë zadachi, 2nd, enlarged ed. (Moscow: Krasnaya nov', 1923), p. 71; B. Arvatov, "K iskusstvu yazyka (v poryadke diskussii)," Zi, no. 40 (October 6, 1925), p. 4. 24. Carmen Claudin-Urondo, Lenin and the Cultural Revolution, trans. Brian Pearce (New Jersey: Humanities Press, 1977), p. 16. 25. Trotsky, Voprosy byta, p. 69. Compare Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, "Manifesto of the Communist Party," Selected Works in One Volume (New York: International Publishers, 1984), p. 43, and Lenin's remarks about the need for overcoming the "trackless roads" of Russia, "an area of wholesale patriarchalism and semi-barbarism"; Claudin-Urondo, Lenin and the Cultural Revolution, p. 16. 26. See Introduction 27. B. Arvatov, "O rabkorakh, khudozhestvennoy literature i proch.," Zi, no. 38 (September 22, 1925), p. 2. He also called it "literary Americanism," which of course meant that he, like FEKS and many other groups, sought to achieve the fast pace of American culture. 28. This position, which was often presented as an attack on Pilnyakovshchina, was also adopted by the Smena faction within LAPP. 29. Trotsky, Voprosy byta, p. 63. 30. Ibid. See also pp. 67, 70. 31. Ibid., p. 71. 32. See Chapter 10; also, see L. Trotsky, "Vodka, tserkov' i kino," Voprosy byta, p. 36. 33. Ibid., p. 67. See also p. 72. 34. See, for example, Ionov, "Rabochie, bud'te agitatorami za kino!," pp. 8–10; G. Bovtvanskiv, "Kino i sovetskaya obshchestvennost'," Zi, no. 45 (no. 7-10) (1925), p. 13. 35. Óriginally, two other films were projected as well, The Scourge of Mankind (Bich chelovechestva), about tuberculosis, and The Truth about Gonorrhea (Pravda o gonoreye); see N. Abay, "Novyy kurs v sovetskoy kinematografii," K-n, no. 40–41 (November 7, 1924), p. 11. 36. "Novosti kino," Zi, no. 38 (September 22, 1925), p. 21. 37. They were: Panteleymon Romanov, "Bez cherëmukhi," Mg, no. 6 (1926), and "Pis'ma zhenshchin," in KP (April 11, 18, 1926), and Kg (July 14–17, 1926); Sergey Malashkin, Luna s pravoy storony, Mg, no. 9 (1926); and Lev Gumilëvskiy, Sobachiy pereulok (Leningrad: Izdaniye avtora, 1927). 38. See V. Petrochenkov, Tvorcheskaya sud'ba Panteleymona Romanova (Tenafly, N.J.: Hermitage Press, 1988), pp. 28–31. 39. See also Eric Naiman, "The Case of Chubarov Alley: Collective Rape, Utopian Desire and the Mentality of NEP," Russian History /Histoire Russe, vol. XVII, no. 1 (Spring 1990), pp. 1–30. 40. Peter Stallybrass and Allon White, The Politics and Poetics of Transgression (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1986), pp. 22–23. 41. Unless otherwise stated, biographical information on Marr is from Lawrence L. Thomas, The Linguistic Theories of N. Ja. Marr, The University of California Publications in Linguistics, vol. XIV (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1957), and V. M. Alpatov, Istoriya odnogo mifa: Marr i marrizm (Moscow: Nauka, 1991). 42. "Basic Tables for the Grammar of Old Georgian with a Preliminary Communication on the Georgian Relationship to Semitic" (Osnovnye tablitsy k grammatike drevnegruzinskogo yazyka s predvaritel'nym soobshcheniyem o rodstve gruzinskogo yazyka s semiticheskimi) (Spb., 1908). Marr had been working on this theory since 1886. 43. An account of the many language groups that fall within the purview of his theory is given by Marr in his "Pochemu tak trudno stat' lingvistom teoretikom" (1928), in N. Ya. Marr, ed., Yazykovedeniye i materializm (Leningrad: ILYaZV RANION, 1929), pp. 25–26. 44. These two collections more or less correspond to volumes I and I, respectively, of his Izbrannye raboty (Leningrad: izd-vo GAIMK, 1933, 1937). 45. See, for example, his invocation of Saussure in "Ob yafeticheskoy teorii," Yafeticheskaua teoriya (Moscow: Nauchnaya assotsiatsiya vostokovedeniya pri TsIK, 1924), p. 8. 46. See N. Ya. Marr, Yafeticheskaya teoriya: Programma obshchego kursa ob yazyke (Baku, 1927), p. 19. 47. See "K proiskhozhdeniyu yazykov," Kg, no. 247 (October 2, 1925). 48. N. Ya. Marr, "Avtobiografiya," O, no. 27 (1927); Marr, Yafeticheskaya teoriya: Programma obshchego kursa ob yazyke, pp. 2-3. 49. Marr, "K proiskhozhdeniyu yazykov." 50. Ibid. 51. Marr, "Pochemu tak trudno stat' lingvistom teoretikom," p. 33. 52. Marr, "Ob yafeticheskoy teorii," p. 4. ## 34º 53. Marr, Yafeticheskaya teoriya: Programma cos!chego kursa ob yazyke, p. 64 54. Marr, "Pochemu tak trudno stat' lingvistom teoretikom," p. 33. 55. Katerina Clark, The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981), Chapter 5. 56. Marr, "K proiskhozhdeniyu yazykov." 57. Marr, Yafeticheskaya teoriya: Programma obshchego kursa ob yazyke, p. 30. 58. Marr, "Ob yafeticheskoy teorii," p. 2. 59. Marr, Yafeticheskaya teoriya: Programma obshchego kursa ob yazyke, p. 32; Marr, "Ob yafeticheskoy teorii," p. 12. 60. Marr, "Ob yafeticheskoy teorii," p. 2. 61. Ibid., p. 30. 62. N. Ya. Marr, "Termin skif," Yafeticheskiy sbornik, no. 1 (Moscow, 1922), pp. 67-122; "K proiskhozhdeniyu yazykov"; "Ob yafeticheskoy teorii," p. 30; Yafeticheskaya teoriya: Programma obshchego kursa ob yazyke, p. 29. 63. E. D. Polivanov, his chief rival in the late 1920s, shared this contempt for Greek and Sanskrit and advocated that instead linguists become involved in the practical work of giving alphabets to the minority peoples. See E. D. Polivanov, "Spetsificheskiye osobennosti poslednego desyatiletiya 1917-1927 v istorii nashey lingvisticheskoy mysli (vmesto predisloviya)," Stat'i po obshchemu yazykoznaniyu (Moscow: Glavnaya redaktsiya vostochnoy literatury, 1968), p. 53. 64. Marr, "Pochemu tak trudno stat' lingvistom teoretikom," pp. 12–13. 65. Marr, Yafeticheskaya teoriya: Programma obshchego kursa ob yazyke, p. 34. 66. The Scythian movement in Russia was at its height from 1918 to 1922 (when Marr published "Termin skif"). 67. Marr, "K proiskhozhdeniyu yazykov." 68. Marr, Yafeticheskaya teoriya: Programma obshchego kursa ob yazyke, p. 88; "Pochemu tak trudno stat' lingvistom teoretikom," p. 39. 69. Marr, Yafeticheskaya teoriya: Programma obshchego kursa ob yazyke, p. 89. 70. Ibid., pp. 90–92, 94, 97. 71. Thomas, The Linguistic Theories of N. Ja. Marr. 72. Cited in A. P. Andreev, Revolyutsiya yazykoznaniya: Yafeticheskaya teoriya akademika N. Ya. Marra (Moscow: Izd. TsK SESR, 1929), p. 3. 73. Polivanov, "Spetsificheskiye osobennosti poslednego desyatiletiya," pp. 53-54. 74. For an account of these events see A. A. Leont'yev, L. I. Royzenzonin, and A. D. Khayutin, "Zhizn' i deyatel'nost' Ye. D. Polivanova," in Polivanov, Stat'i po obshchemu yazykoznaniyu, pp. 21-22; A. A. Leont'yev, Yevgeniy Dmitriyevich Polivanov i yego vklad v obshcheye yazykoznaniye (Moscow: Nauka, 1983), p. 17; V. Lartsev, Yevgeniy Dmitriyevich Polivanov: Stranitsy zhizni i deyatel'nosti (Moscow: Nauka, 1986), p. 16. 75. See Dragomanov (Polivanov), in V. Kaverin, Skandalist ili vechera na Vasil'yevskom ostrove (Leningrad: Priboy, 1929), esp. pp. 142--143, 234–255; Lartsev, Yevgeniy Dmitriyevich Polivanov, pp. 127-187. 76. Leont'yev, Yevgeniy Dmitriyevich Polivanov, p. 11. 77. Elena Luriya, Moy otets A. R. Luriya (Moscow: Gnosis, 1994), p. 124. 78. Oksana Bulgakova, "Sergey Eizenshteyn i psikhologicheskiy Berlin— mezhdu psikhoanalizom i strukturnoy psikhologii," Kz, no. 13 (1992). 79. V. V. Ivanov, Ocherki po istorii semiotiki v SSSR (Moscow: Nauka, 1976), p. 188. 80. See "Vertikal'nyi kino," Iko, no. 9 (1940), pp. 16–25; no. 1 (1941), pp. 29–38. 81. Some believe that these essays were ghost written by V. V. Vinogradov, an associate of the Formalists who had himself been persecuted in the most recent round of pro-Marrist assaults, or by the Georgian linguist A. S. Chikobava, another—and initial-—contributor to the Pravda debate. But the scholarly consensus is that Stalin was the principal author; see M. V. Gorbanevskiy, V nachale bylo slovo.. .: Maloizvestnye strannitsy istorii sovetskoy lingvistiki (Moscow: Izd. Universiteta druzhby narodov, 1991), p. 114. ## 10. Straight Talk and the Campaign against Wagner 1. Ye. Polivanov, "Russkiy yazyk segodnyashnego dnya," Lim, no. 4 (1928), p. 167. 2. M. Bakhtin, "Slovo v romane" (Discourse in the Novel; 1934-1935), Voprosy literatury i estetiki (Moscow: Khudozhestvennaya literatura, 1975), see pp. 168-170. 3. Puti razvitiya sovetskogo teatra: Stenograficheskiy otchët resheniy partiynogo soveshchaniya po voprosam teatra pri Agitprope TsK VKP(b) v maye 1927 g., ed. S. M. Krylov (Moscow and Leningrad: Teakinopechat', 1927), pp. 267–268, 302, 498. 4. Igor' Glebov [B. Asafiev], "Dva opernykh prem'yera," Zi, no. 21 (May 24, 1927), pp. 8–9. 5. N. Malko, "Pryzhok cherez ten'," Zi, no. 22 (May 31, 1927), pp. 11–12. 6. I. Sollertinsky, "'Nos'—orudiye dal'noboynoye," Rit, no. 3 (1930), p. 11. 7. S. M. Khentova, Shostakovich v Petrograde-Leningrade (Leningrad: Lenizdat, 1979), p. 58. 8. D. Shostakovich, "Pochemu 'Nos,'" Nos: Polnyy tekst opery (Leningrad: Teakinopechat', 1930), p. 4. 9. Khentova, Shostakovich v Petrograde-Leningrade, pp. 72, 99. 10. B. M. Bogdanov-Berezovskiy, Sovetskayaopera (Leningrad: Leningradskoye otdeleniye VTO, 1940), pp. 81, 97. 11. S. E. Radlov, "Teatr i opera Deshevova," printed in a manifesto-like brochure produced by the directors of the State Opera on the occasion of the premiere of Deshevov's Ice and Steel, discussed below (cited in Bogdanov-Berezovskiy, Sovetskaya opera, p. 105). 12. Nick Worrall, "Meyerhold Directs Gogol's 'Government Inspector,' " Theater Ouarterly, vol. II, no. 7 (July-September 1972), pp. 75–95. 13. In the scholarship there is a controversy over whether Shostakovich's interpretation was influenced by Meyerhold's production of The Inspector General (the view of Laurel Fay) or that of I. Terentiev in the Press House in Leningrad; see G. Fëdorov, "Vokrug i posle 'Nosa,' " Sm, no. 9 (1976), pp. 41–50, esp. p. 46. 14. "Novaya postanovka 'Shchelkunchika,' " Pir, no. 10 (1929), p. 127. 15. Incidentally, many of its members had previously belonged to the group of A. Tufanov, an epigone of the prerevolutionary zaumniki. 16. "OBERIU," an appendix to R. R. Milner-Gulland, "'Left Art' in Leningrad: The OBERIU Declaration," Oxford Slavonic Papers, New Series, III, p. 70. This statement rides roughshod over the complexity of what OBERYu attempted in its appropriation of everyday speech. See Robin Milner-Gulland, "Beyond the Turning Point: An Afterword," in Neil Cornwall, ed., Daniil Kharms and the Poetics of the Absurd (New York: St. Martins Press, 1991), pp.243–267. 17. "Leningrad," Zi, no. 38 (September 22, 1929), p. 14 (Kharms); "Novaya sovetskaya opera," Pir, no. 9 (1929), p. 123 (Oleinikov's "Karas'," on which Shostakovich worked). 18. See, for example, N. V. Yakovlev, "Leningradskiy institut yazyka i literatury," Nr (1927), pp. 17–18; "Khronika," Lim, no. 6 (1930), pp. 85–86. 19. Yakovlev, "Leningradskiy institut yazyka i literatury," p. 19. 20. N. Bukharin, "O formal'nom metode v iskusstve," Kn, no. 3 (1925), Pp. 248–257, esp. pp. 250–252. 21. See S. M. Dorogayev, "Fiziologicheskiye i sotsiologicheskiye elementy v uchenii o rechi cheloveka," Yil [ILYaZV], vol. III (1929), pp. 259–309; "Khronika," Lim (1928), book 2, pp. 148–149. 22. We might also note in this connection L. S. Vygotsky's pioneering work done in Moscow at this time. 23. My formulation here is ambiguous because the question of authorship of certain texts key to the concerns of this chapter and published under the name of V. N. Voloshinov but widely attributed to M. M. Bakhtin (such as Freudianism: A Critical Sketch and Marxism and the Philosophy of Language) continues to be disputed. My research for this book has made me more convinced that Bakhtin was the author of the disputed texts than I was when I addressed this question in Mikhail Bakhtin. This can probably never be established with any finality, and the claim that Bakhtin was the principal author is stronger for the other disputed texts published under the name of P. N. Medvedev for the simple reason that Medvedev published prolifically in the second half of the 1920s (while Voloshinov published scarcely anything besides the disputed texts) and it is possible to compare the undisputed texts published under Medvedev's name with the disputed texts. 24. R. Shor, Yazyk i obshchestvo, Dopushcheno Nauchno-pedagagogicheskoy sektsiyey Gosudarstvennogo uchënogo soveta, 2nd ed. (Moscow: Rabotnik prosveshcheniya, 1926); V. Voloshinov, "Slovo v zhizni i slovo v iskusstve," Z, no. 6 (1926), pp. 244–267. 25. Khentova, Shostakovich v Petrograde-Leningrade, p. 58. 26.Yakovlev, "Leningradskiy institut yazyka i literatury," p. 19. 27. Ibid., p. 18. 28. "Po literaturnym institutam i organizatsiyam," Pir, no. 1 (1930), p. 85. 29. This was especially true of writers in Leningrad's Smena. See, for example, their anthology Kadry, especially the stories by M. Ostanin and Vissarion Sayanov; Kadry (Leningrad: Assotsiatsiya proletarskikh pisateley, 1928), pp. 57–58 and 78–81, respectively. 30. Khentova, Shostakovich v Petrograde-Leningrade, p. 67. 31. The libretto for the opera was written by V. Lavrenëv. 32. Gennadiy Gor, "Zamedleniye vremeni,"Z, no. 4 (1968), p. 177. 33. B. Eikhenbaum, "Illyuziya skaza," Skvoz' literaturu, Voprosy poetiki, no. IV (Leningrad, 1924), pp. 152, 154 (see also p. 175). 34. See V. V. Vinogradov, "Problema skaza v stilistike" (1925), "Yazyk Zoshchenki (zametki o leksiki)" (1929), and "Literatura i ustnaya slovesnost"" (prepared for publication in 1929 but not published); and M. M. Bakhtin, "Tipy prozaicheskogo slova: Slovo u Dostoevskogo," in Problemy poetiki Dostoevskogo (1929, see fourth ed., Moscow, 1979, pp. 210–236). 35. Yu. Tomashevskiy, "Rasskazy i povesti Mikhaila Zoshchenko" and "Primechaniya," in M. Zoshchenko, Sobraniye sochineniy, vol. I (Leningrad: Khudozhestvennaya literatura, 1986), pp. 5, 540. 36. V. Bogdanov-Berezovskiy, "Novinki budushchego sezona," Rit, no. 33 (August 12, 1928), p. 4. 37. D. Shostakovich, "Pered prem'yeroy," Rit, no. 7 (1930), p. 7. 38. V. Bogdanov-Berezovskiy wrote at the time, in describing what Shostakovich sought to do in The Nose, that he used "intonational speech" and "conversational speech" to bring out "all the very subtle nuances of Gogolian language"; see "Sovetskaya opera v predstoyashchem sezone," Rit, no. 36 (September 8, 1929), p. 9. 39. Quoted in Khentova, Shostakovich v Petrograde-Leningrade, p. 61. 40. S. Tretyakov, "Kino k yubileyu," Nl, no. 10 (1927), p. 29. 41. Eisenstein was far from the only creative intellectual in this period who focused on the bodily functions of authority figures. Compare N. Erdman's play The Mandate (Mandat, 1925) and Yu. Olesha's novel Envy (Zavist', 1926). I. Terentiev in his 1927 production of The Inspector General in Leningrad's Press House also gave prominence to the chamber pot and water closet. 42. M. M. Bakhtin, Tvorchestvo Fransua Rable i narodnaya kul'tura srednevekov'ya i renessansa (Moscow: Khudozhestvennaya literatura, 1965). 43. The erotic and Freudian were important elements in many of the new German operas, such as Krenek's Johnny spielt auf. 44. See, for example, the articles by Iakov Druskin, Robin Milner-Gulland, and others, in Cornwall, ed., Daniil Kharms and the Poetics of the Absurd. 45. "Novosti iskusstva," Rit, no. 31 (June 5, 1930), p. 15; also "Khronika," Rit, no. 30 (July 22, 1928), p. 15; and "Kontsertnaya nedelya," Rit, no. 49 (December 8, 1929), p. 9. 46. N. Malko, "Iz zagranichnykh vpechatleniy," Zi, no. 17 (April 21, 1929), p. 17; "Khronika," Zi, no. 28 (1928). 47. The wreckers put a bolt in the factory's machinery, thus destroying it (note the weight given the small part, typical of the symbolic system of the Plan years). 48. Gregory Freidin, A Coat of Many Colors: Osip Mandelstam and His Mythologies of Self-Presentation (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987), p. 228. 49. See, for example, M. Slonimsky's Lavrovy (1927), critiquing members of his own family dynasty, which includes the Formalists' former teacher at the University, S. A. Vengerov; Kaverin's two novels (see Chapter 1); and K. Vaginov, Kozlinaya pesn' (1927), which includes a representation of M. M. Bakhtin as "the philosopher." 12. See Katerina Clark, "Little Heroes and Big Deeds: Literature Responds to the First Five-Year Plan," in Sheila Fitzpatrick, ed., Cultural Revolution in Russia, 1928–1931 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978), pp. 189-206. 50. See O. Mandelshtam's Egyptian Stamp (Yegipetskaya marka, Z, May 1928), which draws on the Petersburg literary tradition and facts of the author's own biography. 51. "K. S. Malevich: Pis'ma k M. V. Matyushinu," a publication of Ye. F. Kovtun in Yezhegodnik rukopisnogo otdela Pushkinskogo doma na 1974 god (Leningrad: Nauka, 1976), p. 194. 52. Nikoletta Misler, "Filonov, master metamorfozy," in Nikoletta Misler and Dzhon E. Boult, Filonov: Analiticheskoye iskusstvo (Moscow: Sovetskiy khudozhnik, 1990), pp. 131–151. ## 11. The Sacralization of Everyday Life 1. See I. Stalin, "God velikogo pereloma," Kg, no. 257 (November 7, 1929), pp. 2-3. 2. B. Filippov, "Za proverku!" Rit, no. 17 (April 22, 1928), p. 3. 3. Space does not permit me to cover most of the major political and institutional changes affecting culture, such as the founding of Glaviskusstvo in 1928 or the All-Union Conference on Agitation and Propaganda of the summer of 1928 leading to a Central Commitee Resolution on the press in December of that year. 4. Valentina Khodasevich, Portrety slovami: Ocherki (Moscow: Sovteskiy pisatel', 1987), p. 219. 5. Ibid., p. 248. 6. For a fuller description of the spectacle, see Nikolay Petrov, 50 i 500 (Moscow: Vserossiyskoye teatral'noye obshchestvo, 1960), pp. 195–207. 7. "Leningrad: Massovye prazdnestva," Zi, no. 45 (November 6, 1927), p. 38. 8. Sergey Radlov, "Oktyabr'skaya instsenirovka na Neve," Zi, no. 42 (October 18, 1927), p. 5. 9. A. Gvozdev, "Massovoye prazdnestvo na Neve," Zi, no. 47 (November 22, 1927), p. 5. 10. D. T., "Rezhissërskiye vyvody," Zi, no. 47 (November 22, 1927), p. 7. 11. See, for example, A. Piotrovsky, "Torzhestvo rebyat," Kg, no. 124 (May 28, 1930), p. 4; Khodasevich, Portrety slovami, pp. 226–231. 13. See especially Fëdor Gladkov's novel Energiya (Nm, 1932–1937) 14. One can detect this shift already in 1927. See G. A., "Rayonnye instsenirovki k desyatiletiyu oktyabrya," Zi, no. 44 (November 1, 1927), p. 5. 15. Other examples include War to War; see L. T., "Voyna-voyne," Kg, no. 176 (August 3, 1929), p. 6. 16. Gvozdev, "Massovoye prazdnestvo na Neve," p. 5; A. Piotrovsky, "Torzhestvo 10-ogo noyabrya," Zi, no. 46 (November 15, 1927), pp. 1–2. 17. See L. T., "Voyna-voyne," p. 6. 18. "Pervomayskaya instsenirovka u Fondovoy birzhi," Kg, no. 96 (April 26, 1929), p. 6; "Staryy byt sdayët pozitsii," Kg, no. 102 (May 8, 1929), p. 3. 19. "Na tekh zhe pozitsiyakh (Na tea-soveshchanii v Narkomprose)," "Orlinskiy," Zi, no. 14 (April 5, 1927), p. 13. 20. S. Gres, "Plan velikikh rabot': Fil'm A. Rooma," Rit, no. 19 (April 6, 1930), p. 12. 21. "Shchastlivaya ultitsa: Fil'm o 'Krasnom Putilovtse,'"Rit, no. 15 (March 16, 1930), p. 13. This rebuilding was actually done (in 1925–1927); see Selim O. Khan-Magomedov, Pioneers in Soviet Architecture: The Search for New Solutions in the 1920s and 1930s, trans. Alexander Lieven (New York: Rizzoli, 1987), p. 276. 22. See N. Spoluchnyy, "Iskusstvo—sotsialisticheskim gorodam," Rit, no. 27 (May 16, 1930), p. 2. 23. Gres, "'Plan velikikh rabot,' " p. 12. 24. For example, for Christmas see "'Den' sotsialisticheskogo truda," Kg, no. 296 (December 25, 1929), p. 3. 25. "'Den' industrializatsii' dolzhen byt' dnëm kul'tury truda," and Artemenko, "Bez progulov i opozdaniy," "Prazdnovaniye 'Dnya industrializatsii, 11 Kg, no. 177 (August 4, 1929); "'Den' industrializatsii' proshël," Kg, no. 178 (August 7, 1929), p. 1. 26. Khan-Magomedov, Pioneers of Soviet Architecture, pp. 40–42, 77–93. 27. Katerina Clark, The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981), pp. 93–100, 109–110. 28. Mosey Ginzburg, "Tselevaya ustanovka v sovremennoy arkhitekture," Sa, no. 1 (1927), pp. 4–10. 29. Aleksei Gan, Konstruktivizm (Tver': Tverskoye izdatel'stvo, 1922), p. 63. 30. Khan-Magomedov, Pioneers of Soviet Architecture, p. 389. 31. Ginzburg, "Tselevaya ustanovka v sovremennoy arkhitekture," pp. 4–10. 32. See Richard Stites, Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Visions and Revolutionary Life in the Russian Revolution (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989), pp. 145-155, 214-215. 33. Gr. Avlov, "Pereustroystvo byta i klub," Rit, no. 3 (1930), p. 7. 34. Khan-Magomedov, Pioneers of Soviet Architecture, p. 343; "Pervyy domkommuna v Leningrade," Kg, no. 284 (December 11, 1929), p. 4. 35. S. Ts., "Pereustroystvo byta i iskusstva: Na doklade A. V. Lunacharskogo," Rit, no. 3 (January 15, 1930), p. 2. 36. "Bez kukhonnogo chada," Kg, no. 284 (December 11, 1929), p. 4. 37. "Zhizn' v sotsialisticheskom gorode," Kg, no. 77 (April 2, 1930), p. 3. 38. S. Ts., "Pereustroystvo byta i iskusstva," p. 3. 39. N. Spoluchnyy, “Iskusstvo—sots. gorodam," Rit, no. 27 (May 16, 1930), p. 2. 40. See, for example, the remarks about the "velichayshaya tyaga k kul'ture, k nauke," which is especially marked among worker youth in V. Leyzerovich, ed., Kommuna molodezhi (Moscow: Molodaya gvardiya, 1929), p. 3. 41. "Vs. Meyerkhol'd o kinofikatsii teatra," Zi, no. 28 (July 14, 1929), p. 4. 42. A. Gvozdev, "Teatr budushchego," Zi, no. 45 (November 6, 1927), p. 21. 43. Ibid. 44. Siegfried Kracauer, "Das Ornament der Masse" (1927), in Das Ornament der Masse (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamf Verlag, 1965). 45. Walter Benjamin's Afterword to "Das Kunstwerk im Zeitalter seiner technischen Reproduzierbarkeit," Illuminationen (Frankfurt, 1961), p. 175. 46. "Moskva: Otkrytiye obshchestva 'Muzyka-massam,' " Zi, no. 22 (June 14, 1929), p. 14. 47. "Programma chetvërtoy muzykal'noy olimpiady," Rit, no. 33 (June 15, 1930), pp. 10–11. 48. See also Dziga Vertov's The Man with a Movie Camera, discussed below. 49. A. Lunacharsky, "Muzyka i sovremennost'," Zi, no. 25 (June 23, 1929), p. 2. 50. In the mid-1920s intellectuals carried away by a collectivist zeal had instituted a conductorless orchestra known as Persimfans, which spawned several imitations. 51. "Klassovyy vrag v bulochnykh," Kg, no. 290 (December 17, 1929), p. 4. 52. V. I. Lenin, "Iz doklada Vserossiyskogo tsentral'nogo komiteta i Soveta narodnykh komissarov o vneshney i vnutrenney politike 22 dekabrya," Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy, vol. XLlI, pp. 145-157. 53. The writers who contributed to this book, Belomorsko-Baltiyskiy kanal imeni Stalina, included M. Zoshchenko and V. Shklovsky. The leading Constructivist artist Rodchenko did many of the photographs. It is to be noted that Shklovsky at any rate seems to have been motivated to participate because his older brother, V. B. Shklovsky, was among the prisoners working on the canal (he was released in 1933 and Shklovsky made his visit there in 1932). See Aleksandr Galushkin, "Chetyre pis'ma Viktora Shklovskogo," Strannik, no. 2 (Moscow, 1991), p. 77. 54. Belomorsko-Baltiyskiy kanal imeni Stalina (Moscow, 1934), p. 356. 55. P. Mordvinov, "Stroitel'stvo novykh gorodov," Lii, no. 1 (1930), p. 140. 56. Khan-Magomedov accounts in these terms for the demise of a communal house in Leningrad for engineers and writers, designed by Ol' and built on Rubinstein Street in 1930; see Pioneers of Soviet Architecture, p. 392. 57. Jean-Louis Cohen, Le Corbusier and the Mystigue of the U.S.S.R.: Theories and Projects for Moscow, 1928-1936, trans. Kenneth Hylton (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992). 58. A. Movshenson, "Mebel' novogo byta," Rit, no. 42 (July 30, 1930), pp. 4–5. ## 12. The Ultimate Cultural Revolution 1. Compare "S"yezd rabotnikov nauki," Kg, no. 61 (February 23, 1927), p. 2; Ye. Kaganskaya, "Leningradtsy na Sel'mashstroye: Opyt udarnoy brigady," Lg, no. 25 (June 30, 1930), p. 1. 2. "Pisateli na bol'shevistskiy sev," Lg, no. 8 (February 9, 1930), p. 1; "Leningradskiye teatry na fronte krasnogo seva," Pir, no. 3 (1930), p. 90. 3. "Nam predstoit slomat' pisatel'skiy individualizm," Lg, no. 16 (August 6, 1929), p. 1. 4. See D. Kal'm, "Zavodskaya gazeta zhdët pisatelya," Lg, no. 3 (1930), p. 2. 5. "Rabochiye berut shefstvo nad VOSP," L. I. Div, “Signalrabochim uslyshan," Lg, no. 33 (August 5, 1930), p. 11; "Za rabocheye shefstvo nad pisatel'skimi organizatsiyami," Lg, no. 34 (August 10, 1930), p. 11. For more specific details about which factory was to undertake shefstvo over which writers' organization, see Lg, nos. 50–51 (1930). 6. "Khronika," Pir, no. 1 (1930), p. 89. 7. "Leningrad: Prem'yery," Pir, no. 3 (1930), p. 89. 8. "Muzykal'naya olimpiada," editorial, Rit, no. 23 (June 3, 1928), p. 3. 9. See M. Chumandrin, "Yeshchë i yeshchë raz ob etom," Nlp, no. 17 (1930), p. 60. 10. "Pisateli—na krusheniye stroyki SSSR, po-boyevomu vklyuchit'sya v bor'bu za vtoruyu metallicheskuyu bazu Ural-Kuzbass," Lg, no. 22 (April 24, 1931). 11. Vl. Mayakovsky, "Nashemu yunoshestvu," Nl, no. 2 (1927), pp. 6–9, "Iz poemy 'Oktyabr,' " Nl, no. 6 (1927), p. 3; O. Brik, "Za novatorstvo!" Nl, no. 1 (1927), p. 26. 12. V1. Korobinov, "Proyetza," Nl, no. 7 (1927), pp. 33–55; Lef, "Tsitadel'," editorial, Nl, no. 1 (1927), p. 1. 13. See N. M. Lary, Dostoevsky and Soviet Film (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1986), Chapter 1. 14. Robert B. McKean, St. Petersburg between the Revolutions: Workers and Revolutionaries, June 1907-February 1917 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990), p. 2 and map no. 1 on p. xvi. 15. Orest Tsekhnovitser, "Nuzhen tsentr," Zi, no. 31 (August 4, 1929), p. 4; "Khronika," Pir, no. 2 (1930), p. 82; "Khronika. Prostranstvennye iskusstva. Likvidatsiya Vkhuteina," Pir, no. 5–6 (1930), p. 130. 16. See, for example, A. Room's Plan velikikh rabot and Kozintsev and Trauberg's Odna, respectively. 17. I. V. Stalin, Sochineniya (Moscow: Institut Marksa-Engelsa-Lenina), vol. XI, pp. 246-249, 256–257, 276. 18. Anatole Kopp, Constructivist Architecture in the U.S.S.R. (New York and London: St. Martins Press, 1985), pp. 142–143. 19. V. Shklovsky, "60 dney bez sluzhby," Nl, no. 6 (1927), p. 18. 20. This was also advocated by highbrow musicians. See N. Malko, "V zashchitu garmoniki," Zi, no. 2 (January 11, 1927), p. 4. 21. See Katerina Clark, "Little Heroes and Big Deeds: Literature Responds to the First Five-Year Plan," in Sheila Fitzpatrick, ed., Cultural Revolution in Russia (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978), esp. pp. 194–201. 22. "Leningrad: Kvalifikatsiya chlenov khudsovetov," Pir, no. 2 (1930), p. 79. 23. For more information on TRAM, see Katerina Clark, "The Russian Avant-Garde Theater in the Late Twenties," in Sheelagh Graham, ed., New Directions in Soviet Literature (London: Macmillan, 1992), and Lynn Mally, "The Soviet Youth Theater TRAM," Slavic Review, vol. 54, no. 3 (Fall 1992), pp. 411–430. 24. Ivan Chicherov, "TRAM—eto rabota po-novomu," Zi, no. 21 (May 6, 1929), p. 2. 25. A. Piotrovsky, "TRAM (Stranitsa teatral'noy sovremennosti)," Z, no. 4 (1929), p. 143; P. Sokolov, "O vikhrastom yunoshe i mage komsomol'skogo teatra" [a foreword to the TRAM play], Druzhnaya gorka (Leningrad: Tea-kinopechat', 1929), p. 3; N. Radyants, "Teatry rozhdënnye revolyutsii," in Teatr i zhizn' (Leningrad and Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1957), p. 145. 26. Mikh. D., "Idut novye lyudi (Na dispute o teatre rabochey molodëzhi)," KP, no. 138 (June 16, 1928), p. 5; A. V. Lunacharsky, "Tram," P, July 8, 1928. 27. "Za druzhnuyu stroyku komsomol'skogo teatra!" Kg, no. 91 (April 20, 1929), p. 4. 28. V. Mironova, TRAM: Agitatsionno-molodëzhnyy teatr 1920-1930-kh godov (Leningrad: Iskusstvo, Leningradskoye otdeleniye, 1977), p. 6. 29. "V nogu s zhizn'yu!" Kg, no. 224 (September 29, 1929), p. 6. 30. S. R., "TRAM na zavtra," Rit, no. 11 (February 26, 1930), p. 4. 31. Revfront also includes the Krasnyy teatr, Leningradskiy rabochiy teatr Komsomola, and Gosagitteatr (also known as the Kolkhoznyy teatr-this last theater's lineage goes back via its one-time director Shimanovsky and other members to the Traveling Mass Theater of Gaydeburov and Skarskaya). See D., "Krasnyy front teatrov," LP, no. 239 (November 5, 1929), p. 5. 32. "Yedinyy front revolyutsionnykh teatrov," Kg, no. 255 (November 5, 1929), p. 6. See also the account by N. V. Petrov, then director of the State Theater, in his 50 i 500 (Moscow: Vserossiyskoye teatral'noye obshchestvo, 1960), pp. 288–293. 33. Pavel Marinchik, Rozhdeniye komsomol'skogo teatra (Moscow and Leningrad: Iskusstvo, 1963), p. 35. 34. D. Tolmachëv, "Teatr rabochey molodëzhi," Rit, no. 40 (October 6, 1925), p. 4; "Teatr rabochey molodëzhi," Rit, no. 33 (August 15, 1926). 35. M. Sokolovsky, "TRAM," St, no. 28–29 (1929), pp. 396–397. 36. "Za druzhnuyu stroyku komsomol'skogo teatra!" p. 4; V. G-v, "V bor'be za tramovskogo dvizheniya," Zi, no. 19 (May 12, 1929), p. 11. 37. [M. Sokolovsky's speech], "Pervaya vsesoyuznaya konferentsiya TRAMov," Pir, no. 8 (1929), p. 120. 38. TRAM et al., "Ko vsem rabotnikam klubnykh khudozhestvennykh organizatsii. . . .," Zi, no. 46 (November 18, 1929), p. 12; A. Piotrovsky, "Puti i pereput'ya samodeyatel'nogo teatra," Rit, no. 39 (July 15, 1930), pp. 4–5. 40. See "TRAM gotov k nastupleniyu" and "Leningrad," Zi, no. 38 (September 16, 1928), pp. 11, 14. 41. See, for example, "Pod znakom peregruppirovki," Zi, no. 20 (May 19, 1929), p. 1; Veg, "Revolyutsionnyy-proletarskiy front teatra pod ugrozoy," Zi, no. 38 (September 22, 1929), p. 2. 42. Marinchik, Rozhdeniye komsomol'skogo teatra, pp. 35, 67; Sokolov, "O vikhrastom yunoshe," p. 3. 43. D. Shen, Vladimir Mikhaylovich Deshevov: Ocherk zhizni i tvorchestva (Moscow: Sovetskiy kompozitor, 1961), pp. 5–15; S. M. Khentova, Shostakovich v Petrograde-Leningrade (Leningrad: Lenizdat, 1979); "Novosti iskusstva: TRAM," Rit, no. 15 (March 16, 1930), p. 15. 44. L. Zhadova, "Iz istorii sovetskoy polikhromii," Tekhnicheskaya estetika, no. 7 (1975). 45. N. Radyants, "Teatry rozhdënnye revolyutsii," Teatr i zhizn' (Leningrad and Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1957), p. 308; V. Rafalovich, Vesna teatral'naya (Leningrad: Iskusstvo, 1971), p. 44. 46. "Khronika. Ak. opera," Rit, no. 7 (February 12, 1928), p. 15. 47. Vs. Meyerhold, "O kinofikatsii teatra," Zi, no. 28 (July 14, 1929), p. 4. 48. N. Malko, "Neobkhodimye dopolneniya," Zi, no. 15 (April 7, 1929), p. 33. 49. I. Sollertinsky, "Problema 'opernogo naslediya,' " Zi, no. 18 (May 1, 1929), p. 10, and "Vozmozhnye printsipy sovetskoy opery," Zi, no. 31 (August 4, 1929), p. 3. 50. Piotrovsky, "TRAM," esp. pp. 142, 144. 51. This was mostly achieved through extensive use of naplyv (the cinematic technique of the "lap dissolve"). See esp. N. Lvov, Kleshch zadumchivyy (Leningrad: Tea-kino-pechat', 1930). 52. Piotrovsky, "TRAM," pp. 147–148, and "Aktëry v TRAMe," Rit, no. 43 (August 4, 1930), pp. 2–3. 53. Piotrovsky, "TRAM," pp. 147, 151. 54. S. Radlov, "Dramaturgi—v laboratoriyu!" Zi, no. 14 (April 1, 1929), p. 3. 55. S. Mokul'skiy, "Kleshch zadumchivyy i lngr. TRAM," Zi, no. 20 (May 19, 1929), p. 6. 56. A. Piotrovsky, "My eto peresmotrim," Zi, no. 39 (September 29, 1929), p. 4. 57. For family melodrama, see N. L'vov, Plavyatsya dni. Dialekticheskoye predstavleniye v 3-kh krugakh, redaktsiya i vstupitel'naya stat'ya A. Piotrovskogo i M. Sokolovskogo (Leningrad: Tea-kino-pechat', 1929); for the comedy of errors, see Druzhnaya gorka: Komsomol'skaya operetta v 3-kh deystviyakh, tekst P. Maksimova i N. L'vova, muzyka N. Dvorikova i V. Deshevova, obshcheye rukovodstvo M. Sokoloskogo (Leningrad: Tea-kino-pechat', 1929). 58. It should be noted that TRAM's demise was not immediate and the Komsomol and cultural bureaucracy continued to bestow honors and subsidies upon it; see "O podgotovke kadrov v teatre: Postanovleniye Lenobkoma VLKSM," Rit, no. 66–67 (December 11, 1930), p. 1; "Khronika," Pir, no. 2 (1930), p. 79. 59. "Leningradskiy diskussionnyy klub," Zi, no. 16 (April 14, 1929), p. 14. 60. "Konsolidatsiya sil-pervoocherednyaya zadacha," Rit, no. 54–55 (October 16, 1930), p. 1. 61. Gail Warshofsky Lapidus, "Educational Strategies and Cultural Revolution," in Fitzpatrick, ed., Cultural Revolution in Russia, 1928-1931, p. 93. 62. Radyants, "Teatry rozhdënnye revolyutsii," p. 321; A. Fadeyev, "Za TRAM i protiv tramchvanstvo," Nlp, no. 20 (1929). 63. V. Druzgin, "Uchëba u zapada," Zi, no. 21 (May 26, 1929), pp. 3–4. 64. See articles by Milka Bliznakov and Anatole Kopp in William C. Brumfield, ed., Reshaping Russian Architecture: Western Technology, Utopian Dreams (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990), pp. 145–175, 176–214. 65. "TRAM-Krasnyy rupor," Rit, no. 40 (October 5, 1929), p. 14. Another important aspect of the links was journals featuring industrial photography of the new Soviet Union, such as Arbeiter-Illustrierte-Zeitung and SSSR na stroyke. 66. See "Khronika," Pir (1929), no. 10, p. 129, no. 11, p. 117. 67. "Teatr revolyutsii," Rit, no. 7 (February 12, 1928), p. 16 (Brecht); "Anketa sredi pisateley: Ervin Piskator," Kg, no. 146 (June 23, 1930), p. 2. 68. I have in mind here the campaign in the fall of 1929 against the writers Zamyatin and Pilnyak (not coincidentally they were heads of the Leningrad and Moscow branches of VSP, a writers' organization representing the right and center) for publishing works in the West. Space does not permit me to cover here this well-known incident. 69. "Ob"yedinim proletarskiye sily na teatral'nom fronte: Na teatral'nom soveshchanii RAPP," Rit, no. 6 (March 1, 1931), p. 14. 70. "GIII reorganizovan," Rit, no. 62–63 (November 20, 1930), p. 5. In that year Moscow's GAKhN was renamed GAIS and transferred to Leningrad to be incorporated into GIII. 71. S. R., "Slët 70 TRAMov," Rit, no. 10 (February 21, 1930), p. 5. 72. "Oblastnoye tramovskoye soveshchaniye," Rit, no. 13–14 (May 21, 1931), p. 5; "Nashi osnovnye zadachi na segodnyashniy den': Beseda s predsedatelem Teasektsii Leningradskogo otdela Komakademii tovarishchem Libedinskim," Rit, no. 29–30 (December 7, 1931), pp. 5–6. 73. Erde, "Fabrika marksizma," S, no. 21 (1929), pp. 10–11. 74. "Gvozdev i 'Gvodevshchina,' " Rit, no. 11 (April 21, 1931), p. 2. 75. See "Burzhuaznaya teatrovedeniye pod sudom istorii: Gvozdev govorit," Rit, no. 10 (April 11, 1931), p. 6; I. Sollertinsky, "Ideologicheskiye predposylki gvozdevskoy shkoly," Rit, no. 12 (April 30, 1931), pp. 5–6. 76. Sollertinsky, "Vozmozhnye printsipy sovetskoy opery," p. 3. 77.Ye. G., "Shkola Filonova (Vystavka v Dome pechati)," Kg, no. 118 (May 5, 1927), p. 4. 78. "Formalizmu, beskusovshchine, bessistemnosti—konets!" editorial, Rit, no. 7 (February 5, 1930), p. 1. 79. Compare ibid., p. 3; I. Sollertinsky, " 'Nos'—orudiye dal'noboynoye," ibid., pp. 6-7. 80. "VI plenum TsK Rabisa," Rit, no. 28 (October 28, 1931), pp. 6–7. 81. D. Shostakovich, "Deklaratsiya obyazannostey kompozitora," Rit, no. 31 (November 20, 1931), p. 6. It is always tricky to pinpoint motives for individuals' involvement in an enterprise like TRAM. It could be that Shostakovich sat out the storm of the cultural revolution in that relatively safe haven and abandoned it when it was over (reported in Solomon Volkov's not entirely reliable Testimony: The Memoirs of Dmitri Shostakovich, trans. Antonina W. Bouis [New York, 1980] p. 112). But it could also be that Shostakovich, himself from a family with a tradition of revolutionary leftism, joined TRAM at least in part out of idealism. 82. I. Stalin, "Novaya obstanovka—novye zadachi khozyaystvennogo stroitel'stva (rech' na soveshchanii khozyaystvennikov 23 iyunya 1931 goda)," P, July 5, 1931, p. 1. 83. I. Stalin, "O nekotorykh voprosakh istorii bol'shevizma: Pis'mo k redaktsii zhurnala 'Proletarskaya revolyutsiya,' " Proletarskaya revolyutsiya (1931), no. 6 (113), pp. 3–12 (the quotation is from p. 12). 84. I. Stalin, "O nekotorykh voprosakh istorii bol'shevizma," p. 6. 85. Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Cultural Front: Power and Culture in Revolutionary Russia (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1992), pp. 165–167. 86. Victor Turner, The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure (Chicago: Aldine, 1969). 87. "Khronika," Pir, no. 11 (1929), p. 117. 88. "Za pyat' dney," Rit, no. 47 (August 24, 1930), p. 15. 89. Katerina Clark, "Political History and Literary Chronotope: Some Soviet Case Studies," in Gary Saul Morson, ed., Literature and History: Theoretical Problems and Russian Case Studies (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1986), pp. 230-246. 90. "Khronika: Po literaturnym institutam i organizatsiyam," Pir, no. 1 (1930), p. 85. 91. Mikhail Bakhtin, "Forms of Time and the Chronotope in the Novel," The Dialogic Imagination, trans. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981), p. 85. 92. "Khronika," Pir, no. 12 (1928), p. 111. 93. His Khudozhnik neizvesten of 1931 represents a shift from his Skandalist of 1929, where he satirized his own set. 94. See V. Pudovkin's Potomok Chingiz Khana of 1928 and Krasnyy partizan, Turkmeniya, and Put' entuziastov of 1929. 95. A. Karaganov, Vsevolod Pudovkin (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1973), p. 95. ## Epilogue: The Thirties 1. Niles Eldredge and Stephen J. Gould, "Punctuated Equilibrium: An Alternative to Phyletic Gradualism," in T. J. M. Schopf and J. M. Thomas, eds., Models in Paleontology (San Francisco: Freeman, Cooper, 1972), pp. 82–115. 2. Sheila Fitzpatrick in The Russian Revolution, 1917–1932, dates the Great Purge as 1937-1938 but also discusses a series of sweeping purges that began early in 1935. My dates, which encompass the "show trials" of 1936, 1937, and 1938, are the approximate parameters used by Robert Conquest in The Great Terror. 3. M. Gorky, "O rabote nad yazykom,"Lg, no. 26 (May 15, 1931). 4. "Knigi na stole delegatov s"yezda," Lg, no. 9 (January 28, 1934). 5. M. Gorky, "Po povodu odnoy diskussii," Lg, no. 10 (January 30, 1934); A. Serafimovich, "O pisatel'yakh 'oblizannykh'i 'neoblizannykh,' " Lg, no. 13 (February 6, 1934); M. Gorky, "Otkrytoye pis'mo A. S. Serafimovichu," Lg, no. 17 (February 14, 1934); M. Gorky, "O boykosti," Lg, no. 24 (February 28, 1934); A. S. Serafimovich, "Otvet A. M. Gor'komu," Lg, no. 25 (March 1, 1934). 6. "Vchera otkrylsya Plenum Orgkomiteta" and "XVII s"yezd partii i zadachi pisateley: Sokrashchënnaya stenogramma doklada zav. kul'tpropom TsK VKP (b) t. A. Stetskogo na sobraniye pisateley 3 marta," Lg, no. 28 (March 8, 1934). 7. "Za kul'turu yazyka," editorial, Lg, no. 34 (March 20, 1934), p. 1. 8. "Rech' sekretarya TsK VKP (b) A. A. Zhdanova," Peroyy s"yezd pisateley: Stenograficheskiy otchët (Moscow: Ogiz, 1934), p. 5. 9. M. Gorky, "Otkrytoye pis'mo A. Serafimovichu," Lg, no. 17 (February 14, 1934). 10. See Katerina Clark, The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981). 11. This function of the Writers Union was apparent from the very first meeting of its organizational committee. See, for example, "V Orgkomitete soyuza pisateley RSFSR," Lg, no. 27 (June 17, 1932), p. 1; "Uluchshit' material'no-bytovoye obsluzhivaniye pisateley!" Lg, no. 31 (July 11, 1932), p. 1; "Uluchshit' byt," Lg, no. 45 (October 5, 1932). 12. See Katerina Clark, "Little Heroes and Big Deeds: Literature Responds to the First Five-Year Plan," in Sheila Fitzpatrick, ed., Cultural Revolution in Russia, 1928–1931 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978), pp. 191, 205–206. 13. M. Gorky, "O 'karamazovshchine' " (on a staged version of The Possessed at MKhAT), Rso, no. 219 (September 22, 1913); "Yeshchë o 'karamazovshchine,"" Rso, no. 248 (October 27, 1913). 14. See, for example, Sto let so dnya smerti A. S. Pushkina: Trudy Pushkinskoy sessii Akademii nauk SSSR (Moscow and Leningrad: Akademiya nauk, 1938): "Pushkin vkhodit v kommunisticheskoye segodnya" (Nechkina, p. 55); "Zhivoy uchastnik nashey literaturnoy sovremennosti" (Desnitskiy, p. 137). 15. See the concluding sentence of B. Meylakh in Pushkin i russkiy romantizm (Moscow-Leningrad: Akademiya nauk, 1937): "V tvorchestve Pushkina genial'no osushchestvlën tot splav realizma i ustremlënnogo vperëd romantizma, kotoryy tak dorog nam"; compare Zhdanov's account of socialist realism in his speech to the First Writers Congress. See also "Nasha gordost', nasha slava," editorial, I, February 10, 1937, p. 1; "Torzhestvennoye zasedaniye v Bol'shom teatre posvyashchënnoe stoletiyu so dnya smerti A. S. Pushkina," P, February 11, 1937, p. 2 (esp. P. Luppol: "Vsya russkaya literatura, rodonachal'nikom kotoroy byl Pushkin, stala sovetskoy literaturoy"). 16. Evgeniya Ginzburg, Krutoy marshrut, published in English as Journey into the Whirlwind, trans. Paul Stevenson and Max Hayward (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1967). 17. In the 1991 putsch one finds similar ambiguity in the appropriation of Pushkin: the ideologues of the putsch frequently claimed that Pushkin was "theirs" ("ours") by citing from his verse and alleged beliefs in support of their calls for resistance to Gorbachev. Those who resisted the putsch also recited from Pushkin in, for example, the speeches made on a tank outside the R.S.F.S.R. "White House." 18. "Slava russkogo naroda," editorial, P, February 10, 1937, p. 1. 19. See, for example, the materials on the reception of Andrei Sinyavsky's Strolls with Pushkin (Progulki s Pushkinym), in Catherine Nepomnyashchy, ed., The Return of Abram Tertz: Siniavskii's Reception in Gorbachev's Russia, a special issue of Studies in Russian Literature. 20. "Torzhestvuyushchiy oboz," editorial, V, no. 3 (May 1922), p. 2 (cited in Chapter 5). 21. L. S. Viv'yen, "Nashi spektakli," Leningradskiy gosudarstvennyy Ordena Trudovogo Krasnogo Znameni Akademicheskiy teatr dramy im. A. S. Pushkina (Leningrad, 1940), p. 43. 22. N. V. Petrov, 50 i 500 (Moscow: Vserossiyskoye teatral'noye obshchestvo, 1960), pp. 275, 285–288. 23. Sergey Radlov, "Teatr opery i baleta," Rit, no. 23 (September 10, 1931), p. 8. 24. Of course the meaning of Shakespeare is not self-evident since his theater had been a model for the people's theater. Although Radlov now directed Shakespeare as high culture, still he tried to make his productions less pious and grim than those of other contemporary directors. 25."Sumbur vmesto muzyki," P, January 28, 1936, p. 3. 26. "Baletnaya fal'sh," P, February 6, 1936. 27. "Soveshchaniye v Komitete po delam iskusstv," P, March 15, 1936, p. 4. 28. For a fuller account of these events see Konstantin Rudnitsky, "Krusheniye teatra," in Meyerkhol'dovskiy sbornik, issue I, part II, ed. A. A. Sherel' (Moscow: Tvorcheskiy tsentr im. Vs. Meyerkhol'da, 1992), pp. 7–29. 29. See the documents and memoir materials relating to Meyerhold's arrest and execution in two issues of Teatral'naya zhizn' for 1989: "K 50-letiyu gibeli Vs. Meyerkhol'da," no. 2, and "Meyerkhol'd: Posledniy akt tragedii," no. 5. 30. A glossy book on the history and achievements of the theater produced that year discusses the production in some detail but does not mention Meyerhold's name and lists Yuriev as the director: Leningradskiy Gosudarstvennyy Ordena Trudovogo Znameni Akademicheskiy Teatr Drama im. A. S. Pushkina, Pp. 30–31, 43, 46. 31. N. A. Zabolotsky, "Istoriya moego zaklyucheniya," Minuvsheye: Istoricheskiy al'manakh, no. 2 (Paris: Atheneum, 1986), p. 322. 32. V. Gaydebura, "Tak rasskazat' pravdivo," Sk (1989), p. 6. 33. Others include L. S. Viven, who in Petrograd in 1918 had co-authored with Meyerhold a theoretical article on body movement that anticipated his later theories of Biomechanics, and K. S. Derzhavin, who during War Communism had doubled for the circus acrobat Serge on occasion at Radlov's Peoples Comedy Theater. 34. See, for instance, Lo, no. 11 (1991), an "issue devoted to the erotic tradition in Russian literature." 35. Richard Stites, Russian Popular Culture: Entertainment and Society since 1900 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), pp. 72-78. 36. This account comes from my interview with Leonid Trauberg in Moscow in June of 1989. 37. Katerina Clark, "Aural Hieroglyphics? Some Reflections on the Role of Sound in Recent Russian Film and Its Historical Context," in Nancy Condee, ed., Russian/Soviet Hieroglyphics (British Film Institute /Indiana University Press, 1995). 38. S. Eisenstein, "Vertikal'noye kino," Iko, no. 9 (1940), pp. 16–25. 39. Many of the principals involved came originally not from Leningrad but from Jewish enclaves in the Ukraine (especially Odessa), as was also true of many of the pioneering names in Tin Pan Alley. 40. A. Badulin, "'Uslovno ubityy': Prem'yera v myuzik-kholl," Rit, no. 28 (October 28, 1931), p. 9; Lorel E. Fey, "Mitya v myuzik-kholle: Yeshchë odin vzglyad na Uslovno ubitogo," unpublished paper presented in Petersburg on April 12, 1993, to the conference "Otechestvennaya muzyka XX veka: Novoye ob izvestnom." 41. E. D. Uvarova, ed., Russkaya sovetskaya estrada, 1930-1945: Ocherki istorii (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1977), p. 240; A. Razumovskiy, "Dzhaz na estrade: Mozhet li on stat' sovetskim?" Rit, no. 43 (August 4, 1930), p. 7; "Myuzik-kholl," Rit, no. 50 (September 11, 1930), p. 19. 42. "K. Ye. Voroshilov na IX s"yezde VLKSM," P, January 22, 1931, p. 2. 43. "Prakticheskiye meropriyatiya po uluchsheniyu i razvitiyu moskovskogo gorodskogo khozyastva: Postanovleniye Moskovskogo oblastnogo i gorodskogo sovetov VKP (b) . . .," P, June 25, 1931, p. 3. 44. See "Obraztsy bol'shevistskoy bor'by za finplan" and "Smotreniye bol'- shevistkikh pobed" as headings for Pravda reports on production achievements (September 22 and October 1, 1931, respectively). 45. The importance of precedents from Petersburg in the designs for the new monumental buildings is particularly apparent in the illustrations (most of them for plans never executed) in Alexei Tarkhanov and Sergei Kavtaradze, Architecture of the Stalin Era (New York: Rizzoli, 1992). 46. "Prakticheskiye meropryatiya," p. 3; "O Moskovskom gorodskom khozyaystve i o razvitii gorodskogo khozyaystva SSSR: Dokald tov. Kaganovicha L. L. na iyunskom plenume TsK VKP(b)," P, July 4, 1931, p. 4. 47. See, for example, Alex Scobie, Hitler's State Architecture: The Impact of Classical Antiquity (University Park and London: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1990); Alan Balfour, Berlin: The Politics of Order, 1757–1989 (New York: Rizzoli, 1991); Robert A. M. Stern, Modern Classicism (New York: Rizzoli, 1988). 48. "Net takikh krepostey, kotorykh bol'sheviki ne mogli by vzyat': Rech' tov. Stalina na vsesoyuznoy konferentsii rabotnikov promyshlennosti," P, February 5, 1931, p. 2. 49. Even in 1926 when the Alexandrinsky staged a revival of the Meyerhold production it was attacked as "untimely," "aestheticism," and "apoliticism"; Sadko, "'Maskarad'. . .," Zi, no. 21 (May 25, 1926), p. 17. 50. Vladimir Papernyy argues that in the 1930s first Neoclassical models dominated as the official inspiration for Soviet architecture and then models from more strictly "native traditions"; see Kul'tura "dva" (Ann Arbor: Ardis, 1985), pp. 36–40. In the account of the 1930s in Tarkhanov and Kavtaradze's Architecture of the Stalin Era, however, indebtedness to classical models is emphasized. It is worth noting that avant-garde designs were also prominent in some of the competitions of that decade.