# Customer: 1) Give me a bucketful of this stuff. The merchant measures it out and says It costs 100 Marks. 2) Now, salesman, give me the same sized bucketful of this other stuff. The merchant weighs It and says this costs 200 Marks. Customer:(why does thls cost twice as much?) Merchant: Because this other purchase Is twice as heavy. (The customer agrees and pays hinı) Customer: Now give me an equally heavy amount of thls thIrd materiai. The merchant weighs It and says It costs 400 Marks. Customer: (Why Is it double the prlce ?) ## Merchant: Because this thlrd selection Is double the vaiue, keeps longer, tastes better, Is more sought after, nicer to look at. (The customer Is undeclded.) Falls into the sphere of LINE Linear value: longer, shorter, coarser and finer. Fails into the sphere of TONE(tonallty) Tonal value: brighter, darker, heavier, Ilghter. Falls Into the sphere of COLOUR Colour value: more desirable, more beautiful, better, too deep, too beautiful, too sweet, too bitter, too hot, chilling, ugly.

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History\02-Books\Paul Klee：《The Thinking Eye The Notebooks of Paul Klee》，Jürg Spiller (ed.)，1961\02-ADO\02-ADO\auto\02-ADO.md

## Customer: 1) Give me a bucketful of this stuff. The merchant measures it out and says It costs 100 Marks. 2) Now, salesman, give me the same sized bucketful of this other stuff. The merchant weighs It and says this costs 200 Marks. Customer:(why does thls cost twice as much?) Merchant: Because this other purchase Is twice as heavy. (The customer agrees and pays hinı) Customer: Now give me an equally heavy amount of thls thIrd materiai. The merchant weighs It and says It costs 400 Marks. Customer: (Why Is it double the prlce ?) ## Merchant: Because this thlrd selection Is double the vaiue, keeps longer, tastes better, Is more sought after, nicer to look at. (The customer Is undeclded.) Falls into the sphere of LINE Linear value: longer, shorter, coarser and finer. Fails into the sphere of TONE(tonallty) Tonal value: brighter, darker, heavier, Ilghter. Falls Into the sphere of COLOUR Colour value: more desirable, more beautiful, better, too deep, too beautiful, too sweet, too bitter, too hot, chilling, ugly.