Kevin Lynch # T'he Image of the City Copyright © 1960 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the President and Fellows of Harvard College SECOND PRINTING, DECEMBER 1962 Library of Congress Catalog Card No: 60-7362 Printed in the United States of America Distributed by Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts ## PREFACE look is of any importance, and whether it can be changed. The urban landscape, among its many roles, is also something to be seen, to be remembered, and to delight in. Giving visual form to the city is a special kind of design problem, and a rather new one at that. In the course of examining this new problem, the book looks at three American cities: Boston, Jersey City, and Los Angeles. It suggests a method whereby we might begin to deal with visual form at the urban scale, and offers some first principles of city design. The work that lies behind this study was done under the direction of Professor Gyorgy Kepes and myself at the Center for Urban and Regional Studies of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. It was generously supported over several years by funds from the Rockefeller Foundation. The book itself is being published as one of a series of volumes of the Joint Center for Urban Studies of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, an agency which has grown out of the urban research activities of these two institutions. As in any intellectual work, the content derives from many sources, difficult to trace. Several research associates contributed directly to the development of this study: David Crane, Bernard Frieden, William Alonso, Frank Hotchkiss, Richard Dober, Mary Ellen Peters (now Mrs. Alonso). I am very grateful to them all. One name should be on the title page with my own, if only he would thereby not be made responsible for the shortcomings of the book. That name is Gyorgy Kepes. The detailed development and concrete studies are my own, but the underlying concepts were generated in many exchanges with Professor Kepes. I would be at a loss to disentangle my ideas from his. For me these have been good years of association. M.I.T. December, 1959 KEVIN LYNCH ## CONTENTS I The Image of the Environment 1 Legibility, 2; Building the Image, 6; Structure and Identity, 8; Imageability, 9. II Three Cities 14 Boston, 16; Jersey City, 25; Los Angeles, 32; Common Themes, 43. HI The City Image and Its Elements 46 Paths, 49; Edges, 62; Districts, 66; Nodes, 72; Land marks, 78; Element Interrelations, 83; The Shifting Image, 85; Image Quality, 87. IV City Form 91 Designing the Paths, 95; Design of Other Elements, 99; Form Qualities, 105; The Sense of the Whole, 108; Metropolitan Form, 112; The Process of Design, 115. V A New Scale 118 Appendices A Some References to Orientation 123 Types of Reference Systems, 128; Formation of the Image, 131; The Role of Form, 133; Disadvantages of Imageability, 138. B The Use of the Method 140 The Method as the Basis for Design, 155; Directions for Future Research, 156. C Two Examples of Analysis 160 Beacon Hill, 160; Scollay Square, 173. Bibliography 182 Index 187