# 444 745.4 11377 © Elizabeth Aslin 1969 SBN 236.17601.3 All rights reserved Published in Great Britain by ELEK BOOKS LIMITED 2 All Saints Street London NI Designed by Harold Bartram Printed by Westerham Press Westerham Kent England ## Contents Chapter I Introduction 13 2 Red Brick and Sunflowers 36 3 The Aesthetic Interior 52 4 The Japanese Taste 79 5 Oscar Wilde and America 97 6 Satire and Comment 112 7 ‘Art’ Industry 128 8 The Fashionable Aesthete 145 9 Kate Greenaway and Company 160 10 Queen Anne to Art Nouveau 175 Notes 189 Selected Bibliography 190 Index 191 I Corner cupboard designed by Alfred Waterhouse and painted by Mrs Alfred Waterhouse. 2 Buffet with inset panels of embossed Japanese leather paper, designed by E.W.Godwin. 3 Sideboard in various woods, designed by Alfred Waterhouse. 4 Chair with ebonized decoration, designed by Alfred Waterhouse. 5 Armchair, combiningJapanese and English traditional design, about 187o. 6 Side chair in golden oak; Eastlake'style. 7 Buffet of ebony with carved boxwood panels, designed by B.J. Talbert. 8 Detail of plate 7 above. 9 Original design for ‘Sunflower' wallpaper by B.J. Talbert. colour 10Apple Blossom’, hand-printed wallpaper designed by Lewis F. Day. colour II Trellis dado’, hand-printed wallpaper designed by Lewis F. Day. colour 12 Wallpaper designed by B. J. Talbert and exhibited by Jeffrey & Co., Paris 1878.colour 13 Wallpaper, frieze, filling and dado designed by B.J. Talbert. colour 14 The Sleeping Beauty’, machine-printed nursery wallpaper designed by Walter Crane. colour 15 Original design for part ofSwan, Rush and Iris’ dado, by Walter Crane. colour 16 Original design for a wallpaper by E. W. Godwin. colour 1 7 Decorative panel in carved boxwood from a piano, designed by H. W. Batley. 18 Chair in ebonized wood, designed by E. W. Godwin. 19 Jacobean’ armchair, designed by E. W. Godwin. 20Sussex chair ofebonized beech, made by Morris & Co. 21 Table in ebonized oak, designed by E. W. Godwin. 22 Chair, probably designed and made for Liberty & Co., 1884. 23 ‘The Thebes stool’, in mahogany with a leather seat, designed and made for Liberty & Co., 1884. ## List of plates 24 Chair and coffee table, designed by E. W. Godwin. 25 Chairs with ebonized frames, part of a set of bedroom furniture made by Herter Brothers. 26 Honeysuckle’, designed by William Morris and printed on Indian tusser silk by Thomas Wardle. colour 27 Bedspread in indigo-dyed linen embroidered in coloured silks, designed by William Morris. colour 28 Detail ofa curtain, designed by H.R.H. Princess Louise and worked at the Royal School of Art Needlework. colour 29‘Tulip' chintz, designed by William Morris. colour 30 ‘Tanjor Lotus’, tusser silk damask, made by T. Wardle, for Liberty & Co. colour 31 Panel of tiles, painted in Persian’ colours by William de Morgan. colour 32 Tiles, transfer printed and painted by T. & F. G. Booth ofStaffordshire. colour 33 Earthenware tiles, painted with the mark of W. B. Simpson on the reverse. colour 34Detail of brickwork from the Victoria Dwellings, Clerkenwell Road, London. 35 Sunflowers in terracotta, Fitzjohn's Avenue, London. 36 Detail of the decoration ofBarclay's Bank, Saffron Walden, designed by W. Eden Nesfield. 37Central façade of Carlisle Mansions, Cheyne Walk, London. 38 Central façade of Carlisle Mansions, Cheyne Walk, London. 39 North-facing façade of Lowther Lodge, Kensington Gore. 40 Part of north-facing façade of Lowther Lodge. 41 Panel in the façade of Carlisle Mansions, Cheyne Walk. 42 Panel in the façade of Carlisle Mansions, Cheyne Walk. 43 Cheniston Lodge, Kensington. 44 Clock with painted porcelain face, probably designed by Lewis F. Day. 45 Clock with painted tile face, designed by Lewis F. Day and made by Howell & James. 46 Firescreen made in mahogany, inset with tiles, manufactured by W. B. Simpson & Sons. 47 Bureau in bird's eye maple, from the Edwin Gould Bedroom at Lyndhurst, New York. 48 Bed from the Edwin Gould Bedroom at Lyndhurst, New York. ## List of plates 49 Dining-room door at 18 Stafford Terrace, designed and painted by Linley Sambourne. 50 Hanging cupboard and painted wall panels from The Grove, Harborne, Birmingham, designed byJ. H. Chamberlain. 51 Billiards room, designed by Thomas Jeckyll. 52 Cabinet in ebonized wood, probably made by Collinson & Lock. 53 Design for a drawing-room mantelpiece, exhibited at the Paris Exhibition, 1878. 54 Cabinet in ebonized wood, designed by T. E. Collcutt and made by Collinson & Lock. colour 55 ‘Tower House and Queen Anne's Grove' from a set oflithographs of Bedford Park, 1882. colour 56 Watercolour sketch for a Japanese' cabinet, by E. W. Godwin. colour 57 Sketch design for a Town Hall in the ‘Queen Anne' style, by E. W. Godwin. colour 58 The dining-room at 18 Stafford Terrace, Kensington. colour 59 The Whistler Peacock Room. colour 60Blossoms' by Albert Moore. colour 61 The Pelican’, pastel by Edward Burne-Jones. colour 62 Artists’ Houses in Chelsea; a view ofTite Street, drawn by T.R.Davison. 63 Front elevation ofthe House and Studio in Tite Street, Chelsea, designed by E. W. Godwin for Mr F. Miles. 64 The White House, Tite Street, Chelsea, designed by E. W. Godwin for J. McNeil Whistler. 65 Wornington Road School from School Architecture by E. R. Robson. 66 Cast Iron Pavilion designed by Thomas Jeckyll and made by Barnard, Bishop & Barnard, Norwich. 67 Aesthetic Love in a Cottage’, cartoon by George du Maurier in Punch. 68 Sweet Little Buttercup' or Art Embroidery, cartoon by Linley Sambourne in Punch. 69Ornament from Liberty's Eastern Art Catalogue, December 188o. 70 Marigolds and Blossom’, chintz designed by B.J. Talbert. 71 Sunflowers and Vetch’, chintz designed by B.J. Talbert. 72 Flower Pot’, panel designed by William Morris. 73 Peacock’, wallpaper designed by E. W. Godwin. ## List of plates 74 Wallpaper, anonymously designed and printed by Corbiere, Son & Brindle. 75 Nagasaki’, silk damask probably designed by E. W. Godwin. 76 Upholstery fabric by an unknown designer, about 188o. 77 Detail of a piano cover, designed by C. R. Ashbee. 78 Porcelain teapot made by the Worcester Roal Porcelain Works. 79 Bamboo and Fan’, earthenware plate made by Minton's 80 Pressed glass bowl in Patent Queen's Ware’, made by Sowerby & Company. 81 Pressed glass dish in ‘Patent Queen's Ware’, made by Sowerby & Copany, and probably designed by J. G. Sowerby. 82 Plate made by Minton's and painted by Edith S. Hall. 83 Plate from the Sparrow and Bamboo' service made by Wedgwood. 84 Vase of earthenware, painted by Katherine B. Smallfield and made by Doulton's. 85 Jug in saltglaze stoneware, made by Pinder, Bourne & Co. 86 Yeddo’, saltglaze stoneware jug made by W. Brownfield. 87 Jug in saltglaze stoneware, designed by Frank A. Butler and made by Doulton's. 88 Jug in saltglaze stoneware, designed by George Tinworth and made by Doulton's. 89 Wine jug in silver with engraved and applied ornament, made by Frederick Elkington. 90 Jug in silver with engraved decoration, made by John Aldwinkle and James Slater. 91 Jug in saltglaze stoneware, with incised and coloured decoration by Emily J. Edwards, and made by Doulton's. 92 Earthenware plates, designed by W. S. Coleman and made by Minton's. 93 New Year Card, one of a set of prize-winning designs illustrating the seasons, by H. W. Batley. colour 94 Christmas card by an unknown designer for Marcus Ward & Co. colour 95 ‘The Little Red Girl’, greetings card designed by Kate Greenaway for Marcus Ward & Co. colour 96 Frontispiece from A Day in a Child’s Life, by Kate Greenaway. colour 97 ‘The Colonel Waltz’ music cover. colour 98 Illustration from Aladdin or the Wonderful Lamp, one ofWalter Crane's Shilling Toy Books. colour ## List of plates The Girl in Yellow’ from Afternoon Tea, by Thomas Crane and J.G.Sowerby.colour 100 Page from Under the Window, by Kate Greenaway. colour Three views ofa painted porcelain teapot, made by the Worcester Royal Porcelain Works. colour Earthenware vase in the form ofa pilgrim bottle, designed by H. Stacy Marks and made by Minton's. colour Porcelain vase in the form ofa pilgrim bottle, modelled by James Hadley and made by the Worcester Royal Porcelain Company. colour Earthenware dish painted by an unknown artist at Minton's Art Pottery Studio. colour Tile, designed by Kate Greenaway, made by T. & R. Boote. Original design for a greetings card for Messrs de la Rue, by William Coleman. Page from The Decorative Sisters by Josephine Pollard, illustrated by Walter Satterlee. Illustration from Princess Belle Etoile, one ofWalter Crane’s Shilling Toy Books. 109 Christmas cards, designed by Albert Ludovici Junior. Christmas card, designed by Mrs Koberwein Terrell. The Lowther Arcade’ from London Town, by Thomas Crane and Ellen Houghton. Illustration from A Frog He Would a-Wooing Go, one ofRandolph Caldecott's picture books. The Four Seasons’, tiles designed byJ. Moyr Smith and made by Minton's. 1 14 Sunflower in wrought iron designed by Thomas Jeckyll. 115Pencil drawing ofa bracket for the Japanese Pavilion by Thomas Jeckyll. Pencil drawing of a bracket panel for the Japanese Pavilion by Thomas Jeckyll. Detail from Private View ofthe Royal Academy, 188r' by W. P. Frith. Love’s Altar' by Walter Crane. Symphony in Flesh Colour and Pink’, portrait ofMrs F. R. Leyland by J. M. Whistler. Drawing of a panel of stained glass shown at the Paris Exhibition of 1878. Printed velveteen designed by Lewis F. Day. List of plates Front ofjacket: Detail of a piano cover embroidered in gold thread and appliqué on silk damask, designed by C. R. Ashbee, about 1889. London, Victoria and Albert Museum. Back ofjacket: Tile, designed by Kate Greenaway, made of earthernware, transfer printed in colours and made by T. & R. Boote, Birmingham, 1883. London, Victoria and Albert Museum. Front endpaper: Wallpaper registered 7June 187o, made by Gillow & Company, 1 76 Oxford Street, London. London, Patent Office. Back endpaper: 'Gold, black and brown' wallpaper made by Jeffrey & Co., Islington, 1878. London, Patent Office. ## List of figures in the text Drawing of a blacksmith's forge and cottage by W. Eden Nesfield 2 Drawing of a painted drawing-room door. 3Drawing of a cabinet designed by R. Norman Shaw 4Original photograph of Oscar Wilde. 5The Height of Aesthetic Exclusiveness’, drawing by George du Maurier. 6 Caricature of Oscar Wilde by Linley Sambourne. 7Chinamania made useful at last !’, from Punch 8 Standard Theatre, New York, programme for the 1ooth performance of Patience. 9 Drawings ofBurmantofts Pottery’. 10 Drawings ofBurmantofts Pottery’. II Drawing of a cast-iron grate designed by Thomas Jeckyll. 1.2 An Impartial Statement in Black and White’, drawing by George du Maurier. 13 ‘The Tidy Costume'from Punch. 14 Drawing of a tea gown, from a Liberty catalogue. 15 Drawing ofthe decoration of the Lyceum Theatre, New York, designed by Louis C. Tiffany.