# Glossary of Technical Terms Al KALINE GLAZE - Glaze containing an alkaline material such as sodium or potassium in some form; can give rich turquoise colours when small quantities of copper oxide are present. AMPHORA – Pot form used in Mediterranean countries for storing and transporting liquids; usually characterized by two handles linking the neck to the body of the pot. ANTIMONY – Metallic element once used to make glazes opaque white. ARABESQUE - Ornamentation derived from a mixture of formal geometric and foliage patterns, characterized by flowing linear designs of leaves and scrolls. ARMENIAN BOLE – Fine red pigment rich in iron oxide, originating in the Near East and widely used from about the thirteenth or fourteenth century. AsH – Remains from fired wood or other organic matter, often used in hightemperature glazes. BARBOTINE DECORATION – Made by trailing thick slip through a fine nozzle on to the surface of a leather-hard pot. BASALT – Fine-grained black igneous rock; a term used by Wedgwood amongst others for black unglazed ware. BisCUIT - Pottery which has been fired once without a glaze in a biscuit firing; usually porous and relatively soft. BoDY - General term for various clays from which pots are made. BONE CHINA - Type of porcelain, made in England from china clay, bone ash and flint; purè white and translucent. BtRNISHING – Rubbing the surface of unfired pots with a smooth tool such as a stone or a bone; the particles of clay, pressed flat and smooth, take on a dull gloss; sometimes known as polishing. CARINATE - Pottery shape made by joining a rounded base and straight inward-sloping walls. CELADONS – General term for oriental stonewares and porcelains with green glazes, where the colour is obtained from small amounts of iron in the glaze. Sometimes known as greenwares. CHINA CLAY – Pure white clay, sometimes known as kaolin, of theoretically pure composition; essential for the production of fine porcelain. CHINA STONE OR PORCELAIN STONE — Chinese material used for the manufacture of high-temperature porcelain, made from a rock composed of quartz, alkali feldspars secondary mica and a small amount of clay; sometimes known as petuntse; Cornwall stone and Cornish stone are Western equivalents. COLOURING OXIDES - Various metal oxides which, when painted on or mixed into a glaze, give different colours; copper oxide gives green, manganese oxide brown or purple, iron oxide brown or green, cobalt oxide blue. CoMBING – Incised parallel-line decoration made by a toothed tool such as a comb. CRAZING – Cracking of glaze to give a fine network of lines; sometimes known as crackle. DELFTWARE – English term used originally to describe tin-glazed earthenware made in Delft, Holland; sometimes used to describe all tin-glazed ware made in England. EARTHENWARE – General term used for pottery fired to temperatures up to 1150°C; characterized by slightly porous body in which glaze and body remain separate layers. ENAMELS OR ON-GLAZE DECORATION - Glazes prepared in frit form to melt at low temperature, allowing a wide range of colours; painted on to a fired glaze and refired in a muffle kiln. FAIENCE (EGYPTIAN PASTE) - Artificially made clay body prepared from clay and sand to which a fluxing agent has been added; can be moulded into small objects or pots; the surface becomes glossy when fired and, if dusted with copper oxide, turquoise. A term also used by the French for tin-glazed earthenware. FRIT - Manufactured glaze or body material made by heating two or more raw materials together until they melt to form a glass which is then shattered, usually by pouring into cold water, and ground to powder. GALENA – An impure lead ore used by potters to make lead glazes. GLAZE – A smooth waterproof glossy surface usually applied to the surface of pottery to make it smooth and waterproof and also as a decorative finish. GREENWARE – General term for pots before they have been fired; also used for celadons. GROG – Fired crushed pottery added to clay to make it more workable. INCISED DECORATION – Lines pressed or cut into the surface of a pot or tile. KILNSs – Structures in which clay forms are fired until they become pottery, sometimes known as the potter's oven; more sophisticated kilns separate the fire from the chamber which holds the pots. KWAART – Technique used by the Delft potters to imitate Chinese blue-and-white porcelain in tin-glazed earthenware, by using a clear transparent glaze over a white opaque glaze to give greater gloss and depth to the colours. LEATHER-HARD - Term describing the midway stage between wet and dry clay, comparable to shoe leather, when the clay is sufficiently stiff to support its own weight but still pliable enough to be bent and carved, at which point turning can also be carried out on unfinished pots; sometimes known as cheese-hard. <table><tr><td>LEVIGATION – Process of preparing clay by reducing it to liquid and then decanting the finer particles, which remain in suspension while the heavier particles sink.</td><td>POTASH − Form of potassium oxide (K20) found in wood-ash, which acts as a flux in glaze or faience.</td><td>SOFT-PASTE PORCELAIN – Made by mixing white clay with a frit or flux such as bone ash or talc which vitrifies at earthenware temperature to give a white translucent body; European invention produced to</td></tr><tr><td>LUSTRE – Colouring decoration achieved by painting metallic pigment on to a fired glaze and refiring in a reducing atmosphere, giving an iridescent effect.</td><td>QUARTZ − Form of silica (SiO,) such as sand, which when mixed with a suitable flux will form a glaze; flint is a finely ground form of silica.</td><td>imitate Chinese high-temperature (sometimes called hard-paste) porcelain. SPRIGGING - Decorating technique in</td></tr><tr><td>MAIOLICA - General term for tin-glazed earthenware decorated with colouring oxides painted on to unfired opaque white tin-glaze.</td><td>RAKU – Method, originated in Japan, of firing quickly by placing pots in a glowing kiln and removing them while still at top temperature.</td><td>which relief-moulded decoration is applied to the leather-hard pot; used extensively by Wedgwood in the production of his Jasper wares.</td></tr><tr><td>MAJOLICA - Corruption of maiolica; a term used during the nineteenth century for moulded earthenware with relief patterns decorated with coloured glazes or maiolica in-glaze painting.</td><td>atmosphere; the resulting pots are often dark brown or black; iron glazes produce greens or blues (opposite to oxidation firing).</td><td>temperature, about 1250°C, at which the body is vitrified and the glaze and body are partially fused together. TEMMOKU – Term used to describe black</td></tr><tr><td>MONOCHROME POTTERY - Usually made in one colour or with decoration painted in a single contrasting colour.</td><td>RESIST DECORATION - Part of the pot is painted with a substance such as wax which resists any colouring pigment or glaze and therefore fires a contrasting colour.</td><td>oriental glazes that break light brown on rims and ornament. TEMPER - Coarse, non-plastic material</td></tr><tr><td>MUFFLE KILN – Protects pots from flames in a flame-burning kiln; essential for production of enamels.</td><td>RoULETTING – In antiquity, decoration made by allowing a tool to chatter&#x27; against the side of a leather-hard pot revolving on the wheel; also used to describe the pattern</td><td>added to clay to improve its working and firing qualities. TERRA SIGILLATA — Pottery with an orange or red glossy surface achieved by adding a</td></tr><tr><td>NATRON − Mineral found in the Near East containing sodium oxide (Na,O), which acts as a flux in a glaze or in faience. OPACIFIER — Substance, usually a metal</td><td>made by a relief-decorated revolving wheel held against a turning pot. SAGGAR – Ceramic container in which the</td><td>layer of finely prepared slip; made in Italy and Gaul during the Roman period and sometimes known as Samian ware.</td></tr><tr><td>oxide such as tin oxide, which, when added to clear glazes, becomes suspended and renders the glaze opaque.</td><td>ware is placed during the firing for protection from kiln gases, flames or contact with other pots or loose material. SALT-GLAZE − A thin glaze achieved by</td><td>THROWING – Art of building up pots on the fast-spinning potter&#x27;s wheel using centrifugal force.</td></tr><tr><td>atmosphere with a clean bright flame; the resulting pots are often bright coral red; iron glazes give yellow or brown (opposite to reduction firing).</td><td>introducing common salt (NaCl) into the kiln at high temperature. The chlorine goes up the chimney as a gas and the sodium vapour reacts with the surface of the clay to form a glaze.</td><td>opaque by the addition of tin oxide to the mixture. ToURNETTE - Turntable device used to</td></tr><tr><td>PADDLE AND ANVIL – Tools often used for hand-built pottery. The anvil, often in the form of a stone, supports the pot wall inside while the paddle is beaten against the outside wall.</td><td>SGRAFFITO – Decoration scratched through a layer of slip to show the body of contrasting colour.</td><td>assist the shaping of pots by coiling. TURNING OR TRIMMING – Process of removing surplus clay from thrown pots by returning them, when leather-hard, to the</td></tr><tr><td>POLYCHROME POTTERY - Decoration painted in two or more colours, usually with coloured slips or oxides.</td><td>SLIP – Clay that has been thinned in water and sieved to make it smooth.</td><td>potter&#x27;s wheel and trimming with a metal tool. UNDERGLAZE PAINTING - Technique of painting colouring oxides on to unfired</td></tr><tr><td>PORCELAIN - High-temperature ware which is white and translucent, with a body made by mixing china clay, china stone and quartz</td><td>SLIP-CAST – Ware, usually thin-walled, made in a mould from a specially prepared clay slip. SLIPWARE – Pots and dishes decorated with</td><td>pottery which may or may not be subsequently glazed; used occasionally to describe the technique of painting on to unfired glaze.</td></tr></table>