The Lesser Arts. cultivation of the powers of the mind, general cuitivation of the powers of the eye and hand. Perhaps that seems to you very commonplace advice and a very roundabout road; nevertheless 'tis a certain one, if by any road you desire to come to the new art, which is my subject to-night: if you do not, and if those germs of invention, which, as I said just now, are no doubt still common enough among men, are left neglected and undeveloped, the laws of Nature will assert themselves in this as in other matters, and the faculty of design itself will gradually fade from the race of Sirs, shall we approach nearer to perfection by casting away so large a part of that intelligence which makes us men? ## man. And now before I make an end, I want to call your attention to certain things, that, owing to our neglect of the arts for other business, bar that good road to us and are such an hindrance, that, till they are dealt with, it is hard even to make a beginning of our endeavor. And if my talk should seem to grow too serious for our subject, as indeed I think it cannot do, I beg you to remember what I said. earlier, of how the arts all hang together. Now there is one art of which the old architect of Edward the Third's time was thinking-he who founded New College at Oxford, I mean when he took this for his motto: 'Manners maketh man :' he meant by manners the art of morals, the art of living worthily, and like a man. I must needs claim this art also as dealing with my subject.