The Art of the People. indeed the chief part of it. I doubt if it be possible for a whole mass of men to do work to which they. are driven, and in which there is no hope and no pleasure, without trying to shirk it- at any rate, shirked it has always been under such circumstances. On the other hand, I know that there are some men so right-minded, that they will, in despite of irksomeness and hopelessness, drive right through their work. Such men are the salt of the earth. But must there not be something wrong with a state of society which drives these into that bitter heroism, and the most part into shirking, into the depths often of half-conscious self-contempt and degradation? Be sure that there is, that the blindness and hurry of civilization, as it now is, have to answer a heavy charge as to that enormous amount of pleasureless work "” work that tries every muscle of the body and every atom of the brain, and which is done without pleasure and without aim work which everybody who has to do with tries to shuffle off in the speediest way that dread of starvation or ruin will allow him. I am as sure of one thing as that I am living and breathing, and it is this: that the dishonesty in the daily arts of life, complaints of which are in all men's mouths, and which I can answer for it does exist, is the natural and inevitable result of the world in the hurry of the war of the counting-house, and the war of the battlefield, having forgotten-of all men, I say, each for the other, having forgotten,