# Acknowledgements Most of the Art and Crafts patterns illustrated in this book are taken from the collections of the Victoria and Albert Museum. I would like to thank my colleagues in the Department of Textiles and Dress, Mike Kitkatt and Daniel McGrath, who took most of the photographs, and Isobel Sinden and Edwin Wallace of the Picture Library for making this a comparatively painless exercise. Selecting items from other collections has also been made easier with the help of a number of colleagues and friends; Ann Lynch and Audrey Duck of G.P. & J. Baker and Mark Turner of the Silver Studio Collection at Middlesex Polytechnic deserve special thanks. I would also like to thank: the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, New York; Rhode Island School of Design; NordenfjeldskeKunstindustrimuseum,Trondheim; Kunstindustrimuseet Oslo; Museum of Decorative Arts, Copenhagen; Wurttembergisches Landesmuseum, Stuttgart;Deutsches Textilemuseum, Krefeld; Museum fur angewandte Kunst, Vienna. By listing only the collections of European and American museums I hope that the many individuals who have also assisted will also accept my sincere appreciation. The process of putting the book together has been very pleasurable thanks both to Peggy Vance and Jane Rogoyska and I am delighted to have been part of this joint Anglo-American study. Published by Portland House a division of dilithium Press, Ltd. Distributed by Crown Publishers, Inc. 225 Park Avenue South New York New York 10003 Copyright © 1989 Studio Editions All rights reserved William Morris and The Arts and Crafts Movement contains a selection of designs and patterns from The Victoria and Albert Museum Cromwell Rd., London SW7 and other Museums in Europe and the USA All rights reserved. This publication may not be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publishers. ISBN 0-517-69260-0 Printed in Málaysia hgfedba