# THE AGE OF MANUFACTURES, 1700–1820 This new edition of The Age of Manufactures provides an exciting alternative overview of the eighteenth-century British economy. Recent macroeconomic history has discounted many of the achievements of the Industrial Revolution, but Maxine Berg digs beneath the macroeconomic estimates to dissect the characteristics and processes of industry in the eighteenth century. A male industrial revolution has been presented as the general experience, but new industries, notably in textiles and metal products, were primarily employers of women. This new edition gives these industries and their workforces due prominence. Technologies, work processes, labour forces and markets shifted in a variety of directions and forms to create a sector of dynamic new initiatives alongside stable and declining crafts. The key to the Industrial Revolution must lie in the sources of technological creativity and the structures of industrial communities. The rise of the factory system was one result; proliferating workshops and putting-out systems were equal novelties in a whole range of consumer-based manufacturing industries. The Age of Manufactures reasserts the primacy of the industrial experience to Britain’s Industrial Revolution. In this new edition, four additional chapters, graphs and statistical summaries, as well as a thorough revision of the rest of the text, have refreshed and enhanced this well-established and important contribution to British economic history. Maxine Berg is Senior Lecturer in History at the University of Warwick. She is the author of The Machinery Question and the Making of Political Economy 1815–1848 (1980), an editor of Markets and Manufacture in Early Industrial Europe (1991), and author of many articles on the Industrial Revolution.