## PREFACE The first edition of this book was written nearly ten years ago. In the intervening years there has been a flowering of research on the eighteenth century. While this new edition does not address all of this history, it has in many ways been inspired by it. The most important new perspectives on the eighteenth-century economy have been offered by N.F.R.Crafts and A.E.Wrigley, who have argued for slow continuous change and the handicap of a large and sluggish industrial sector. My original edition had argued the case for ‘the other Industrial Revolution’ which included domestic industry and artisan workshops at least as much as the factory system. It argued for an Industrial Revolution which relied on tools, small machines and skilled labour much more than it did on steam engines and automatic processes, and an Industrial Revolution which was created by women and children at least as much as it was by male artisans and factory workers. This new edition affirms this position, but sets it much more explicitly apart from the slow growth formulae of Crafts and Wrigley. Friends and colleagues working on a range of eighteenth-century subjects have provided new insights and evidence which have reshaped some of my arguments and helped to confirm others. These have included Robert Allen and Jeanette Neeson on agriculture and common right, Pat Hudson on regions, Jan de Vries and Amanda Vickery on consumption, Patrick O’Brien on trade, Joel Mokyr and David Landes on technology, and Pamela Sharpe and Brenda Collins on women’s industries. Ruth Pearson has continued to illuminate for me the connections between current new technologies and women’s work. Against the background of this research the new edition of The Age of Manufactures like the old still provides the only easily accessible overview of manufacturing during the eighteenth century. The history of manufacture is placed within the framework of debates about the Industrial Revolution and of changes in agriculture and international markets. It remains, however, essentially a history of the technologies, forms of work organization and the labour forces of Britain’s key industries during the period. The book has benefited especially from work which Pat Hudson and I did together for our article, ‘Rehabilitating the Industrial Revolution’, and our many discussions on these topics over the years. I am grateful as well to R.N.Nash and James Thomson who read the book in full, and provided helpful criticisms and suggestions. The Simon Fellowship at Manchester University gave me the time to revise the book, at the same time as pursuing new research. John Robertson has kept me conscious of how all this fits with broader historical issues, and my three daughters have grown more vociferous in their efforts, still unsuccessful, to banish history and the Industrial Revolution from the kitchen table.