# INTRODUCTION My introduction to the first edition of this book was written in the very different economic climate of the early 1980s, and in the different intellectual climate which then prevailed, where industrial and social revolutions were still considered to be formative of our modern identity. My book then was about industry and technology; it placed these at the centre of an account of the Industrial Revolution. For over a generation accounts had focused on the ‘macroeconomics’ of the Industrial Revolution—patterns of economic growth, capital formation, demand, income distribution and economic fluctuations made up the rather dull Anglo-American cuisine of the student diet. Indeed students in numbers studied economic history in Coventry, Birmingham, Leeds, Liverpool and Manchester, and found it increasingly easy to understand their subject without noticing the cities they lived in and without visiting the factories and workplaces which gave these places an industrial identity. I hoped that my book would make a difference to this. It was meant to bring to light the long and varied experience of organizational and technological change in manufacture going back to the early eighteenth century. My book was about the content of that manufacture, not just its results in the indices of economic growth. The economy I analysed was not one of economic indicators and national accounts. It was made up of the people and processes of industry, their work, their inventions and their communities. It was furthermore a book which brought out of the shadow cast by quantitative history the processes of manufacture and parts of the labour force, especially women, children and the unskilled, which played a central role not reflected in official statistics. The book raised innumerable questions over criteria for ‘transition’, ‘successes’ and ‘failures’, and charted the different technological choices and routes of industrial development. It challenged former apocalyptic metaphors of change and the much-vaunted achievements of factory and large-scale power technologies. It called for new research into a whole range of industries which we still know little about, and enquiry into the social realities behind the changes in productivity at the time. My book was intended, if metaphor be allowed, to recreate a Babette’s feast of trades, crafts, new products and industries, of girls, old women and mothers, as well as of proud artisans and casual labourers, of machines, tools and skills. A new historical framework is now on the agenda, and I have written a new edition of the book to engage with this. First, a new economic climate has emerged from the restructuring of the 1970s and 1980s. The major feature of the 1780s to 1830s was the rise in the place of industry. Where industry’s share in national product rose from 23 per cent in 1801 to 34 per cent in 1840, and on to 40 per cent in 1901, in the early 1990s that trend has been sharply reversed. In the course of two decades from 1973 to 1990 manufacturing’s share of gross domestic product fell from 30 per cent to 20 per cent. Britain’s manufacture of capital and intermediate goods and components all but dropped out of world trade during the 1980s. During the recession of the 1990s the industrial towns of the Midlands and the North are in decline and demoralization. The factories and the workshops neglected by a past generation of students, by governments and by our cultural icons are now only skeletons. David Lodge wrote about this in Nice Work, published in 1988 at the peak of a boom. He described the industrial suburbs of Birmingham, once the Black Country, as a district dominated by factories, large and small, old and new. Many are silent, some derelict, their windows starred with smashed glass. Receiverships and closures have ravaged the area in recent years, giving a desolate look to its streets… A factory is sustained by the energy of its own functioning, the throb and whine of machinery, the clash of metal, the unceasing motion of the assembly lines, the ebb and flow of workers changing shifts, the hiss of airbrakes and the growl of diesel engines from wagons delivering raw materials at one gate, taking away finished goods at the other. When you put a stop to all that, when the place is silent and empty, all that is left is a large, ramshackle shed—cold, filthy and depressing.<sup>1</sup> The result of this economic decline and the savage reduction of the country’s industrial heartland has been a period of prolonged introspection over the national identity. As Linda Colley has put it, the British ‘came to define themselves as a single people not because of any political or cultural consensus at home, but rather in reaction to the Other beyond their shores’.<sup>2</sup> One part of this reaction was in defining themselves as the first industrial nation. That identity as ‘first’ has long disappeared, now so too has that of ‘industrial’ nation. The industry has, indeed, become part of the iconography of past glories—long-abandoned industrial sites have been made a part of the national heritage, a new picturesque landscape, a postmodern comment on the pastoral picturesque scenes of the eighteenth century. Those landscapes were not ‘natural’ as the poets and painters tried to present them, nor the remains of an ancient rural birthright. They were the deindustrialized and poverty-stricken regions of Scotland, Wales, the South-West and other ‘marginalized’ communities of Britain. Our new industrial picturesque is likewise a celebration of a past at some remove from the industrial unemployment of the present. A part of that introspection, however, has also been a calling to account of the industrial past. At one level this has been a questioning of the ‘sacred cows’ of the postwar boom—the heavy capital investment, large-scale industry and regional concentration. The failings of our own heavily capitalized, large-scale factories have been measured against the revival of alternative smaller-scale units elsewhere. And the inflexibilities and industrial conflict of hierarchically organized systems of management have entailed new attempts at network capitalism, just-in-time production systems, franchises, subcontracting and co-operative ventures. Smoke stack capitalism has had its day, its assembly lines and ‘ramshackle sheds’ abandoned for the airport and motorway flows of ‘designer capitalism’. At another level the historical facts of Britain’s industrial identity have been challenged. These facts were not, however, investigated as I had hoped, through the processes of industrial change, the sources of innovation, the potentialities for or inhibitions upon technological creativity which existed within communities and industrial structures. Instead, the application of different statistical techniques to quantitative indicators has brought to these a new precision, however spurious, and brought them to the forefront of analysis, to the exclusion of discussion of the processes and microeconomics of industrial change. Economic historians now emphasize slow continuous change rather than the dramatic break with the past which the term ‘Industrial Revolution’ once conveyed. The first edition of my book was published just before N.F.R.Crafts’s British Economic Growth,<sup>4</sup> and, like the challenging articles by Crafts and Harley published before this, I emphasized the broad coverage of industry and the role of proto-industrial development in the years long before 1780. But the focus of Crafts’s analysis in his book and in later articles was to centre on the slow rate of productivity growth during the Industrial Revolution, especially during the period between 1780 and 1820. The brunt of the explanation for disappointing results as indicated in the newly estimated growth rates was borne not by a large agricultural sector, but by a large and sluggish industrial sector. Britain was a much more industrial nation in the eighteenth century than once thought, but in Crafts’s view much of this industry was traditional and overmanned. T.S.Ashton’s spectacular ‘wave of gadgets’ was confined to a few small industries, notably cotton and iron which failed to overcome the deadweight of the older industries until after the 1830s. Crafts’s new output and growth estimates were presented in the framework of macroeconomic analysis formerly followed by economic historians, but they turned its previous conclusions on their head. For his new estimates found no radical discontinuity in national income, industrial output, capital formation, gross domestic product per head and productivity. Following soon on Crafts’s new gradualism came Wrigley’s continuity thesis.<sup>6</sup> Based on an ecological insight into the predominance of organic over inorganic resources in industry, it argued for limits to growth before the mid-nineteenth century. Resource factors were reinforced by a distribution of the labour force towards rural and traditional industrial occupations. ‘Slow growth’ and ‘continuity’ have thus become positions imposed on the period. These positions on the economy have fitted well with revisionist views in political and social history seeking constitutional continuities between ancien régime aristocratic oligarchies and ‘gentlemanly capitalism’. The new edition of my book is a challenge to the orthodoxy which now prevails on the dimensions of the eighteenth- and early-nineteenth-century economy. It is also a restatement and reformulation of my position in the first edition that the key to the Industrial Revolution was to be found in the dynamics of technological creativity and the structures of industrial communities. Orthodoxies have their fellow travellers for a time, but ultimately the statistical reworking of the same body of data must end in intellectual rigor mortis. The study of the Industrial Revolution will either be abandoned, or must seek out new frontiers of primary microeconomic research and new frameworks of analysis. One such new framework must be women’s industrial work, and female consumption of manufactured commodities. The hidden bias in all the existing estimates of productivity growth and distribution of the labour force is that they are based on male occupational categories. A male industrial revolution has been presented to us as the general experience. If women’s workforce contributions, women’s property-holding and capital investment were counted, what difference would this make to accounts of productivity growth? If women’s consumer decision-making, and family incomes rather than male wage rates were considered, what difference would this make to currently accepted views of the passive roles of home demand and international trade, and of stable, then steadily rising standards of living? In current accounts of the slow productivity growth of British industry during the eighteenth and early-nineteenth century, traditional, male labour surplus industries take the fore while new manufacturing industries deploying cheap female labour in conjunction with improved forms of economic organization and new machinery are excluded, or their place is understated. Narrative accounts along with partial quantitative indicators built up from specific regional and industrial studies provide insight into more rapid industrial transformation than ever conceived within the blinkered framework of current national accounting categories. Another framework is the extent of Britain’s difference, from the eighteenth century onwards, from her European and Asian neighbours. Perhaps the major contribution of Crafts’s and Wrigley’s books is their clarification of the distinctiveness of the British path of economic development. But this has been hidden behind more prominent messages of slow productivity change, limits to growth, organic resource bases and traditional labour forces. Crafts compared the rapid labour force deployment away from agriculture in Britain to the still largely agricultural economies of the rest of Europe. This reduction in the agricultural labour force was combined with organizational and technical change to produce a high productivity agriculture capable of feeding a rapidly growing population. Yet international specialization and comparative advantage went to a new, initially small but rapid growth industry—the cotton manufacture. It was not British industry which set the economy apart from the rest of the continent, but British agriculture plus the cotton manufacture. Wrigley identified two other distinctive features of the British economy. One was its urban growth along with the extent of its rural manufacturing. Population growth over the course of the eighteenth century emerged from rural industrial expansion and an uninterrupted growth in the urban sector. The towns of Britain, especially those of small and medium size, were growing rapidly at a time when those in much of the rest of Europe were stagnating or declining. In 1800 Britain’s urban population was surpassed only by the Netherlands, and the Dutch towns had been declining for a century.<sup>7</sup> Many of Britain’s smaller towns were heavily industrial, closely integrated with concurrent protoindustrial development in rural hinterlands. Turnpikes, canals and rivers, and a constant traffic of human activity bound the countryside to the town. Another distinctive feature was Britain’s reliance on coal resources since the later eighteenth century. New potentials for growth set her apart from the stagnation facing the Dutch economy.<sup>8</sup> From this time on, Britain, unlike her neighbours, broke free of the limitations imposed by organic, land-based raw materials. Her industries shifted from woollen textiles, leather and construction to iron and steel goods, pottery, bricks, glass and inorganic chemicals.<sup>9</sup> The expansion of the northeastern coalfield was one of the miracles of the seventeenth century, and Newcastle was proverbial for its wealth and population even at the end of the eighteenth century.<sup>10</sup> By this time the other major coalfields of the Midlands and the North were in rapid development and dictated the location of new industry. Britain consumed more coal per capita than any other European country even in the nineteenth century. In 1850 her consumption of coal per capita exceeded that reached by Germany in 1880, but the main industrial use for this coal was in the iron and the cotton industries.<sup>11</sup> Coal, towns and labour deployment played their part, to be sure, and set a distinctive path for Britain apparent in all the available macroeconomic indicators. It was not these that set off the discontinuity, however, but a concentrated technological breakthrough combined with a more broadlybased technological innovation across a range of new manufacturing industries. What the Industrial Revolution involved, as Ralph Davis once wrote, was ‘a movement on to quite different paths of industrial development from those that were being successfully followed’.<sup>12</sup> But the backdrop to this intensive capitaldeepening kind of transformation, was the expansion of manufacturing usually associated with capital-widening. This too was accompanied in many newer industries by the application of the division of labour, as well as new tools and techniques if not mechanization. The clustering of a key set of inventions was combined with new forms of work organization, centralized factories and workshops as well as decentralized subcontracting, and new labour forces, especially women, children and other uninitiated labour such as pauper apprentices. Framing this clustering was a rich diversity of technological and organizational change in a broad range of industries. As Mokyr has argued, ‘per capita consumption and living standards increased little initially, but production technologies changed dramatically in many industries and sectors, preparing the way for sustained Schumpeterian growth in the second half of the nineteenth century’.<sup>13</sup> These fundamental changes in production systems were achieved by major inventors like Samuel Crompton who wrote that he spent ‘fourand-a-half years at least wherein every moment of time and power of mind as well as expense which my other employment would permit were devoted to this one end’.<sup>14</sup> They were achieved by minor manufacturers such as James Bisset who could not brook the prospect of life as a journeyman japan painter, spending twelve-hour days painting snuff boxes with roses and anemones. He escaped by inventing a novel kind of painting on glass, called Imperial, and a whole range of other designer goods.<sup>15</sup> They were also achieved by such as Catherine Willcox, Wedgwood’s designer and painter,<sup>16</sup> or the anonymous female spinner and engineer who escaped with Hargreaves when his spinning jenny was attacked by a mob.<sup>17</sup> And they were achieved by the groups of women who applied their own divisions of labour and female work patterns in the proliferating workshops and small factories of the new manufacturing industries. Such technological and organizational change brought major dislocation to many communities. Manufacture was by no means new to the eighteenth century; cottage industries were widespread over the Scottish Highlands, West Wales, the Yorkshire Dales, the Derbyshire and Cornish countrysides, not to mention Ulster, Kilkenny, Mayo and Donegal. These regions experienced a new pastoralization and with it pauperization as a result of the onset of industrialization on an altogether different scale in a few key regions of mainland England and lowland Scotland. This ‘euthanasia of cottage industries’ may have been a ‘great exercise in Schumpeterian creative destruction’,<sup>18</sup> but for the families, and above all the women and children who played such a prominent part in these industries, the results were catastrophic, and entailed a long period of resistance to technology in many such communities. Technological change and the expansion of manufacturing took shape within this diverse climate of enthusiasm and resistance, and were vigorous enough to produce the discontinuity which distinguished Britain from her continental neighbours. As O’Brien has put it, ‘the productivity of the British workforce producing manufactures and urban services had to advance…rapidly enough to support the terms and levels of trade between industry and agriculture required for sustained structural transformation’.<sup>19</sup> At the back of all this, Britain had advantages over her neighbours. Over the period from the late seventeenth to the early nineteenth century Britain fought a long series of wars outside her shores. The results were a windfall of colonial markets, a huge navy and army which made international and domestic markets safer for British trade, and, even more significantly, the founding of the Bank of England, the creation of the City, and the shipping and insurance services which dominated world markets. Britain, by first obtaining a dominating position for herself in world markets, and then by servicing the commercial and industrial needs of other countries during their industrialization processes, built up an almost unassailable comparative advantage in these fields. In this case at least, then, the role of the external world in Britain’s industrialization had a consequence of a permanent nature.<sup>20</sup> Britain’s economy was ‘distinctive’ in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, not because of resource endowments and agricultural output, but, as contemporaries such as Tocqueville saw, because of the extraordinary industry and inventiveness of her manufacturing people. But distinctive does not mean isolated, for around this lay the allure, the adventure, and indeed the conquest of the world economy. Britain was not the first to understand the crucial role of this world economy: ‘the splendid high noon of Dutch wealth and power’ was achieved in the seventeenth century from this vantage point. The British learned their lessons from the Dutch, but took that major step into the beyond by connecting their dominant trading position to broadly-based expansion of their manufacturing sector along with concentrated growth in their new leading manufactures, cotton and iron. This book is an industrial history, and it reasserts the primacy of the industrial experience to Britain’s Industrial Revolution. That experience was tremendously varied and fraught with the struggles and controversies of both machinery and the intensive exploitation of labour. This is also a book about the process of restructuring and transformation of production, a process which was spread over a longer period and a broader range of manufacture than once thought. It is, nevertheless, a book about transformations and not about the gradualism and continuity of economic indicators. While these indicators have their place, the estimates on which they are based are fragile and incomplete. They are so far all we have in terms of quantitative estimates, but the story which is told on the basis of such estimates alone is not only not enough, it is also at odds with other narratives of the times. David Landes warned thirty years ago against masking the significance of discontinuities by concentrating on the absence of shifts in quantitative indicators: to him these were the historian’s ‘butterfly under glass or frog in formaldehyde—without the virtue of wholeness to compensate for their lifelessness’.<sup>21</sup> It is time that this warning was renewed. Finally, this book forms part of a debate on the Industrial Revolution which I hope will continue to invigorate the subject. Crafts has given us new quantitative estimates of economic growth, and new ways of thinking about the sectoral developments of the economy. Wrigley has given us new ways of thinking about the agricultural and resource base of the economy as well as new estimates of the growth and distribution of the labour force. My book is not simply an account of the industrial facts which they have left out; it is an alternative analysis which questions the interpretations and significance placed upon the economic indicators. These arguments are developed through twelve chapters. Chapters 1, 3, 8 and 9 are mainly theoretical, dealing with debates and issues. Chapter 1 summarizes the now orthodox quantitative treatment of the Industrial Revolution, the problems with this, and the new issues now opening for research. Chapters 3, 8 and 9 discuss a series of debates over industry, including classical writers such as Smith and Marx, as well as recent discussion of proto-industrialization, flexible specialization, the ‘bosses’ and labour process debates, and economic and social theories of technological and organizational change. The other chapters marshal both argument and evidence to present a different view of the place of manufacture in the British Industrial Revolution. This includes discussion of agriculture and resources as well as trade and consumption. Chapter 2 on Industries provides a broadly based and up-to-date survey of technological, organizational and productivity change in Britain’s major industries. Chapters 10 to 12 provide an in-depth discussion of changes in techniques and work, and their social impact in Britain’s two major and contrasting industries, textiles and metals. This book still challenges the attachment of older generations of economic historians to the years after 1780, to the factory and to the cotton industry. But in this new edition it also challenges the current and now orthodox preference for gradual and continuous change over the discontinuity associated with the Industrial Revolution. That discontinuity was less short and sharp than once thought, but it was nevertheless a transformation, and one in which changes in manufacturing played a prominent part. This second edition, like the first, asks that we reconsider the kinds of changes taking place in the earlier eighteenth century and the context in these years for the rise of household and workshop industries. It asks for a closer analysis of the economic dynamic, the techniques and the labour forces of these cottage and workshop industries, and of the factories which grew up in the midst of some but not all of them. It asks finally that we look on the Industrial Revolution as a more complex, many-sided and long-term phenomenon than economic historians have recently assumed. This book considers a range of debates over and analyses of industrial change. On specific industries, however, it is selective, and deals in depth with only some of the textile industries and some of the metal industries. Since the first edition, I have been able to draw on new research on the woollen industry by Pat Hudson and Adrian Randall, on the silk industry by Judy Lown and on the lace industry by Pamela Sharpe. But a range of other industries, examined from the viewpoint of their labour forces, work and technologies, remains neglected, including the whole range of food processing, papermaking, glass and pottery, shoemaking, and colonial finishing trades. As a general survey, this second edition, like the first, still raises more questions than it answers. I hope, however, that these will still provide the incentive for new research and new interpretations of the Industrial Revolution.