# MODELS OF INDUSTRIAL TRANSITION There have been many theories of the sources of the Industrial Revolution, but a limited few of these address the economic and social changes within industry. Indeed significant attention has shifted recently far from the entrepreneurs, inventors and workers at the centre of industry towards the long-term processes of demographic change and resource endowments.<sup>1</sup> Debates on randomness and contingency, sectoral shifts and levels of capital investment<sup>2</sup> have pushed industry to the sidelines. Models of industrial change which look, however, to the social structures of industry, its organization and techniques, were popular in earlier accounts of the Industrial Revolution, and some of these have been rediscovered and developed anew. This chapter will accordingly discuss Adam Smith’s theory of the rise of industry, Marx’s theory of manufactures and modern industry, and theories of proto-industrialization. All of these theories draw attention to the connections between agrarian change, commercial capitalism and the growth of handicraft production in rural cottages and urban workshops. They find in these connections the roots of subsequent mechanization and factory organization. The chapter will then relate the limitations of these theories to recent ideas on regional transformation and consumer demand. ## ADAM SMITH AND NATURAL PROGRESS For the economic and social historian, Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations has always provided the first systematic analysis of the division of labour and increasing returns. Smith provided a much more far-reaching historical model linking industrial, agricultural and urban growth in his lesser-known Book III, ‘Of the Different Progress of Opulence in Different Nations’. The connections Smith set out in this model have come once again to the fore in recent historical work on agriculture and urban growth. His analysis of distinctive types of manufacture, and his observations on the organization of industry and mercantile trade, provide major insights into the transitions in eighteenth-century industry. Smith specifically deployed a development model to understand the economic history of Europe. He called this the ‘natural progression’ of economic development. The ‘natural’ in this phrase was not the actual, but an ideal type. The components of the model were agricultural surpluses, markets, and urban manufactures and services. Increasing productivity in agriculture created the base for urban and industrial growth. The ‘natural progress’ was from agriculture to manufacture and thence to foreign commerce. ‘Manufactures for distant sale’ might ‘grow up of their own accord, by the gradual refinement of those household and coarser manufactures which must at all times be carried on in even the poorest and rudest countries.’ Based on domestic raw materials, they generally sprang up in an inland country which produced an agricultural surplus that it, in turn, found difficult to trade, owing to high transport costs. The surplus, however, made basic needs very inexpensive, encouraging the immigration of a larger labour force. These workmen work up the materials of manufacture which the land produces… they give a new value to the surplus part of raw produce…and they furnish the cultivators with something in exchange for it that is either useful or agreeable to them… They are thus both encouraged and enabled to increase this surplus produce by a further improvement and better cultivation of the land; and as the fertility of the land had given birth to the manufacture, so the progress of the manufacture re-acts upon the land and increases still further its fertility.<sup>4</sup> This ‘natural progress’ provided a close interaction between agricultural and industrial growth, and a solid basis for sustained regional development. Smith believed that his model came close to reality in the the histories of some parts of England, and in America. In England, some cities had arisen on the basis of rural industries which complemented regional agricultural surpluses: ‘In this manner have grown up naturally, and as it were of their own accord, the manufactures of Leeds, Halifax, Sheffield, Birmingham and Wolverhampton. Such manufactures are the offspring of agriculture.’<sup>5</sup> Of American development, he wrote, ‘Compare the slow progress of those European countries of which the wealth depends very much upon their commerce and manufacture, with the rapid advances of our North American colonies, of which the wealth is founded altogether in agriculture.’<sup>6</sup> Unlike these model cases, however, Smith found the actual course of European development to be the reverse, that is not from agriculture to industry and commerce, but from foreign commerce and industry to agriculture. The ‘unnatural’ course of European economic development had been based on policies which favoured the development of luxury manufactures using foreign raw materials, manufactures introduced to substitute for former imports. Such industries had usually been the ‘scheme and project of a few individuals’ and were established in maritime towns or inland cities ‘according to their interest, judgment or caprice’.<sup>7</sup> The results were the exploitation of the countryside by the town, turning the terms of trade against agriculture, and an unstable industrial sector. ‘Manufactures for which the demand arises altogether from fashion and fancy, are continually changing, and seldom last long enough to be considered as old established manufactures.’<sup>8</sup> Smith believed that the capital created by a merchant ‘who was not necessarily the citizen of any particular country’ was an unstable possession until part of it was reinvested in the land. An economy with a strong agrarian base was more likely to have a strong and stable political and social structure. Smith’s aversion to merchants and the industries they fostered for international luxury markets was clear in his conclusions on the different routes to urban growth. It is thus that through the greater part of Europe the commerce and manufactures of cities, instead of being the effect, have been the cause and occasion of the improvement of cultivation of the country. This order, however, being contrary to the natural course of things, is necessarily both slow and uncertain. The Smithian model of integrated agricultural and industrial development and complementarity between the town and the country has been recast in recent analyses of regional growth, urbanization and consumption. Industrialization as a regional phenomenon is now a starting point for analysis. The agrarian setting and social institutions in different regions are a determinant of industrial structures and vitality.<sup>10</sup> The success of industrial transition in different regions was dependent on the degree of conglomeration of multiple industrial activities, all interconnected, providing externalities and supporting overheads.<sup>11</sup> While agriculture may have passed at some point from being one of the key activities of a region, the principle of new activities arising on the basis of local surpluses, and in turn newly stimulating the local economy, remains. The regional model is thus fundamentally a Smithian construct. ## NEW THEORIES OF REGIONAL AND URBAN GROWTH Recent accounts of urban growth and manufacture also have a Smithian framework. Smith’s model addressed the recent rise of Britain’s new industrial towns. Their growth and the broadly-based urban growth in Britain in general over the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries have been compared recently by Wrigley to urban decline in the rest of Europe. The great cities of Europe (described by Smith as ‘unnatural’ extensions of commerce, monopolistic restriction and mercantile greed), whose growth was founded in the early modern period on long-distance trade, went into decline, falling victim to the new vitality of local rural-based manufacture.<sup>12</sup> Britain’s new industrial towns, based on regional growth, home markets and agricultural development, not only survived, but grew rapidly.<sup>13</sup> The interdependency of agricultural and industrial growth was also to be found in the distribution of income and consumer demand. Hohenberg has analysed rural-urban dynamics in a closed economy model of income distribution. The early modern city played an important part in manufacture. The model related incomes and, with this, demand in urban centres to conditions in the countryside. Agricultural productivity is related to property incomes. Improvements in productivity raise the share of income going to profits, reducing the shares going to wage payments and rents. A rising population would lead ultimately to diminishing returns in agriculture and, with this, higher rents. Diminishing returns in the countryside, reducing productivity and bringing high grain prices and lower discretionary incomes, would rapidly affect rural manufacturers. The rising population which brought higher rents would, in this model, also entail higher urban incomes, since the holders of power and property lived in the towns. Taxes and government revenue would also flow into the towns. Those in the central city might thus for a time retain their prosperity, buoyed up by high rents and property incomes, but demographic crisis would eventually cut rental incomes and break the urban boom.<sup>14</sup> This interdependent cycle would only be broken with rising agricultural surpluses, and such surpluses depended in turn on market incentives. Market incentives would sustain the urban and industrial economy by providing new consumer demands. Demands for basic consumer goods were necessary to promote urban industry; such demand needed to be generated not only within the towns themselves, but in surrounding rural areas which held the greatest part of the population. Rural areas thus had to become commercialized; market-oriented work and market-oriented household consumption were the vital aspects of rural expansion needed to sustain urban expansion. Changes in rural household behaviour towards greater consumer demand were the key to what Jan de Vries has called the ‘industrious revolution’.<sup>15</sup> This will be explored at length in Chapter 6. But the basic connections between town and country, and industry and agriculture in these recent historical models are based in Smithian concepts of market expansion and commercialization: ‘as the fertility of the land had given birth to the manufacture, so the progress of the manufacture re-acts upon the land, and increases still further its fertility’.<sup>16</sup> The Smithian model was based in agricultural and regional growth with international trade emerging out of this base. Where industry was, instead, the child of international trade and mercantile schemes, growth was erratic and the conditions of labour poor. Putting-out systems which were tied to the dynamics of international markets did not necessarily provide any mechanism for transitions in the economic and social organization of industry. From Smith’s viewpoint such industries were frequently undercapitalized, deploying underemployed rural labour. They generated extremes of poverty and luxury, not the roots of industrialization. Smith used the linen industry of Scotland as a good example. Most of the labour went into the preparation and spinning of the yarn, and ‘our spinners are poor people, women commonly, scattered about in all the different parts of the country, without support or protection’. But the great merchants and master manufacturers wanted to sell the final cloth as expensively, and to buy the yarn as cheaply as possible. ‘It is the industry which is carried on for the benefit of the rich and the powerful, that is principally encouraged by our mercantile system. That which is carried on for the benefit of the poor and indigent, is too often either neglected or oppressed.’<sup>17</sup> Alongside models of the rise and expansion of industry based mainly on Smith, are others more directly concerned with the processes of industrial production. These have taken their inspiration primarily from the Marxian analysis of the transition to industrial capitalism, and the rise of ‘manufactures and modern industry’. This analysis has been important in recent years in shaping our ideas and assumptions about the creation of an industrial labour force and about the transition in the organization of industry from craft to factory production. The Marxian analysis is another historical model; its focus is based not in market expansion as with Smithian models, but in transitions in the production process. As a model it highlights key connections and tendencies, and is not intended as historical description. ## MARX ON PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION The first analysis of industrial expansion before the factory, to which most historians have been tempted to look back, is Marx’s model of the phase of manufacture, and, with this, his theory of primitive accumulation. Classical Marxist questions concerning the nature and mechanism of primary accumulation, the role of merchant capital, and the advance of the division of labour informed a widespread debate on the nature of the transition to industrial capitalism. Marx defined primitive accumulation as the necessary prehistorical phase of capitalism. It was the process which initially created the capitallabour relation. Primitive accumulation was, in the first instance, associated with agrarian change and enclosure movements. The industrial side of the model is, at first, difficult to see. And the agrarian bias of primitive accumulation fitted well with a separate English historical tradition on the decline of the peasantry. Primitive accumulation influenced the tradition of Tawney and the Hammonds, and was also basic to the beliefs of the Oxford founders of economic history—Toynbee and James E.Thorold Rogers, a former Drummond Professor. It is to this historical tradition that we look to find the strongly-held belief that the robbery of his just rights from the labourer took the major form of the robbery of his land. Thorold Rogers, on the basis of his massive and much-praised History of Agriculture and Prices, denounced the practices of landlords and the government from the Middle Ages through to recent times. We have been able to trace the process by which the condition of English labour had been continuously deteriorated by the acts of government. It was first impoverished by the issue of base money. Next it was robbed of its guild capital by the land thieves of Edward’s regency. It was next brought in contact with a new more needy set of employers—the sheepmasters who succeeded the monks…the agricultural labourer was then further mulcted by enclosures… The poor law professed to find him work, but was so administered that the reduction of his wages to a bare subsistence became an easy process… The freedom of the few was bought by the servitude of the many… Such was the education of which the English workman received from those evil days… He may have no knowledge, or a very vague knowledge, as to the process by which so strange, so woeful an alteration has been made in his condition. But there exists, and always has existed, a tradition, obscure and uncertain, but deeply seated, that there was a time when his lot was happier, his means more ample, his prospects more cheerful than they have been in more modern experience.<sup>18</sup> This historical tradition, however, neglected the industrial side of the peasantry’s decline. And Marx too wrote less, and less systematically, on the association between the spread of domestic industry and primitive accumulation. He did, however, write of primary accumulation as the first stage on the way to industrial concentration. He regarded the private property of the worker in his means of production as the foundation of small-scale industry, and small-scale industry as the necessary condition for the development of social production and the free individuality of the worker himself. He argued that the destruction of the subsidiary trades of the countryside went hand in hand with the expropriation of a previously self-supporting peasantry. Only through the destruction of rural domestic industry could an adequate home market be provided for the capitalist mode of production. Yet he also pointed out that such domestic crafts did not simply disappear before the emergence of large-scale industry. This ‘manufacturing period’ did not ‘carry out this transformation radically’. It always rested on the ‘handicrafts of towns’, and the domestic subsidiary industries of rural districts, but it destroyed these in one form and resurrected them again elsewhere. It produced ‘a new class of small villagers who cultivate the soil as a subsidiary occupation, but find their chief occupation is industrial labour, the products of which they sell to the manufacturers directly, or through the medium of merchants’.<sup>19</sup> Primitive accumulation was thus associated with manufacture. Primitive accumulation was meant to accomplish the separation of the labourer from his means of production, but did not necessarily mean removing him from the countryside. For, as Marx argued, the merchant capital which commissioned a number of immediate producers provided the ‘soil from which modern capitalism has grown’, and here and there it still forms an aspect of what Marx called the ‘formal subsumption of labour’, that is, where capital took over an available and established labour process. The changes taking place in domestic industry during primary accumulation were a good example. ## ‘MANUFACTURES’ AND ‘MODERN INDUSTRY’ Elsewhere in Capital Marx also set out the definition of a stage in the development of the capitalist labour process which he termed ‘manufacture’. Manufacture described a phase of handicraft workshop industry, a phase which preceded that of modern machine production. He was concerned with the organization and technological developments which set ‘manufacture’ off from previous industrial production. As a new form of organization, ‘manufacture’ described a workshop of handicraftsmen under capitalist control, carrying out one or a variety of tasks. As a new technology, it introduced the division of labour, though operations done by hand were still dependent on the skill of individuals and retained the character of a handicraft. It becomes clear that Marx was more concerned to point out the limitations of the system of manufactures than to detail the variety of its manifestations. He noted three basic inadequacies of the system. First, because a hierarchical structure was inserted into the division of labour, the number of unskilled workers could not be infinitely extended. Hierarchy entailed the power and influence of skilled workers, and this prevented the full application of the division of labour.<sup>20</sup> Second, the narrow basis of handicraft itself excluded a really scientific division of the production process into its constituent parts. The division of labour could only go so far, for all parts had to be capable of being done by hand and forming a separate handicraft. The third and greatest problem, however, was the inability of capital to seize control of the whole disposable labour time of manufacturing workers. Since handicraft skill is the foundation of manufacture, and since the mechanization of manufacture as a whole possesses no objective framework which would be independent of the workers themselves, capital is constantly compelled to wrestle with the insubordination of the workers.<sup>21</sup> The best historical example Marx could find to fit the criteria of his model of manufacture was the engineering workshop of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. In spite of the allusions to rural industry and centralized production, then, Marx’s model of ‘manufactures’ seems to have been a large workshop in the hands of a capitalist and organized on the basis of wage labour. Though Marx clearly intended it to be an abstract model, he included many historical signposts. The image of a handicraftworkshop economy preceding the rise of the factory system has been readily accepted with little enquiry into ‘manufactures’ as a model rather than as an historical description. But it seemed very aptly to encapsulate the structures of some of the leading workshops and proto-factories of the day. There was the minute division of labour of the pin manufactory described in Diderot’s Encyclopédie. The pin, the smallest and most common of all manufactured products, demanded perhaps the most operations before entering into commerce. The essay on the pin describes eighteen different stages in the manufacturing process.<sup>22</sup> There was also the division of handicraft skills in the Birmingham toy trades described in 1766: There a button passes through fifty hands, and each hand passes perhaps a thousand in a day—likewise, by this means, the work becomes so simple that five times in six, children of 6 or 8 years old do it as well as men, and earn from 10 pence to 8 shillings a week.<sup>23</sup> The Boulton and Watt works in 1790 seemed the epitome of the order, regularity, and systematic layout emphasized by Marx.<sup>24</sup> Other manufacturers, such as Robert Peel in his Bury calico printing works in the 1780s, deployed unskilled labour under close discipline and supervision in much the manner described by Marx.<sup>25</sup> These examples have frequently been accepted as indicative of the character of manufacturing organization in the country as a whole; or other manufacturing systems, such as ‘putting-out’, have been analysed purely in terms of ‘manufactures’. Both systems are regarded as the first stage of that two-step phase by which workers were deprived of their control of product and process. But clearly the processes Marx was concerned to highlight were hierarchy and the division of labour. The manufacturing workshop was an example, an image of this. It was not a descriptive category meant to encompass a stage of capitalist development, for such workshops were of minimal significance beside rural decentralized industry. The break constituted by the minute division of labour in manufactures was followed by a second step, the centralized organization of the factory system. The phase of ‘manufactures’ was thus an innovation in organization, but one which obviously paled by comparison with the later innovation of the factory system. ‘Manufactures’ is credited with giving the capitalist, rather than the worker, control of the product, while the factory achieved this control over the production process itself.<sup>26</sup> ## Applications and problems The Marxist view of the system of manufactures is obviously ‘retrospective’, its vantage point progressive modern industry. The linear framework of the model of manufactures has, however, been incorporated into historians’ discussion of industry before the factory system; it has also significantly affected our histories of workers’ resistance. For just as the history of production was divided into control over product versus control over process, so eighteenth-century workers’ struggles were divided off from those of the nineteenth century. Under manufactures, it has been assumed that each worker or group of workers still controlled, in some degree, the speed, intensity and rhythm of work, while later, under the factory system, machine-based modern industry was more profitable because it succeeded in taking away this control. The model of manufactures was useful in highlighting the features of some of eighteenth-century industry, but it was a model and as such excluded the complication and variety of production processes. It was also a linear model, looking forward and back and not to either side, thus failing to place this manufacture in its own wider historical context. The clearest instance of both these problems is the model’s failure to deal adequately with the features of the putting-out system and other related domestic forms of manufacture. This neglect did not, however, prevent economists and historians from applying Marx’s model. Maurice Dobb, in particular, presented a clear and provocative account of the domestic system. The domestic industry of this period, however, was in a crucial respect different from the gild handicraft from which it had descended: in the majority of cases it had become subordinated to the control of capital, and the producing craftsman had lost most of his economic independence of earlier times… The craftsman’s status was already beginning to approximate to that of a simple wage-earner; and in this respect the system was much closer to ‘manufacture’ than to the older urban handicrafts… The subordination of production to capital, and the appearance of this class relationship between capitalist and the producer is, therefore, to be regarded as the crucial watershed between the old mode of production and the new, even if the technical changes that we associate with the industrial revolution were needed both to complete the transition and to afford scope for the full maturing of the capitalist mode of production.<sup>27</sup> The model of manufactures does, however, have much more to offer in recent research on the transition from artisan to factory production. Research addressed to different types of factory production has set out a new model of the ‘small scale or unmechanised factory’. This model, deployed by Goldin and Sokoloff to analyse the early phases of American industrialization, is used to analyse the sources of productivity growth in a range of industries outside of textiles—clock- and gunmaking, hat- and shoemaking, umbrella and hardware manufacture. These new-style factories were to be distinguished from artisan workshops by size (6–15 employees), division of hand-performed tasks, use of simple tools, supervision and a more disciplined work regime. These latter features were reflected in the significantly higher proportion of female and child labour.<sup>28</sup> This Sokoloff model of sources of productivity gain in organizational change, bringing hierarchy, division of labour and greater intensity, is a modern-day version of Marx’s insights on the phase of manufacture. Other alternative models such as this and ‘flexible specialization’ will be explored at greater length in Chapter 9. ## PROTO-INDUSTRIALIZATION Where Marx himself did not dwell on the domestic system as the key manifestation of early modern manufacture, a recent historical school has identified rural putting-out systems with a distinct historical phase which preceded and paved the way for industrialization proper. The point of this model was to direct historians to the regional and rural economy, not simply agriculture, and to the country cottage rather than the urban workshop, for the crucial transitional phase of economic development, a phase now popularly known as ‘proto-industrialization’. Economic historians have long recognized the existence and importance of the great increase in commercial manufacturing production in the countryside between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries. This rural industry, practised in conjunction with agriculture, has now, however, been elevated into the matrix of early modern economic and social change which paved the way for the factory system and wage labour: in short, industrialization at a later date. Developments from the seventeenth to the nineteenth century are encapsulated in the following key changes. The world market for massproduced goods grew at such a pace from the later sixteenth century that traditional urban manufacturers could not efficiently respond, hampered as they were by guild restrictions and high labour costs. Complementary agricultural development entailed increasing regional differentiation between arable and pastoral regions. A regional symbiosis based on comparative advantage ensued. An underemployed peasantry in pastoral regions became the basis for an expandable and self-exploiting industrial labour force, and the industry it took up improved the seasonal employment of labour. The possibilities of alternative industrial employment released the traditional limits placed on population growth by the size of landholdings. Rural workers, living as they did in a world of traditional peasant culture and values, took less than the customary urban wage for their industrial work and laboured more intensively in the face of falling wages. In theory they had access to agricultural work which allowed them to produce part of their own subsistence. Their dispersal across the countryside furthermore made it difficult for them to organize so as to prevent price reductions by merchants. Access to this cheaper labour force therefore gave merchants a differential profit, one which was above the usual urban rates. This differential profit in turn provided a major source for capital accumulation. Proto-industry is credited not just with the sources of labour and capital, but in addition with the entrepreneurship and the technical and organizational changes that led to the first It is important to note that the emphasis given in this theory to cottage manufacture and putting-out systems is nothing new. Its proponents acknowledge their debt to later nineteenth-century German authorities such as Sombart, Troeltsch and Schmoller, and to the classic English economic histories by Unwin, Wadsworth and Mann, and Court. And recent English economic historians of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries had already drawn attention to the demographic, agrarian and social organizational implications of the spread of rural industry.<sup>30</sup> But unlike this work, proto-industrialization implied systematic theory and predictive hypotheses. If we wish to spell out more fully the definition of proto-industrialization, we can look to the criteria drawn up by Franklin Mendels who coined the term itself: 1 the unit of reference is the region; 2 rural industry in the region involved peasant participation in handicraft production for the market. Thus industry was seasonal and provided an income supplement, though it could ultimately be a full-time family occupation; 3 the market for proto-industrial goods was international, not local; 4 proto-industrial manufacture developed in symbiosis with commercial agriculture; 5 towns in the region provided a locus for marketing, finishing and mercantile activity. This definition of proto-industrialization went with a series of hypotheses. 1 The higher incomes derived from handicraft production led to population growth, breaking the balance between labour supply and local subsistence; that is, handicraft generated the labour supply of the Industrial Revolution. 2 Population growth and proto-industrialization soon generated diminishing returns, prompting changes in organization as well as new techniques which saved labour. In other words, proto-industrialization created pressures leading to the factory system and to new technology. 3 The profits from proto-industry accumulated in the hands of merchants, commercial farmers and landlords; that is, proto-industry led to the accumulation of capital. 4 Proto-industry required and generated specialist knowledge of manufacturing organization and commerce; that is, proto-industry provided a training ground for and a new supply of entrepreneurs. 5 Proto-industrialization and regional agricultural specialization go hand in hand; that is, proto-industrialization leads to agricultural surpluses and reduces the price of food. Proto-industrialization is thus credited with creating the key changes in the use of land, labour, capital and entrepreneurship which made the Industrial Revolution possible.<sup>31</sup> The most widely-explored aspect of Mendels’s original theory has been the demographic. Incentives to the emergence of domestic industry, it is argued, were strengthened by population pressure and magnified by the existence of partible inheritance. Simultaneously, income-earning activities such as handicraft production outside agriculture released the traditional social controls on marriage—inheritance and patriarchal control. Mendels argued on the basis of evidence from Flanders that earlier marriage and rapid rates of population increase were associated with areas of protoindustry. But the demographic evidence, despite the energy devoted to collecting it over the past decade, has not given us the clue to causation. Did the characteristics of protoindustry generate a growth in population, or was higher population the factor which attracted rural industry to an area?<sup>32</sup> Not only were the connections of the model tenuous, but the results of its application to explain the economic history of various regions have proved enormously variable. Mendels called his proto-industry the first phase of the industrialization process. Yet, in fact, for every area that made a successful transition to the factory system—Lancashire, Yorkshire, Lille, Alsace, the Rhineland, Saxony—there were many more which headed straight for deindustrialization—the West Country, East Anglia, the Cotswolds, rural Warwickshire, Bedfordshire, Ulster, Brittany, Flanders, Silesia, Languedoc, Bavaria and Bohemia. The discussion of these larger macroeconomic implications of proto-industry has complemented a debate at another level on the microeconomics of the proto-industrial manufacturing unit. The most sophisticated work from this new perspective has questioned the meaning of the division of labour in proto-industry. It has shown that there was little marked division of labour in the proto-industrial household. Several members of one household might carry on the same operation side by side, or alternatively individual processes might be put out to separate households. It was ‘not the rule’ for a proto-industrial household to be a ‘miniature factory’. It was difficult to get a proper ratio of numbers employed in the different operations in the small unit of the proto-industrial household. The most important form of the division of labour was not the technical division of labour analysed by Marx and the nineteenth-century economists, but a division of labour in the society and economy at large, that is, the specialization of regions in the mass-production of a small number of articles.<sup>33</sup> The sexual division of labour characteristic of such rural industry was also different from that imagined in more traditional literature. The characteristic household structure and production unit were not dominated by a servant class, but by families which had recently turned to early marriage and more children to meet the needs of a new production process reliant on child and female labour. This household production unit reveals not a division of labour but the reverse—a new lack of separation between the work of men and women. As Hans Medick has put it, ‘proto-industry brought the man back to the household’.<sup>34</sup> The main reason for the success of this system of capitalist production, it is argued, was the built-in tendency to workers’ self-exploitation. Even where guild artisans might mass-produce a commodity, they could not compete with rural labourers who had to be content with lower wages, both because they lacked corporate protection and because they had access to cheaper food. The higher profitability of rural industry did not necessarily imply higher productivity; if anything, productivity probably stagnated in the countryside until the connection between proto-industry and agriculture was weakened. Proto-industrialization is used by historians as a phase or stage of development in much the same way as is ‘manufactures’. Like ‘manufactures’, it, too, was said to ‘contain the seeds of its own destruction’. For the same limitations of the high marginal costs of geographical dispersion and lack of regulation over work rhythms and quality pushed the putting-out system either into full factory production or into deindustrialization. Recent research has, however, diverged from Mendels’s former unilinear framework. Historians have enquired into the reasons for the different outcomes of proto-industrialization. And they have tried to explain these by differences among regions in their internal economic, political and institutional environments, as well as in patterns of world trade. Although it is now accepted that the experience of protoindustrialization varied from region to region, the explanations given for this are based on two conflicting theories: one a theory of comparative advantage; the other a theory of noneconomic motivation. Mendels and Jones explained the different regional specializations of Europe in terms of comparative advantage. According to Jones, comparative advantage accounted for the emergence of the North and Midland areas of England as the major manufacturing counties in the eighteenth century, while the southern regions de-industrialized and turned to the higher returns to be gained in agriculture. Areas of light and heavy soils adapted differently to the new crops and rotations of the Industrial Revolution, revealing a higher comparative advantage in agriculture in the light-soil regions of the South.<sup>35</sup> Similar regional differentiation is said to have taken place on the Continent. But this mode of reasoning is really very unsatisfactory. Regional specialization and centres of proto-industry are explained by results—areas became proto-industrial because they did—and because they were good at what they did. To this theory of comparative advantage is joined a simultaneous belief in the role of nonmarket behaviour or pre-industrial values. The emergence, success and ultimately the limitations of proto-industry are all explained by these values. And historians also appeal to these to explain away the continued existence of dispersed manufacture after the factory system. Proto-industry sometimes led into de-industrialization, it is argued, because of the subsistence orientation of workers.<sup>36</sup> And economic historians have long explained away that age-old bête noire of the success story of the Industrial Revolution— the handloom weaver and sweated industry—by appeals to the values of handicraft workers or family production units. The values of the family economy are thus left to account for a great deal, but we know little of what these values were. Yet it is precisely these nonmarket values, those unanalysed areas of custom and culture, which determined the way in which individuals, families and communities reacted to new economic settings and constraints. This is not to say that they dwelt in a nonmonetary world or ‘moral economy’ which simply clashed with the market values of commerce and industry when these came to the countryside, but rather that they participated in this market with a different code of rationality, consuming at times when ‘economic man’ saved, playing at times when ‘economic man’ worked. A recognition and analysis of this plebeian culture are vital to the understanding of the dynamic of this period of ‘manufactures’ or ‘protoindustry’.<sup>37</sup> ## MANUFACTURE AND PROTO-INDUSTRY: APPLICATIONS? If we now look in more depth at the problems raised by the way in which the model of proto-industrialization has been used, we find them mirroring those of the model of manufactures. Both models assume the factory to be the ultimate method of organizing labour, and modern power-based machinery to be the best-practice technology. The arrival of both made the Industrial Revolution, and they apparently eclipsed all other forms of technology and organization. But what do we know of these other technologies and manufacturing structures? Eighteenth-century manufacture was practised in all manner of different settings; it was organized along many different lines, each of which was ‘rational’ or legitimate in its own environment. Putting-out systems coexisted with artisan and co-operative forms of production, and all of these systems frequently interacted with some type of manufacture or proto-factory. This was often the case within any one region. There was, for example, the Kentish Weald in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. It had a rural textile industry organized on a putting-out system which employed peasant labour, but it also had an important iron industry organized in centralized units around water-powered blast furnaces. Even within one industry, these diverse forms of organization prevailed at the different stages of production. In eighteenth-century West Yorkshire, small artisan clothiers built and used their own co-operative mills for some of their preparatory processes. In eighteenth-century Lancashire, the Peels centralized their calico printing and spinning establishments, but ran extensive putting-out networks among weavers. In eighteenthcentury Birmingham, small artisans in the hardware trades gathered together to build a centralized processing unit which supplied their brass and copper, and they ‘put out’ the production of parts and pieces in much the same way as did the lockmakers of the West Midlands and the nineteenth-century watchmakers of Coventry. How, then, did these many systems of manufacture succeed for so long in organizing work? For an answer to this we might turn first to the economics of work organization. For it is here that we find some systematic attempt to compare the efficiencies and advantages of the different types of work organization at any one time. Williamson, who compared several different modes of organizing a batch industry such as pinmaking, assessed each mode in terms of its efficiency and its socioeconomic implications. Putting-out systems were compared to co-operative forms, and both in turn to capitalist subcontracting and factory hierarchies. On such assessments the factory system still appeared ‘superior’ in terms of efficiency to the putting-out system, and the putting-out system was better in turn than artisan ownership. The putting-out system had key disadvantages as compared to factories: high inventories, high transportation costs, poor work intensity, embezzlement and poor quality control, and poor adaptation to sudden changes in markets or technique. In turn, the putting-out system has been deemed on such assessments to be preferable to artisan systems, for putting-out allowed the diffusion of knowledge of new materials or mixes of materials, and it ensured better quality control of a standardized output. These advantages compounded cost advantages associated with the exchange of materials and the final product.<sup>38</sup> The economists of work organization, for all their claims to independent judgement of a wide range of forms of work organization, ultimately confirm the old linear framework of artisan stage succeeded by putting-out stage, with both finally eclipsed by the factory. Marx and the historians of proto-industry adopted the same framework. Marx’s analysis of the ‘system of manufacture’ and his historical view of production in the period just prior to the Industrial Revolution were mainly confined to the large workshop deploying the division of labour; while the proto-industry model has in general been applied only to the rural textile manufacture deploying putting-out systems. The large, hierarchically-organized workshop was seen by Marx to be the most advanced form reached by manufacture before the limitations of the system became obvious. The historians of proto-industry have similarly regarded putting-out in such a light. They have certainly recognized that putting-out was not the only way of organizing industry before the factory. Indeed, they have distinguished between the ‘Kauf system’ (or artisan production) and the ‘Verlag system’ (or putting-out), but only to point to putting-out as the superior and dominant mode of organization before the factory system. It is back to Clapham’s Industrial Revolution that we must go for any understanding of the polymorphic nature of industrial organization in this period. Clapham pointed out in 1930 that the Britain of a hundred years before had abounded in ancient and transitional types of industrial organization. While putting-out prevailed in much of the Scottish linen industry, in Dundee the spinners dealt directly with the manufacturer. While the woollen industry of the West Country and the worsted industry of West Yorkshire were model examples of putting-out, the woollen industry of the West Riding was the seat of that independent artisan production which received the praise of Defoe, Josiah Tucker and David Hume. And the survival of these small independent clothiers was ensured well into the nineteenth century, when in face of the advantages of machinery and concentration in some processes they formed the co-operative or company units of which Clapham and more recently Pat Hudson have written.<sup>39</sup> When factories were forming in Lancashire, we must also remember what Faucher said of Birmingham in the 1830s: The industry of this town, like French agriculture, has got into a state of parcellation. You meet…hardly any big establishments:… whilst capitals tend to concentrate in Great Britain, they divide more and more in Birmingham.<sup>40</sup> ## OTHER ALTERNATIVES ## Artisans, co-operatives and centralized manufacture If we look at two alternatives to the putting-out system—artisan production and centralized manufacture or proto-factories—we find many instances of their widespread use and success. In other European countries and in earlier centuries artisan production had emerged as an alternative to both the medieval guilds and the putting-out systems dominated by merchant capital.<sup>41</sup> In an urban context, artisan structures or small commodity production also developed their own dynamic, sometimes alongside old guild-dominated production or as a form of production appropriate to unincorporated towns and areas.<sup>42</sup> Artisan-organized production was a dynamic industrial structure of the urban villages, suburbs and unincorporated towns of eighteenth-century Britain, in areas such as Birmingham and the London suburbs. It was a system of production which was not constrained by guild regulations but, nevertheless, it did not operate purely according to the dictates of market forces; rather it was mediated through artisan customs and values. These customs and values, even in a guild-free environment, were expressed through journeymen’s associations, as in the compagnonnages of eighteenth-century France, or simply through those principles of mutuality and co-operation contained in the ‘custom of the trade’.<sup>43</sup> Yet we know virtually nothing of the place of artisan structures or of co-operative alternatives in industrialization. These have been by and large disregarded by historians, written off as primitive structures of prehistory or as utopian failures. Economists and economic historians have nearly always taken the side of the winners and have written for them. Industry, like labour, needs its sympathetic historian, one who would recognize all those forms of enterprise other than the factory. Integral to many such artisan systems of production were co-operative systems which were sometimes resorted to in order to ensure sources of materials or to complete a necessary stage of production involving centralized or mechanized processes, as we found in the metal and textile industries. A tradition of co-operation was also started in many trades as a temporary expedient for dealing with cyclical fluctuations. In our attempt to uncover the history of some of the neglected artisanal and cooperative structures, we might take our inspiration not from Marx or the proto-industry model, but from eighteenth-century observers. For as we have seen already, Adam Smith regarded putting-out industries as a major source of labour’s exploitation, but artisanship he credited with the most favourable of working conditions. With artisan structures, too, were to be found particular forms of artisan discipline and technology. Time was a discipline which structured the artisan’s life to an enormous extent. He or she worked within the limits of set delivery times of raw materials, availability of assistants who might have a different time economy, set dates for markets and fairs, and the time patterns of other social and income-earning activities. It is also striking that the theory of proto-industrialization has shunned technological change, assuming static technologies before the eighteenth century. But the significance, ubiquity and flexibility of handtools like the stamp, press, drawbench and lathe, cemented artisan industry in Birmingham in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. As a witness to the Select Committee on Arts and Manufactures wrote in 1824, Our Birmingham machines are rarely, if ever mentioned in the scientific works of the day. The Birmingham machine is ephemeral…it has its existence only during the fashion of a certain article, and it is contained 44 within the precincts of a single manufactory of a town. And the inventions, improvements and adaptations made by these small artisans were often kept secret, incorporated in the special skill which guaranteed their craft superiority. The organizational and technological achievements of these artisan systems may be compared to the assessments of recent quantitative history. This history, as discussed in Chapters 1 and 2, finds most industry during the eighteenth century dogged by slow productivity growth. This is explained by traditional small-scale organization and slow mechanization, in contrast to cotton’s factory system and mechanized powered technologies. But innovation in industries organized on a small-scale basis was, as demonstrated, widespread. And the potential in such small-scale industries for dynamic expansion forms the basis for an alternative model of industrial transition. ## Flexible specialization ‘Flexible specialization’ is the term devised for a recent model of craft production and industrial development. In this model craft production was not a prehistory to, but an alternative to mass-production and the factory system. Artisan production was not necessarily equated to low-productivity traditional activities; craft economies could equally be the basis for a highly innovative small-scale capitalism. Small producers offered economic advantages of creativity, nimbleness and easy entry; they could develop ‘flexible technologies’, easily changed across products and activities, as well as skillintensive processes and a range of product choices for localized and regional tastes. 45 This model brought regional conglomeration, technological initiative and market diversity together as the framework for dynamic craft economies. It offered an alternative kind of industrial transition, but as a model it had many weaknesses. A full discussion of these problems belongs to later sections of the book. Apart from these artisan and co-operative manufacturing systems, which flourished alongside putting-out, there were those forms of industrial production which were centralized from the outset, as in mining and metal processing, and in the proto-factories which existed in the silk industry, in calico printing, in pinmaking, and in some of the factory colonies of the West Country woollen industry.<sup>46</sup> The calico-printing protofactories have been described as the ‘missing link’ between the proto-industrial and modern industrial system in the textile industries. Such works were organized along the lines of Marx’s workshop-manufactures, based on elementary labour-intensive techniques, the disciplining of the labour force, and the maximization of skills deriving from the division of handicraft labour.<sup>47</sup> The structures and dynamics of these forms have been revived recently in the Goldin-Sokoloff ‘small-scale factory’. Although textiles formed the largest industry in the period before the factory, this does not mean that other industries organized around some central plant—as in mining, smelting, forging, brewing or distilling works—should be excluded from consideration as proto-industrialization. Many such activities entailed some change for better or worse in the local economy. The existence of centralized plant and processes did not prevent a seasonal or even family division of labour between industry and agriculture in much the same manner as in the textile putting-out industries. The same thing occurred frequently in mining and early iron forges and furnaces. One industry, such as metalworking, contained classic ‘proto-factories’ such as the Crowley ironworks, and at the same time the extensive division of labour found in a putting-out framework as in Peter Stubs’s Warrington filemaking business. There was the Bristol wireworks producing pins in a proto-factory side by side with dispersed and impoverished nailmakers exploited in a highly-developed putting-out system. The textile industry, too, easily assimilated partlymechanized mills into a countryside dominated by dispersed man- and womanpower. ## Diversity and change This diverse range of manufacturing structures coexisted within and across industries; in addition, these structures were rarely static. Either they adapted to changing market conditions with more or less success in their individual industries and regions, or industries changed their organization not in a linear but more frequently in a cyclical pattern.<sup>48</sup> There was no one pattern and no one criterion for the choice of a type of industrial organization. Profitability and labour costs were important determinants for the development of each structure, but, as we have seen, in a transitional capitalist society they were not the only ones—custom, community and patriarchal discipline played at least as significant a role in artisan, co-operative and proto-factory alternatives to puttingout. This range of industrial structures also implied a range of different types of labour discipline and technological change. Yet we also know little of these. Not only must we learn more of these alternative manufacturing structures, but we must more clearly assess the accomplishments and difficulties of the putting-out systems so frequently equated with proto-industrialization. Just how adaptable, for one, was the putting-out system to changes in demand? Fabrics, of whatever fibres, in England or elsewhere, readily became identified in pre-industrial manufacture with particular regions… conservatism of method could almost be described as an endemic disease. Although the system knew little fixed capital, it had much human capital, which means minds as well as hands; to re-tool a factory or scrap a plant is often much easier than to bring about a fresh approach in management or to retrain a workforce with inherited ways of doing things.<sup>49</sup> ## SOCIAL VALUES To conclude: the period just before industrialization was characterized by a multiplicity of different organizational structures of manufacture. Historical theories of why these organizational structures arose and how they changed during industrialization reach back to Smith and forward to theories of ‘flexible’ and network capitalism. The resilience of organizational structures was determined by their own special adaptability to the market, but it was also significantly affected by a range of nonmarket values and institutions. The directions of technological change and the choice of economic structures were, in other words, partly dependent on these social values of domestic workers and artisans. The strength of such values reverberated in the resistance to factories and to mechanization, ultimately determining the location of much factory-based industry. In moving beyond the market we can also start to account for all those nonwaged activities in which a largely underdeveloped workforce engaged in order to make up a daily subsistence. Credit and debt, perks and customary rights, and even embezzlement intersected with the extra-economic relationships of the various forms of community—familial, civic as well as trade-based—which made up the texture of the working man and woman’s daily life. We must seek to delve into those interstices of economic and customary relationship, interstices which have been neglected in economic history. Primitive accumulation and proto-industry have drawn our attention to the problem and to the years of transition before the Industrial Revolution, but the research still remains to be done to give these years an historical existence of their own.