# 5INDUSTRIAL DECLINE Industrial transformation in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries meant not only the rise of new industries and the reorganization of the old. It also entailed the decline of old industries and erasure of old methods of production. Earlier chapters have pointed out the significance historians attach to the spread of the rural domestic industries in the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries, and the bridge these industries formed between agricultural and industrial development. Now we shall examine some of the failures of this rural manufacture or proto-industrialization. We shall trace the road to decline in some of these industries and production methods over the eighteenth century. Joan Thirsk has described the growth and wide geographical dispersal of industrial byemployments in the seventeenth century. Most of these industries grew up within a pastoral economy, though some found a more suitable context in the towns. The manufacture of starch, needles, pins, cooking pots, kettles, frying pans, lace, soap, vinegar and stockings, as well as the more conventional iron, glass, brass, lead and coal industries, now employed large numbers of part- and full-time workers. Divisions in the quality of commodities coincided in many cases with divisions between town and country industries. The best knives were made in Sheffield itself; the inferior and cheaper ones in the villages round about. Coarse pottery was made in the country, while delftware and creamware were crafts of the large towns. Woollen and worsted stockings were made in the country; jersey stockings in Norwich and London; and silk stockings only in London. Some areas of the country were already industrialized regions by the seventeenth century. Most parts of Staffordshire, for example, supported industry of some kind. There were wood turning, carpentry and tanning in the Needlewood Forest, coal in south Staffordshire, as well as iron and metal goods including locks, handles, buttons, saddlery and nails, and coal and iron in Cannock Chase. Kinver Forest in the South-West had scythesmiths and makers of edge tools, and there were glassworkers on the StaffordshireWorcestershire border at Stourbridge. Burslem in the North-West had a pottery industry, and there was ironstone mining in the North-East. Leatherworking and textile weaving in hemp, flax and wool were scattered throughout the country.<sup>2</sup> In Essex by 1629, 40,000 to 50,000 people were said to be wholly dependent on the manufacture of the New Draperies. These rural workers were ‘not able to subsist unless they be continually set on work, and weekly paid’. A trade crisis in 1629 meant the ‘instant impoverishment of multitudes of those poor people’.<sup>3</sup> We know of the emergence of these industries in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and subsequently of the factory-based textile industries and large-scale metal manufactures which formed the basis for industrialization in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. But we know little of the course of economic change between these two periods nor of what happened to all those industries set up by hopeful projectors before and after the Civil War. Here we shall look at the forgotten side-effects of the greater regional concentration of industry and the development of factory production. Industrial decline is a subject curiously neglected by economic historians who are generally more concerned to point out the triumphs of industrialization and the growth of new regions. They have assumed that most regions of domestic industry went on to join the story of the factory system, and for those that did not do so immediately it was apparent that the effect of economic growth from the late eighteenth century onwards was to generate employment opportunities in hand-domestic as well as mechanized sectors. We are aware of a whole series of traditional domestic industries which were eclipsed in the course of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, but know little of the course of their decline and nothing of the short- if not long-term effect of this deindustrialization. Sidney Pollard has admitted industrial decline as part of a European pattern of ebb and flow between regions,<sup>4</sup> and Eric Richards has postulated an association between the decline of a whole series of traditional domestic industries and a contraction of employment opportunities for women over the course of the nineteenth century. Richards argues that not only did employment for women in agriculture fall in the nineteenth century, but women’s hand trades withered away. The new cotton industry did generate jobs for women but these were concentrated in only a few regions, and other new industries created few employment opportunities. ‘For women the gradual loss in employment in the traditional lines was probably greater than the creation of new opportunities.’<sup>5</sup> The greatest decline of these traditional industries probably took place in the years just following the Napoleonic Wars. But a substantial revolution, if not actual decline, is also evident over the course of the eighteenth century. Historians who have acknowledged this decline ascribe it to a number of factors: a regional phenomenon reflecting changes in comparative advantage;<sup>6</sup> the failure of traditional entrepreneurship and labour;<sup>7</sup> or a specific outcome of cyclical downturn in the middle of the century.<sup>8</sup> Be that as it may, the most striking change in the industrial structure of the country between the end of the seventeenth century and the middle of the nineteenth was its geography. The urbanized industrial zone of the seventeenth century extended along a right-angle connecting Bristol, London and Norwich. By the nineteenth century this zone had shifted north and north-west to the coalfields of the West Midlands, the West Riding, Lancashire and South Wales. The old manufacturing centres of southern and eastern England had languished or disappeared.<sup>9</sup> ## DISPERSED INDUSTRY AND REGIONAL FACTORS The decline of these centres and the emergence of new industrial areas can be analysed in terms of regional development. A new type of industrial region emerged in the later eighteenth and early nineteenth century. This differed from earlier and indeed later regions. Earlier proto-industrial and pre-industrial regions existed side by side, relatively cut off from one another, due to poor interregional transport and little economic complementarity. Proto-industrial regions connected much more significantly to the metropolis, and through this to international markets. Industrial concentrations in these areas were very mixed, comprised of small towns and villages, and often spread over wide areas. They frequently lacked the scale and external economies which came to 10 characterize regions of the Industrial Revolution. There were also important political factors behind earlier regional structures. Much proto-industrial development found its framework within what was an age of absolutism and mercantilism. Industries were thought to be sources of military and thus of political power. Industrial self-sufficiency in many provinces and towns became a goal of economic policy.<sup>11</sup> Industry was also a means of poor relief and social control. Economic policy in some areas and especially in towns was directed to stabilizing the volume and type of industrial production in order to prevent dearth and unemployment.<sup>12</sup> Debates on trade and industrial policy during the eighteenth century focused in much the same way as they do today on the issue of unemployment. Projectors and inventors couched their schemes in terms of how many jobs they would create.<sup>13</sup> John Cary wrote: ‘new projections are every day set on foot to render the making of our woollen manufactures easy, which should be rendered cheaper by the contrivance of manufacturers not by the falling price of labour; cheapness creates expense, and expense gives fresh employments, whereby the poor will be still kept at work’.<sup>14</sup> Postlethwayt feared that English industry would be undermined by foreign imports, and thought that the best security was the ‘home market’ provided by the ‘cultivators of the soil’, and that ‘every machine tending to diminish their employment would really be destructive of the strength of society, of the mass of men and of home consumption’.<sup>15</sup> The result was a state infrastructure of subsidies, monopolies and protective tariffs primarily directed towards reinforcing existing regional leads and lags.<sup>16</sup> The regions built up under this framework of dispersed industry and state policy went into decline during the course of the eighteenth century, to be replaced by distinctive, much more specialized regions. These new regions were marked by a geographical concentration of whole sectors of production. Regional capital markets and intraregional labour migration, regional ports and mercantile facilities, and provincial capitals with their own political and cultural priorities developed to reinforce the industrial dynamic at the core of South Lancashire, the West Riding, the West and East Midlands, the North-East, South Wales and the South-West of Scotland. These regional economies were also canal economies. Dense patches of the [canal] network…developed highly integrated economies largely separate from one another…the canal-based economies became more specialised, more differentiated from each other and more internally unified.<sup>17</sup> The result, for a particular stage of economic development, was not isolation but innovation. Britain’s pioneering industrialization was grounded, according to Pollard, in a set of regions, each internally integrated in such a way as to foster innovation, and, in Chandler’s terminology, to focus the economies of scope as well as of scale.<sup>18</sup> Before the rise of these new industrial regions, however, a number of early and protoindustrial regions had appeared. With their fate was bound up the livelihoods of large numbers of rural and urban small producers and poor landless labourers. For agricultural advance during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, as we have seen, was labourshedding, especially in areas turning to large-scale arable cultivation. While peasant society was mean and poor, the coming of some domestic industries could make the difference between destitution and decency for the poor and dispossessed. Defoe in the early eighteenth century reported on the living conditions of some of the leadminers of Bassington Moor in Derbyshire, where he found a woman and her family living in a cave. The habitation was poor, ‘tis true, but things within did not look so like misery as I expected. Everything was clean and neat, though mean and ordinary. There were shelves with earthenware and some pewter and brass. There was…a whole flitch or side of bacon hanging up in the chimney and by it a good piece of another. There was a sow and pigs running about at the door, and a little lean cow feeding upon a green place just before the door…a little enclosed piece of ground was growing with good barley. The woman’s husband worked in the leadmines for 5d a day, and when she could she worked ore for 3d a day. Defoe was amazed that 8d a day was enough to maintain a man, his wife and five small children, but declared that they ‘seemed to live pleasantly’. The children looked ‘plump, ruddy and wholesome and the woman was full, well shaped and clean’. He found nothing there which looked like the ‘dirt and nastiness of the miserable cottages of the poor’.<sup>19</sup> But other contemporaries saw different conditions, for such industry was as uncertain as the volatile trade which encouraged it. An observer in 1677 wrote that though it sets the poor on work where it finds them, yet it draws them still more to the place; and their masters allow wages so mean that they are only preserved from starving while they work; when age, sickness and death comes, themselves, their wives or their children are commonly left on the parish.<sup>20</sup> The variable conditions of these areas of industrial by-employment even in the seventeenth century were dramatically accentuated by the nineteenth. Some areas had declined into terrible poverty. Hoskins found that the peasant society of Wigston Magna, practically all framework knitters by the 1830s, lived in overcrowded streets, only to die at alarming rates of puerperal fever, consumption, and infant mortality. ‘Wages were low, housing conditions worse than they had been since the sixteenth century, unemployment had become endemic.’ And the trade declined amidst all those depressing institutions of decline—truck payments, debts and proliferating middlemen. By 1845 knitters could rarely earn more than 7s a week, and young people were finally giving up this low-paid trade for a new one, sewing and stitching gloves.<sup>21</sup> The decline of industries in the South of England took place earlier, but the effect on local communities, at least in the short term, was no less devastating. E.L.Jones has charted the grim litany of regional decline in Berkshire, Dorset, Hampshire, Wiltshire, Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex, areas which dropped an average of eleven places in the county league table of wealth between 1693 and 1843. Ironworking left Kent, the Sussex Weald, then the Forest of Dean in the course of the eighteenth century. The woollen cloth industry disappeared from Kent in the late seventeenth century and was finally eclipsed in the later eighteenth in Surrey, Berkshire and Hampshire. It dwindled in Exeter, and by the early nineteenth century was contracting in Somerset, Wiltshire and Gloucestershire. Neither carpet weaving, cotton spinning, nor stocking knitting sustained a hold in the South. By the nineteenth century, boot- and shoemaking had disappeared from Berkshire, 22 the making of wire buttons from Dorset, and wool and fur hatting from Gloucestershire. Beside these regions, where industry contracted over the eighteenth century, may be placed others which saw new industries and innovations spurt briefly and retreat thereafter. Pollard names ten regions which ‘saw significant innovatory change in the period between the 1760s and 1790s’. But of these he found that Cornwall, Shropshire, North Wales and the Derbyshire uplands fell by the wayside after making their vital contributions, and Tyneside and Clydeside had to find a ‘second wind to survive as industrial centres’.<sup>23</sup> ## REASONS FOR DECLINE What were the causes of these different regional experiences of expansion and decline? Many historians are quick to point to the inexorable emergence of ‘comparative advantage’ between industry and agriculture in various regions. Some regions were better suited to take up the new agricultural techniques of the period, while others had distinctive industrial advantages. Regions then specialized accordingly. Sidney Pollard charges a more specific set of factors with the subsequent decline of industrial regions, including exhaustion of minerals, discovery of cheaper alternative supplies, locational shifts elsewhere, new developments in transportation which made the region less favourable than its rivals, or the fetter of small size.<sup>24</sup> The natural resources which had formed a raison d’être of an industrial region might be depleted, as happened with copper in the Lake District, iron ore in Shropshire, and lead in Derbyshire. Even if such resources remained, new sources, richer, of better quality, or easier to access, might be discovered, throwing traditional sources of supply into decline. Markets might decline with changing fashions, and the region fail to adapt to new tastes, as was the case with the Norwich worsted manufacture during the eighteenth century. There was also, as Pollard has argued, the reluctance of many erstwhile successful industrial regions to accept change: ‘pride, conservatism, self-satisfaction, misplaced hopes, misunderstood market signals’ leading to ‘loss of market and momentum when change becomes necessary’.<sup>25</sup> We need to consider the course and causes of industrial decline in the case of several regions and industries, looking first at the most celebrated case of decline— that of the traditional cloth industries of East Anglia and the West of England. Some contemporaries attributed the failure of these regions to a lack of basic raw materials, for example coal and water power. Yet, as Jones has shown, the persistence of the blanket manufacture at Witney was specifically attributed in 1809 to cheap local labour offsetting the ‘want of vicinity to coal’. The Wiltshire mills had access to Somerset coal, and the competition of agriculture for water power in the South hardly accounts for the extent of market retreat.<sup>26</sup> As we shall see, more weight should be placed on the social and institutional factors, and we need to re-examine the meaning of comparative advantage as an explanation for regional growth and decline. # THE OLD CLOTH REGIONS The cloth industry of Essex was the first major southern industry to collapse. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries it dominated the life of four large towns as well as a further dozen towns and large villages: it contributed something to the income of most Essex families. Defoe had seen the villages stand thick, the market towns not only more in number but larger and fuller of inhabitants and, in short, the whole county full of little endships or hamlets and scattered houses, that it looks all like a planted colony, everywhere full of people and the people everywhere full of business. 27 By 1800 the cloth industry was gone. The two regions had specialized in says and bays, that is, cloth which was half worsted and half fulled. Rural weaving, which had been widespread, was the first to decline, disappearing soon after 1700. At this time the few surviving village firms all ceased, and weaving continued for a time in the towns. Spinning, however, was widespread through the countryside, and in the 1740s it was thought that the majority of women were employed in it. In addition to wool, fustians and cottons were manufactured across North-West Essex into Suffolk. These new textiles had caused smallholders to settle in the area, growing woad for dyeing, and this survived until mechanization in the North at the end of the century. The cloth trade, however, collapsed even before mechanization posed any threat. The first casualties were the small centres where most of the clothiers were master weavers with a small capital. The major centre was Halstead, where long-established family businesses also maintained extensive interests in farming, malting and milling, following the classic pattern of pre-industrial capital formation. Most of the men were weavers and the women spinners. But apprenticeship suddenly declined after 1780, population fell soon after, and by 1791 it was reported that the industry was in a declining state: there were only four clothiers left, and by 1800 even these were gone. Other Essex cloth towns declined even earlier. The centuries-old cloth trade of Coggeshall, buttressed by very substantial business, was in decay by 1720. In 1733 it was petitioning Parliament for help; in 1740 there was a major poor law crisis; a short recovery was followed by collapse again in the 1760s. The early 1790s saw the last workers’ procession and the dissolution of the Cloth Workers’ Company. Even Colchester, known for its high standards and pre-eminent craftsmen, failed to escape the general malaise. A decline from 1700, punctuated by occasional booms following on the end of wars, escalated after the 1760s to a state of bankruptcy.<sup>28</sup> The booms were memorable. Defoe remembered that after the late plague in France and the Peace in Spain the Run for goods was so great in England and the Price of everything rose so high that the poor women in Essex could earn one shilling to one shilling and sixpence per diem by spinning…the poor farmers could get no dairy maids…they all run away to Bocking, Sudbury, to Braintree and to other manufacturing towns in Essex and Suffolk. The very Plowman did the same. But this prosperity was not long-lasting, for ‘As soon as the demand slack’d from abroad all these loose people were turn’d off, the spinsters went to begging, the weavers rose in rebellion.’<sup>29</sup> Norfolk’s industry was in trouble from the first decade of the eighteenth century, thanks to the transfer of the stocking manufacture. There was a petition to Parliament in 1709 on the decline of trade, followed by riots against printed calico ten years later. Norfolk staggered under the blow of competition first from East India goods, then from Yorkshire worsteds, and finally from cotton. Prosperity returned in the 1750s and 1760s followed by decline again in 1765. Trade picked up in the 1770s, but was low again in the 1780s.<sup>30</sup> Stumbling between periods of stagnation and activity, the worsted industry did continue to grow until the 1770s, and, though it saw the occasional light of prosperity until the 1820s, it was by then well on the wane behind the rising star of the West Riding.<sup>31</sup> By 1820 Rees’s Cyclopedia could report that the manufacture of worsteds had transferred to Yorkshire and that the manufacture of camlets, calimancoes and bombazines had disappeared from Norwich.<sup>32</sup> The cloth industry of the West Country held out until the early nineteenth century, but it was subject to fluctuating fortunes for most of the eighteenth. While output of broadcloth in Yorkshire doubled between 1727 and 1765, that of the West Country did not grow at all—it stagnated right up until 1770. The little improvement which followed was eclipsed by a severe depression in Gloucestershire in 1783–4, and the last five years of the decade in no way overcame this. A growth in demand in the early 1790s, however, encouraged manufacturers and workers to acquiesce in the use of spinning machinery. The industry grew in Wiltshire and Somerset, making great advances in Frome. But by 1800 there was more unemployment in Wiltshire and Somerset. An air of confidence appeared once more in Gloucestershire in the early 1820s. But except in Trowbridge the small clothier was replaced by the large factory, though domestic handloom weaving continued in the West. The crisis of 1826 was the real dividing line, and while the industry picked up again in the early 1830s, it had actually shifted in location from the Upper Stroudwater Valley and the region below the Cotswolds to concentrate around Stroud and the Nailsworth Valley. But the West did not take up steam power; by the 1830s it had lost almost all its manufacture of cheaper cloth, and like Essex and Norfolk was experiencing population decline.<sup>33</sup> The pattern and timing of decline in Essex, Norfolk and the West Country were also those of Suffolk, Coventry, Worcester, Dorset and Exeter. The serge industry of Exeter, which claimed an export trade of £500,000 in 1700, had ceased to be of any importance to the city by 1800.<sup>34</sup> ## COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE The explanations given for the decline of these old cloth regions are as varied as those for the rise of the industrial North. They range from geography to institutions, including the characteristics of management and labour. Though Clapham dismissed the significance of water power and coal as factors behind the shift of the industry to the North, a new form of natural determination has arisen based on the theory of comparative advantage. It is E.L.Jones’s view that regions progressively discovered their comparative advantage in either agriculture or industry and increasingly concentrated resources in the one or the other. The kinds of agricultural innovation which occurred in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries favoured the light land soils of the South, where agriculture became the more profitable activity. In the North and the Midlands, on the other hand, domestic industries gathered in areas suited only to pastoral husbandry, and these industrial occupations became relatively more profitable even before other advantages of coal and water power came into play in the later period of mechanization. The North and some Midland districts became more industrial precisely because the readier uptake of the ‘new’ crops on the light land in the south had made them relatively poorer agriculturally. North and south thus evolved as complementary markets which it became worth linking by better communications.<sup>35</sup> The decline of the Essex cloth industry was a pre-eminent example of this. Though the decline of the industry was blamed directly on its product specialization, there had to be some reason why clothiers did not introduce new product lines. Specialization in bays and says with limited markets in Spain, Portugal and Latin America made the link with Lisbon crucial, and the series of eighteenth-century wars was disastrous for trade. But in Essex the traditional dual occupations of farming and textiles formed the basis for some clothiers to strengthen their ties with farming, especially after 1700 when both the profitability and the social standing of agriculture improved.<sup>36</sup> It had also long been customary for West Country clothiers to buy estates and become gentlemen clothiers. But it was in addition evident that the spread of investment across industrial- and agrarianrelated pursuits was part and parcel of the pre-industrial pattern of capital formation.<sup>37</sup> That resources were shifted over to agriculture and away from industry was nothing new. What was new was the extent and the timing of this shift of resources. Jones points out that in Gloucestershire this transfer of capital into land was said to have caused the failure of clothiers whose assets were no longer liquid enough to tide them over trade depressions. But more important was a prolonged and unfortunately-timed withdrawal from industry into agriculture which seemed to coincide with the recognition that local industrial investment was no longer rewarding. This argument seems to fit the experiences of Essex, Berkshire and Norfolk, which were in decline even before the threat of mechanization. Subsequently this was reinforced by the dictates of sources of power. On the clays and lowland heaths of the south and east, with little or no alternative to ‘mother and daughter power’, no escape from the spinning wheel or hand loom, cottage industry contracted in the face of competition from machines… Handicraft workers cut their prices to the bone in order to match machine production…the operators of water driven textile mills cut their prices when in turn they were also faced with competition from steam. Coal beat them. Without it areas with waterpower alone followed handicraft districts into industrial oblivion.<sup>38</sup> Comparative advantage in agriculture cannot, however, provide a sufficient explanation for industrial decline in the old clothing districts. For it explains much of what occurred by the end result, failing to provide enough in the way of independent factors contributing to industrial decline. Reasons behind the original aptitude of regions for the one pursuit or the other are not explored. It is also clear that, although the cloth industry in the southern regions did not entirely de-industrialize, it shifted resources into more profitable agricultural pursuits. It is clear that the capital and labour of the failing cloth industry also provided a congenial environment to attract a whole series of smaller domestic industries in silk, lace and strawplait manufacture, glovemaking and shirtbuttonmaking, until these industries too faced the threat of the machine. ## INSTITUTIONAL FACTORS If comparative advantage in agriculture is not reason itself for the shift away from the southern cloth manufacture, what other explanations are there? There were several notable institutional rigidities. The first was restrictions on capital and entrepreneurship. Monopoly restriction on markets and credit was exercised by a small group of London merchants called the Blackwell Hall factors. By manipulating credit the factors apparently split the clothiers into a small wealthy group and a large group of men with inadequate credit. High and inflexible wage rates in the South have also been blamed for industrial decline. It is often argued that in the late seventeenth century the many competing occupations in Kent and the high price of food in the Home Counties so forced up wages that Kentish clothiers could no longer compete with lower-wage areas. But in the remainder of the southern cloth industry wages were by the second half of the eighteenth century lower than in the North. The final rigidity was the polarity of master and man in the South compared to the socially more uniform small weaver communities of the North. This produced more forceful workers’ resistance to mechanization in the South.<sup>39</sup> The limitations of entrepreneurship do seem to have played a contributory, if not decisive, part in the route to decline. It was said of the West Country that it was founded on a monopoly erected and supported by great capitals and this led to conservatism. Most have accepted Josiah Tucker’s well-known comparison of Yorkshire and the West Country. In Yorkshire Their journeymen…if they have any, being so little removed from the Degree and Condition of their masters, and likely to set up for themselves by the Industry and Frugality of a few years…thus it is, that the working people are generally Moral, Sober, and Industrious; that the goods are well made, and exceedingly cheap. ## In the West Country The Motives to Industry, Frugality and Sobriety are all subverted to this one consideration viz. that they shall always be chained to the same Oar (the Clothier), and never be but Journeymen… Is it little wonder that the trade in Yorkshire should flourish, or the trade in Somersetshire, Wiltshire, and Gloucestershire be found declining every Day?<sup>40</sup> More recently several historians have made a similar observation on the deficiencies of entrepreneurship: ‘All through the eighteenth century the Company [of Weavers, Fullers and Shearmen] was inbreeding, with the same families and their ideas preserved like heirlooms.’<sup>41</sup> Although, as Julia Mann points out, clothiers, small as well as large, abounded in the West Country in the eighteenth century, the conditions for the survival of the small man became more difficult over the period as divisions between ‘respectable and ‘inferior’ clothiers sharpened. Mann, however, blames the clothiers for being too easy-going, ‘faithful for too long’ to the older types of cloth.<sup>42</sup> Yet another failure lay in marketing; this explains the continued specialization in the same product lines and the same markets. For all the West Country cloth exports went through Blackwell Hall. There were no public cloth halls in the West Country or Norwich where clothiers could exhibit and sell their wares. Export outlets in the West Country were entirely, if somewhat indirectly through the Blackwell Hall factors, controlled by merchants in London… They were not experts in handling cloth. The merchants in Leeds and Wakefield were a different species. Cloth was their life, their sole interest… The difference between the ways in which the West Riding trade was handled by the active merchants of Leeds, Wakefield (and eventually Halifax) and the exports of every other production area from Norwich down, which were all monopolized by non-specialist London traders often working within the restrictions of the trading companies themselves, accounts in good measure for Yorkshire’s growing supremacy 43 in the eighteenth century. The social divisions which inhibited enterprise also provoked extensive workers’ antagonism to technical and organizational change. Though decline in the South had set in before the time of water- and steam-powered factories, this is not to deny the role of earlier technical innovation. The examples of resistance to machinery are legion throughout the eighteenth century. In Essex class conflict was often acute. Weavers in the towns shared identical working conditions and were well placed to combine. The weavers’ revolt of 1715 extinguished any idea of a factory system. There was a big strike in 1757 when Colchester employers demanded the return of thrums (the ends left on the loom after weaving). Weavers in Barking fought against the wool mill (for cleaning and loosening wool) in 1759. There was also some resistance to the flying shuttle, though it was introduced from the 1750s. Spinning remained backward, and there were no jennies until 1794. But cheap domestic spinning labour seemed a viable alternative, and it just did not seem profitable to invest in machinery at a time of imminent industrial collapse.<sup>44</sup> In the West Country, weavers faced an almost continuous decline in wage rates, at least until the middle of the eighteenth century. Spinners’ earnings were more volatile, but, when they fell, a widely-dispersed body of female spinners had no organization to marshal resistance. The wretched state of these spinners and other clothworkers in Gloucestershire was more often expressed in embezzlement and shoddy work. By the 1780s the clothiers of Minchinhampton sent all their wool to be spun outside the area, for ‘Our poor spoil their yarn by dirtiness, bad spinning, dumping and frequently putting several workers’ yarn together and many other frauds.’<sup>45</sup> Spinning occupied women over a wide area in what were otherwise purely agricultural districts. Though there were spinning jennies and carding engines in Yorkshire from the 1770s, few were introduced into the West Country until the 1790s. A jenny set up in Shepton Mallet in 1776 was destroyed by a mob. Elsewhere until the 1790s it was only on the fringe of the industrial area that machinery was set up. The fierce resistance to the jenny at Keynsham among colliers and their wives, dependent upon the supplementary income from spinning, may have eroded the industry there, for, whatever the reasons, the industry left the area soon after.<sup>46</sup> Within the West Country, Wiltshire and Somerset continued to be much more hostile to machinery than Gloucestershire. A mob destroyed an advanced scribbling machine in Bradford-on-Avon in 1791. Workpeople rioted against the flying shuttle in Trowbridge in 1785–7 and 1810–13, postponing its introduction there and in West Wiltshire until the end of the Napoleonic Wars. Weavers were still rioting against the flying shuttle in Frome in 1822. Resistance to finishing machinery was even more celebrated, in Yorkshire fuelling the classic Luddite attacks, and just as strongly resisted in Wiltshire and Somerset. Unlike the clothworkers of Gloucestershire who had long ago adopted the gig mill, those of Wiltshire and Somerset believed the machine would be the first step to the introduction of the shearing frame, and it remained rare in these counties until the end of the wars.<sup>47</sup> The greater resistance to the jenny in the South and the East can be accounted for by the much greater importance of hand spinning to the subsistence of poor women and rural families generally. There were fewer poor women dependent on spinning alone in the North, and anyway those previously employed in the wool trade could get employment well into the nineteenth century in spinning worsted, for which the jenny was little used. In the South and the East, it was not just machinery but the decline of the worsted trade itself which removed the mainstay for thousands of women and children in the villages of Norfolk and Suffolk. The concentration of industry did bring more employment and higher wages for women in the districts where mechanization was introduced, but it spelt doom to thousands of women in scattered outlying parishes.<sup>48</sup> ## NEW RURAL INDUSTRIES But where the cloth industry declined in the South of England, other smaller domestic industries grew up, some of them continuing into the later nineteenth century. Comparative advantage in agriculture did not prevent the emergence of new industries there when the old cloth centres declined. However, it would be a big mistake to regard these industries as a replacement for the old cloth industries. In the first place, they were smaller and poorer than their great predecessors. And, in addition, they were sometimes not real replacements at all. In Northamptonshire, for example, shoes apparently replaced worsted, but in fact they were made in different areas and employed different sections of the country population. 49 The decline of several Essex towns was stayed by the silk manufacture and by the substitution of bunting for the more expensive worsted previously made. This coarse cheap fabric continued to employ women in and around Sudbury until the 1870s.<sup>50</sup> The ancient bone and pillow lace industry in the early eighteenth century was the staple of women and children in Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Northamptonshire, Devon, Dorset, Somerset, Wiltshire, Hampshire, Derbyshire and Yorkshire. By the end of the eighteenth century the industry had concentrated in the first three of these counties, and by 1780 was employing 140,000 there and over the borders of Huntingdon, Hertfordshire and Oxford. The finest and most expensive lace was made in the West Country—Honiton in Devon and Blandford in Dorset. The trade, however, gradually declined with competition from foreign lace and in some cases from machinery. In Honiton in 1820 only 300 lacemakers remained out of the 21,000 formerly employed.<sup>51</sup> The domestic lace industry appeared to go into a general decline from 1815 to the 1830s, under those dual threats. While the Nottingham industry had been steadily improving, the pillow lace industry had been ‘constantly deteriorating and excluded by the price’. The demand for cheaper products favoured the Nottingham machine-made lace industry. The threat from the handworkers of France was countered by the machine. ‘By the 1830s, the industry had disappeared from a number of places and almost everywhere prices and wages had fallen, and employment had become very intermittent.’ But a new wave of demand for lace of all kinds, including in particular handmade lace, appeared in the 1840s, and the industry gained a new lease of life. Prices and employment reached a high point. After this the industry lasted until 1880. In addition to lace there was straw plaiting which spread quickly in the borders of Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire and Bedfordshire. It was also introduced into North Essex in the late eighteenth century, and in 1840 was still keeping women, children and old men busy in the Halstead, Braintree and Barking districts. Straw plaiting had started in the late eighteenth century and spread rapidly just at the time when the decline in wool spinning had left many women unemployed. There were good wages until the end of the Napoleonic Wars. The introduction of hats from Italy was a temporary setback, and the industry recovered for a time by importing Italian straw. Wages, however, fell to 5s-7s a week and stayed there until the industry finally died in 1870.<sup>53</sup> The appearance of lace and strawplaiting in southern arable farming regions may have been connected to contemporary agricultural change. As Keith Snell and Robert Allen have argued recently, the kind of agricultural changes which took place in the South and the East probably reduced the potential for the participation of women in the agricultural labour force.<sup>54</sup> This was not nearly so marked in western pastoral regions, for such regions did make available some comparatively well-paid agricultural and alternative female employment. Because farming activities were reduced for women in the South and the East, a labour force was left to take up lacemaking and straw plaiting. It could just as well be argued, however, that the attractiveness of these industries after the mideighteenth century might itself have contributed to the sexual division of labour in agriculture.<sup>55</sup> There was a rapid increase in glovemaking from the end of the eighteenth century, and this industry found its urban headquarters in Woodstock, Yeovil and Worcester, with outworking villages in Oxfordshire, Somerset and Worcestershire. Worcester and its outlying villages claimed 30,000 workers in the 1820s, Somerset had 20,000, Hereford 3,000. But there was a great decline after Huskisson’s withdrawal of the import restrictions on French gloves.<sup>56</sup> By 1832 output at Worcester was one-third of what it had been in 1825.<sup>57</sup> Dorset had further cottage industries in string, pack thread, netting, cordage, and ropes with sailcloth and sacking. It was well known, too, for its wire shirt-button industry which in 1793 employed 4,000 in the town and neighbourhood of Shaftesbury. But this industry too bowed out in the 1830s, to competition from horn and pearl buttons.<sup>58</sup> The decline of the older domestic manufactures in the South of England was thus much more complicated than is generally allowed for. The decline of the older woollen manufacture was of course dominant. Wool, which was Britain’s chief home as well as export industry, provided 70 per cent of domestic exports in 1700 and 50 per cent in 1770. The enormous effect of its transfer from the South to Yorkshire, which produced 20 per cent of output in 1700 and 60 per cent in 1800,<sup>59</sup> outweighs all other trends. But still the South did not entirely turn to agriculture—new cottage industries developed on the burial mounds of the old. The reasons for the decline of the old cloth centres cannot lie entirely in a comparative advantage for agriculture in the South, because the appearance of these new industries, limited though they were in extent and long-term success, contradicts that case. The argument of comparative advantage is, in addition, an anachronistic one, because investment decisions were based on a long tradition of mixed portfolios and responses to the trade cycle. Bankruptcy, not comparative advantage, determined the allocation of resources between the industrial and agricultural sectors.<sup>60</sup> ## OTHER REGIONS Other regions of Britain played an important part in the early phase of industrialization, but failed to sustain their leadership. Cornwall was one such area. Early and rapid growth was based on the tin and copper industries. Because coal was expensive, the area was the first to use the Watt engine, and tin and copper mining and smelting became the basis for one of the most advanced engineering centres of the world. But in the middle of the nineteenth century mining suddenly declined and the region was rapidly transformed into a holiday resort. Shropshire was another such early developer. A technological leader in ironmaking and -using, it fostered brickworks, potteries, glass and chemical works, armament works and engineering plants. But the region went into decline; the absolute growth of iron output from Shropshire peaked in 1869, but the county’s share of national production fell from 27 per cent in 1796 to 10 per cent in 1830.<sup>61</sup> The problem here does not appear to have been depletion of mineral resources, but instead failure to use them effectively. Local iron-using industries were not built up, and a decline in the relative wages of iron-workers soon resulted in the emigration of skilled men. Even South Staffordshire and the Black Country failed to stay the course. Rich in coal, iron and water power as well as generations of skilled metalworkers, the area developed some of the earliest canal networks and glass, engineering and armament works. There was substantial expansion in heavy industry in 1810–30 but the area rapidly declined after 1860. The place of North Wales was also ambiguous. With supplies of coal, slate, iron, lead, copper and water power it created ironworks, copper-smelting plants, engineering works, brick- and limeworks. It built up cotton mills, and woollen-, linen-and ropemaking industries. Yet even before the depletion of its coal, copper had given out in the 1820s, and cotton spinning declined by the 1830s. It too became a recreation area. Derbyshire was rich in lead ore and water power. It had a long tradition of domestic textile work with leading textile innovations including those of Arkwright, Lombe, Paul, Hargreaves, Cartwright and Strutt. Its attraction to early cotton entrepreneurs was based on its low wages and absence of any history of machine-breaking, as well as its proximity to the framework-knitting centres which created cotton twist. But the cotton industry only lasted fifteen years in the area before shifting to Lancashire.<sup>62</sup> During this time the centuries-old leadmining industry also suffered a demise. The industry’s peak output was in the mideighteenth century, but technical changes at the end of the century both displaced the smaller investor and increased productivity. Trouble was obvious in the first years of the nineteenth century when the exhaustion of ore shoots, deeper working and drainage problems led to a reduction in mining output. The industry was in severe decline by the 1830s.<sup>63</sup> The decline of the Weald was a classic case of a ‘failed transition’ from proto-industry to industrialization. The Weald was, at the beginning of the seventeenth century, a leading industrial centre, known internationally for its iron, cloth, glass and timber products. The region’s famous iron industry was in decline long before the rise of cokesmelted iron; the cloth industry had disappeared even further back. The reasons for this decline did not lie in depleted natural resources, nor in comparative advantage in agriculture. Loose land controls had brought immigration, population pressure and poverty. Entrepreneurship and technical expertise were not based in the region, but came from outside mercantile groups and groups of migrant foreign craftsmen mainly from France and the Low Countries. There was little overlap in capital and technology between the different industries, and no external economies. As each individual industry declined, mercantile metropolitan capital switched not into the region’s agriculture or even any other activity, but into foreign investment and government stocks. 64 Abortive development also featured in Ireland, where the cotton industry had made a brief start in the areas around Belfast, Dublin and Cork. Cork was already in decline in the first decade of the nineteenth century as large general manufacturers collapsed following the decline in the Atlantic trade in provisions. An industry which employed about 80,000 in 1810 succumbed by the 1820s to international commercial crises and stagnation in the home market. The crisis of 1825–6 caused the greatest run of failures in the history of the industry, and, around Bandon, where coarse cords were manufactured, a slump in the mid-1820s followed by the advent of the power loom had a devastating effect. Bandon decayed, its inhabitants choosing emigration. Other areas responded to the challenge of improvements in flax spinning, and many Belfast cotton spinners opted out of cotton and transferred operations to the linen manufacture.<sup>65</sup> None of these regions succeeded in accumulating the ‘critical mass’ of industrial activity, or in taking part in the ‘economics of conglomeration’. They did not develop the sequence of industries which came to characterize the manufacturing regions of the Industrial Revolution. Glasgow and the Clyde valley followed the sequence of linen and tobacco to coal, to cotton, and iron, and on to engineering, steel and shipbuilding. The North-East started with coal and salt, glass and chemicals, then iron, followed by steel, shipbuilding and engineering. Lancashire had wool and linen, then cotton, coal, chemicals, metals, iron and engineering.<sup>66</sup> ## CYCLICAL FACTORS The fortunes of those regions which dropped out of the industrial vanguard in the course of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries were partly set by cyclical swings over the period. Industries highly dependent on export markets suffered deeply from the setbacks of the numerous eighteenth-century wars. Deane and Cole saw a definite discontinuity in economic growth in the second quarter of the century. They found a turning point in the rate of growth in total output and incomes as well as in the growth rates of particular industries in the 1740s. The downturn in economic growth was closely connected with the depression in agriculture in the 1730s and 1740s. This view and the estimates it is based on are now subject to substantial criticism.<sup>67</sup> The impact of war over the period was, however, probably felt in the index of industrial production, for most eighteenth-century wars had a particularly adverse effect on the home market.<sup>68</sup> Taking the available estimates of output along with contemporary observation, there still seems some evidence for an industrial setback in the years before mid-century. Complaints of depression in the woollen industry in the 1730s were complemented by an obvious need for export subsidies in the linen manufacture. Innovations in cotton technology—the flying shuttle and roller spinning stood out—took until the 1760s either to spread significantly in the one case or to be perfected in the other. The hosiery industry expanded rapidly in the later seventeenth century and first quarter of the eighteenth, then slackened. Imports of raw silk increased slowly until 1740 then fell to levels lower than at the beginning of the eighteenth century and revived only in the 1750s. The hosiery industry in Nottingham and Leicester fell into wide-spread poverty in the 1740s and 1750s. Military expenditure during the War of the Austrian Succession boosted the output of Birmingham only slowly. The pottery industry, after undergoing a great transformation in 1690–1720, was in crisis in the late 1750s, and only revived in the third quarter of the eighteenth century. The output of the paper industry, after rising fourfold between 1710 and 1720, stagnated until 1735–45. Domestic consumption of copper and brass fell between 1725 and 1745, exports were booming but prices low. Tin had become almost unsaleable by the late 1740s. The throughput of the English iron industry stood at 26,000 tons in 1625–35 but at only 20,000–25,000 tons in the 1720s. In Phyllis Deane’s words, The evidence suggests that the English iron industry in the first half of the eighteenth century was scattered, migratory, intermittent in operation and probably declining. 69 Whether there was a general mid-century cyclical industrial malaise, or whether this was recession and crisis in only a selected group of industries particularly affected by war, the result was regional industrial decline in the old industrial South. This may have been enough to set the seal of de-industrialization on some of those areas of former protoindustrial splendour. But it only brought to a head the many underlying institutional problems of the older industrial regions. Long periods of stagnation and at best uncertainty made the prospect of new frontiers all the more appealing. For the largely rural industrial workforce the effects of industrial decline in a region and mechanization in at least some of the major industries brought labour redundancy on a huge scale. The West of England cloth industry was such a case; mechanization and decline went hand in hand, with the worst consequences of labour redundancy felt by women spinners located not only in the woollen centres, but spread over a broad swathe of the agricultural landscape.<sup>70</sup>