## CONCLUSION The age of manufactures in Britain was a complex web of improvement and decline, large- and small-scale production, machine and hand processes. This book has attempted to present some of the richness and variety of early industrial Britain. It has explicitly redressed the balance of recent teleological accounts of the process of industrialization. It has abandoned the perspective which probes back to the eighteenth century for examples of the ‘modern’, for instances of striking increases in productivity, and for some clearly defined path into nineteenth-century industrial greatness. It has challenged the applicability of the economists’ growth models and stage theories, which have narrowed our account of historical processes to aggregate and macro-economic analysis. Such purely economic history has contributed little to understanding the wider historical framework, especially social history. In many ways, purely economic history has presented a misleading picture of the eighteenth-century economy itself: focusing on but one path into industrialization, it has cut us off from understanding alternative paths, and the whole experience of traditional and declining sectors. My book has drawn on a variety of sources and forms of argument from economic, social and cultural history in order to present a more historical and less instrumental picture of eighteenth-century and early-nineteenth-century industry. The picture is incomplete: I have been able to give little space to several industries—building, mining, leatherworking, food processing—which deserve more prominence. Here, as in more conventionally economic histories, the focus has been on the two industries which dominated the foreground: textiles and metals. It is precisely through detailed focus on these two best-known cases, however, that I have sought to deepen the conventional perspective, amplifying the presentation of the economic, social and cultural experiences which lay behind the industries. I have recounted recent debates on the status of the Industrial Revolution. Themes of slow growth and continuity were contrasted with regional change, new technologies, and women’s work. I discussed the structure of industrial growth and its relation to the wider economy and society. Successive chapters examined theories of industrial change, the relations of industry to the agricultural sector and the experiences of regional industrial decline. Labour forces in manufacturing, especially women’s and children’s labour, were analysed, as were trade and consumption of manufactured commodities. Later chapters investigated recent theories and debates over technology and the rise of the factory system, pointing out the variety of forms of industrial structures and technologies, and their very different outcomes. Through a combination of extended narrative and socioeconomic analysis the experiences of the textile and metal industries were examined afresh. This new edition of my book confronts the now orthodox accounts of slow growth and continuity over the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The Industrial Revolution may not have been the brief dramatic event it was once held to be. But macroeconomic indicators play down the extent of change by obscuring the transformation of production processes and regions. A return to a focus on industry, though a broader range of industries than once conceived, and a return to technologies and production processes would reveal the extent of transformation and restructuring of industry over the course of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The conclusions of my first edition remain valid. My picture of the age of manufactures has, I believe, highlighted the following points. First, industrial growth took place over the whole of the eighteenth century, not just in the last quarter of it. There was substantial growth in a whole range of traditional industries as well as in the most obviously exciting cases of cotton and iron. Second, technical change started early and spread extensively through industry. Innovation was not necessarily mechanization. It was also the development of hand and intermediate techniques, and the wider use of and division of cheap labour. It was above all a conjuncture of old and new processes, and that conjuncture affected performance and work experience. Thus, third, industrialization was about work organization; decentralization, extended workshops, and sweating were equally new departures in the organization of production. There was no necessary progression from one to another; their relative efficiency depended on the economic context, and almost any combination of them was possible. These industrial forms, furthermore, had their origins in the differences in work organization to be found in industries like metals and textiles from the very early industrial or proto-industrial phases. Marked differences in production arrangements existed from the beginning of the eighteenth century among the wool, worsted, knitting, silk, linen and cotton industries. In turn, these differences were rooted in socioeconomic structures: historically established levels of industrial concentration and social inequality, legal and customary regulations, and regional cultural traditions. Fourth and finally, but not least, my book has demonstrated the variable impact of technical and industrial change on the division of labour, skills, employment and regions. It has shown that such change did not always and everywhere entail growth. On the contrary, regional industrial decline affected large numbers of workers, and the traditional industries practised in areas of decline, especially the South, were among the most important employers of labour in the eighteenth century. The eighteenth century was no ‘golden age’ for the labourer, and though decentralized processes in cottage or workshop manufacture predominated, much of this manufacture was marked by poverty and insecurity. Growth itself, moreover, need not benefit labour. The expansion of the eighteenth-century textile and metal industries depended on the recruitment of huge quantities of cheap female and child labour. This book has shown how some technologies and processes were adapted to the use of large quantities of cheap labour. But this was often the same labour which subsequently suffered the first widespread dislocation from technological change, and mounted the first great waves of resistance to machinery. These four conclusions seem to me to point towards two directions for future research. I would suggest first that, in moving away from our current narrow vision of industrialization, we take research beyond the conventional territory of cotton, iron and steam power. Fewer people and less wealth were tied up in those technological leaders than in the traditional textile industries and metal manufactures, and this book has sought to give due attention to the range of woollen, linen, silk, cutlery and hardware trades. But large numbers were also to be found in mining, building and the food, drink and leather trades; and there were also the luxury and service trades of town and village. Existing research on these is limited, and analysis in the broad socioeconomic terms here outlined has been virtually non-existent. Accordingly, they have yet to be given their historical due. This book itself has continued the conventional focus on the textile and metal industries, but it has sought to give more weight to their range. We need now to move further out, to discover the processes, organization and labour forces of many more eighteenth-century industries. Second, there is an urgent need for enquiry into the social realities behind ‘increases in productivity’. It is beyond doubt that the technical, organizational and structural changes behind increases in labour productivity involved the dislocation of labour and communities. Hand in hand with industrialization went acute divisions in social experience. One of the most pervasive divisions was that between regions; another was the division of labour, especially by gender. Our curiosity must surely be whetted by the very different responses of workers to technological change in the eighteenth century. Some were enthusiastic or at least passive, others entirely negative. And the reasons for this seem to lie to a large extent in the regional pattern of industrial growth and decline. For the reception accorded technological change in regions where industry had ceased to grow, or where social inequality was marked, was much more negative than in regions of economic opportunity and more egalitarian social structures. The new textile machinery was fiercely resisted in the South, and especially in the West Country, while there seem to be no major instances of resistance to the introduction of machinery in Birmingham. There was more to it than simply differences in regional economic opportunity and social structures, however. Resistance to textile machinery was found in the developing North, even in the cotton districts; and almost certainly this has to be explained in terms of community and cultural traditions along with the emergence of new social divisions. This book has drawn attention to the potential role of artisan organization and especially the solidarity of the outworker communities in the reception of technical change: both of these need to be explored in further comparative research. Still more in need of investigation is the division between male and female labour markets. In the nineteenth century the great public debates on machinery allowed the voices of artisans and sweated handloom weavers, many of them urban male workers, to be heard. But the much earlier, eighteenth-century voices of protest against the machine, voices from the countryside and especially from women, were drowned out at the time by the proclamations of the ‘improvers’, and have since been largely ignored by historians. My book has revealed something of the reception which women domestic workers gave to machinery, and of the complexity of their responses, both favourable and hostile. But we need to know much more about the extent to which there were ‘women’s technologies’, and the extent to which there was a ‘gender bias’ in technological development. We need to know too about the behaviour of women workers in family and community work settings. What part did their work patterns and social networks play in determining the structure of work organization and the reception of new technologies? Above all else this book indicates the need for a reconciliation of social and economic history. For too long their divorce has entailed a major gap in our understanding of the deep social divisions which accompanied industrialization, and which are still so evidently present at the heart of the current decline and restructuring of the British economy.