## NOTES ## INTRODUCTION 1 Lodge, Nice Work, 33. 2 Colley, Britons, 6. 3 Richards, ‘Margins of the Industrial Revolution’, 203–29. 4 Crafts, British Economic Growth. 5 Crafts, ‘Industrial Revolution in Britain and France’; ‘British Economic Growth, 1700–1831’; Harley, ‘British Industrialization before 1841’. 6 Wrigley, Continuity, Chance and Change. 7 Wrigley, ‘Urban Growth’, 178. 10 Levine and Wrightson, The Making of an Industrial Society. 8 Wrigley, Continuity, 57–60. 9 ibid., 5. 11 Crafts, British Economic Growth, 69. 12 Davis, The Industrial Revolution and British Overseas Trade, 64–5. 13 Mokyr, Lever of Riches, 83. 14 ibid., 112. 15 ‘Memoirs of James Bisset’, Warwick County Record Office. 16 Reilly, Josiah Wedgwood, 100–3. 17 ‘Hargreaves’, Chambers Cydopedia. 18 Richards, ‘Margins’, 212. 19 O’Brien, ‘Introduction: Modern Conceptions’, 11. 20 Thomson, ‘British Industrialization’, 91. 21 Landes, Unbound Prometheus, 122. 13 ibid., 54. ## 1 ## CURRENT PERSPECTIVES AND NEW DEPARTURES 1 Stone, Europe Transformed, 83. 2 Stedman Jones, ‘The Changing Face’, 40. 3 Ashton, An Economic History of England, 125. 4 Deane and Cole, British Economic Growth, 78, 166. 5 Crafts, British Economic Growth, 165. 6 ibid., 160–5. 7 Wrigley and Schofield, Population History, 528–9. 8 Crafts, ‘British Industrialisation’, 425. 9 ibid., 425. 10 See Floud, ‘Slow to Grow’, cited in Berg, ‘Revisions and Revolutions’, 47. 11 Wrigley, People, Cities and Wealth, 9. 12 Wrigley, Continuity, Chance and Change, 51. 14 ibid., 55. 15 ibid., 84, 86. 16 Wrigley, People, Cities and Wealth, 11–15. 17 Wrigley and Schofield, Population History, chs 10, 11; R.M.Smith, ‘Fertility, Economy and Household Formation’; Wrigley, ‘Growth of Population’. 18 Kussmaul, A General View. 19 The phrase is Gareth Stedman Jones’s. ‘The Changing Face’, 36–40. 20 Crafts, British Economic Growth, 87. 21 Landes, ‘Fable of the Dead Horse’, 149; O’Brien, ‘Introduction: Modern Conceptions’, 9. 22 Lindert and Williamson, ‘Revising England’s Social Tables’; Lindert, ‘English Occupations’. 23 O’Brien, ‘Introduction: Modern Conceptions’, 13. 24 Berg and Hudson, ‘Rehabilitating the Industrial Revolution’, 29. 25 O’Brien, ‘Introduction: Modern Conceptions’, 14. 26 Ashton, Peter Stubs, 4–5. 27 Landes, Unbound Prometheus. 28 Landes, ‘Fable of the Dead Horse’, 161. 29 Hudson, The Industrial Revolution, ch. 4, and ‘The Regional Perspective’. 30 See Von Tunzelmann, Steam Power, 62–70. 31 Pollard, ‘Regional Markets and National Development’. 32 Berg and Hudson, ‘Rehabilitating the Industrial Revolution’, 39. 33 These are explored by Hudson, The Industrial Revolution, 104. 34 ibid., ch. 4, and Hudson, Regions and Industries. 35 See Berg, The Machinery Question. 36 Crafts, British Economic Growth, 87. 37 Wrigley, cited in Berg, ‘Revisions and Revolutions’, 52, note 29. 38 Crafts, ‘The Industrial Revolution’, 58. 39 Berg and Hudson, ‘Rehabilitating the Industrial Revolution’, 33–34; Usher, The Measurement of Economic Growth, 8–19. 40 Mokyr, ‘Technological Change’, 41. 41 McCloskey, ‘The Industrial Revolution’, 127. 42 Berg, ‘Revisions and Revolutions’, 57; Rosenberg, Inside the Black Box. 43 Berg, ‘Revisions and Revolutions’, 57; Berg and Hudson, ‘Rehabilitating the Industrial Revolution’, 31. 44 Landes, ‘Fable of the Dead Horse’, 162. 45 Berg, ‘Women’s Work’, 61–3. 46 Deane and Cole, British Economic Growth, 83. 47 Hobsbawm, The Age of Revolution. 48 Thomas and McCloskey, ‘Overseas Trade and Empire’, 100–1. 49 McCloskey, ‘The Industrial Revolution’, 121–3. 50 Thomas and McCloskey, ‘Overseas Trade and Empire’, 101; Crouzet, ‘Towards an Export Economy’, see Hudson, The Industrial Revolution, 167; Engerman, ‘Mercantilism and Overseas Trade’, 185. 51 Crafts, British Economic Growth, 142. 52 O’Brien, Introduction: Modern Conceptions’, 12. 53 Price, Masters, Unions and Men; Breen, ‘“Baubles of Britain”’; Hudson, The Industrial Revolution, 184–5. 54 De Vries, ‘Between Purchasing Power’, 119. 55 O’Brien, ‘Foundations of European Industrialisation’, 39. 56 Cf. Cuenca Esteban, ‘Are British Growth Rates Worth Revising? 57 Crafts, ‘British Industrialisation’, 416. ## 2 ## INDUSTRIES 1 Defoe, cited in George, England in Transition, 29. 2 A.Anderson, Historical and Chronological Deduction. 3 Crafts, Leybourne and Mills, ‘Trends and Cycles’, 45–7. 4 Crafts, ‘British Industrialisation’, 425. 5 Hoppit, ‘Counting the Industrial Revolution’; Hudson, The Industrial Revolution, 44. 6 Crafts, ‘The Industrial Revolution’, 7. 7 Hoppit, ‘Counting the Industrial Revolution’. 8 Berg, The Machinery Question, ch. 4. 9 Coleman, Courtaulds: An Economic and Social History, ch. 2. 10 Harris, The Copper King; Harris and Roberts, ‘Eighteenth-Century Monopoly’, 69–82. 11 Landes, Unbound Prometheus, 42. 12 Crouzet, The First Industrialists, 32. 13 Hoffmann, British Industry 1700–1950; Harley, ‘British Industrialization before 1841’; Crafts, Leybourne and Mills, Trends and Cycles’. 14 Cuenca Esteban, ‘Are British Growth Rates Worth Revising?’ 15 Chapman, The Cotton Industry, 56. 16 Hudson, Genesis, ch. 2. 17 Darby, A New Historical Geography, 56–7. 18 Hudson, The Industrial Revolution, 119. 19 Crafts, British Economic Growth, 23. 20 Whyte, ‘Proto-industrialisation in Scotland’, 232. 21 Mitchell and Deane, Abstract of British Statistics; Durie, ‘The Linen Industry’. 22 Wrigley, Continuity, Chance and Change, 67, 77–9. 23 ibid., 57–60; Israel, Dutch Primacy in World Trade. 24 Crafts, Leybourne and Mills, ‘Britain’, 140. 25 Mokyr, ‘Has the Industrial Revolution been Crowded out?’; Berg, ‘Revisions and Revolutions’, 52. 26 Berg, ‘Revisions and Revolutions’, 28. 27 ibid. 28 Levine and Wrightson, The Making of an Industrial Society, 214; Clapham, Economic History, 186. 29 Crafts, British Economic Growth, 23; Hyde, Technological Change. 30 Riden, ‘Iron and Steel’, 128. 31 Crouzet, The First Industrialists, 34. 32 Crafts, British Economic Growth, 22. 33 Riden, ‘Iron and Steel’, 127. 34 Mathias, First Industrial Nation. 35 Harris, The Copper King, 134; Hoppit, ‘Counting the Industrial Revolution’, 180. 36 Cited in Darby, A New Historical Geography, 69. 37 Schumpeter, English Overseas Trade Statistics, 64. 38 Gee, Trade and Navigation of Great Britain, 5, 69. 39 Schumpeter, English Overseas Trade Statistics, 52–9. 40 Davis, The Industrial Revolution and British Overseas Trade, 28. 41 Floud, British Machine Tool Industry, 36. 42 Crafts, Leybourne and Mills, ‘Trends and Cycles’, 46. 43 Bowley, British Building Industry, 64. 44 ibid., 59. 45 Clapham, Economic History, Vol. II, 119. 46 Bowley, British Building Industry, 48. 47 ibid., 49. 48 Wrigley, Continuity, Chance and Change, 84. 49 Chalklin, The Provincial Towns of Georgian England, 160–3; Chapman and Bartlett, ‘The Contribution of Building Clubs’. 50 Crafts, British Economic Growth, 22. 51 Mounfield, ‘Leather Footwear’, 124; Clarkson, ‘The Manufacture of Leather’; Church, ‘The Shoe and Leather Industries’. 52 Weatherill, The Pottery Trade. 53 Barker and Harris, A Merseyside Town. 54 Schumpeter, English Overseas Trade Statistics, 64. 55 Mokyr, ‘Demand vs. Supply in the Industrial Revolution’, 107. 56 Martyn, ‘Considerations on the East India Trade’, 613. 57 Cary, An Essay Towards Regulating the Trade, 99. 58 O’Brien, Foundations of European Industrialisation, 23. 59 Chapman, The Cotton Industry, 56. ## 3 ## MODELS OF INDUSTRIAL TRANSITION 1 Wrigley, Continuity, Chance and Change. 2 Crafts, ‘Why was England First?’; Mokyr, ‘Has the Industrial Revolution been Crowded out?’. 3 Wrigley, ‘Urban Growth’; De Vries, European Urbanization; Hohenberg and Lees, Making of Urban Europe. 4 Smith, Wealth of Nations, Vol. I, Book III, iii, 409. 5 ibid. 6 ibid., Book III, iv, 422. 7 ibid., Book III, iii, 408. 8 ibid., Book I, x, 131. 9 ibid., Book III, iv, 422. 10 Hudson, ‘The Regional Perspective’. 11 Pollard, ‘Regional Markets and National Development’, 45. 12 De Vries, European Urbanization. 13 Wrigley, ‘Urban Growth’, 177–9. 14 Hohenberg and Lees, Making of Urban Europe, 13–120. 15 De Vries, ‘Between Purchasing Power’, 107. 16 Smith, Wealth of Nations, Book III, iii, 409. 17 ibid., Book IV, viii, 644. 18 Thorold Rogers, Six Centuries of Work and Wages, 489–90. 19 Marx, Capital, I, 911. 20 ‘The Babbage Principle’, in Babbage’s own words, was ‘that the master manufacturer by dividing the work to be executed into different processes, each requiring different degrees of skill or of force, can purchase exactly that precise quantity of both which is necessary for each process, whereas if the whole work were executed by one workman, that person must possess sufficient skill to perform the most difficult and sufficient strength to execute the most laborious, of the operations into which the work is divided’. See Berg, The Machinery Question, 182–9. 21 Marx, Capital, 489–90. 22 See Diderot, Encyclopédie, Vol. 5, ‘Epingle’. 23 Lord Fitzmaurice, Life of Shelbourne, 404. 24 Roll, An Early Experiment. 25 Chapman and Chassagne, European Textile Printers, 97. 26 Marglin, ‘What Do Bosses Do?’, 20; The Brighton Group, ‘Capitalist Labour Process’; Berg, Technology and Toil. 27 Dobb, Studies, 143 and ch. 4. 28 Goldin and Sokoloff, ‘Women, Children and Industrialization in the Early Republic’; Goldin and Sokoloff, ‘The Relative Productivity Hypothesis’; Sokoloff, ‘Transition from the Artisanal Shop’. 29 Mendels, ‘Proto-industrialization’; Medick, ‘The Proto-industrial Family Economy’; Jones, ‘Agricultural Origins’; De Vries, Economy of Europe, 95–6. Some of the discussion of proto-industrialization in this section of the chapter is based on Berg, Hudson, Sonenscher, ‘Introduction’, Manufacture in Town and Country, and I am indebted to my co-authors. 30 Habakkuk, ‘Population Growth’; John, ‘Agricultural Productivity’; Thirsk, ‘Industries in the Countryside’; Chambers, ‘Vale of Trent’; Chambers, ‘The Rural Domestic Industries’; Jones, ‘Agricultural Origins’. 31 Mendels and Deyon, ‘Proto-industrialization’; Coleman, ‘A Concept too Many’. 32 Jeannin, ‘Développement ou Impasse?’, 52–65; Kriedte, Medick, Schlumbohm, Industrialization, 7; Houston and Snell, ‘Proto-industrialization?’. 33 Kriedte, Medick and Schlumbohm, Industrialization, 111. 34 Medick, ‘The Proto-industrial Family Economy’, 301–10. 35 Jones, ‘Environment’, 494. 36 Medick, ‘The Proto-industrial Family Economy’, 301. 37 Medick, ‘Plebeian Culture’, 89–92. 38 Williamson, ‘The Evolution of Hierarchy’, and Millward, ‘The Emergence of Wage Labour’. 39 Clapham, Economic History, I, 145, 191; Hudson, ‘From Manor to Mill’. 40 Faucher, cited in Clapham, Economic History, I, 175. 41 Schremmer, ‘Proto-industrialization’, 123. 42 DuPlessis and Howell, ‘Early Modern Urban Economy’, 51 and 84. 43 For a discussion of these artisan structures in an unincorporated town such as Birmingham see Chapter 10. For further discussion of these artisan systems in Britain and France see Sabel and Zeitlin, ‘Historical Alternatives’. Artisan organization and customs in Britain and France are discussed in Prothero, Artisans and Politics; Rule, Experience of Labour; Sewell, Work and Revolution. 44 Clapham, Economic History, I, 156. 45 Sabel and Zeitlin, ‘Historical Alternatives’. 46 These are described in Chapman, ‘Industrial Capital’, 124. 47 Chapman and Chassagne, European Textile Printers, 215, 194. Also see Freudenberger, ‘Protofactories’, for a discussion of the characteristics of this industrial structure and how it was developed on the landed estates of the Hapsburg Empire in the eighteenth century. 48 See Sabel and Zeitlin for the different success rates by which three artisan regions adapted to changing markets. See Thomson, ‘Variations in Industrial Structure’. 49 Coleman, ‘A Concept too Many’, 445. # AGRICULTURE, RESOURCES, ENVIRONMENT 1 Mill, ‘Nature, Origins, and Progress of Rent’, 177. 2 Jones, Agriculture, ch. 3; Thirsk, Agrarian History, Introduction. 3 Wrigley, ‘Growth of Population’, 122; Deane and Cole, British Economic Growth, 45; Mitchell and Deane, Abstract of British Historical Statistics, 8. 4 Crafts, ‘British Industrialisation’, 418. 5 Allen, ‘Agriculture’ 100; Holderness, ‘Agriculture 1770–1860’; Jackson, ‘Growth and Deceleration in English Agriculture’; Overton, ‘Agricultural Productivity’; O’Brien, ‘Introduction: Modern Conceptions’, 19. 6 Allen, ‘Agriculture’, 100. 7 ibid., 119, 122. 8 Crafts, British Economic Growth, p. 84. 9 Crafts, Leybourne and Mills, ‘Britain’, 115. 10 Wrigley, ‘A Simple Model of London’s Importance’. 11 Allen, ‘Agriculture’, 121. 12 Jackson, ‘Growth and Deceleration in English Agriculture’; O’Brien, ‘Agriculture and the Home Market’; Allen, ‘Agriculture’, 122. 13 Smith, Wealth of Nations, Vol. I, Book I, i, 17. 14 Crafts, Leybourne and Mills, ‘Britain’, 116; Crafts, ‘British Industrialization’, 424–8. 15 O’Brien, ‘Introduction: Modern Conceptions’, 20. 16 John initially made the case for a connection between low agricultural prices and rising industrial demand. Recent work throws this into question. See Cole, ‘Factors in Demand’, and Beckett, ‘Regional Variation’. 17 O’Brien, ‘Agriculture and the Home Market’, 730; Crafts, British Economic Growth, 133–4. 18 Gould, ‘Agricultural Fluctuations’. 19 Eversley, ‘The Home Market’, 206–59. 20 Jones, ‘Agricultural Origins’, 138. 21 These arguments are made by Hohenberg, ‘Toward a Model of the European Economic System’. 22 Jones, Agriculture, 117. 23 Hoskins, The Midland Peasant, 269. 24 ibid., 310. 25 Eden, The State of the Poor, I, 555. 26 See Westerfield, Middlemen, for a survey of the distinctions between the various functions of the corn middlemen. Also see Thompson, ‘The Moral Economy’, for a discussion of monopolies in the retailing of corn. 27 I owe this point to Jeanette Neeson. Also see Beckett, ‘Regional Variation’, 41–2. 28 Cole, ‘Factors in Demand’, 54–7. 29 Wrigley, ‘Growth of Population’, 97–8. 30 Jones, Agriculture, 102–10, produces the usual examples of landlords investing in mining and ironworking on their estates. But the motivation behind their industrial investment may have been as dubious as that behind their investment in the land itself. For a discussion of this see Cooper, ‘In Search of Agrarian Capitalism’. 31 B.L.Anderson, ‘The Attorney’. Also see Rowlands, ‘Society and Industry in the West Midlands’, who shows from local studies that credit was available to all but the lowest levels of society, and that anyone with any land at all could raise a mortgage. Smiths and husbandmen could raise £20 to £40 in this way. 32 Burley, ‘An Essex Clothier’; Ashton, Peter Stubs. 33 Chapman, ‘Industrial Capital’. 34 Berg, ‘Small-Producer Capitalism’; Hudson, Genesis, chs 3–4. 35 Berg, ‘Women’s Property and the Industrial Revolution’; Davidoff and Hall, Family Fortunes, 205–15. 36 The classic statement of this position is Chambers, ‘Enclosure and Labour Supply’. 37 Crafts, ‘British Industrialisation’, 420–3. 38 Hoskins, The Midland Peasant, 263. 39 Jones, ‘Agricultural Origins’, 139. 40 For a standard statement of this position see Bythell, Handloom Weavers. 41 I owe this point to Jeannette Neeson. 42 Snell, Annals of the Labouring Poor, chs 1,4. 43 Allen, Enclosure and the Yeoman, chs 12, 14. 44 Thirsk, ‘Industries in the Countryside’. This paragraph is based on arguments made in Berg, Hudson, Sonenscher, ‘Introduction’, Manufacture in Town and Country, 22–3. 45 ibid. Also see Hey, ‘A Dual Economy’. 46 Chambers, ‘The Rural Domestic Industries’, 430. 47 Jones, ‘Agriculture and Economic Growth’, 110–11. 48 Spufford, ‘Peasant Inheritance Customs and Land Distribution’, 157. 49 Howell, ‘Peasant Inheritance Customs in the Midlands 1280–1800’. 50 For an early statement of this see Habakkuk, ‘Family Structure’. 51 Hey, Rural Metalworkers. 52 Thompson, ‘The Grid of Inheritance’. 53 Houston and Snell, ‘Proto-industrialization’. 54 Rowlands, Masters and Men, 39–43. 55 See Hudson, ‘Proto-industrialization’. 56 Cited in Neeson, Commoners, ch. 1. 57 Smith, Wealth of Nations, Vol. I, Book I, 101. 58 ibid., 103. 59 The extent of local industrial specialization within regions is noticed by Sydney Pollard in his Peaceful Conquest, 32–5, but no attempt is made to link these specializations to their individual agrarian contexts. 60 Wolfe, Europe and the People without History, 265, 158. 61 Mathias, ‘Resources and Technology’, 20. 62 ibid., 20. 63 Pollard, ‘Regional Markets and National Development’, 35. 64 Langton, Atlas of Industrialising Britain, 4. 65 Flinn, History of the British Coal Industry, 290. 66 Levine and Wrightson, The Making of an Industrial Society, 1. 67 ibid., 8. 68 ibid., ix. 69 ibid., 79. 70 ibid., 79; Flinn, Men of Iron, 52–4. 71 Wrigley, Continuity, Chance and Change, 77. 72 ibid., 81. 73 Harris, ‘Skills, Coal and British Industry’. 74 Mokyr, Lever of Riches, 84–93. 75 Ricardo, Principles, ch. 3, 85. 76 Von Tunzelmann, Steam Power, 64–9, 84–6. 17 Langton, ‘Industrial Revolution and the Regional Geography of England’, 162; Turnbull ‘Canals, Coal and Regional Growth’; cf. Hudson, The Industrial Revolution, 103. ## 5 ## INDUSTRIAL DECLINE 1 Thirsk, Economic Policy, 109. Also see Thirsk, ‘Industries in the Countryside’, and ‘The Fantastical Folly of Fashion’. 2 Thirsk, Economic Policy, 168. 3 Wrightson, English Society, 139. 4 Pollard, ‘Industrialization and the European Economy’; Pollard, Peaceful Conquest. 5 Richards, ‘Women in the British Economy’, 343. 6 Jones, ‘Constraints’, 423–30; Jones, ‘Environment’. 7 Polanyi, The Great Transformation. 8 Little, Deceleration, 24–31. 9 Jones, ‘Constraints’, 423. 10 Hudson, The Industrial Revolution, 101, 108. 11 Pollard, ‘Regional Markets and National Development’, 38. 12 Hohenberg, ‘Urban Manufactures’, 169. 13 MacLeod, Inventing the Industrial Revolution. 14 Cary, An Essay Towards Regulating the Trade, 99. 15 Postlethwayt, Britain’s Commercial Interest, II, 416, 420. 16 Pollard, ‘Regional Markets and National Development’, 39–40. 18 Pollard, Peaceful Conquest, 19; Chandler, ‘Scale and Scope’. 19 Defoe, Tour, 464. 20 Wrightson, English Society, 139. 21 Hoskins, The Midland Peasant, 274. 22 Jones, ‘Constraints’, 425. 23 Pollard, Peaceful Conquest, 14. For a recent detailed treatment of declining marginal regions see Richards, ‘Margins of the Industrial Revolution’. 24 Jones, ‘Constraints’, 429; Pollard, Peaceful Conquest, 20. 25 Pollard, ‘Regional Markets and National Development’, 44. 26 Jones, ‘Constraints’, 426. 27 Cited in Brown, Essex, 1. 28 ibid., 14. Also see Coleman, ‘Growth and Decay’. 29 Defoe, Plan of English Commerce, 257, cited in George, England in Transition, 55. 30 Lloyd Prichard, ‘The Decline of Norwich’, 373, 374; Coleman, ‘Growth and Decay’. 31 Wilson, ‘The Supremacy of the Yorkshire Cloth Industry’, 231–7. 32 Lloyd Prichard, ‘The Decline of Norwich’, 375. 33 Mann, The Cloth Industry, 159–76. 34 Wilson, ‘The Supremacy of the Yorkshire Cloth Industry’, 233. 35 Jones, ‘Agriculture and Economic Growth’, 111. 36 Brown, Essex, 19–25. 37 See previous chapter and Chapman, ‘Industrial Capital’. 38 Jones, ‘Agriculture and Economic Growth’, 105. 39 Jones, ‘Environment’, 498. 40 Tucker, Instructions for Travellers, cited in Wilson, ‘The Supremacy of the Yorkshire Cloth Industry’, 238. 41 ibid., 238. 42 Mann, The Cloth Industry, 97–9, 192. 43 Wilson, ‘The Supremacy of the Yorkshire Cloth Industry’, 241. 44 Brown, Essex, 20, 25. 45 Mann, The Cloth Industry, 114. 46 ibid., 114, 125, 126. 47 Jones, ‘Constraints’; Mann, The Cloth Industry, 161, 149. 48 Pinchbeck, Women Workers, 155–6. 49 I owe this point to Jeannette Neeson. 50 Brown, Essex, 113; Burley, ‘An Essex Clothier’, 289. 51 Pinchbeck, Women Workers, 206. 52 Spencely, ‘The English Pillow Lace Industry’, 70. 53 Pinchbeck, Women Workers, 222. 54 See Chapter 4, p. 89; Snell, Annals of the Labouring Poor, chs 1 and 4; Allen, Enclosure and the Yeoman, chs 12 and 14. 55 Snell, ‘Agricultural Seasonal Unemployment’, 434–7. 56 Clapham, Economic History, I, 183. 57 Pinchbeck, Women Workers, 225. 59 Pollard, Peaceful Conquest. 58 ibid., 229, and Clapham, Economic History, I, 183. 60 Burley, ‘An Essex Clothier’; Chapman, ‘Industrial Capital’. 61 Richards, ‘Margins of the Industrial Revolution’, 207. 62 This paragraph is based on Pollard, Peaceful Conquest, 14–16. 63 Honeyman, Origins of Enterprise, 28–9. 64 B.M.Short, ‘The De-industrialisation Process’, 164–160; Hudson, The Industrial Revolution, 128–30. 65 Dickson, ‘Aspects of the Rise and Decline of the Irish Cotton Industry’, 100–16. 66 Pollard, ‘Regional Markets and National Development’, 44. 67 Beckett, ‘Regional Variation’, concludes that this depression was less intense than previously supposed, and its effects on the rest of the economy much weaker. On eighteenth-century growth see Wrigley, ‘Growth of Population’; Crafts, ‘British Economic Growth’; and McCloskey, ‘The Industrial Revolution’. 68 Cole, ‘Factors in Demand’, 53. 69 This paragraph is based on Little, Deceleration, 65–85. 70 Randall, Before the Luddites, 60–1. ## 6 TRADE, CONSUMPTION AND MANUFACTURING 1 Crouzet, ‘Towards an Export Economy’, 65, 69, 81. 2 Price, ‘What Did Merchants Do?’, 269–70. 3 Goodman and Honeyman, Gainful Pursuits, 24, 25. 4 ibid., 53, 56. 5 Price, ‘What Did Merchants Do?’, 269–70. 6 O’Brien, ‘Foundations of European Industrialisation’, 21. 7 Davis, ‘English Foreign Trade’, 93. 8 Crouzet, ‘Towards an Export Economy’, 87. 9 ibid., 90–2. 10 Pollard, ‘Industrialisation and the European Economy’, 641, 643; Pollard, Peaceful Conquest. 11 Davis, The Industrial Revolution and British Overseas Trade, 64–5. 12 This paragraph is based on Thomson, ‘British Industrialization and the External World’, 83– 5. 13 Mokyr, ‘Demand vs. Supply in the Industrial Revolution’; Crafts, British Economic Growth. 14 Crafts, ‘The Industrial Revolution’, 48. 15 Thomson, ‘British Industrialization and the External World’, 86–7. 16 Cuenca Esteban, ‘Are British Growth Rates Worth Revising?’ 17 See Hudson, The Industrial Revolution, 182. 18 Engerman, ‘Mercantilism and Overseas Trade’, 197. 19 O’Brien, Power with Profit, 17–20. 20 ibid. 21 O’Brien, ‘Introduction: Modern Conceptions’, 12. 22 Weatherill, The Pottery Trade. 23 Israel, Dutch Primacy in World Trade, 356–7, 386, 409. 24 Steensgaard, ‘Growth and Composition’, 102–53. 25 Devine, Tobacco; Price, Capital and Credit. 26 O’Brien, ‘Foundations of European Industrialisation’, 25. 27 Thomson, ‘State Intervention’, 57–93. 28 O’Brien, ‘Foundations of European Industrialisation’, 25. 29 Steensgaard, ‘Growth and Composition’, 151. 30 Price, ‘What Did Merchants Do?’, 283–4. 31 Chapman, Merchant Enterprise in Britain, 7–17. 32 O’Brien, ‘Agriculture and the Home Market’, 773–9. 33 Clifford, ‘Eighteenth-Century Goldsmithing Business’. 34 De Vries, European Urbanisation. 35 Wrigley, ‘Urban Growth’. 36 Quoted in McKendrick, Brewer and Plumb, Birth of a Consumer Society, 77. 37 Robinson, ‘Matthew Boulton and Josiah Wedgwood’. 38 See Douglas and Isherwood, The World of Goods; Clifford, ‘Eighteenth-Century Goldsmithing Business’; Vickery, ‘Women and the World of Goods’. 39 Weatherill, Consumer Behaviour and Material Culture, 41; cf. Shammas, The Pre-industrial Consumer. 40 Shammas, The Pre-industrial Consumer, 185. 41 Weatherill, Consumer Behaviour and Material Culture, 33–42. 42 Nenadic, ‘Businessmen. The Urban Middle Classes’, 74–5. 43 Sabel and Zeitlin, ‘Historical Alternatives to Mass Production’. 44 The above paragraphs summarize the arguments in ‘Historical Alternatives to Mass Production’. 45 Styles, ‘Manufacturing, Consumption and Design’, 540. 46 Said, Orientalism. 47 Weatherill, ‘A Possession of One’s Own’; Vickery, ‘Women and the World of Goods’, 287– 9. 48 Lemire, Fashion’s Favourite, 109. 49 Pollexfen in 1681, cited in Steensgaard, ‘Growth and Composition’, 127. 50 De Vries, ‘Between Purchasing Power’, 119. ## 7 ## WOMEN, CHILDREN AND WORK 1 Lindert and Williamson, ‘Revising England’s Social Tables’, 385–408. 2 Hill, Women, Work and Sexual Politics. 3 Allen, Enclosure and the Yeoman, ch. 1. 4 Allen, Enclosure and the Yeoman, ch. 12; Snell, Annals of the Labouring Poor; Valenze, ‘The Art of Women and the Business of Men’. 5 Hill, Women, Work and Sexual Politics, 125–7. 6 Higgs, ‘Women, Occupations and Work’, 59–80, 68–9. 7 Pearson, ‘Gender Matters in Development’, ch. 15. 8 Humphries, ‘“Lurking in the Wings”’, 32–44. 9 Randall, Before the Luddites, 54–5, 58. 10 Smith, Wealth of Nations, Vol. I, Book IV, VIII, 644. 11 Collins, ‘Proto-industrialization and Pre-Famine Emigration’, 132–4. 12 See Rothstein, ‘The Silk Industry in London’, ch. 2; Lown, Women and Industrialisation, ch. 1. 13 Freudenberger, Mather and Nardinelli, ‘Early Factory Labour Force’, 1085–90, 1087; Bolin-Hort, Work, Family and the State, 54. 14 Sharpe, ‘Literally Spinsters’, 46–65, 52. 15 Pinchbeck, Women Workers, 204; Spencely, ‘The Origins of the English Pillow Lace Industry’, 81–93. 16 See Martin, ‘Village Traders and the Emergence of a Proletariat’; cf. Allen, Enclosure and the Yeoman, ch. 1, who found that shoemakers made up 15 per cent of industrial employment in the South Midlands in 1831. These trades fitted well with W.A.Lewis’s petty retail trades which are enormously expanded in overpopulated economies. See Lewis, ‘Economic Development’, 141. 17 See Chapter 12; Behagg, Politics and Production, 48–9. 18 Eden, The State of the Poor, II, 385, III, 739, 814, 876. 19 Chambers, ‘The Rural Domestic Industries’, 438. 20 Cited in the Hammonds, The Skilled Labourer, 145. 21 Eden, The State of the Poor, III, 821. 22 ibid. 23 Clark, Working Life of Women, 111. 24 Cited in Richards, ‘Women in the British Economy’, 341. 25 Aspin and Chapman, James Hargreaves and the Spinning Jenny, 57. 26 Reddy, The Rise of Market Culture, ch. 2. 27 Select Committee on the State of Children. 28 Hutton, History of Derby. 29 Vincent, Bread, Knowledge and Freedom, 78. 30 Children’s Employment Commission, 1816. 31 See MacLeod, Inventing the Industrial Revolution, 159–71. 32 Dean Tucker, cited in Porter, English Society, 213–14. 33 Eversley, ‘Industry and Trade 1500–1800’, 110–11. 34 See advertisements in Aris’s Gazette, 1766–96. 35 Josiah Wedgewood, Children’s Employment Commission, vol. I, 1816. 36 E.I.Davies, The Handmade Nail Trade’, 142. 37 See Thirsk, Economic Policy. 38 Cf. Sharpe, ‘Literally Spinsters’, 46–65. 39 Earle, ‘The Female Labour Market’, 328–53, 338, 340, 346; Dent, ‘Ubiquitous but Invisible’, 111–29, esp. 119, 125; Cunningham, ‘Employment and Unemployment of Children’, 115– 50, esp. 131, 133, 137. 40 Pinchbeck, Women Workers, 155. 41 The Hammonds, The Skilled Labourer, 152. 42 ibid., 149. 43 Cited in Wadsworth and Mann, The Cotton Trade. 44 Baines, History of the Cotton Manufacture, 159. 45 Wadsworth and Mann, The Cotton Trade, 375. 46 ibid., 301. 47 Richards, ‘Women in the British Economy’, 343. 48 Clapham, Economic History, I, 183. 49 Jones, ‘Constraints’. 50 Snell, ‘Agricultural Seasonal Unemployment’, 436. 51 Hobsbawm, Age of Revolution, 55. 52 Landes, Unbound Prometheus, 117. 53 Pollard, ‘Labour in the British Economy’. 54 Pinchbeck, Women Workers; Alexander, ‘Women and the London Trades’. 55 Chapman and Chassagne, European Textile Printers, 95, 96, 194. 56 Coleman, ‘Growth and Decay’, 120, 123–4. 57 Wadsworth and Mann, The Cotton Trade, 285, 325, 332, 336. 58 Boserup, Women’s Role in Economic Development. 59 Elson and Pearson, ‘Nimble Fingers’. 60 McKendrick, ‘Home Demand and Economic Growth’, 186. 61 Prothero, Artisans and Politics, 35. 62 Phillips and Taylor, ‘Sex and Skill’, 82–8. 63 Godelier, ‘Work and its Representations’. 64 Sharpe, ‘Literally Spinsters’, 55; Hill, Women, Work and Sexual Politics, chs 12, 13. 65 Saito, ‘Labour Supply Behaviour of the Poor’, 633–52, esp. 636, 645–9. 66 Gibson and Smout, Prices, Food and Wages in Scotland; Whyte, ‘Proto-industrialisation in Scotland’, 228–52, esp. 242, 247. 67 Snell, Annals of the Labouring Poor; Neeson, Commoners. 68 Medick, ‘The Proto-industrial Family Economy’, 304, 307, 310. 69 Chaytor, ‘Household and Kinship: Ryton’, 30. 70 Laslett, ‘Family and Household’, 555. 71 B.Collins, ‘Proto-industrialization and Pre-Famine Emigration’, 133. 72 Levine, Family Formation, 48. 73 J.Anderson, Observations on National Industry, I, 39. 74 Cited in Hudson, ‘From Manor to Mill’, 130. 75 Pinchbeck, Women Workers, 126. 76 Chaytor, ‘Household and Kinship’, 48. 77 O.Harris, ‘Households and their Boundaries’, 8, 150. 78 Kusamitsu, ‘Industrial Revolution and Design’, 118. 79 Edwards and Lloyd-Jones, ‘Smelser and the Cotton Factory Family’, 305. 80 Radcliffe, New System of Manufacture. 81 The Hammonds, The Skilled Labourer, 162. 82 Snell, Annals of the Labouring Poor, ch. 6, 331. 83 Simonton, ‘Apprenticeship: Training and Gender’, 227–61. 84 Lown, Women and Industrialisation, ch. 1. 85 Reid, ‘Decline of Saint Monday’, 95. 86 David Sabeen has, however, suggested to me that many of the arts typically associated with housewifery only really came into being in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The finer needlework required in the working of cotton and linen fabrics was not practised by most peasant and working-class households clothed in coarse woollen clothing. 87 Samuel Bamford, Passages in the Life of a Radical, 111. 88 Quoted in Malcolmson, Life and Labour in England, 118. 89 Thompson, ‘The Moral Economy Reviewed’, 305–22. 90 Reddy, The Rise of Market Culture. 91 Randall, Before the Luddites. 92 These points were raised by David Washbrook, ‘Markets and Custom in Eighteenth-Century South India’. ## 8 ## MACHINES AND MANUAL LABOUR 1 Landes, Unbound Prometheus, 41, 81, 95, 99, 105, 123. 2 For a lucid, layperson’s account of some of the theories of technical change see Nathan Rosenberg, ‘The Direction of Technological Change’. For a good, basic survey of the economic theories and some empirical studies of technical change see Arnold Heertje, Economics and Technical Change. N.von Tunzelmann, ‘Technical Progress’, discusses the applications of some of these theories to the British experience before 1860. 3 Habakkuk, American and British Technology. 4 Marx, Capital, I, 391. 5 David, ‘Labour Scarcity’. 6 Habakkuk, ‘Labour Scarcity’. 7 Saul, Technological Change, ‘Introduction’. 8 These arguments are put in Berg, ‘Power Loom’. 9 Temin, ‘Labour Scarcity in America’. 10 David, ‘Labour Scarcity’, 33. 11 ibid., 28. 12 MacLeod, Inventing the Industrial Revolution, ch. 9; Mokyr, Lever of Riches, 165. 13 Bruland, ‘Industrial Conflict’; Lazonick, ‘Industrial Relations and Technical Change’; Styles, ‘Embezzlement, Industry and the Law’. 14 Von Tunzelmann, ‘Technology in the Early Nineteenth Century’, 295. 15 Von Tunzelmann, ‘Technological and Organizational Change’, 258. 16 Von Tunzelmann, ‘Technology in the Early Nineteenth Century’, 291–3. 17 See McCloskey, Essays on a Mature Economy. 18 Von Tunzelmann, Steam Power; Hyde, Technological Change. 19 Sandberg, Lancashire in Decline; David, ‘The Landscape and the Machine’; Temin, ‘The Relative Decline of the British Steel Industry’. 20 Von Tunzelmann, ‘Technological and Organizational Change’, 259. 21 David, ‘The Landscape and the Machine’; Collins, ‘Harvest Technology’; Roberts, ‘Sickles and Scythes’, 22. 22 Sandberg, Lancashire in Decline; Gutman, Work Culture and Society, 39. For a critique of this see Lazonick, ‘Factor Costs and the Diffusion of Ring Spinning’. 23 Hyde, Technological Change. 24 Von Tunzelmann, Steam Power. 25 Mokyr, Lever of Riches, 160. 26 Von Tunzelmann, ‘Technology in the Early Nineteenth Century’, 286–7. 27 Mokyr, ‘Technological Change’, 31. 28 Nelson and Winter, An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change, 9, 17, 349. 29 Nelson, ‘The Roles of Firms’, 169. 30 Dosi, ‘Sources, Procedures’, 1131. 31 ibid., 1138. 32 ibid., 1158. 33 Mokyr, Lever of Riches, 294–9. 34 Mokyr, ‘Technological Change’, 41. 35 Rosenberg, ‘Machine Tool Industry’. 36 Rosenberg, ‘Economic Development’; ‘The Direction of Technological Change’. 37 Harris, ‘Industry and Technology’; ‘Skills, Coal and British Industry’; Mathias, ‘Skills and the Diffusion’. 38 Mokyr, ‘Technological Change’, 41. 39 Von Tunzelmann, ‘Technology in the Early Nineteenth Century’, 277–9. 40 MacLeod, Inventing the Industrial Revolution. 41 Von Tunzelmann, ‘Technology in the Early Nineteenth Century’, 283. 42 ibid., 285. 43 Mokyr, ‘Technological Inertia’, 328; Randall, Before the Luddites, 3. 44 Landes, ‘Fable of the Dead Horse’, 161. 45 Mokyr, ‘Technological Inertia’, 336. 46 Randall, Before the Luddites, ch. 3. 47 Berg, ‘Workers and Machinery’, 57–69. 48 Marglin, ‘What Do Bosses Do?’; ‘The Power of Knowledge’. See Berg, ‘On the Origins of Capitalist Hierarchy’. 49 Berg, Technology and Toil, ‘Introduction’. 50 Stone, ‘The Origins of Job Structures in the Steel Industry’. 51 Lazonick, Competitive Advantage, 27–67. 52 Samuel, ‘Workshop of the World’. 53 Von Tunzelmann, Steam Power. 54 Bruland, Industrial Conflict’. 55 Lazonick, ‘Industrial Relations and Technical Change’. 56 Zeitlin, ‘Craft Control and the Division of Labour’. 57 Price, Masters, Unions and Men. 58 These are elaborated in Chapters 10 to 12 below. 59 For example, Gray, The Labour Aristocracy. 60 Prothero, Artisans and Politics, 15. 61 This perspective has been uncovered in disputes over the masculinity of the tailoring trades in early nineteenth-century London. See Taylor, Eve and the New Jerusalem, ch. 4. # THE RISE OF THE FACTORY SYSTEM 1 Von Tunzelmann, ‘Technological and Organizational Change’, 268. 2 Heaton, Yorkshire Woollen and Worsted, 352, cited in Von Tunzelmann, ‘Technological and Organizational Change’, 269. 3 Von Tunzelmann, ‘Technological and Organizational Change’, 269. 4 Crouzet, The First Industrialists, 32. 5 Chapman and Butt, ‘The Cotton Industry’, 115. 6 Marglin, ‘What Do Bosses Do?’, 29. 7 ibid., 81. 8 Williamson, Economic Institutions of Capitalism. 9 Landes, ‘What Do Bosses Really Do?’, 603. 10 ibid., 607. 11 ibid., 606–7. 12 Fitton and Wadsworth, Strutts and Arkwrights, 79. 13 Mokyr, Lever of Riches, 257. 14 ibid., 255. 15 Marglin, ‘What Do Bosses Do?’ 16 Goldin and Sokoloff, ‘Women, Children and Industrialisation in the Early Republic’. 17 Landes, ‘What Do Bosses Really Do?’, 615. 18 Landes, ‘Small is Beautiful. Small is Beautiful?’, 26. 19 Sokoloff, ‘Transition from the Artisanal Shop’, 372; Von Tunzelmann, ‘Technological and Organizational Change’. 20 Marshall, Industry and Trade, 237. 21 Cf. Marglin, ‘What Do Bosses Do?’; Piore and Sabel, The Second Industrial Divide. 22 Landes, ‘Small is Beautiful. Small is Beautiful?’, 26. 23 Sabel and Zeitlin, ‘Historical Alternatives’. 24 Marshall, Industry and Trade, 237. 25 ibid., 237, 225. 26 Kenney and Florida, ‘Beyond Mass Production’, 133–8. 27 Sonenscher, Work and Wages, 44, 45. 28 Behagg, Politics and Production, 10. 29 Sonenscher, Work and Wages, 135–8. 30 Behagg, Politics and Production, 8. 31 Crafts, British Economic Growth, 69; Wrigley, Continuity, Chance and Change, 84. 32 Sabel and Zeitlin, ‘Historical Alternatives’, 146–50. 33 Landes, ‘What Do Bosses Really Do?’, 606–7. 34 ibid., 607. 35 Landes, ‘Small is Beautiful. Small is Beautiful?’, 27. 36 Berg, Hudson and Sonenscher, Manufacture in Town and Country; Houston and Snell, ‘Proto-industrialisation? 37 Marglin, ‘Understanding Capitalism’, 237. 38 The Webbs, History of Trade Unionism, 232–5. 39 See p. 273. 40 Chapman, ‘Fixed Capital in the Cotton Industry’; Gatrell, ‘Labour, Power and the Size of Firms’. 41 Gatrell, ‘Labour, Power and the Size of Firms’, 113. 42 Clapham, Economic History, Vol. I, 196. 43 Crouzet, The First Industrialists, 30. 44 ibid., 3. 45 Hudson, Genesis, 42. 46 Levine and Wrightson, The Making of an Industrial Society, 214; Clapham, Economic History, 185. 47 Riden, ‘Iron and Steel’, 28; Crouzet, The First Industrialists, 34. 48 Mathias, Brewing Industry in England, 542–3. 49 Sokoloff, ‘Transition from the Artisanal Shop’, 353, 372, 375. 50 Goldin and Sokoloff, ‘Women, Children and Industrialisation in the Early Republic’; Goldin and Sokoloff, ‘The Relative Productivity Hypothesis’. 51 Sokoloff, ‘Inventive Activity’, 846; Sokoloff and Khan, ‘Democratisation of Invention’. 52 Kanefsky, ‘Motive Power in British Industry’, 360–76, esp. 363–9. 53 Chapman, ‘The Cotton Industry’, 107. 54 Cited in Porter, English Society, 213–14. 55 Marshall, Industry and Trade, 285–8. 56 Florence, The Logic of British and American Industry, 86–92. 57 Hudson, ‘From Manor to Mill’. 58 Behagg, Politics and Production, ch. 1. 59 Pollard, Labour in Sheffield, 58. 60 Landes, ‘What Do Bosses Really Do?’, 622. 61 Pollard, ‘Regional Markets and National Development’, 42–3. 62 Chandler, Scale and Scope. ## 10 ## THE TEXTILE INDUSTRIES: ORGANIZING WORK 1 Defoe, Complete English Tradesman, 393. 2 Jenkins and Ponting, British Wool Textile Industry, 5. 3 Eden, The State of the Poor. 4 Jenkins and Ponting, British Wool Textile Industry, 4, 7. 5 ibid., 58–9. 6 ibid., 75. 7 Heaton, Yorkshire Woollen and Worsted, 264–75. 8 R.G.Wilson, ‘The Supremacy of the Yorkshire Cloth Industry’, 233; Lloyd Prichard, ‘The Decline of Norwich’, 374–6; C.Wilson, England’s Apprenticeship, 291. 9 Brown, Essex, 2–11, 20. 10 Jenkins and Ponting, British Wool Textile Industry, 71. 11 Mann, The Cloth Industry, 159–63. 12 Heaton, Yorkshire Woollen and Worsted, 78, 285. 13 ibid., 289. 14 Thirsk, ‘The Fantastical Folly of Fashion’, 62–3. 15 Chambers, ‘The Rural Domestic Industries’, 428–9. 16 Heaton, Yorkshire Woollen and Worsted, 235. 17 Rogers, ‘Framework Knitting’, 8–10; Levine, Family Formation, 21. 18 Clapham, Economic History, I, 145. 19 Timmins, Birmingham, 179–83; Prest, Coventry, 53. 20 De Vries, Economy of Europe, 100; Harte, ‘Rise of Protection’, 109. 21 Harte, ‘Rise of Protection’, 76. 22 ibid., 109. 23 ibid., 103. 24 Bremner, Industries of Scotland, 214–30. 25 B.Collins, ‘Proto-industrialization and Pre-Famine Emigration’, 129–30. 26 Harte, ‘Rise of Protection’, 112. 27 Chapman and Chassagne, European Textile Printers, 4. 28 Lee, Cotton Enterprise, 6, 24. 29 Bremner, Industries of Scotland, 281; Jewkes, ‘Localization of Cotton’. 30 Quoted in Bremner, Industries of Scotland, 282. 31 Mann, The Cloth Industry, 97. 32 Heaton, Yorkshire Woollen and Worsted, 96, 203. 33 Select Committee Appointed to Consider the State of the Woollen Manufacture; Heaton, Yorkshire Woollen and Worsted, 293–4. 34 Defoe, Tour, 491–2. 35 Hudson, ‘Proto-industrialization’, 51. 36 Wilson, England’s Apprenticeship, 238. 37 Jenkins, West Riding Wool Textile Industry. 38 Rogers, ‘Framework Knitting’, 8–10, 17; D.R.Mills, ‘Proto-industrialization’. 39 Warner, Silk Industry, 499. 40 Aspin and Chapman, James Hargreaves and the Spinning Jenny, 30. 41 ibid., 38. 42 The Hammonds, The Skilled Labourer, 209; Sholl, Short Historical Account of the Silk Manufacture. 43 Warner, Silk Industry, 513. 44 Prest, Coventry, 45; Lane, ‘Apprenticeship’, 316. 45 Prest, Coventry, 49. 46 Timmins, Birmingham, 179–83. 47 Bremner, Industries of Scotland, 222. 48 Lee, Cotton Enterprise, 2. 49 Edwards, British Cotton Trade, 9. 50 Lee, Cotton Enterprise, 3. 51 Chapman and Chassagne, European Textile Printers, 37–52. 52 Fitton and Wadsworth, Strutts and Arkwrights, 82. 53 Edwards, British Cotton Trade, 131, 145. 54 Friedman, Industry and Labour, 151. 55 Jenkins and Ponting, British Wool Textiles. 56 Heaton, Yorkshire Woollen and Worsted, 351–2. 57 Hudson, ‘Proto-industrialization’. 58 Aspin and Chapman, Hargreaves. 59 Mills, ‘Proto-industrialization’,14; Levine, Family Formation, 19. 60 Warner, Silk Industry, 58, 128, 139, 154. 61 Prest, Coventry, 53. 62 Durie, ‘Linen Industry’, 91. 63 Bremner, Industries of Scotland, 247–8. 64 Edwards and Lloyd-Jones, ‘Smelser and the Cotton Factory Family’, 306. 65 Wadsworth and Mann, cited in Edwards and Lloyd-Jones, ‘Smelser and the Cotton Factory Family’, 307. 66 Honeyman, Origins of Enterprise, 240. 67 Unwin, Samuel Oldknow, 32. 68 Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class, 304. 69 ibid., 305. 70 Fitton and Wadsworth, Strutts and Arkwrights, 193. ‘The large employer did most of the speaking before the Parliamentary Committees, but he was hardly the characteristic figure of the trade. There were actually very few “cotton lords”. 71 Unwin, Samuel Oldknow, 15. 72 Lee, Cotton Enterprise, 146; Collier, Family Economy, 42. 73 Chapman, Early Factory Masters, 128; Chapman, ‘Fixed Capital in the Cotton Industry’. Drinkwater’s Manchester mill in 1792 employed 500. See Chaloner, ‘Owen, Drinkwater and Factory System’, 88. Mills similar in size were the Pleasley Works valued at £4,195, Robertson’s mill at Linby valued at £3,600, Dale’s mill at New Lanark valued at £3,500. These were Arkwright licensees and appear to have been restricted to 1,000 spindles. See Chapman, Early Factory Masters, 128. 74 Chapman, Early Factory Masters, 64. 75 Fitton and Wadsworth, Strutts and Arkwrights, 193; Chapman, Early Factory Masters, 129. 76 Clapham, ‘Factory Statistics’, 475–7. 77 Cited in Gatrell, ‘Labour, Power and the Size of Firms’, 95. 78 Chapman, ‘Fixed Capital in the Industrial Revolution’, cited in Gatrell, ‘Labour, Power and the Size of Firms’, 109. 79 ibid., 113. 80 Lloyd-Jones and Le Roux, ‘Size of Firms’. ## 11 ## THE TEXTILE INDUSTRIES: TECHNOLOGIES 1 Linebaugh, ‘Labour History’, 320. 2 Kriedte, Medick, Schlumbohm, Industrialization before Industrialization. 3 Lee, Cotton Enterprise, 4. 4 Aspin and Chapman, James Hargreaves and the Spinning Jenny, 57. 5 Jenkins and Ponting, British Wool Textile Industry, 48; Heaton, Yorkshire Woollen and Worsted, 340; and Mann, The Cloth Industry, 126. 6 Lee, Cotton Enterprise, 4; Smelser, Social Change, 89. 7 Aspin and Chapman, James Hargreaves and the Spinning Jenny, 37–8. 8 Catling, ‘Spinning Mule’, 39. 9 Edwards, British Cotton Trade, 5 and 8. 10 Von Tunzelmann, Steam Power, 176–7. 11 Rees’s Manufacturing Industry, V, 474. 12 Hills, ‘Hargreaves, Arkwright and Crompton’. 13 Unwin, Samuel Oldknow, 32. 14 Von Tunzelmann, Steam Power, 179–83. 15 Edwards, British Cotton Trade, 204. 16 Lardner, Silk Manufacture, 196–200. 17 Rees’s Manufacturing Industry, IV, 468–9. 18 Ponting, Woollen Industry in the South West of England, 61. 19 Heaton, Yorkshire Woollen and Worsted, 340. 20 Lardner, Silk Manufacture, 223. 21 Kusamitsu, ‘Industrial Revolution and Design’, 53–4. 22 Warner, Silk Industry, 117. 23 Timmins, Birmingham, 179–89. 24 Baines, History of the Cotton Manufacture, 207; Wood, History of Wages, 141–3. In 1815 the few power looms in Stockport were capable only of weaving strong calicoes and other coarse cloth made from low counts of yarn. A greater part of the weaving was done by hand. See Giles, ‘Stockport’, 37. 25 Wilkinson, ‘Power Loom Developments’, 129. 26 Baines, History of the Cotton Manufacture, 229–31; McCulloch, ‘Rise of Cotton Manufacture’. Also see Select Committee Appointed to Inquire into the Present State of Manufactures, Commerce and Shipping, Testimony of H.W.Sefton, 622. ‘There are now hundreds of dressers, who dress the warp previous to it being woven on the power loom, those are classes who 20 or 30 years ago were scarcely known by name, compared with their present number…in one mill, there are about 17 to about 350 looms, that will be one to 20 in Stockport…there would be about 500. 27 The evidence of Babbage quoted by Habakkuk, American and British Technology, 148. 28 Contrary to Habakkuk’s belief stated in ibid., 148. 29 Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class, 315; Wood, History of Wages, 141–3. 30 Rees’s Manufacturing Industry, V, 479. 31 Pinchbeck, Women Workers, 149. 32 See Berg, The Machinery Question, ch. 4. 33 Von Tunzelmann, ‘Technical Progress’, 155, 161. 34 Aspin and Chapman, James Hargreaves and the Spinning Jenny, 48. 35 Von Tunzelmann, Steam Power, 176. 36 Pinchbeck, Women Workers, 150–1. 37 Scott-Taggart, ‘Crompton’s Invention’, 28. 38 Catling, ‘Spinning Mule’, 43. 39 Baines, History of the Cotton Manufacture, 436. 40 Smout, History of the Scottish People, 385–6. 41 Catling, ‘Spinning Mule’, 49. 42 Collins, ‘Proto-industrialization and Pre-Famine Emigration’. 43 Lee, Cotton Enterprise, 24. 44 Unwin, Samuel Oldknow, 45. 45 Select Committee Appointed to Inquire into the Present State of Manufactures, Commerce and Shipping, 75. 46 Baines, History of the Cotton Manufacture, 485. 47 Wilkinson, ‘Power Loom Developments’, 130. 48 Brown, Essex, 20. 49 Mann, Cloth Industry, 126, 149. 50 Randall, ‘The Shearmen and the Wiltshire Outrages’, 284–5. 51 Heaton, Yorkshire Woollen and Worsted, 340; Mann, Cloth Industry, 174–92. 52 See above, pp. 109–10. Jones, ‘Constraints’. 53 Aspin and Chapman, James Hargreaves and the Spinning Jenny, 47; Baines, History of the Cotton Manufacture, 159. 54 Aspin and Chapman, James Hargreaves and the Spinning Jenny, 31. 55 Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class, 604–28, 657. ## THE METAL AND HARDWARE TRADES 1 Marx, Capital, I. 2 Faucher, cited in Clapham, Economic History, I, 175. 3 Cited in Armytage, Social History of Engineering, 93. 4 J.R.Harris, ‘Industry and Technology’; Mathias, ‘Skills and the Diffusion’. 5 This paragraph and the passages quoted are based on J.R.Harris, ‘Skills, Coal and British Industry’, 177–9. 6 Cited in Briggs, ‘Metals and the Imagination’, 665. 7 Rolt, Tools, 68. 8 Pole, Fairbairn, 26, 33. 9 Clapham, Economic History, I. 10 Tann, ‘Textile Millwright’. 11 Fairbairn, Mills and Millwork, vi. 12 Tann, ‘Textile Millwright’, 82, 87. 13 Jeffreys, Story of the Engineers, 15. 14 More, Skill and the English Working Class. 15 Barker and Harris, A Merseyside Town; Bailey and Barker, ‘Watchmaking in S.W.Lancashire’; Ashton, Peter Stubs, 2–5; Landes, Revolution in Time. 16 Rolt, Tools, 68–9. 17 Smiles, Industrial Biography: Iron Makers and Tool Makers, 180. 18 Pole, Fairbairn, 39. 19 Musson and Robinson, ‘Steam Power’. 20 Armytage, Social History of Engineering, 118, 127. 21 Ashton, Peter Stubs, 19. 22 Landes, ‘Watchmaking’, 11. 23 Roll, An Early Experiment, 18; Clapham, Economic History, I, 154. 24 Cited in Briggs, ‘Metals and the Imagination’, 667–8. 25 Burgess, ‘1852 Lockout’, 218, 221. 26 Allen, Birmingham and the Black Country, 17. 27 Hamilton, Brass and Copper, 88, 96. 28 Hey, Rural Metalworkers, 7, 21. 29 Frost, ‘Yeomen and Metalsmiths’. 30 Hay, ‘Manufacturers and the Criminal Law’, 3. 31 Lloyd, Cutlery Trades, 273–7. 32 ibid., 37–50; Hall, ‘Trades of Sheffield’, 11, 17–18. 33 Lloyd, Cutlery Trades, 35, 60. 34 Cited in Eversley, ‘Industry and Trade 1500–1800’, 87, 103. See Journals of the House of Commons, 1759, 496; Robinson, ‘Boulton and Fothergill’, 61; Victoria History of the Counties of England, II, Warwick, 199, 214. 35 Rowlands, Masters and Men, 127. 36 Hamilton, Brass and Copper, 131; Lane, ‘Apprenticeship’, 223. 37 Rowlands, Masters and Men, 135. But Taylor and Garbett reported that only 6,000 were thus employed. See Journals of the House of Commons, 1759, 496. 38 Lane, ‘Apprenticeship’, 213. 39 Hamilton, Brass and Copper, 267. 40 ibid., 273. 41 Rowlands, Masters and Men, 155. 42 Court, Midland Industries, 218. 43 Hamilton, Brass and Copper, 82, 143, 162, 236, 252, 256–8, 264–6; Hutton, History of Birmingham, 113. 44 Behagg, ‘Custom, Class and Change’, 454. 45 See Berg, ‘Small-producer Capitalism’. 46 Fitzmaurice, Life of Shelbourne, 404. 47 Marshall, Industry and Trade; Florence, The Logic of British and American Industry. 48 Victoria History, Warwick, 238; Eversley, ‘Industry and Trade 1500–1800’, 96; Victoria History, Warwick, 236; Hamilton, Brass and Copper, 255. For a more detailed discussion of the manufacturing process in pinmaking see Diderot, Encyclopédie. 49 Court, Midland Industries, 194; Eversley, ‘Industry and Trade’, 87; Davies, ‘The Handmade Nail Trade’, 265. 50 Prosser, Birmingham Inventors, for details of the patents, inventions and im-provements in the Birmingham trades before 1850. Also see Victoria History: Warwick. 51 MacLeod, Inventing the Industrial Revolution. 52 Hawkes Smith, Birmingham and its Vicinity, 18. 53 Eversley, ‘Industry and Trade 1500–1800’, 93. 54 Pelham, ‘Water Power Crisis’, 75–90; Court, Midland Industries, 257; Behagg, ‘Custom, Class and Change’. 55 Fairbairn, Mills and Millwork, viii. 56 Pole, Fairbairn, 92. 57 Roll, An Early Experiment, 225. 59 Armytage, Social History of Engineering, 118–27; Lloyd, Cutlery Trades, 119. 58 Pole, Fairbairn, 112–17. 60 Court, Midland Industries, 53, 60; Lloyd, Cutlery Trades, 247. 61 Clapham, Economic History, I, 173–7. 62 Behagg, ‘Custom, Class and Change’, 466. 63 Reddy, ‘Textile Trade’. 64 Ashton, Peter Stubs, 36. 65 Lloyd, Cutlery Trades, 191–7. 66 Donnelly and Baxter, ‘Sheffield and the English Revolutionary Tradition’, 90–1. 67 Behagg, ‘Custom, Class and Change’, 464. 68 Lloyd, Cutlery Trades, 203. 69 Ashton, Peter Stubs, 28. 70 Court, Midland Industries, 218; Allen, Birmingham and the Black Country, 152–4. 71 Allen, Birmingham and the Black Country, 152; Reid, ‘Decline of Saint Monday’, 95–6. 72 Allen, Birmingham and the Black Country, 160, 164. 73 Kelley, ‘Brass Trades’, 43. 74 Roll, An Early Experiment, 186, 194, 201. 75 Armytage, Social History of Engineering, 126. 76 Landes, Unbound Prometheus. 77 Burgess, ‘1852 Lockout’, 222; Behagg, Politics and Production, 40–5. 78 Behagg, Politics and Production, 58. 79 Dickson, ‘Aspects of the Rise and Decline of the Irish Cotton Industry’; Boulton correspondence. 80 Lane, ‘Apprenticeship’, 223; Eversley, ‘Industry and Trade’, 110–11. 81 Eversley, ‘Industry and Trade’, 110–11. 82 Aris’s Gazette, 1788. 83 Allen, Birmingham and the Black Country, 168. 84 Hutton, History of Birmingham. 85 Eversley, ‘Industry and Trade’, 110. 86 Linebaugh, The London Hanged, ch. 2, outlines a typology of work and modes of production, but fails to analyse any movement or dynamic in these modes. 87 Reid, ‘Decline of Saint Monday’.