# BIBLIOGRAPHY Alexander, S., ‘Women and the London Trades’, in Mitchell, J. and Oakley, A., The Rights and Wrongs of Women. Harmondsworth 1978. Allen, G.C., The Industrial History of Birmingham and the Black Country 1860–1927. London 1929. Allen, R.C., Enclosure and the Yeoman. Oxford 1992. Allen, R.C., ‘Agriculture and the Industrial Revolution, 1700–1850’, in Floud, R. and McCloskey, D., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, Vol. I, 2nd edition. Cambridge 1994. Anderson, A., Historical and Chronological Deduction of the Origin of Commerce from the Earliest Accounts to the Present Times, 2 vols. London 1764. Anderson, B.L., ‘The Attorney and the Early Capital Market in Lancashire’, in Crouzet, F., ed., Capital Formation in the Industrial Revolution. London 1972. Anderson, J., Observations on the Means of Exciting a Spirit of National Industry, Chiefly Intended to Promote the Agriculture, Commerce, Manufactures and Fisheries of Scotland, 2 vols. Dublin 1779. Anderson, M., Family Structure in 19th Century Lancashire. Cambridge 1971. Aris’s Birmingham Gazette (1750–1800). Armytage, W.H., A Social History of Engineering. London 1961. Ashton, T.S., An Eighteenth Century Industrialist, Peter Stubs of Warrington, 1756–1806. Manchester 1939. Ashton, T.S., An Economic History of England: The 18th Century. London 1955. Aspin, C. and Chapman, S.C., James Hargreaves and the Spinning Jenny. Preston 1964. Bailey, F.A. and Barker, T.C., ‘The Seventeenth Century Origins of Watchmaking in S.W. Lancashire’, in Harris, J.R., ed., Liverpool and Merseyside. London 1967. Bailey, W. and Nie, D.A., English Gunmakers. The Birmingham and Provincial Gun Trade in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries. London 1978. Baines, E., A History of the Cotton Manufacture in Great Britain (1835). London 1966. Bamford, S., Passages in the Life of a Radical (1884). Oxford 1984. Barker, T.C. and Harris, J.R., A Merseyside Town in the Industrial Revolution, St Helens 1750– 1900. London 1959. Beckett, J.V., ‘Regional Variation and the Agricultural Depression 1730–50’, Economic History Review, February 1982. Behagg, C., ‘Custom, Class and Change in the Trade Societies of Birmingham’, Social History, IV, October 1979. Behagg, C., Politics and Production in Nineteenth-Century England. London 1990. Berg, M., ‘The Introduction and Diffusion of the Power Loom 1789–1842’, MA thesis, University of Sussex 1972. Berg, M., Technology and Toil in Nineteenth-Century Britain. London 1979. Berg, M., The Machinery Question and the Making of Political Economy 1815–1848. Cambridge 1980. Berg, M., ‘Political Economy and the Principles of Manufacture 1700–1800’, in Berg, M., Hudson, P. and Sonenscher, M., Manufacture in Town and Country before the Factory. Cambridge 1983. Berg, M., ‘Women’s Work, Mechanisation and the Early Phases of Industrialisation in England’, in Joyce, P., ed., The Historical Meanings of Work. Cambridge 1987. Berg, M., ‘Workers and Machinery in Eighteenth-Century England’, in Rule, J., ed., British Trade Unionism 1750–1850. London 1988. Berg, M., ‘Commerce and Creativity in Eighteenth-Century Birmingham’, in Berg, M., ed., Markets and Manufacture in Early Industrial Europe. London 1991. Berg, M., ‘On the Origins of Capitalist Hierarchy’, in Gustafsson, B., ed., Power and Economic Institutions: Reinterpretations in Economic History. Aldershot 1991. Berg, M., ‘Revisions and Revolutions: Technology and Productivity Change in Manufacture in Eighteenth-Century England’ in Davis, J.A. and Mathias, P., eds, Technology and Innovation from the Eighteenth Century to the Present Day. Oxford 1991. Berg, M., ‘Small-Producer Capitalism in Eighteenth-Century England’, Business History, 35, 1993. Berg, M., ‘What Difference did Women’s Work Make to the Industrial Revolution?’, Historical Workshop, 35, 1993. Berg, M., ‘Women’s Property and the Industrial Revolution’, Journal of Inter-disciplinary History, XXIV, 1993. Berg, M., ‘Factories, Workshops and Industrial Organisation’, in Floud, R. and McCloskey, D., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, Vol. I, 2nd edition. Cambridge 1994. Berg, M., Hudson, P. and Sonenscher, M., eds, Manufacture in Town and Country before the Factory. Cambridge 1983. Berg, M., and Hudson, P., ‘Rehabilitating the Industrial Revolution’, The Economic History Review, XLV, 1992. Bisset, James, MS Memoirs, Warwick County Record Office. Blaug, M., ‘The Productivity of Capital in the Lancashire Cotton Industry’, Economic History Review, XIII, 1961. Bolin-Hort, P., Work, Family and the State. Child Labour and the Organization of Production in the British Cotton Industry, 1780–1920. Lund, Sweden 1989. Boserup, E., Women’s Role in Economic Development. London 1970. Bowley, M., The British Building Industry: Four Studies in Response and Resistance to Change. Cambridge 1966. Boyson, R., The Ashworth Cotton Enterprise. Oxford 1970. Braverman, H., Labor and Monopoly Capital. New York 1974. Breen, T., ‘“Baubles of Britain”: The American and Consumer Revolutions of the Eighteenth Century’, Past and Present, 119, 1988. Bremner, D., The Industries of Scotland, their Rise, Progress and Present Condition (1869). London 1969. Brewer, J., McKendrick, N., and Plumb, J.H., The Birth of a Consumer Society: The Commercialisation of Eighteenth-Century England. London 1982. Briggs, A., ‘Metals and the Imagination in the Industrial Revolution’, Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, September 1980. The Brighton Group, ‘The Capitalist Labour Process’, Capital and Class, I, 1976. Brown, A.F.J., Essex at Work, 1700–1815. Chelmsford 1969. Bruland, T., ‘Industrial Conflict as a Source of Technical Innovation: Three Cases’, Economy and Society, XI (2), 1982. Burgess, K., ‘Technological Change and the 1852 Lockout in the British Engineering Industry’, International Review of Social History, XIV, 1969. Burley, K.H., ‘An Essex Clothier of the Eighteenth Century’, Economic History Review, XI, 1958. Bythell, D., The Handloom Weavers. Cambridge 1969. Bythell, D., The Sweated Trades. London 1978. Cary, J., An Essay Towards Regulating the Trade and Employing the Poor of the Kingdom, 2nd edition. Bristol 1719. Catling, H., ‘The Development of the Spinning Mule’, Textile History, IX, 1978. Chalklin, C.W., The Provincial Towns of Georgian England. A Study of the Building Process 1740–1820. London 1974. Chaloner, W.H., ‘Robert Owen, Peter Drinkwater and the Early Factory System in Manchester, 1788–1800’, Bulletin of the John Rylands Library, 1954. Chambers, J.D., ‘Enclosure and Labour Supply in the Industrial Revolution’, Economic History Review, V, 1953. Chambers, J.D., ‘The Vale of Trent 1660–1800’, Economic History Review Supplement, no. iii, 1957. Chambers, J.D., ‘The Rural Domestic Industries during the Period of Transition to the Factory System, with Special Reference to the Midland Counties of England’, Proceedings of the Second International Congress of Economic History, Aix-en-Provence, ii, 1962. Chandler, A.D., Scale and Scope. Cambridge, Mass. 1990. Chapman, S.D., ‘Fixed Capital in the Industrial Revolution in Britain’, Journal of Economic History, XXIV, 3, 1964. Chapman, S.D., The Early Factory Masters. Newton Abbot 1967. Chapman, S.D., ‘Fixed Capital in the Cotton Industry’, Economic History Review, XXIII, 1970. Chapman, S.D., ‘Industrial Capital before the Industrial Revolution 1730–1750’, in Harte, N. and Ponting, K., Textile History and Economic History. Manchester 1973. Chapman, S.D., The Cotton Industry in the Industrial Revolution, 2nd edition. London 1987. Chapman, S.D., Merchant Enterprise in Britain. From the Industrial Revolution to World War I. Cambridge 1992. Chapman, S.D. and Bartlett, J.N., ‘The Contribution of Building Clubs and Freehold Land Societies to Working-Class Housing in Birmingham’, in Chapman, S.D., ed., The History of Working Class Housing: A Symposium. Newton Abbot 1971. Chapman, S.D. and Chassagne, S., European Textile Printers in the Eighteenth Century: a Study of Peel and Oberkampf. London 1981. Chapman, S.D. and Butt, J., ‘The Cotton Industry, 1775–1856’, in Feinstein, C.H. and Pollard, S., eds, Studies in Capital Formation in the United Kingdom 1750–1920. Oxford 1988. Charlesworth, A., An Atlas of Rural Protest in Britain 1548–1900. London 1983. Chayanov, A.V., The Theory of Peasant Economy (1915), ed. Thorner Kerblay and Smith. Homewood, 111. 1966. Chaytor, M., ‘Household and Kinship: Ryton in the Late 16th and Early 17th Centuries’, History Workshop, X, 1980. Church, R., Kenricks in Hardware. A Family Business 1791–1966. Newton Abbot 1969. Church, R.A., ‘The Shoe and Leather Industries’, in Church, R.A., The Dynamics of Victorian Business. Problems and Perspectives to the 1870s. London 1980. Clapham, J.H., ‘Some Factory Statistics of 1815–1816’, Economic Journal, XXV, 1915. Clapham, J.H., An Economic History of Modern Britain, 3 vols. Cambridge 1926–38. Clark, A., Working Life of Women in the Seventeenth Century (1919). London 1982. Clarkson, L.A., ‘The Manufacture of Leather’, in Mingay, G.E., ed., The Agrarian History of England and Wales, Vol. VI, 1750–1850. Cambridge 1989. Clifford, H., ‘A Study of an Eighteenth-Century Goldsmithing Business with Reference to the Garrod Ledgers 1760–1776’, Ph.D. thesis, London University, 1989. Coats, W.A., ‘Changing Attitudes to Labour in the Mid-Eighteenth Century’, in Flinn, M.W. and Smout, T.C., eds, Essays in Social History. Oxford 1974. Cole, W.A., ‘Factors in Demand’, in Floud, R. and McCloskey, D., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, vol. 1:1700–1860. Cambridge 1981. Coleman, D.C., The British Paper Industry, 1495–1860: A Study in Industrial Growth. Oxford 1958. Coleman, D.C., ‘Growth and Decay during the Industrial Revolution: The Case of East Anglia’, Scandinavian Economic History Review, X, no. 2, 1962. Coleman, D.C., Courtaulds: An Economic and Social History. Oxford 1969. Coleman, D.C., ‘Proto-industrialization: A Concept too Many’, Economic History Review, XXXVI, 1983. Colley, L., Britons Forging the Nation 1707–1837. London 1993. Collier, F., The Family Economy of the Working Classes in the Cotton Industry. Manchester 1964. Collins, B., ‘Proto-industrialization and Pre-Famine Emigration’, Social History, VII, no. 2, 1982. Collins, E.J.T., ‘Harvest Technology and Labour Supply in Britain, 1790–1870’, Economic History Review, XXII, 1969. Cooper, J., ‘In Search of Agrarian Capitalism’, Past and Present, LXXX, August 1978. Court, W.H.B., The Rise of the Midland Industries 1600–1838. London 1953. Crafts, N.F.R., ‘British Economic Growth, 1700–1831: A Review of the Evidence’, Economic History Review, XXXVI, 1983. Crafts, N.F.R., British Economic Growth during the Industrial Revolution. Oxford 1985. Crafts, N.F.R., ‘British Economic Growth, 1700–1850: Some Difficulties of Interpretation’, Explorations in Economic History, 24, 1987. Crafts, N.F.R., ‘British Industrialisation in an International Context’, Journal of Interdisciplinary History, XIX, 1989. Crafts, N.F.R., ‘Industrial Revolution in Britain and France: Some Thoughts on the Question “Why was England First?”’, Economic History Review, XXX, 1977. Crafts, N.F.R., ‘The Industrial Revolution’, in Floud, R. and McCloskey, D., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, Vol. I, 2nd edition. Cambridge 1994. Crafts, N.F.R. and Harley, C.K., ‘Output Growth and the British Industrial Revolution: A Restatement of the Crafts-Harley View’, Economic History Review, XLV, 1992. Crafts, N.F.R., Leybourne, S.J., and Mills, T.C., ‘Trends and Cycles in British Industrial Production, 1700–1913’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 152, 1989. Crafts, N.F.R., Leybourne, S.J., and Mills, T.C., ‘Britain’, in Sylla, R. and Toniolo, G., eds, Patterns of Industrialisation in Nineteenth-Century Europe. London 1991. Crouzet, F., ‘Towards an Export Economy: British Exports during the Industrial Revolution’, Explorations in Economic History, 17, 1980. Crouzet, M., The First Industrialists. Cambridge 1985. Cuenca Esteban, J., ‘British Textile Prices, 1779–1827: Are British Growth Rates Worth Revising Once Again?’, Economic History Review, 1994. Cunningham, H., ‘The Employment and Unemployment of Children in England, c. 1680–1851’, Past and Present, 126, 1990. Cunningham, W., The Growth of English Industry and Commerce. Cambridge 1882. Daniels, G.W., ‘Industrial Lancashire Prior to and Subsequent to the Invention of the Mule’, Journal of the Textile Institute, 1927. Darby, H.C., A New Historical Geography of England after 1600. Cambridge 1976. David, P., ‘The Landscape and the Machine’, in McCloskey, D., ed., Essays on a Mature Economy: Britain after 1840. London 1971. David, P., ‘Labour Scarcity and the Problem of Technological Practice and Progress in 19th Century America’, in David, P., Technical Choice Innovations and Economic Growth: Essays on American and British Experience in the Nineteenth Century. Cambridge 1975. David, P.A, ‘The Computer and the Dynamo. The Modern Productivity Paradox in a Not-Too-Distant Mirror’, Warwick Economic Research Papers, 339, 1989. Davidoff, L. and Hall, C., Family Fortunes: Men and Women of the English Middle Classes, 1780– 1850. London 1987. Davies, E.I., ‘The Handmade Nail Trade of Birmingham and District’, M.Com. thesis, Birmingham University, 1933. Davis, R., ‘English Foreign Trade, 1700–1774’, Economic History Review, 15, 1962. Davis, R., ‘The Rise of Protection in England 1689–1786’, Economic History Review, XIX, 1966. Davis, R., The Rise of the Atlantic Economies. London 1973. Davis, R., The Industrial Revolution and British Overseas Trade. Leicester 1979. Davis, R. and, Pollard, S., ‘The Iron Industry, 1780–1850’, in Feinstein, C.H. and Pollard, S., eds, Studies in Capital Formation in the United Kingdom 1750–1920. Oxford 1988. De Vries, J., The Economy of Europe in the Age of Crisis. Cambridge 1976. De Vries, J., European Urbanization 1500–1800. London 1985. De Vries, J., ‘Between Purchasing Power and the World of Goods: Understanding the Household Economy in Early Modern Europe’, in Brewer, J., and Porter, R., eds, Consumption and the World of Goods. London 1993. Deane, P., The First Industrial Revolution. Cambridge 1962. Deane, P. and Cole, W.A., British Economic Growth 1688–1959. Cambridge 1969. Defoe, D., The Complete English Tradesman. London 1726. Defoe, D., A Tour through the Whole Island of Great Britain (1720). Harmondsworth 1971. Dent, D.A., ‘Ubiquitous but Invisible: Female Domestic Servants in Mid-Eighteenth Century London’, History Workshop, 28, 1989. Devine, T.M., The Tobacco Lords: A Study of the Tobacco Merchants of Glasgow and their Trading Activities 1740–90. Edinburgh 1975. Dickson, D., ‘Aspects of the Rise and Decline of the Irish Cotton Industry’, in Cullen, L.M. and Smout, T.C., eds, Comparative Aspects of Scottish and Irish Economic and Social History 1600–1900. Edinburgh 1977. Diderot, M., Encyclopédie ou Dictionnaire Raisonné des Sciences, des Arts et des Métiers. Paris 1755. ‘Die Sinking’, in Timmins, S., ed., The Resources, Products and Industrial History of Birmingham and the Midland Hardware District. London 1866. Disraeli, B., Sybil or the Two Nations. London 1845. Dobb, M., Studies in the Development of Capitalism, 2nd edition. New York 1963. Donnelly, F.K. and Baxter, J.L., ‘Sheffield and the English Revolutionary Tradition 1791–1820’, in Pollard, S. and Holmes, C., eds, Essays in the Economic and Social History of South Yorkshire. Sheffield 1976. Dosi, G., ‘Sources, Procedures and Microeconomic Effects of Innovation’, Journal of Economic Literature, XXVI, 1988. Douglas, M. and Isherwood, B., The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of Consumption (1978). Harmondsworth 1980. DuPlessis, R. and Howell, M.C., ‘Reconsidering the Early Modern Urban Economy: The Cases of Leiden and Lille’, Past and Present, XCIV, 1982. Durie, A.J., ‘The Linen Industry in Scotland’, in Cullen, D. and Smout, C., Comparative Aspects of Scottish and Irish Economic and Social History 1600–1900. Edinburgh 1977. Earle, P., ‘The Female Labour Market in London in the Late Seventeenth and Early Eighteenth Centuries’, Economic History Review, XLII, 1989. Eden, F., The State of the Poor. 5 vols (1797). London 1966. Edwards, M.M., The Growth of the British Cotton Trade 1780–1815. Manchester 1967. Edwards, M.M. and Lloyd-Jones, R., ‘N. J. Smelser and the Cotton Factory Family’, in Harte, N.B. and Ponting, K.G., eds, Essays in Textile History. Manchester 1973. Eliot, George, The Mill on the Floss (1860). London 1902. Elson, D. and Pearson, R., ‘Nimble Fingers Make Cheap Workers’, Feminist Review, VII, Spring 1981. Engels, F., The Condition of the Working Class in England (1845), ed. E.J. Hobsbawm. London 1969. Engerman, S., ‘Mercantilism and Overseas Trade, 1700–1800’, in Floud, R. and McCloskey, D., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, Vol. I, 2nd edition. Cambridge 1994. Eversley, D.C., ‘Industry and Trade 1500–1800’, Victoria County History of Warwickshire, vii, London 1965. Eversley, D.C., ‘The Home Market and Economic Growth in England 1780’, in Jones, E.L. and Mingay, G., Land, Labour and Population in the Industrial Revolution. London 1967. Fairbairn, W., Treatise on Mills and Millwork. London 1861. Feinstein, C., ‘Capital Formation’, in Mathias, P. and Postan, M.M., eds, The Cambridge Economic History of Europe, Vol. vii, part ii. Cambridge 1978. Feinstein, C.H., ‘National Statistics, 1760–1920’, in Feinstein, C.H. and Pollard, S., Studies in Capital Formation in the United Kingdom, 1750–1920. Oxford 1988. Fitton, R.S. and Wadsworth, A.P., The Strutts and the Arkwrights 1758–1830. Manchester 1958. Fitzmaurice, Lord Edward, Life of William, Earl of Shelbourne, Vol. I, 1737–1766. London 1875. Flinn, M.W., Men of Iron: The Crowleys in the Early Iron Industry. Edinburgh 1962. Flinn, M.W., The History of the British Coal Industry, Volume 2, 1700–1830: The Industrial Revolution. Oxford 1984. Florence, Phillip Sargant, The Logic of British and American Industry. London 1953. Floud, R., The British Machine Tool Industry, 1850–1914. Cambridge 1976. Floud, R. and McCloskey, D., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, 2 vols. Cambridge 1981; 2nd edition, 3 vols. Cambridge 1994. Fores, M., ‘The Myth of a British Industrial Revolution’, History, LX, 1981. Fores, M., ‘Technical Change and the Technology Myth’, Scandinavian Economic History Review, XXX, no. 3, 1982. Freudenberger, H., ‘Proto-industrialization and Protofactories’, Eighth International Congress of Economic History, Section A-2: Proto-industrialization. Budapest 1982. Freudenberger, H., Mather, K.J. and Nardinelli, C., ‘A New Look at the Early Factory Labour Force’, Journal of Economic History, 44, 1984. Friedman, A., Industry and Labour. London 1977. Froebel, F., Heinrichs, J. and Kreye, O., The New International Division of Labour. Cambridge 1980. Frost, P., ‘Yeomen and Metalsmiths: Livestock in the Dual Economy of South Staffordshire, 1560– 1720’, Agricultural History, XXIX, 1981. Gaskell, P., The Manufacturing Population of England. London 1833. Gatrell, V.A.C., ‘Labour, Power and the Size of Firms’, Economic History Review, XXX, 1977. Gee, J., The Trade and Navigation of Great Britain Considered. London 1729. George, D., London Life in the Eighteenth Century. London 1925. George, D., England in Transition. London 1931. Gibson, A. and Smout, T.C., Prices, Food and Wages in Scotland, 1550–1780. Cambridge forthcoming. Giles, P.M., ‘The Economic and Social Development of Stockport 1815–1836’, MA dissertation, Manchester University 1950. Godelier, M., ‘Work and its Representations’, History Workshop, X, 1980. Goldin, C., ‘The Economic Status of Women in the Early Republic: Some Quantitive Evidence’, Journal of Interdisciplinary History, 16, 1986. Goldin, C. and Sokoloff, K., ‘Women, Children and Industrialization in the Early Republic: Evidence from the Manufacturing Censuses’, Journal of Economic History, XLII, 1982. Goldin, C. and Sokoloff, K., ‘The Relative Productivity Hypothesis and Industrialisation: The American Case, 1820–1850’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, XCIX, 1984. Goodman, J. and Honeyman, K., Gainful Pursuits: The Making of Industrial Europe 1600–1914. London 1988. Goody, E., From Craft to Industry. The Ethnography of Proto-industrial Cloth Production. Cambridge 1982. Gould, J.D., ‘Agricultural Fluctuations and the English Economy in the Eighteenth Century’, Journal of Economic History, XXII, 1962. Gray, R.Q., The Labour Aristocracy in Edinburgh. London 1980. Gregory, D., The Transformation of Yorkshire. A Geography of the Yorkshire Woollen Industry. London 1982. Gutman, H.B., Work, Culture and Society in Industrializing America (1966). Oxford 1977. Habakkuk, H.J., ‘Family Structure and Economic Change in Nineteenth Century Europe’, Journal of Economic History, XXV, 1955. Habakkuk, H.J., ‘Population Growth in Nineteenth Century Europe’, Journal of Economic History, XXVII, 1957. Habakkuk, H.J., American and British Technology in the Nineteenth Century: The Search for Labour Saving Inventions. Cambridge 1962. Habakkuk, H.J., ‘Labour Scarcity and Technological Change’, in Saul, S.B., ed., Technological Change: The U.S. and Britain in the 19th Century. London 1970. Hall, J.C., ‘The Trades of Sheffield as Influencing Life and Health, More Particularly File Cutters and Grinders’, National Association for the Promotion of Social Sciences, October 1865. Hamilton, H., The English Brass and Copper Industries to 1800. London 1926. Hammond, J.L. and Hammond, B., The Rise of Modern Industry. London 1925. Hammond, J.L. and Hammond, B., The Skilled Labourer 1760–1832 (1919). New York 1970. Harley, C.K., ‘British Industrialization before 1841: Evidence of Slower Growth during the Industrial Revolution’, Journal of Economic History, XLII, 1982. Harris, J.R., The Copper King. Liverpool 1964. Harris, J.R., ‘Industry and Technology in the Eighteenth Century: Britain and France’, Inaugural Lecture, Birmingham 1971. Harris, J.R., ‘Skills, Coal and British Industry in the 18th Century’, History, LXI, June 1976. Harris, J.R. and Roberts, R.O., ‘Eighteenth-Century Monopoly: The Cornish Metal Company Agreements of 1785’, Business History, V (1), 1962. Harris, O., ‘Households as Natural Units’, in Young, K., Wolkowitz, C. and McCullogh, R., Of Marriage and the Market. London 1981. Harris, O., ‘Households and their Boundaries’, History Workshop, XIII, Spring 1982. Harrison, M., ‘Chayanov and the Economics of the Russian Peasantry’, Journal of Peasant Studies, ii, July 1975. Harte, N.B., ‘The Rise of Protection and the English Linen Trade 1690–1790’, in Harte, N.B. and Ponting, K.G., Textile History and Economic History, Essays in Honour of Julia de Lacy Mann. Manchester 1973. Hawkes Smith, W., Birmingham and its Vicinity as a Manufacturing and Commercial District. London 1836. Hay, D., ‘War, Dearth and Theft in the Eighteenth Century: The Record of the English Courts’, Past and Present, 95, 1982. Hay, D., ‘Manufacturers and the Criminal Law in the Later Eighteenth Century: Crime and Police in South Staffordshire’. Unpublished paper presented to the Past and Present Colloquium, Oxford 1983. Heaton, H., The Yorkshire Woollen and Worsted Industry, 2nd edition. Oxford 1965. Heertje, A., Economics and Technical Change (1973). London 1977. Hey, D., ‘A Dual Economy in South Yorkshire’, Agricultural History Review, XVII, 1969. Hey, D., The Rural Metalworkers of the Sheffield Region, Leicester University Department of English Local History Occasional Papers 2nd Series No. 5, Leicester 1972. Higgs, E., ‘Women, Occupations and Work in the Nineteenth-Century Censuses’, History Workshop Journal, 23, 1987. Hill, B., Women, Work and Sexual Politics in Eighteenth-Century England. Oxford 1989. Hills, R.L., ‘Hargreaves, Arkwright and Crompton, Why Three Inventors?’, Textile History, X, 1979. Hobsbawm, E.J., The Age of Revolution. London 1962. Hoffmann, W.G., British Industry 1700–1950, English translation by W.O. Henderson and W.H.Chaloner. Oxford 1955. Hohenberg, P., ‘Toward a Model of the European Economic System in Protoindustrial Perspective, 1300–1800’, Eighth International Congress of Economic History, Section A-2: Protoindustrialization. Budapest 1982. Hohenberg, P., ‘Urban Manufactures in the Proto-Industrial Economy: Culture Versus Commerce?’, in Berg, M., ed., Markets and Manufacture in Early Industrial Europe. London 1991. Hohenberg, P. and Lees, L., The Making of Urban Europe 1000–1950. Cambridge, Mass. 1985. Holderness, B.A., ‘Agriculture, 1770–1860’, in Feinstein, C.H. and Pollard, S., eds, Studies in Capital Formation of the United Kingdom. 1750–1920. Oxford 1988. Honeyman, K., Origins of Enterprise. Manchester 1981. Hopkins, E., ‘Working Hours and Conditions during the Industrial Revolution: A Reappraisal’, Economic History Review, XXXV, 1982. Hoppit, J., ‘Counting the Industrial Revolution’, Economic History Review, XLIII, 1990. Hoskins, W.G., The Midland Peasant. London 1965. House of Commons, Minutes of Evidence Taken before the Committee of the Whole House to Consider Several Petitions Against the Orders in Council, Reports from Committees, Parliamentary Papers, III, 1812. Houston, R. and Snell, K., ‘Proto-industrialization? Cottage Industry, Social Change and the Industrial Revolution’, Historical Journal, XXVII, 2, 1984. Howell, C., ‘Peasant Inheritance Customs in the Midlands 1280–1800’, in Goody, J., Thirsk, J. and Thompson, E.P., Family and Inheritance, Rural Society in Western Europe 1200–1800. Cambridge 1976. Hudson, P., ‘Proto-industrialization: The Case of the West Riding’, History Workshop Journal, no. 12, Autumn 1981. Hudson, P., ‘From Manor to Mill. The West Riding in Transition’, in Berg, M., Hudson, P. and Sonenscher, M., Manufacture in Town and Country before the Factory. Cambridge 1983. Hudson, P., The Genesis of Industrial Capital: A Study of the West Riding Wool Textile Industry, c.1750–1850. Cambridge 1986. Hudson, P., ‘Capital and Credit in the West Riding Wool Textile Industry c.1750–1850’, in Hudson, P., ed., Regions and Industries. Cambridge 1989. Hudson, P., ‘The Regional Perspective’, in Hudson, P., ed., Regions and Industries. Cambridge 1989. Hudson, P., The Industrial Revolution. London 1992. Hufton, O., ‘Women, Work and Marriage in Eighteenth Century France’, in Outhwaite, R.B., Marriage and Society. London 1981. Hufton, O., ‘Survey Articles. Women in History. I. Early Modern Europe’, Past and Present, ci, 1983. Humphries, J., ‘“Lurking in the Wings”: Women in the Historiography of the Industrial Revolution’, Business and Economic History, 2nd series, 20, 1991. Hunt, E.H., ‘Industrialisation and Regional Inequality: Wages in Britain, 1760–1914’, Journal of Economic History, XLVI, 1986. Hunt, E.H., ‘Wages’, in Langton, J. and Morris, R.J., eds, Atlas of Industrialising Britain 1780– 1914. London 1986. Hutton, W., A History of Birmingham to the End of the Year 1780. Birmingham 1781. Hutton, W., History of Derby. London 1817. Hyde, C.K., Technological Change and the British Iron Industry 1700–1870. Princeton, NJ 1977. Israel, J. L, Dutch Primacy in World Trade 1585–1740. Oxford 1989. Jackson, R.V., ‘Growth and Deceleration in English Agriculture, 1660–1790’, Economic History Review, 2nd series, XXXVIII, 1985. Jackson, R.V., ‘Government Expenditure and British Economic Growth in the Eighteenth Century: Some Problems of Measurement’, Economic History Review, XLIII, 1990. Jackson, R.V., ‘Rates of Industrial Growth during the Industrial Revolution’, Economic History Review, XLV, 1992. Jeannin, P., ‘La Proto-Industrialisation: Développement ou Impasse?’, Annales Economies, Sociétés, Civilisations, 35a, 1980. Jeffreys, J.B., The Story of the Engineers 1800–1945. London 1945. Jenkins, D.T., The West Riding Woold Textile Industry, 1770–1835: A Study of Fixed Capital Formation. Edington 1975. Jenkins, D.T., ‘The Wool Textile Industry, 1780–1850’, in Feinstein, C.H. and Pollard, S., eds, Studies in Capital Formation in the United Kingdom 1750–1920. Oxford 1988. Jenkins, D.T. and Ponting, K.G., The British Wool Textile Industry 1770–1914. London 1982 Jewkes, J., ‘The Localization of the Cotton Industry’, Economic History, II, no. 5, 1930. John, A.H., ‘Agricultural Productivity and Economic Growth in England 1700–1760’, Journal of Economic History, XXV, 1965. Jones, E.L., ‘The Constraints on Economic Growth in Southern England 1650–1850’, in Proceedings of the Third International Congress of Economic History. Munich 1965. Jones, E.L., ‘Agricultural Origins of Industry’, Past and Present, 40, 1968. Jones, E.L., ‘Environment, Agriculture and Industrialization’, Agricultural History, LI, 1977. Jones, E.L., ‘Agriculture and Economic Growth in England 1660–1750: Agricultural Change’, in Jones, E.L., ed., Agriculture and the Industrial Revolution. Oxford 1978. Jones, E.L., ‘Agriculture and Economic Growth in England 1650–1815: Economic Change’, in Jones, E.L., ed., Agriculture and the Industrial Revolution. Oxford 1978. Jones, E.L., ed., Agriculture and the Industrial Revolution. Oxford 1978. Journals of the House of Commons, XCIII, 1759. Kadish, A., The Oxford Economists in the Late Nineteenth Century. Oxford 1982. Kanefsky, J.W., ‘Motive Power in British Industry and the Accuracy of the 1870 Factory Return’, Economic History Review, XXXII. Kelley, T., ‘Wages and Labour Organization in the Brass Trades of Birmingham and District’, Ph.D. thesis, Birmingham University 1930. Kenney, M. and Florida, R., ‘Beyond Mass Production: Production and the Labour Process in Japan’, Politics and Society, 16, 1988. Kenrick, W., An Address to the Artists and Manufacturers of Great Britain. London 1774. Kriedte, P., Medick, H. and Schlumbohm, J., Industrialization before Industrialization (1977), English translation. Cambridge 1981. Kusamitsu, T., ‘The Industrial Revolution and Design’, Ph.D. thesis, Sheffield University 1982. Kussmaul, A., A General View of the Rural Economy of England 1538–1840. Cambridge 1990. Kussmaul, A., ‘The Pattern of Work as the Eighteenth Century Began’, in Floud, R. and McCloskey, D., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, Vol. I, 2nd edition. Cambridge 1994. Kuznets, S., Modern Economic Growth. New Haven and London 1965. Landes, D.S., The Unbound Prometheus. Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present. Cambridge 1969. Landes, D.S., ‘Watchmaking: A Case Study in Enterprise and Change’, Business History Review, liii, Spring 1979. Landes, D.S., A Revolution in Time. Cambridge, Mass. 1985. Landes, D.S., ‘What Do Bosses Really Do?’, Journal of Economic History, 46, 1986. Landes, D.S., ‘Small is Beautiful. Small is Beautiful?’, Fondazione ASSE, Instituto per la Storia dell Umbria Contemporanea, in Piccola e grande improsa: un problema storico. Milan 1987. Landes, D.S., ‘The Fable of the Dead Horse; or, the Industrial Revolution Revisited’, in Mokyr, J., ed., The British Industrial Revolution: An Economic Perspective. Oxford 1993. Lane, J., ‘Apprenticeship in Warwickshire’, Vol. ii, Ph.D. thesis, Birmingham University 1977. Langton, J., ‘The Industrial Revolution and the Regional Geography of England’, Trans. Inst. Brit. Geog., 9, 1984. Langton, J., ‘The Physical Environment’, in Langton, J. and Morris, R.J., eds, Atlas of Industrialising Britain 1780–1914. London 1986. Langton, J. and Morris, R.J., eds, Atlas of Industrialising Britain 1780–1914. London 1986. Lardner, D., A Treatise on the Origin, Progressive Improvement and Present State of the Silk Manufacture. London 1831. Laslett, P., ‘Family and Household as Work Group and Kin Group: Areas of Traditional Europe Compared’, in Wall, R., Robin, J. and Laslett, P., Family Forms in Historic Europe. Cambridge 1983. Laxton, P., ‘Wind and Water Power’, in Langton, J. and Morris, R.J., eds, Atlas of Industrialising Britain 1780–1914. London 1986. Lazonick, W., ‘Industrial Relations and Technical Change: The Case of the Self Acting Mule’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, iii, 1979. Lazonick, W., ‘Factor Costs and the Diffusion of Ring Spinning in Britain Prior to World War I’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1981. Lazonick, W., Competitive Advantage on the Shop Floor. Cambridge, Mass. 1990. Lee, C.H., A Cotton Enterprise 1795–1840. A History of McConnel and Kennedy, Fine Cotton Spinners. Manchester 1972. Lemire, B., Fashion’s Favourite: The Cotton Trade and the Consumer in Britain, 1660–1800. Oxford 1991. Levine, D., Family Formation in an Age of Nascent Capitalism. London 1977. Levine, D. and Wrightson, K., The Making of an Industrial Society: Whickham, 1560–1765. Oxford 1991. Lewis, W.A., ‘Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour’, The Manchester School, 22, 1954. Lindert, P.H., ‘English Occupations, 1670–1811’, Journal of Economic History, XL (4), December 1980. Lindert, P.H. and Williamson, J.G., ‘Revising England’s Social Tables’, Explorations in Economic History, 19, 1982. Lindert, P.H. and Williamson, J.G., ‘English Workers’ Living Standards during the Industrial Revolution: A New Look’, Economic History Review, XXXVI, 1983. Linebaugh, P., ‘Labour History without the Labour Process; A Note on John Gast and his Times’, Social History, VII, no. 3, 1982. Linebaugh, P., The London Hanged: Crime and Civil Society in the Eighteenth Century. London 1991. Little, A.J., Deceleration in the 18th Century British Economy. London 1976. Lloyd, G.I. H., The Cutlery Trades. London 1913. Lloyd-Jones, R. and Le Roux, A.A., ‘The Size of Firms in the Cotton Industry, Manchester, 1815– 41’, Economic History Review, XXXIII, 1980. Lloyd Prichard, M.F., ‘The Decline of Norwich’, Economic History Review, 2nd series, ii, 1950. Lodge, David, Nice Work. London 1988. Lown, J., Women and Industrialisation: Gender at Work in Nineteenth Century England. Cambridge 1991. McCloskey, D.N., ed., Essays on a Mature Economy. Britain after 1840. London 1971. McCloskey, D.N., ‘The Industrial Revolution 1780–1860. A Survey’, in Floud, R. and McCloskey, D.N., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, Vol. I. Cambridge 1981; 2nd edition, Vol. I. Cambridge 1994. McCulloch, J.R., ‘The Rise, Progress, Present State and Prospects of the British Cotton Manufacture’, Edinburgh Review, 1827. McCulloch, J.R., ed., Early English Tracts on Commerce (1856). Cambridge 1952. MacFarlane, A., The Origins of English Individualism. Oxford 1978. McKendrick, N., ‘Home Demand and Economic Growth: A New View of Women and Children in the Industrial Revolution’, in McKendrick, ed., Historical Perspectives, Studies in English Thought and Society. Cambridge 1974. McKendrick, N., Brewer, J. and Plumb, J.H., The Birth of a Consumer Society. London 1983; and in Davenport-Hines, R.P.T. and Liebenau, J., Business in the Age of Reason. London 1987. MacLeod, C., Inventing the Industrial Revolution. Cambridge 1988. Malcolmson, R., Life and Labour in England 1700–1800. London 1981. Maloney, J., ‘Marshall, Cunningham and the Emerging Economics Profession’, Economic History Review, XXIV, 1976. Mann, J.de Lacy, The Cloth Industry in the West of England from 1640 to 1880. Oxford 1971. Mantoux, P., The Industrial Revolution in the Eighteenth Century: An Outline of the Beginnings of the Modern Factory System in England. London 1955. Marglin, S., ‘What Do Bosses Do? The Origins and Functions of Hierarchy in Capitalist Production’, Review of Radical Political Economy, vi, 1974. Version reprinted in Gorz, A., ed., The Division of Labour. London 1976. Marglin, S., ‘The Power of Knowledge’, in Stephens, F., ed., Work Organization. London 1983. Marglin, S., ‘Understanding Capitalism: Control Versus Efficiency’, in Gustafsson, B., ed., Power and Economic Institutions: Reinterpretations in Economic History. Aldershot 1991. Marshall, A., Industry and Trade, Appendix B. London 1919. Martin, J.M., ‘Village Traders and the Emergence of a Proletariat in South Warwickshire, 1750– 1851’, Agricultural History Review, 32, 2, 1984. Martyn, H., ‘Considerations on the East India Trade’ (1701), in McCulloch, J.R., ed., Early English Tracts on Commerce. Cambridge 1952. Marx, K., The Grundrisse, trans. and ed. M.Nicholaus. Harmondsworth 1973. Marx, K., Capital, I. Harmondsworth 1976. Mathias, P., The Brewing Industry in England, 1700–1830. Cambridge 1959. Mathias, P., ‘Skills and the Diffusion of Innovations from Britain in the Eighteenth Century’, reprinted in Mathias, P., ed., The Transformation of England. London 1979. Mathias, P., The First Industrial Nation. An Economic History of Britain 1700–1914. London (1969) 1983. Mathias, P., ‘Resources and Technology’, in Mathias, P. and Davis, J.A., eds, Innovation and Technology in Europe from the Eighteenth Century to the Present Day. Oxford 1991. Medick, H., ‘The Proto-industrial Family Economy’, Social History, October 1976. Medick, H., ‘Plebeian Culture in the Transition to Capitalism’, in Samuel, R. and Stedman Jones, G., Culture, Ideology and Politics. London 1982. Mendels, F., ‘Proto-industrialization: The First Phase of the Process of Industrialization’, Journal of Economic History, XXXII, 1972. Mendels, F. and Deyon, P., ‘Proto-industrialization: Theory and Reality’, Eighth International Congress of Economic History, Section A-2: Proto-industrialization. Budapest 1982. Mill, J.S., ‘The Nature, Origins, and Progress of Rent’ (1828), in Essays on Economics and Society, in Mill, J.S., Collected Works, iv. Toronto 1967. Mill, J.S., Principles of Political Economy (1848), in Mill, J.S., Collected Works, ii, iii. Toronto 1965. Mokyr, J., ‘Technological Change, 1700–1830’, in Floud, R. and McCloskey, D., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, Vol. I, 2nd edition. Cambridge 1994. Mills, D.R., ‘Proto-industrialization and Social Structure: The Case of the Hosiery Industry in Leicestershire, England’, Eighth International Congress of Economic History, Section A-2: Proto-industrialization. Budapest 1982. Millward, R., ‘The Emergence of Wage Labour in Early Modern England’, Explorations in Economic History, 18, 1981. Mitchell, B.R. and Deane, P., Abstract of British Historical Statistics. Cambridge 1962. Mokyr, J., ‘Demand vs. Supply in the Industrial Revolution’, in Mokyr, J., ed., The British Industrial Revolution. An Economic Perspective. Totowa, NJ 1985. Mokyr, J., ‘Has the Industrial Revolution been Crowded out? Some Reflections on Crafts and Williamson’, Explorations in Economic History, 24, 1987. Mokyr, J., The Lever of Riches. Oxford 1990. Mokyr, J., ‘Technological Inertia in Economic History’, Journal of Economic History, 52, 1992. More, C., Skill and the English Working Class. London 1982. Mounfield, P.R., ‘Leather Footwear’, in Langton, J. and Morris, R.J., eds, Atlas of Industrialising Britain 1780–1914. London 1986. Musson, A.E. and Robinson, E.H., ‘The Early Growth of Steam Power’, Economic History Review, XI, 1959. Nardinelli, C., Child Labour and the Factory Acts. Bloomington, Ind. 1990. Neeson, J., ‘Opposition to Enclosure in Northamptonshire c. 1760–1800’, in Charlesworth, A., An Atlas of Rural Protest in Britain 1548–1900. London 1983. Neeson, J., Commoners: Common Right, Enclosure and Social Change in England, 1700–1820. Cambridge 1993. Nelson, R.R., ‘The Roles of Firms in Technical Advance: A Perspective from Evolutionary Theory’, in Dosi, G., Giannetti, R. and Toninelli, P.A., eds, Technology and Enterprise in Historical Perspective. Oxford 1992. Nelson, R.R. and Winter, S.G., An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Cambridge, Mass. 1982. Nenadic, S., ‘Businessmen. The Urban Middle Classes and the “Dominance” of Manufacturers in Nineteenth Century Britain’, Economic History Review, XLIV, 1991. O’Brien, P.K., ‘Agriculture and the Home Market’, English Historical Review, 1985. O’Brien, P.K., ‘The Foundations of European Industrialisation: From the Perspective of the World’, Journal of Historical Sociology, IV, 1991. O’Brien, P.K., Power with Profit: The State and the Economy, 1688–1815. Inaugural Lecture, University of London 1991. O’Brien, P.K., ‘Introduction: Modern Conceptions of the Industrial Revolution’, in O’Brien, P.K., and Quinault, R., eds, The Industrial Revolution and British Society: Essays in Honour of Max Hartwell. Cambridge 1993. O’Brien, P.K., ‘The State and the Economy 1688–1815’, in Floud, R. and McCloskey, D., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, Vol. I, 2nd edition. Cambridge 1994. O’Brien, P.K. and Keyder, C., Economic Growth in Britain and France 1780–1914. London 1976. Overton, M., ‘Agricultural Productivity in Eighteenth-Century England: Some Further Speculation’, Economic History Review, XXXVII, 1984. Overton, M. and Campbell, B.S., eds, Land, Labour and Livestock: Historical Studies in European Agricultural Productivity. Manchester 1991. Pawson, E., The Early Industrial Revolution. Britain in the Eighteenth Century. New York 1979. Pearson, R., ‘Gender Matters in Development’, in Allen, D. and Mamas, A., eds, Poverty and Development in the 1990s. Oxford 1992. Pelham, R.A., ‘The Immigrant Population of Birmingham 1686–1726’, Birmingham Archaeological Transactions, LXI, 1937. Pelham, R.A., ‘The Water Power Crisis in Birmingham in the Eighteenth Century’, University of Birmingham Historical Journal, IX, 1963–4. Phillips, A. and Taylor, B., ‘Sex and Skill: Notes Towards Feminist Economics’, Feminist Review, VI, 1980. Pinchbeck, L, Women Workers and the Industrial Revolution (1930). London 1981. Piore, M. and Sabel, C., The Second Industrial Divide. New York 1984. Polanyi, K., The Great Transformation. London 1957. Pole, W.A., ed., The Life of William Fairbairn. London 1877. Pollard, S., A History of Labour in Sheffield. Liverpool 1959. Pollard, S., ‘The Factory Village in the Industrial Revolution’, English Historical Review, LXXIX, July 1964. Pollard, S., The Genesis of Modern Management. Harmondsworth 1965. Pollard, S., ‘Industrialization and the European Economy’, Economic History Review, XXVI, November 1973. Pollard, S., ‘Labour in the British Economy’, Cambridge Economic History of Europe, VII, Part ii, Vol. 1. Cambridge 1978. Pollard, S., Peaceful Conquest. Oxford 1981. Pollard, S., ‘Coal Mining, 1750–1850’, in Feinstein, C.H. and Pollard, S., eds, Studies in Capital Formation in the United Kingdom 1750–1920. Oxford 1988. Pollard, S., ‘The Insurance Policies’, in Feinstein, C.H. and Pollard, S., eds, Studies in Capital Formation in the United Kingdom 1750–1920. Oxford 1988. Pollard, S., ‘Regional Markets and National Development’, in Berg, M., ed., Markets and Manufacture in Early Industrial Europe. London 1991. Ponting, K., The Woollen Industry in the South West of England. Wiltshire 1971. Porter, Roy, English Society in the Eighteenth Century. Harmondsworth 1982. Postlethwayt, M., Britain’s Commercial Interests, Vol. 2. London 1757. Prest, J., The Industrial Revolution in Coventry. London 1960. Price, J., Capital and Credit in British Overseas Trade: The View From the Chesapeake, 1700– 1776. Cambridge, Mass. 1980. Price, J.M., ‘What Did Merchants Do? Reflections on British Overseas Trade, 1660–1790’, Journal of Economic History, XLIX, 1989. Price, R., Masters, Unions and Men. Work Control in Building and the Rise of Labour 1830–1914. Cambridge 1980. Prosser, R.B., Birmingham Inventors and Inventions. Birmingham 1881. Prothero, L, Artisans and Politics in Early Nineteenth Century London. John Gast and his Times. London 1979. Radcliffe, W., Origin of the New System of Manufacture. Stockport 1828. Randall, A.J., ‘The Shearmen and the Wiltshire Outrages of 1802: Trade Unionism and Industrial Violence, Social History, VII, no. 3, 1982. Randall, A.J., ‘The Philosophy of Luddism: The Case of the West of England Woollen Workers’, Technology and Culture, 27, 1986. Randall, A.J., ‘The Industrial Moral Economy of the Gloucestershire Weavers in the Eighteenth Century’, in Rule, J., ed., British Trade Unionism 1750–1850. London 1988. Randall, A.J., Before the Luddites: Custom, Community and Machinery in the English Woollen Industry, 1776–1809. Cambridge 1991. Reddy, W., ‘The Textile Trade and the Language of the Crowd at Rouen 1752–1791’, Past and Present, LXXIV, February 1977. Reddy, W., ‘Skeins, Scales, Discounts, Steam and Other Objects of Crowd Justice in Early French Textile Mills’, Comparative Studies in Society and History, XXI, 1979. Reddy, W., The Rise of Market Culture. Cambridge 1985. Rees’s Manufacturing Industry 1819–20. A Selection from the Cyclopedia; or Universal Dictionary of Arts, Sciences and Literature,, by Abraham Rees, edited by Neil Cossons, 5 vols. Newton Abbot 1975. Reflections on Various Subjects Relating to Arts and Commerce, Particularly the Consequences of Admitting Foreign Artists on Easier Terms. London 1752. Reid, D., ‘The Decline of Saint Monday’, Past and Present, LXXI, 1976. Reilly, R., Josiah Wedgwood. London 1992. Ricardo, D., Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 1821, in Dobb, M. and Sraffa, P., Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo, Vol. I. Cambridge 1970. Richards, E., ‘Women in the British Economy’, History, LIII, 1974. Richards, E., ‘Margins of the Industrial Revolution’, in O’Brien, P.K. and Quinault, R., eds, The Industrial Revolution and British Society. Cambridge 1993. Riden, P., ‘Iron and Steel’, in Langton, J. and Morris, R.J., eds, Atlas of Industrialising Britain 1780–1914. London 1986. Roberts, M., ‘Sickles and Scythes: Women’s Work and Men’s Work at Harvest Time’, History Workshop Journal, VII, 1979. Robinson, E.H., ‘Boulton and Fothergill 1762–1782 and the Birmingham Export of Hardware’, University of Birmingham Historical Journal, vii, 1959–60. Robinson, E.H., ‘Matthew Boulton and Josiah Wedgwood: Apostles of Fashion’, in Davenport-Hines, R.P.T. and Liebenau, J., Business in the Age of Reason. London 1987. Rogers, A., ‘Rural Industrial and Social Structure: The Framework Knitting Industry of South Nottinghamshire, 1670–1840’, Textile History, XII, 1981. Roll, E., An Early Experiment in Industrial Organization, Being a History of the Firm of Boulton and Watt 1775–1805. London 1930. Rolt, L.T.C., Tools for the Job. A Short History of Machine Tools. London 1965. Rosenberg, N., ‘Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry, 1840–1910’, Journal of Economic History, XXIII, December 1963. Rosenberg, N., ‘The Direction of Technological Change: Inducement Mechanisms and Focusing Devices’, Economic Development and Cultural Change, XX, 1969. Rosenberg, N., ‘Economic Development and the Transfer of Technology: Some Historical Perspectives’, Technology and Culture, XI, 1970. Rosenberg, N., Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge 1982. Ross, E., ‘Survival Networks: Women’s Neighbourhood Sharing in London before World War One’, History Workshop Journal, XV, Spring 1983. Rothstein, N.K., ‘The Silk Industry in London, 1702–1766’, unpublished MA thesis, London University, 1961. Rowlands, M.B., Masters and Men in the West Midlands Metalware Trades before the Industrial Revolution. Manchester 1975. Rowlands, M.B., ‘Society and Industry in the West Midlands at the End of the 17th Century’, Midland History, iv, Spring 1977. Rowlands, M.B., ‘Continuity and Change in an Industrialising Society: The Case Study of the West Midlands Industries’, in Hudson, P., ed., Regions and Industries. Cambridge 1989. Rule, J., The Experience of Labour in 18th Century Industry. London 1981. Sabel, C. and Zeitlin, J., ‘Historical Alternatives to Mass Production: Politics, Markets and Technology in Nineteenth-Century Industrialisation’, Past and Present, 108, 1985. Said, E., Orientalism, Western Conceptions of the Orient. Harmondsworth 1991. Saito, O., ‘Labour Supply Behaviour of the Poor in the English Industrial Revolution’, Journal of European Economic History, 10, 1981. Samuel, R., ‘The Workshop of the World: Steam Power and Hand Technology in mid-Victorian Britain’, History Workshop Journal, III, Spring 1977. Sandberg, L., Lancashire in Decline. Columbus, Ohio 1974. Sandilands, D.N., ‘The History of the Midlands Glass Industry’, M.Com. thesis, Birmingham University 1927. Saul, S.B., ‘Editor’s Introduction’, in Saul, S.B., ed., Technological Change: The U.S. and Britain in the 19th Century. London 1970. Schmiechen, J.A., Sweated Industries and Sweated Labour. London 1984. Schmitz, H., Manufacturing in the Backyard, Case Studies of Accumulation and Employment in Small Scale Brazilian Industry. London 1982. Schremmer, E., ‘Proto-industrialization’, Journal of European Economic History, 1982. Schumpeter, E.B., English Overseas Trade Statistics 1697–1808. Oxford 1960. Scott-Taggart, W., ‘Crompton’s Invention and Subsequent Development of the Mule’, Journal of the Textile Institute, XVIII, 1927. Select Committee Appointed to Consider the State of the Woollen Manufacture of England, Parliamentary Papers, 1806 (268) (168a) III. Select Committee on the State of Children Employed in the Manufactories of the United Kingdom, Parliamentary Papers, 1816 (397) III. Select Committee on Children in Factories, Parliamentary Papers, 1831. Select Committee Appointed to Inquire into the Present State of Manufactures, Commerce and Shipping in the United Kingdom, Parliamentary Papers, 1833 (690) VI. Sewell, W., Work and Revolution in Nineteenth Century France. Cambridge 1982. Shammas, C., The Pre-industrial Consumer in England and America. Oxford 1990. Sharpe, P., ‘Literally Spinsters: A New Interpretation of Local Economy and Demography in Colyton in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries’, Economic History Review, XLIV, 1991. Sholl, S., Short Historical Account of the Silk Manufacture. London 1811. Short, B.M., ‘The De-industrialisation Process: A Case Study of the Weald, 1618–50’, in Hudson, P., ed., Regions and Industries. Cambridge 1989. Sider, G.M., ‘Christmas Mumming and the New Year in Outport, Newfoundland’, Past and Present, LXXI, 1976. Simonton, D., ‘Apprenticeship: Training and Gender in Eighteenth-Century England’, in Berg, M., ed., Markets and Manufacture in Early Industrial Europe. London 1991. Smelser, N.J., Social Change in the Industrial Revolution: An Application of Theory to the Lancashire Cotton Industry 1770–1840. London 1959. Smiles, S., Industrial Biography: Iron Makers and Tool Makers. London 1863. Smith, A., An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776), 2 vols. Oxford 1976. Smith, R.M., ‘Fertility, Economy and Household Formation in England over Three Centuries’, Population and Development Review, 7, 1981. Smout, T.C., A History of the Scottish People 1560–1830. London 1969. Snell, K.D.M., ‘Agricultural Seasonal Unemployment, the Standard of Living and Women’s Work in the South and the East 1690–1860’, Economic History Review, XXXIV, 1983. Snell, K.D. M., Annals of the Labouring Poor: Social Change and Agrarian England, 1660–1900. Cambridge 1985. Sokoloff, K., ‘Was the Transition from the Artisanal Shop to the Non-mechanised Factory Associated with Gains in Efficiency?’, Explorations in Economic History, 21, 1984. Sokoloff, K., ‘Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence from Patent Records, 1790–1846’, Journal of Economic History, 48, 1988. Sokoloff, K. and Khan, B.Z., ‘The Democratisation of Invention during Early Industrialisation: Evidence from the United States, 1790–1846’, Journal of Economic History, 50, 1990. Sonenscher, M., Work and Wages: Natural Law, Politics and the Eighteenth-Century French Trades. Cambridge 1989. Spencely, G.F.R., ‘The English Pillow Lace Industry 1845–80: A Rural Industry in Competition with Machinery’, Business History, LXX, 1970. Spencely, G.F.R., ‘The Origins of the English Pillow Lace Industry’, Agricultural History Review, 21, 1973. Spufford, M., ‘Peasant Inheritance Customs and Land Distribution’, in Goody, J., Thirsk, J. and Thompson, E.P., eds, Family and Inheritance in Rural Society in Western Europe 1200–1800. Cambridge 1976. Stedman Jones, G., ‘The Changing Face of 19th-Century Britain’, History Today, October 1991. Steensgaard, N., ‘The Growth and Composition of the Long-Distance Trade of England and the Dutch Republic before 1750’, in Tracy, J.D., ed., The Rise of Merchant Empires. Long-Distance Trade in the Early Modern World, 1350–1750. Cambridge 1990. Stewart, D., Lectures on Political Economy, Vol. 1, in Hamilton, W., ed., Collected Works of Dugald Stewart, viii. Edinburgh 1855. Stone, K., ‘The Origins of Job Structures in the Steel Industry’, Review of Radical Political Economy, vi, 1976. Stone, N., Europe Transformed 1878–1919. London 1983. Styles, J., ‘Embezzlement, Industry and the Law in England, 1500–1800’, in Berg, M., Hudson, P. and Sonenscher, M., eds, Manufacture in Town and Country before the Factory. Cambridge 1983. Styles, J., ‘Manufacturing, Consumption and Design in Eighteenth-Century England’, in Brewer, J. and Porter, R., ed., Consumption and the World of Goods. London 1993. Sullivan, R., ‘England’s “Age of Invention”: The Acceleration of Patents and Patentable Inventions during the Industrial Revolution’, Explorations in Economic History, 26, 1989. Tann, J., ‘The Textile Millwright in the Early Industrial Revolution’, Textile History, v, October 1974. Taylor, A.J., ‘Concentration and Specialization in the Lancashire Cotton Industry, 1825–50’, Economic History Review, i, 1949. Taylor, B., ‘The Men are as Bad as their Masters’, in Taylor, B., Eve and the New Jerusalem. London 1983. Temin, P., ‘The Relative Decline of the British Steel Industry 1880–1914’, in Rosovsky, H., ed., Industrialization in Two Systems. Essays in Honour of Alexander Gershenkron. New York 1966. Temin, P., ‘Labour Scarcity in America’, Journal of Interdisciplinary History, I (2), Winter 1971. Thirsk, J., ‘Industries in the Countryside’, in Fisher, F.J., ed., Essays in the Economic and Social History of Tudor and Stuart England. Cambridge 1961. Thirsk, J., The Agrarian History of England and Wales, iv, 1500–1640. Cambridge 1967. Thirsk, J., ‘The Fantastical Folly of Fashion: The English Stocking Knitting Industry 1500–1700’, in Harte, N.B. and Ponting, K.G., eds, Textile History and Economic History. Manchester 1973. Thirsk, J., Economic Policy and Projects: The Development of Consumer Society in Early Modern England. Oxford 1978. Thomas, R.P. and McCloskey, D.N., ‘Overseas Trade and Empire 1700–1860’, in Floud, R. and McCloskey, D., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, Volume I: 1700–1800. Cambridge 1981. Thomis, M.I. and Grimmett, J., Women in Protest 1800–1850. London 1982. Thompson, E.P., ‘Time, Work Discipline and Industrial Capitalism’, Past and Present, 38, 1967. Thompson, E.P., The Making of the English Working Class. Harmondsworth 1968. Thompson, E.P., ‘The Moral Economy of the Crowd’, Past and Present, i, 1972. Thompson, E.P., ‘The Grid of Inheritance’, in Goody, J., Thirsk, J. and Thompson, E.P., Family and Inheritance, Rural Society in Western Europe 1200–1800. Cambridge 1976. Thompson, E.P., ‘The Moral Economy Reviewed’, in Thompson, E.P., Customs in Common. London 1991. Thomson, J.K.J., ‘British Industrialization and the External World: A Unique Experience or an Archetypal Model?’, in Bienefeld, M. and Godfrey, M., eds, The Struggle for Development: National Strategies in an International Context. London 1982. Thomson, J.K.J., ‘Variations in Industrial Structure in Pre-Industrial Languedoc’, in Berg, M., Hudson, P. and Sonenscher, M., Manufacture in Town and Country before the Factory. Cambridge 1983. Thorold Rogers James E., Six Centuries of Work and Wages (1884). London 1917. Timmins, S., ed., The Resources, Products and Industrial History of Birmingham and the Midland Hardware District. London 1866. Toynbee, A., Lectures on the Industrial Revolution in England (1884). London 1969. Tucker, J., Instructions for Travellers. London 1757. Turnbull, G., ‘Canals, Coal and Regional Growth during the Industrial Revolution’, Economic History Review, 2nd series, XL, 1987. Unwin, G., The Guilds and Companies of London. London 1908. Unwin, G., Samuel Oldknow and the Arkwrights. Manchester 1924. Usher, A.P., An Introduction to the Industrial History of England. London 1921. Usher, D., The Measurement of Economic Growth. Oxford 1980. Valenze, D., ‘The Art of Women and the Business of Men: Women’s Work and the Dairy Industry, c.1740–1840’, Past and Present, 130, 1991. Vickery, A., ‘Women and the World of Goods: A Lancashire Consumer and her Possessions, 1751–1781’, in Brewer, J. and Porter, R., eds, Consumption and the World of Goods. London 1993. The Victoria History of the Counties of England, ii, The History of the County of Warwick. London 1965. Vincent, D., Bread, Knowledge and Freedom. A Study of Nineteenth-Century Working-Class Autobiography. London 1982. Von Tunzelmann, G.N., Steam Power and British Industrialization to 1860. Oxford 1978. Von Tunzelmann, G.N., ‘Technical Progress’, in Floud, R. and McCloskey, D., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, Vol. 1. Cambridge 1981. Von Tunzelmann, G.N., ‘Coal and Steam Power’, in Langton, J. and Morris, R.J., eds, Atlas of Industrialising Britain 1780–1914. London 1986. Von Tunzelmann, G.N., ‘Technological and Organizational Change in Industry during the Early Industrial Revolution’, in O’Brien, P.K. and Quinault, R., eds, The Industrial Revolution and British Society: Essays in Honour of Max Hartwell. Cambridge 1993. Von Tunzelmann, G.N., ‘Technology in the Early Nineteenth Century’, in Floud, R. and McCloskey, D., eds, The Economic History of Britain since 1700, Vol. I, 2nd edition. Cambridge 1994. Wadsworth, A.P. and Mann, J.de L., The Cotton Trade and Industrial Lancashire 1600–1780. Manchester 1931. Walton, J.K., ‘Proto-industrialisation and the First Industrial Revolution: The Case of Lancashire’, in Hudson, P., ed., Regions and Industries. Cambridge 1989. Warner, F., The Silk Industry of the U.K. London 1921. Washbrook, D., ‘Markets and Custom in Eighteenth-Century South India’, unpublished paper, 1985. Weatherill, L., The Pottery Trade and North Staffordshire, 1660–1760. Manchester 1971. Weatherill, L., ‘A Possession of One’s Own: Women and Consumer Behaviour in England, 1660– 1740’, Journal of British Studies, XXV, 1986. Weatherill, L., Consumer Behaviour and Material Culture in Britain 1660–1760. London 1988. Webb, S. and B., The History of Trade Unionism. London 1902. Weir, R.B., ‘Brewing and Distilling’, in Langton, J. and Morris, R.J., eds, Atlas of Industrialising Britain 1780–1914. London 1986. Westerfield, R.B., Middlemen in English Business (1915). London 1968. Whipp, R., ‘Potbank and Unions: A Study of Work and Trade Unionism in the British Pottery Industry’, unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Warwick University 1983. Whyte, I., ‘Proto-industrialisation in Scotland’, in Hudson, P., ed., Regions and Industries. Cambridge 1989. Wilkinson, W., ‘Power Loom Developments’, Official Record of the Annual Conference of the Textile Institute. Bolton 1927. Williamson, J.G., ‘Why was British Economic Growth so Slow during the Industrial Revolution?’, Journal of Economic History, 44 (3), 1984. Williamson, J.G., ‘Debating the British Industrial Revolution’, Explorations in Economic History, 24, 1987. Williamson, J.G., Coping with City Growth during the British Industrial Revolution. Cambridge 1990. Williamson, O.E., Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, Relational Contracting. New York 1985. Wilson, C., England’s Apprenticeship 1603–1763. London 1965. Wilson, C., ‘The Other Face of Mercantilism’, in Coleman, D.C., ed., Revisions in Mercantilism. London 1969. Wilson, C. and Parker, G., An Introduction to the Sources of European Economic History 1500– 1800. London 1977. Wilson, R.G., ‘The Supremacy of the Yorkshire Cloth Industry in the Eighteenth Century’, in Harte, N.B. and Ponting, K.G., Textile History and Economic History. Manchester 1973. Wolfe, E.R., Europe and the People without History. Berkeley 1982. Wood, G.H., The History of Wages in the Cotton Trade. London 1910. Wrightson, K., ‘Household and Kinship in Sixteenth Century England’, History Workshop Journal, XII, Autumn 1981. Wrightson, K., English Society 1500–1700. London 1982. Wrigley, E.A., ‘A Simple Model of London’s Importance in Changing English Society and Economy 1650–1750’, in Patten, J., ed., Pre-Industrial England. Folkestone 1979. Wrigley, E.A., ‘The Growth of Population in Eighteenth Century England: a Conundrum Resolved’, Past and Present, XCVIII, 1983. Wrigley, E.A., People, Cities and Wealth. Oxford 1987. Wrigley, E.A., ‘Urban Growth and Agricultural Change: England and the Continent in the Early Modern Period’, in Wrigley, E.A., Peoples, Cities and Wealth. Oxford 1987. Wrigley, E.A., Continuity, Chance and Change: The Character of the Industrial Revolution in England. Cambridge 1989. Wrigley, E.A., ‘The Great Commerce of Every Civilised Society’, Scottish Economic and Social History, 12, 1992. Wrigley, E.A. and Schofield, R.S., The Population History of England, 1541–1871: A Reconstruction. Cambridge 1981. Zeitlin, J., ‘Craft Control and the Division of Labour: Engineers and Compositors in Britain 1890– 1930’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 3, 1979.