# INTRODUCTION My view about these volumes is that much of your father's writing in his later years was hasty and was intended to be ephemeral and that the three existing volumes of lectures contained the greater part of what he wished to stand as his message on art and socialism. May Morris did include some of the lectures, in defiance. In her later 1936 collection William Morris, Artist, Writer, Socialist she printed more of them. This is the volume with the brilliantly mischievous preface, 'William Morris as I Knew Him', by Bernard Shaw. There is still no full edition of Morris's lectures, though these contain some of the most splendid of his writings as he grapples with ideas and formulates a policy, pushed to the limits of his clarity and passion by the prospect of addressing by no means captive audiences, some of them virtually uneducated. Even more disgracefully there is no complete published collection of his enormous output of editorials, articles, propaganda playlets, his jobbing journalism for the Socialist cause. To read these, one has to thumb through the yellowing copies of Commonweal and Fustice in the socialist libraries of Clerkenwell and Manchester and Amsterdam. They are uneven, often careless, vehement, exhilarating, revealing an unknown, unbuttoned, unselfconscious Morris. Raymond Williams once described him as a generalized swearer’. These political diatribes show what an accomplished and resourceful swearer he actually was. We do at least have easy access to his letters, in the comprehensive and meticulous edition Professor Norman Kelvin of New York City College and University has been amassing since 1965. I am, I think, the first biographer of Morris to have made full use of this resource. Indeed I often wonder how I could have embarked on this enterprise without it, since the letters give the key to Morris's inner feelings, often so well hidden, and resound with his oddities and quirkiness of language. Through the letters we arrive at Morris's authentic voice. They finally disprove the Mackail/Burne-Jones confection that Morris's Socialism was a temporary madness. Read through in their long sequence, they show convincingly that, far from being an aberration, Morris's progression from the heart of the mercantile establishment (his father was a bill broker) to the forefront of late Victorian Socialist agitation in Britain had a grand inevitability. The conspiracy of silence has extended to William Morris's marriage. Morris married Jane Burden, the daughter of an Oxford stablehand, in 1859 when he was twenty-five. Mackail was, not surprisingly, circumspect about it. Marital troubles were not the subject matter of official biographies of the 18gos. Janey Morris was living when he wrote his book on Morris, and she did not die until 1914. He was faced with an additional family complication: how far Morris did, or did not, turn for consolation to Mackail's own mother-in-law, Georgiana Burne-Jones. As Mackail discovered more and more unpublishable details about the past amours of the older generation he alternated between fascination and frustration: How extraordinarily interesting one could make the story, if one were going to die the day before it was published.' In the circumstances it is indeed surprising that he nevertheless gives us some impression that William and Janey's marriage was an anguished one, suggesting diplomatically that his readers should look for an account of it in the more melancholy of Morris's poems. The full extent of his unhappiness, and his fortitude and generosity in facing it, is only now being revealed, bit by bit and gradually, as the national libraries yield up their collections of confidential papers, under the fifty-year embargo rule. In 1964 the British Museum's collection of letters from Dante Gabriel Rossetti to Jane Morris became available for consultation. The sealed collection of Wilfrid Scawen Blunt's papers at the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge was first opened in 1972. As these papers indicate, Rossetti and Blunt had been, in succession, Janey's lovers in Morris's lifetime. Morris's most recent biographer, Jack Lindsay, would in theory have had access to both caches of material. But in his biography, published in 1975, he is obviously unaware of Janey's exact relationship with Blunt. In his personal relations Morris was very reticent. He was the inarticulate Englishman personified. There is something horribly ironic about Janey's need to turn to two of the most notoriously honey-tongued philanderers of the age. Reading her correspondence with Rossetti and with Blunt it becomes obvious that their male bravado and sexual attentiveness gave Janey a self-confidence that Morris, with his shyness and his multitude of energetic preoccupations, patently did not. With her lovers Janey blossoms, becomes tender, even witty. The failure of his marriage caused Morris considerable pain. What we do not know is how exactly he arrived at his ideas of the non-possessiveness of sexual relationships: by natural progression of his thought? Or by bitter force of circumstance? In 1886 Morris wrote a famous letter on sexual relations, in which he insists that copulation is ‘worse than beastly' unless it is the outcome of natural desires and kindliness, in effect abrogating the legally enforceable Victorian male insistence on marital rights. His friend and publisher F. S. Ellis suggested in the 188os that Morris's opinions on the relations of the sexes had altered. His views in the old days were by no means the same as he professes to hold now'. The Morris family's health has been another taboo subject. Physical debilities were not within the remit of the Victorian biographer. Despite the effect they had on Morris's day-to-day domestic life, Mackail did not feel it would be proper to investigate either Morris's intermittent rages and trances, or the epileptic attacks which dramatically affected his elder daughter Jenny from her mid-teens onwards, virtually incapacitating her. As Mackail maintained to Cockerell, assuming full agreement: The fluctuations of illness are certainly no matter for permanent record, either in his own case or in that of others; one of the sources of embarrassment in his more intimate letters is the perpetual recurrence of Jenny's state of health from day to day. The first public intimation that Morris's legendary rages were in fact eclampsia, a form of epilepsy, was given only in 1949, in a review in The Observer by Bernard Shaw who went on to suggest that Morris's desperation over Jenny's illness was caused by his conviction that she had inherited it. He felt himself to blame. There remains the mystery of the ill health of Mrs Morris, who took to the sofa in 1869, at the age of twenty-nine, and never really left it. The details of her treatment at the German spa town of Bad Ems suggest her problems were gynaecological in origin. But the ease with which Janey could spring back into normal activity, with Rossetti or with Blunt, able suddenly to walk for many miles across the countryside, suggests her illnesses were psychological as well. The effects of his invalid household upon Morris were complex and far-reaching. Undoubtedly it deepened his poetic imagination and his capacity for sympathy; it is plausible to argue that his domestic troubles sharpened his awareness of the unfortunate in general, helping to propel him into political activity. But at the same time his household of the ailing put obvious constraints on his own freedom of manoeuvre. He remained the capitalist father of the family, riding out the inevitable charges of political inconsistency, and one's admiration for his sheer productivity is redoubled in the light of these domestic handicaps. The most interesting and in some ways enigmatic of Morris's three women was his second daughter May. As a girl May had been a famous beauty. She appears in the centre of Burne-Jones's lascivious assemblage of dream women in his large oil painting The Golden Stairs. May followed her father into Socialism, acting as his factotum, his adjutant. The full extent of her involvement is made clear in the hoard of so far unpublished material in the Socialist League papers in the International Institute of Socialist History in Amsterdam. May married a Comrade, the young, untalented and impecunious Henry Halliday Sparling. The marriage was a failure. It failed partly because of the cynical intrusion of Bernard Shaw into the Sparlings' household. It also failed, I suggest, because no Comrade could replace May's father. May eventually found emotional security in a female friendship assumed by those who knew her to be lesbian. In the years between the wars she and Miss Lobb, an ex-land girl, retired to Kelmscott Manor. May became, in her own right, a superb embroiderer and did much to advance the status of British craftswomen. William Morris's Comrade daughter has a significant role in this book. Because he so consciously cultivated manliness Morris has consistently been put over as impervious to women. This view is incorrect. It is not that I underestimate his male entourages. He had a deep emotional need for these gatherings of cronies: Morris's formations and renewals of male brotherhoods are the recurring pattern of his life. Nor would I deny the closeness of his male friendships, though I have my reservations about his supposedly exclusive fondness for Edward Burne-Jones. Surely this was a figment of the Burne-Jones mythology. Morris had other friends as intimate, especially Philip Webb. But I have come to realize that Morris, more than most Victorians, was aware of women's unfulfilled potential. As early as 188o he was speaking in public on women's rights and his work in the Socialist circles of that decade brought him into contact, as his equals in the struggle, in committees, demonstrations, on the Socialist platforms, with such formidable women as Eleanor Marx, Annie Besant and Charlotte Wilson. It was C. S. Lewis who first noted the pervasive eroticism of William Morris's writing and it is noticeable that, as Morris becomes older, in his years of devotion to the Socialist cause, his most desired women get more positive and active, sunburnt, comradely, resplendent (the opposite of pale and slender Janey, languid on her sofa). One of the revelations of William Morris's letters is that only to two female correspondents - Georgiana Burne-Jones and Aglaia Coronio - is he able to open his heart. ## INTRODUCTION Morris is often viewed as the high priest of the countryside. Reasonably so, since no one has written or spoken more persuasively about the special rural qualities of England. Part of the reason for the lasting popularity of Morris's wallpapers and textiles with the urban middle classes is their fecundity of rural imagery: they put us back in touch with our lost imagined landscapes. You can see the rabbits lollop and hear the blackbirds sing. But the image of Morris as exclusively the ruralist is mistaken, sentimental. After his years at Red House in the early 186os he never spent the bulk of his time in the country. Kelmscott Manor was a house he only visited occasionally, for long weekends and holidays. He did not even own it. Most of his adult life was taken up in the town and not just in any town but in London, the Great Wen' whose Victorian expansiveness alternately stimulated Morris – it provided the basis for his business – and drove him to a terrible despair. Morris was indeed involved in the formation, in the late 187os, of the Commons Preservation Society. But at the same period he was also a prime mover in the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings and the Kyrle Society, whose remits were much broader, embattled against environmental carelessness, ugliness and squalor generally. Here in Sheffield, where I write surrounded by industrial wasteland of the middle 199os, Morris's worst fears for the city ring hideously true. Those who, through the years, have denigrated Morris have taken their cue from his Times obituary of 1896 which, in preposterously condescending terms, wrote down his politics to a general woollymindedness, an excess of eccentric optimism in Morris's opinions: if they led him, as they have led other generous men before him, towards Socialism, the world can afford to judge him indulgently, as not apprehending much danger from his rhetoric. I hope, if nothing else, that this book refutes all charges of the woolliness of Morris. His importance surely lies in the reverse: in his precision. He knew exactly what the bourgeois motivation was, since he was one of us'. He understood the workings of commerce; he belonged to it. As a person who made things he understood completely the essential disciplines of materials and techniques. As a writer he was up against the nuances of language. Morris allowed himself few selfdeceptions. He was steely and straight, also ruthless in facing his own failure. He was accurate and dangerous enough to know that the things he most valued would go under in the end. Some heroic images of the Victorian rebel: Morris arrested in Limehouse for disorderly conduct. Morris mounting the trolley to address what seemed a sea of striking miners in Northumberland in 1887. Morris speaking from the Socialist wagon to the workers in Clerkenwell on Bloody Sunday' before marching in the ill-fated columns of protesters towards Trafalgar Square. Morris acting as pall-bearer in the funeral procession for Alfred Linnell, crying out over the coffin 'Let us feel he is our brother', with a ‘fearful earnestness' in his voice. As a Victorian protester he belongs with Carlyle, Ruskin, Kingsley, Angela Burdett-Coutts, Octavia Hill, Elizabeth Fry, men and women of another century. What is special about Morris is the way in which his ideas and personality have outlasted events and issues of the time into our own aspirations and concerns. Like Sigmund Freud he has settled in our consciousness. As the late E. P. Thompson so marvellously put it, he is one of those men whom history will never overtake'. At Morris's death there seemed very little future for the indigenous socialism he invented. Of the two main organizations with which he had been associated, the Socialist League had exploded into anarchy; the Social-Democratic Federation continued, but was dispirited, depleted and as riven by dissension as it had always been. The initiative in socialist reforms by now belonged to the Fabian Society and the Independent Labour Party, both in their ways anathema to Morris who distrusted what he termed ‘gas and water' socialism, the Fabians' emphasis on material improvement at the expense of the politics of vision, and who had a deep-rooted dislike of the institution of Parliament itself Keir Hardie had been elected the first Independent Labour Party member of Parliament in 1892. There was a lull for the next decade. Morris was disregarded, no longer considered a serious political force. Then, remarkably quickly, his ideas can be seen resurfacing as the passionate socialism that he stood for was seized upon by young idealists as the antidote to Edwardian complacency. G. D. H. Cole, the twentiethcentury's leading socialist theoretician, writing in 1959, looked back on his conversion: I became a Socialist more than fifty years ago when I read News from Nowhere as a schoolboy and realised quite suddenly that William Morris had shown one the vision of a society in which it would be a fine and fortunate experience to live. Morris was an early influence on R. H. Tawney, the great Socialist historian and teacher, who in the early 19oos was entreating his sister to