# INTRODUCTION read William Morris's books. Tawney's radical Utopian vision of socialist ideology not handed down by intellectuals but rising from within the working classes is rooted in Morris's imaginative, iconoclastic views. Harold Laski, the political theorist and teacher who dominated the London School of Economics, wrote to May Morris in the early 193os: You can be very sure that among at least the Socialists of my generation your father remains a constant and abiding inspiration'. Graham Wallas, Laski's contemporary, the political psychologist, wrote to tell May of a conference at which he had just spoken: I argued that a body of men who ask to be made a government (as the Fabians have done for the last thirty years) must try to see life as a whole, as your father did, and not from the simple economic angle.' He told her he was trying to put these ideas into a book, presumably Social Fudgment, published posthumously in 1934. To me the most poignant of these affidavits of the 193os is that of Barbara Castle, one of the most enduring of Labour politicians in the second half of the twentieth century, coming home from Oxford to West Yorkshire in the bleak years of the Depression, walking the lonely moors with her lover, looking down on the smoky industrial valleys below and reading Morris's revolutionary poem ‘The Message of the March Wind': But lo, the old inn, and the lights, and the fire, And the fiddler's old tune and the shuffling of feet; Soon for us shall be quiet and rest and desire, And tomorrow's uprising to deeds shall be sweet. This poem, she says, taught her that Socialism was not merely about struggle but was about sensual fulfilment, and it gave her hope. Morris's aspirations were still very much alive in the reconstruction and reform of post-war Britain by the 1945 Labour government. Clement Attlee, then prime minister, was another of the young men whose Socialist vision had been formed by reading Morris's works. He represented Limehouse, where William Morris had once had a spot of bother with the police. Attlee was familiar with the detail of William Morris's lectures and political journalism: How we Live and How we Might Live'; 'A Factory as It Might Be'; ‘Useful Work versus Useless Toil'. It is fascinating, and in a way ironic, to see Morris's precepts percolating through to inspire an institution he would certainly have been dubious about: the Welfare State of the early 195os. Attlee was steeped in News from Nowhere. He quoted avidly from Morris's A Dream of Fohn Ball with its messages of brotherhood: Forsooth, brothers, fellowship is heaven and lack of fellowship is hell.'In 1953 (after Labour had lost office) he wrote to Sydney Cockerell, full of memories of Morris: I was telling a group of foreign socialists the other day how much more Morris meant to us than Karl Marx. The following year Attlee, handicapped by his famous brevity and clearly very nervous, went through the ordeal of his first major television interview. The interviewer was the young Kenneth Harris, soon to become an early media star. Harris, desperate to elicit some sort of credo, asked what the Labour party had to offer to the voters of mid-twentieth-century Britain. Attlee reached out for William Morris with a touching confidence: ATTLEE: Well, you know there's nothing better than the motto that we have in this Borough, by our greatest citizen, William Morris –Fellowship is Life' – we believe in the kind of society where we've fellowship for all. You can't get that while there's grave inequalities in wealth. That is the hope of the world, and we offer fellowship with all other countries. HARRis: Do you find it then apt, Mr Attlee, that we should be meeting tonight in the Borough of Walthamstow, which is the town of William Morris? ATTLEE: I think that's absolutely right. It has always been quite easy to pick holes in William Morris. As with all great visionaries there are flaws in his arguments, for those who choose to find them. His practice did not by any means bear out his theories. His own factory was not ‘A Factory as It Might Be'. There is a kind of wilful blindness in his attitude to population growth and the new technologies. But the quarrel with Morris on such individual issues has been used by his detractors as a distraction from the vigour and to many the terror of his underlying message, which was the abandonment of capitalism itself and its replacement by more equitable, humane social structures. It is to this generous, immense and sweeping challenge that the left in Britain has returned, with a curious compulsion, throughout the century. William Morris has provided a voice of inner conscience. In his purity and passion he has been the pivotal figure, connecting socialist collectivism in Britain to its origins in early nineteenth-century Romantic libertarianism. Morris has, uniquely, married the tradition of