# INTRODUCTION socialism as a critique of political economy with the tradition of Romantic anti-industrialism. If you are finally going to say to an increasing number of people that they are simply surplus to requirements, that they are not really necessary in this society, at that point the basic question returns, of what people need to produce and how they need to produce it and how, over and above all this, they relate to each other while they are producing it. This was Raymond Williams, speaking on Morris's relevance to the economic crisis of the 198os. And his hopes and fears seem even more prophetic in the industrial north of England ten years further on. A William Morris arrives only once or twice each century, in the sense of someone of their time and yet beyond it. Morris is a time-traveller. He does it in his writing, in those oddly hypnotic futuristic novels. He does it in his politics and his polemic. It is part of his magic that we know what his response is to events he did not survive long enough to see. We can feel quite certain that the world collapse of Marxism would have overjoyed him. Morris called himself a communist, but Communism as developed in the Soviet Union and in Eastern Europe would never have been what he envisaged. Unlike Shaw and the Webbs, he would have seen through Lenin and Stalin and their political economy instantly. We can also feel confident that he would have looked on the Thatcher years in the Britain of the last two decades of this century as amongst the worst he could imagine in terms of human destructiveness and capitalist greed. Electronic addiction? Drug culture? Inner city planning? Bottom line banking? Political correctness? Post-Modernist architecture? Theme parks? Niche retailing? Bargain breaks? Time-share homes? Spaghetti junctions? Shopping malls? Leisure centres? Tele-cottages? Health farms? Saturation advertising? Freebie magazines? Junk mail? Fast food? Course modules? Heritage trails? Craft Fayres? Business parks? Garden centres? Sound bites? Opinion polls? Chat shows? Designer clothes? Executive phones? Pulp literature? Video porn? Corporate sponsorship? Market-orientated society?. . . ‘Damn'd pigs! Damn'd fools!’ You can hear Morris expostulate, robust, fidgety, tremendous, pulling out the hairs (singly) from his great prophetic beard.