# Oxford 1853-55 Morris travelled up to Oxford to take his matriculation examination at Exeter College in June of 1852. Beside him in the hall, taking the same papers, was Edward Burne-Jones from King Edward's Grammar School in Birmingham. They did not speak, but Burne-Jones remembered him when they met again the next year as undergraduates. His appearance then was striking. He was slight in figure in those days; his hair was dark brown and very thick, his nose straight, his eyes hazel-coloured, his mouth exceedingly delicate and beautiful.’ Burne-Jones noticed from that first day his peculiar decisiveness, watching how he finished a Horace paper early, folded it and inscribed it'William Morris'. He seemed very self-contained. Morris came to regard Oxford with a vehemence unusual even for him. In his classification of the cities it did not rate simply as ‘the most important town of England': it had more personal resonances as ‘a place, a second home'. When he first arrived iņ Oxford it was a city in transition. The railway had arrived there, but only very recently, in 1844. Suburban development, which was to make Oxford almost unrecognizable by the 188os, had only just begun. There was enough of the old city left intact for Morris to adopt it as the paradigm of the perfect mediaeval city: ‘A vision of grey-roofed houses and a long winding street and the sound of many bells'. Only Rouen ever matched it in his mind. His memories of that first and almost untouched Oxford fired and fuelled his opposition to what he regarded as its violation: it was his ‘jewel' city cast away. Oxford had so fixed a place in his emotional history that ‘a kind of terror' always came upon him at returning: indignation at wanton or rash changes mingles curiously in me with all that I remember I have lost since I was a lad and dwelling there; not the least of losses the recognition that I didn't know in those days what a gain it was to be there.' Morris took up his place at Exeter in January 1853. He had expected to enter the previous autumn, but the college was so full that his entry was deferred and he spent a few more months studying with F. B. Guy. When he arrived in Oxford he still found an accommodation crisis in the college; he and Burne-Jones were allocated daytime rooms out in the town, returning at night to sleep in college, billeted in the third room of other students' sets. It was a ramshackle start that may have influenced their gathering despondency. Burne-Jones and Morris made immediate friends and they spent much of their time in that first term in gloomy disappointment and disillusion', taking angry walks together in the afternoon, complaining of the sloth and apathy of Oxford. In this they were not especially original. The transition from high hopes to dawning disillusionment with a system so languid as to be almost corrupt was familiar enough to be satirized in that classic Oxford novel of the period, Cuthbert Bede's Mr. Verdant Green. It was clear we had lighted on a distasteful land in our choice of College.' Burne-Jones's antipathy to Exeter was shared by Morris, who complained of its banality: I took very ill to the studies of the place.’ Marlborough had a traditional connection with Exeter. Primarily, this was a West Country alliance. Until 1856, when the statutes were revised, Oxford colleges drew their fellows from specific regions of the country. This meant that Exeter was very largely governed by a body of clergymen from Devon and Cornwall. There was also, as at Marlborough, a certain High Church emphasis. Interestingly John Betjeman, who himself proceeded from Marlborough to Exeter in the 192os, still found it the headquarters of Anglo-Catholicism'. College records for 1852 show that eight of the fifty-nine boys who went on to university that year went on to Exeter. One of these was W. Fulford Adams, a distant school friend of Morris's, and later his neighbour in Oxfordshire. Exeter life was all too close to school life. Morris once described Oxford as a huge upper public school'. The college divided into two distinct communities: the reading men', absorbed in the classics and theology; and the fast set', men who rowed, hunted, ate, drank, whored and swore. The fast set at Exeter was then in the ascendant. Burne-Jones found it like the Brasenose of old times, very fast indeed'. Now all Oxford undergraduate courses lead to a bachelor's degree with honours. A pass may be awarded to those who do not achieve the honours standard. In the mid-nineteenth century the system was more flexible. Morris had entered specifically to read for a pass degree. His tutor was unimpressed with him, noting in the pupil book ‘a rather rough and unpolished youth, who exhibited no special literary tastes or capacity, but had no difficulty in mastering the usual subjects of examination'. The lack of enthusiasm was mutual: Morris's formal studies of the classics were accompanied by groanings all through his Oxford period. My life is going to become a burden to me, for I am going, (beginning from Tuesday next) to read for six hours a day at Livy, Ethics, etc. – please pity me.' His hatred of the classics in fact was only nominal. He did not hate the classics, but he loathed how Oxford taught them. Morris's view of the classics was eccentric and possessive. He was always deeply stirred by the thought of epic tale-tellers, seeing himself as a part of that tradition. Later in his life he would set about translating The Aeneid and The Odyssey with a kind of nonchalance derived from loving them so much and knowing them so well. For Morris, as much as any of the writers and painters of his period, the imaginative worlds of the ancient Greeks and Romans were deeply embedded in his mind. But classics were taught at Oxford with a dryness and pomposity that undermined their wonders. When he came to equate his official Oxford studies with snobbery, aridity and practical uselessness, Morris was attacking a whole style of education and a lack-lustre and self-serving institution. It was anything but an ideal training for the ministry. 'A University education', he wrote caustically, fits a man about as much for being a Ship-Captain as a Pastor of Souls’. The fierceness of his feelings about Oxford education pours out in News from Nowhere in the passage about the decline of real learning in the nineteenth century in Oxford ‘and its less interesting sister Cambridge'. The commercialization of these cities had corrupted those who taught there: They (and especially Oxford) were the breeding places of a peculiar class of parasites, who called themselves cultivated people; they were indeed cynical enough, as the so-called educated classes of the day generally were; but they affected an exaggeration of cynicism in order that they might be thought knowing and worldly wise. The rich middle classes (they had no relation with the working classes) treated them with a kind of contemptuous toleration with which mediaeval baron treated his jester; though it must be said that they were by no means so pleasant as the old jesters were, being, in fact, the bores of society. They were laughed at, despised – and paid. Morris escaped again, as he had escaped at Marlborough, into the study of history. He gives his own account of how, when first at Oxford he fell to very vigorously on history and specially mediaeval history’. There was a tradition of history at Exeter. Amongst its recent fellows was the great historian J. A. Froude, one of the last of the Exeter Devonians; C. W. Boase, elected three years before Morris's arrival as an undergraduate, remained a Fellow for over forty years. It seems possible that Morris was marginally influenced by academic specialism in history at Exeter. But much more important to him was the town that stood around him, the deductions he could draw from the practical history of buildings, the massing and the details of construction, the relation of ornament to form. What had in his childhood been a question of instinct became, in those years at Oxford, a study and a science: he came to look at architecture solemnly as witness to‘the unfolding of medieval thought’. This was a radical and indeed an almost anti-Oxford discipline, a kind of hands-on history. By the middle 187os, when the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings was founded, it was a national movement and Morris was welcoming an enlightened period in which the newly invented study of living history is the chief joy of so many of our lives’. Oxford at Morris's period had an enclosed quality. The city came to an end abruptly, almost as if it had been walled. There was very little brick in it: Oxford was predominantly grey, the grey of stone, with the yellow wash of pebble-dash on the houses in the poorer streets. The castle was dominant, with its monster beauty of a keep' and the mill and little network of waterways near by. There was the cathedral so admired by Ruskin for its unaffected Englishness: the true English Norman vaults: the true English Tudor roof; and the west window, with its clumsy painting, the best men could do of the day'. University expansion in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries had brought a scattering of Baroque buildings: one would like to know how Morris had reacted to the early seventeenth-century Exeter College chapel, demolished in the year he came to Oxford to make way for George Gilbert Scott's reworking of the Sainte-Chapelle. But the town was still mainly ifteenth century, small-scale, and possessing the character Morris so much valued: the sense that it had never not been there. Morris looks at Magdalen Buildings and he sees buildings that are essentially part of the street, and look almost as if they had grown up out of the roadway'. In this vision of the building as organic William Morris prefigures not just Frank Lloyd Wright and Gaudí but a whole twentieth-century counter-culture movement for architecture without architects'. To Morris and the friends he made there Oxford took on the aspect of the mediaeval citadel, the place beyond the world, a kind of no man's land. It had its Lewis Carroll air of dottiness: could Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland (1865) have been written anywhere else? Years later Burne-Jones described his Oxford as all friends living in the same street, and the street long and narrow and ending in the city wall, and the wall opening with a gate on to cornfields in the south, and the wild wood on the north – and no railways anywhere – all friends and all one's world tied up in the little city – and no news to come – only rumours and gossips at the city gate, telling things a month old, and all wrong'. At Oxford Burne-Jones and Morris went through a phase of wearing purple trousers. They already spoke a shared language of clothes as social protest, as they later dressed in almost uniform blue working shirts. Burne-Jones came upon the scene as the unconsciously desired male intimate, filling the vacuum left by Morris's own elder brother, Charles Stanley, who was born and died in a week, and by William Morris Senior's early death. He was also in a sense a compensation for the close friend Morris had failed to find at Marlborough. Morris had had his school friends, but none of them were intimate. This new friendship was based on an instant recognition of samenesses of attitude: a restless and prickly perceptiveness, an earnestness. As with forty per cent of Oxford entrants at that period Burne-Jones too was at this stage intended for the Church. The friendship was sharpened by its obvious differences: Burne-Jones from the urban Midlands, Morris from the soft home counties. Their contrast in appearance made them almost cartoon characters, perambulating round the streets of Oxford, one so tall and pale and languid, one so dark and taut. Edward Burne-Jones was plain Ted Jones in those days. The name Ned came later, apparently invented by Dante Gabriel Rossetti. His upbringing had been the contrary of William Morris's; Burne-Jones had been the solitary child in a terrace house on Bennett's Hill, in the commercial centre of Birmingham. His mother had died the week after he was born and his childhood was punctuated by lugubrious expeditions to her graveside where his father would grasp his arm so tight he almost cried. Edward Richard Jones was a very unsuccessful picture framer and gilder. Part of the house was a showroom, with a workshop in the yard behind it. They were painfully hard up. Burne-Jones had known Morris was comfortably off, since in their first term at Oxford Morris had offered to give him half his money: ‘which’, said Burne-Jones, ‘was nice of him, only I was proud'. But until he was invited to Walthamstow, cocooned in that genteel atmosphere where Mrs Morris dropped her aitches and the butler tried to hide his laughter at the sallies of the two young Oxford gentlemen at table, Burne-Jones had no idea Morris's house would be so grand. Morris and Burne-Jones arrived in Oxford in the aftermath of the Oxford Movement. For the two previous decades the town had been torn by religious controversy. In so inturned a community the social consequences were intense. In 1845 John Henry Newman, the former Fellow of Oriel and vicar of the university church of St Mary's, had finally embraced Roman Catholicism. Burne-Jones regarded Newman with ferocious admiration. Even as a schoolboy he identified with Newman's radiant austerities, so strikingly prophetic of the Arts and Crafts aesthetic: In an age of sofas and cushions he taught me to be indifferent to comfort; and in an age of materialism he taught me to venture all on the unseen.'It was because of Newman that Burne-Jones had been inspired to choose Oxford in the first place. He and Morris had expected to find a town still heady with Tractarian arguments, the religious battleground described so vividly in Newman's Oxford novel. Loss and Gain: The Story of a Convert was published in 1848. In the event they were disappointed. It was part of their angry disillusionment with Oxford that the influence of Newman was no longer so alive. But they still endeavoured to recreate that fervour. In their first few terms at Oxford they were solemn, still devout. In the evenings they read religious works. Morris read and Burne-Jones listened: Morris hated to be read to. They devoured Milman's Latin Christianity, Neale's History of the Eastern Church, great swaths of the Acta Sanctorum and Tracts for the Times, the controversial essays written by Newman, Pusey and Keble, insistent upon reclaiming the identity of the Church of England as the true Catholic and Apostolic Church'. They both found deeply attractive the Tractarian emphasis on sacraments and ceremonial. Burne-Jones, writing home, adopted the joke persona of Edouard Cardinal de Birmingham. At mealtimes he was reading Archdeacon Wilberforce's latest treatise on the Holy Eucharist. At one point he and Morris confessed to one another they had both been reading Kenelm Digby's Mores Catholici in secret. In 1854, when Wilberforce too became a Catholic convert, they very nearly followed him, such was the lure of Rome. In their first term Morris also read ‘The Lady of Shalott' out loud to Burne-Jones in the funny sing-song voice he always used when reading poetry. He laid great stress on the rhymes. Tennyson had written ‘The Lady of Shalott' in the early 183os. In 1842 his ‘Sir Launcelot and Queen Guinevere', Morte d’Arthur' and ‘Sir Galahad' were published. This was part of a whole Arthurian cult, following the rediscovery of Malory's Morte d’Arthur in the late eighteenth century by Sir Walter Scott. By the time Morris and Burne-Jones arrived in Oxford Victorian Arthurianism was approaching its grand climax. William Dyce had already started painting his cycle of Arthurian frescoes in the Queen's Robing Room in the Palace of Westminster. Morris and Burne-Jones laid their own claims on the Arthurian myth. Morris's interpretation was primarily a verbal one, although in early days he produced Arthurian paintings; Burne-Jones, all his life, dwelt on themes of the San Graal in his paintings and his tapestries and he was still painting in the irises on his giant canvas Avalon' in the weeks before he died. Arthurianism, as Burne-Jones and Morris saw it, was not merely an intellectual exercise. They fell upon it as an extension of religion, adopting the chivalric as a rule of life. Embedded in their visions of the San Graal were the memories of the high emotions of those early weeks at Oxford, and their mutual recognition: 'Nothing', wrote Burne-Jones, 'was ever like Morte d’Arthur – I don't mean any book or any one poem – something that can never be written, I mean, and can never go out of the heart'. Burne-Jones attributed their closeness to the fact that he and Morris were both Goths, by which he meant they had a shared sense of morality, a shared creative energy. From such different backgrounds they had found, when they converged, they belonged to the same tribe They encouraged one another to a heightening of vision. This was partly the artist's perception of colour. Morris was a supreme colourist. Burne-Jones saw days in colour. Sunday was gold, Monday yellow, Tuesday red, Wednesday blue, Thursday amethyst, Friday sapphire – and ‘Saturday wet', he said, ‘ever since I was tiny – but I don't know why'. There was in their relationship a wistfulness, a winsomeness, a consciousness of nonsense not so far from Edward Lear. Morris and Burne-Jones created a double persona which was not English mainstream but which verged on the surrealist. They liked exaggeration. As Burne-Jones was to comment after Robert Browning's funeral in Westminster Abbey: ‘how flat these English are'. It was Burne-Jones at Oxford who first saw Morris's quality, saying he was certain Morris would be a ‘star'. At the end of their first year Burne-Jones described him as ‘one of the cleverest fellows I know . . . He is full of enthusiasm for things holy and beautiful and true, and, what is rarest, of the most exquisite perception and judgment in them. For myself he has tinged my whole inner being with the beauty of his own, and I know not a single gift for which I owe such gratitude to Heaven as his friendship. If it were not for his boisterous mad outbursts and freaks, which break the romance he sheds around him – at least to me – he would be a perfect hero.' But even then Burne-Jones had a sense of Morris's ferocity: he too noted his eyes, those eyes of such great inexpressiveness, which took in a whole person, the details of the clothing, nuances of physiognomy, without being seen to look. The friendship with Burne-Jones was Morris's first real friendship. It remained important to him, though it had its ebbs and flows. But to see this as the legendary and all-excluding friendship, as it has so often been portrayed, is incorrect. If Morris had a need for the intimate companion he had an even stronger yearning for the group. He knew a great deal about chivalric fraternities. The Broadstone of Honour by Kenelm Digby, a rambling and hypnotic overview of the theory and history of chivalry, first published in 1822, was a book to which Morris was addicted and, like other books he read and clung to, it idealized the small band of valiant friends. The search for brotherhood can also be explained in terms of Morris's own shyness, the enduring and exceptional privateness that coexisted so strangely with his bluffness. As his daughter May described it: No glimpse of the inner life of Morris was ever vouchsafed even to his closest friends – secretum meum mihi.' Morris felt at his most comfortable in a group, in a setting of male badinage, of generalized affection. 'This again he had never properly achieved at Marlborough. He found it at Oxford in discovering the Set’. The Set, later expanded and referred to as ‘the Brotherhood', was already in place when Morris came to Oxford. It was based at Pembroke, where three undergraduates from Birmingham all had rooms in the old quadrangle. The Set then consisted of William Fulford and Richard Watson Dixon, two friends of Burne-Jones from King Edward's, with Charles Faulkner who also came from Birmingham, though from a different school. Fulford and Dixon were meant for holy orders, an immediate link with Morris and Burne-Jones. They were all, in their way, brilliant young men. Faulkner was a highly original mathematician who became a Fellow of University College; he followed Morris into Socialism, leading the Oxford branch of the Socialist League. Fulford was the Set's chief literary figure, small, energetic, dapper, and at the time galvanic; but he seems to have had the precocious sort of talent that quite rapidly burns itself out. Richard Watson Dixon, later Canon Dixon, was perhaps the most interesting of the brethren, himself a considerable poet, correspondent and supporter of Gerard Manley Hopkins, one of the few people who understood the nature of that tormented and complicated talent. (Hopkins, also a musician, set some Dixon poems to music.) The Set was joined later by another friend from Birmingham, Cormell Price. It was Price who founded the United Services College, the colonialist boarding school which educated Rudyard Kipling. Cormell Price is immortalized as the unconventional but respected headmaster in Kipling's Stalky & Co. The Birmingham contingent had been introduced to Morris by Burne-Jones. At first they dismissed him as ‘a very pleasant boy' who talked compulsively in his husky shouting voice and liked going down the river with Charles Faulkner, sharing his interest in boats. They saw him as a sportsman, good at singlestick and fencing. It was only gradually they realized he was much more intellectual, and odder, than he seemed. Faulkner commented to Dixon, 'How Morris seems to know things, doesn't he?' and Dixon observed how decisive Morris was, how accurate, without making an issue of his expertise. They saw what a great reservoir of observation lay behind so many of his most casual comments. Morris surprised them with sophisticated knowledge of subjects about which the literary-oriented Set knew nothing. Unlike them, he read The Builder magazine; and went to look at buildings. Dixon was startled when, the first time he met Morris, he suggested they should go and look at Merton tower. In the Michaelmas term of 1853 Morris and Burne-Jones moved into rooms in college. Morris's rooms were in the quadrangle called Hell Quad, reached by passing through an archway out of the great quadrangle. This archway was known as Purgatory. The rooms overlooked the Fellows' garden and the chestnut tree, with a sideways vista down Brasenose Lane to the Bodleian Library where Morris at this period spent many hours examining the mediaeval painted manuscripts. In the 189os he returned again to study the thirteenth-century Apocalypse which as an undergraduate he specially loved. His rooms at Exeter were gradually filled with rubbings from mediaeval brasses, imprints on paper taken from the brass memorials to knights and their ladies set into the floor of many early churches. A letter he sent to Cormell Price one spring vacation mentions his success in having gone a-brassing' near the Thames on the Essex side. Here he acquired two remarkable brasses, one a Flemish brass of knight, dated 137o; another a brass (very small, with the legend gone) of a priest in his shroud; I think there are only two other shrouded brasses in England'. This last brass, about which Morris writes with such authority, came from one of the prettiest small village churches he had ever seen, with the consecration crosses showing red in a red circle. The parson showed them round: he was very civil and very, very dirty and snuffy, inexpressibly so, I can't give you an idea of his dirt and snuffiness.' In those early terms at Oxford a routine had soon evolved. Faulkner's rooms at Pembroke, on the ground floor in the corner of the quadrangle, became the social centre for the Set. They would meet there around nine o'clock most evenings. They talked of Transcendentalism and ‘all the host of German systems', continuing the debates of their Birmingham vacations. Burne-Jones had once launched on a defence of the Jesuits; to his great surprise, this met no opposition. They were treading, selfconsciously, on dangerous ground. The little group at Pembroke was old-fashioned Evangelical. Its infiltration by such intense Tractarians as Morris and Burne-Jones set up a frisson that was practically sexual. The religious debate had its aspects of flirtation. The Set, so closely intertwined and so high-minded, were intensely conscious of each other's physicality. Dixon, describing Morris as an aristocrat and a High Churchman, emphasized his radiance. His countenance was beautiful in features and expression, particularly in the expression of purity ... I have a vivid recollection of the splendid beauty of his presence at this time. The Set were Tennysonians. The Oxford intelligentsia of that period was obsessed with poetry in general and Tennyson especially. It was almost a fever, as Dixon recollected it: 'All reading men were Tennysonians; all sets of reading men talked poetry. Poetry was the thing: and it was felt with justice that this was due to Tennyson. Tennyson had invented a new poetry, a new poetic English: his use of words was new, and every piece that he wrote was a conquest of a new region. This lasted till "Maud", in 1855.' Dixon, with his own poetic sensibility, had watched the effect of Tennyson on Morris. Where the other members of the Set were caught up by the language Morris searched much further, looking for a morality beyond the language: he saw that Tennyson's poems represented substantial things that were to be considered out of the poems as well as in them'. It was ‘this substantial view of value' that later led Morris to admire ballads so highly. In this context it is certainly ironic that so much well-founded criticism of Morris has been as the writer of the poetry that lulls. William Fulford was the chief Tennysonian of the group. He loved reading poetry and had a fine deep voice in which he regaled the Set with In Memoriam'. Dixon listened entranced, Morris a little less so. He admired Tennyson, but there was defiance in that admiration. He had perceived some limitations. He commented: ‘Tennyson's Sir Galahad is rather a mild youth.'In expressing such lukewarmness about Tennyson Morris, whether consciously or not, was challenging the older, more bumptious Fulford, who had installed himself as the leader of the Set. Morris tended to resist overbearing masculinity. He detected a certain male rowdiness in Tennyson. He criticized the hero of 'Locksley Hall': My dear fellow, if you are going to make that row, get out of the room, that's all. Morris's clique at Oxford was a reading set. In his second year at Oxford the Set began assembling weekly to read Shakespeare in one another's rooms. Morris, Burne-Jones and Fulford were the prize performers, together with Cormell Price, by then at Brasenose. They drew lots for their parts. Morris did a good Macbeth and a good Touchstone, and his tour de force was Claudio in Measure for Measure. He suddenly raised his voice to a loud and horrified cry at the word “Isabel", and declaimed the awful following speech “Aye, but to die, and go we know not where" in the same pitch.'The effect was overpowering. Morris kept his childlike literalness. Reading Troilus and Cressida he interrupted the passage where Thersites lists the fools, ending 'And Patroclus is a fool positive'. Morris intervened unselfconsciously, delightedly: Patroclus wants to know why he is a fool! The horizons of the Set were in some ways wider than those of William Morris. Coming as they did from Birmingham they were closer to industrial realities and social upheavals. Burne-Jones's father had been enrolled as a special constable in the Chartist Riots of 1839, and the maidservant, putting the child to bed, had told him scaring stories of the violence on the streets. Cormell Price had childhood memories of bestial prize fights and remembered one Saturday night walking from Birmingham far into the Black Country and counting, in the last three miles more than thirty people lying dead drunk on the ground, nearly half of them women. Because most of the pupils at King Edward's Grammar School were day-boys, familiar with the city, taking short cuts through the slums, they were much more aware than Morris, insulated at his boarding school, of Dickensian squalor and industrial reality. Older boys at King Edward's had awakened social consciences and they discussed contemporary social problems. Before they came to Oxford Cormell Price and Charles Faulkner were experts on such topics as sanitation and the Factory acts. Their awareness of poverty and suffering was deepened in 1854 by the terrible cholera epidemic (whose causes were no better understood than the outbreak of the Plague two centuries earlier). The Oxford autumn term was postponed for a week because of it. Morris's story of that period, 'A Dream', has as its background the plague hospital of a disease-ridden city. Morris's memories of Rouen? The sense of perspective in the Set was also altered by the onset of the Crimean War, the closest Europe came to an all-out war between 1815 and 1914. There was a kind of youth cult in the circles of reformers. The ardour of Morris and his group of friends at Oxford was in some ways very close to that of the Young England movement of the 184os. The spokesmen for Young England were four Conservative MPs: Benjamin Disraeli, Lord George Manners, Alexander Baillie-Cochrane, George Smythe. They themselves were young. In Disraeli's trilogy of novels, Coningsby, Sybil and Tancred, it is the young men who are reforming activists. Young England sought to emulate ideals of mediaeval England, not in a regressive way but a creative one. They wanted to extract from mediaeval England those elements from which the Victorian age could learn. New societies based on equality of classes; a small-scale quasi-monastic system of community; the return to the country; the revival of physical activity; principles of shared work and work-as-holiday, like the roadbuilding and haymaking in Morris's News from Nowhere; architecture as the measure of civilization and the means by which the people reconnected themselves with the past: all these were ideas Morris worked on and developed and in the end, during his Socialist period, elaborated and sharpened almost beyond recognition. It is ironic that Morris's Socialism had roots in the Tory Young England movement. Noteworthy too that such palliative measures as the Whig Reform Act of 1867, which gave the vote to respectable urban working-class men, exacerbated discontent in the voteless lower strata, enabling Tory Young England to make common cause with the labouring classes, in an alliance which in some ways still exists. Morris said that at Oxford he had been ‘a good deal influenced' by the works of Charles Kingsley. Kingsley's books gave him 'some sociopolitical ideas which would have developed probably but for the attractions of art and poetry'. What exactly were these socio-political ideas? Charles Kingsley at this period was a controversial clergyman, a Christian Socialist and an academic. As Professor of English he had been a colleague of F. D. Maurice's at Queen's College in London. F. D. Maurice had been forced to retire after his denial of the received interpretation of Eternal Punishment: Burne-Jones had heard the news of this with great regret, ‘for the Christian Socialists, if Maurice and Kingsley are fair examples, must be glorious fellows'. Both Burne-Jones and William Morris were prone to sympathy for martyrs of the faith. Kingsley too had his history of martyrdom. In 1851, after he had preached a reckless sermon, the Bishop of London banned him from London preaching. What Morris found in him was iconoclasm, courage, an extreme concern with the right use of one's talents and resources. Kingsley spoke to Morris of the conscience of his class. The books Morris read at Oxford certainly included the first of Kingsley's novels, Yeast, A Problem, written in 1848 and originally serialized in Fraser's Magazine. Its hero, Lancelot Smith, is a young man with money who has just left Cambridge. Smith makes friends with a Carlyle-reading Cornish gamekeeper. Confronted with real rural poverty he is enlightened and inflamed. It is a powerful study of a young man with a conscience; it is one of the most savage novels ever written about class and the English. It was a book almost made for William Morris. Kingsley then wrote Alton Locke, Hypatia and Westward Ho! All these apparently were 'welcomed gladly by the set', who found in Kingsley's works not only food for thought but the sources of marvellous and almost endless arguments. Kingsley's were books they liked to read together: these took on a special meaning in the context of the group. Kingsley made them conscious of their country as it actually was, and they came to see themselves as young men with a mission, as full of enthusiasm as the first crusaders’. This was how Burne-Jones described himself and Morris in their Kingsley days. In 1855 Morris came of age. Devon Great Consols shares had been prospering and his mother was advised to safeguard the future of her children by putting shares in trust for them. Emma Morris and her brothers-in-law Thomas and Francis were the joint trustees. When he was twenty-one Morris was given thirteen shares. The dividend provided him with income of $\pounds _ { 7 4 ^ { \tt I } }$ in 1855, £715 in $\mathtt { I 8 5 6 }$ and so on. In today's real terms this would be well over £7,ooo a year. It was then a lavish income that gave him extra freedom but which was also a cause of some embarrassment, in that his spending power was immeasurably greater than that of the others in the Set. Already here at Oxford one can see the tension in him between his munificence, an extreme generosity that prompted him to buy his friends the books they had been wanting, surprising them, delighting them, and equally strong urges towards anonymity and modesty. There was a sense in which Morris's relative affluence made it even more essential for him to feel accepted by his peers and a part of their activities. This was the beginning of a pattern. All his life he was to see the possibilities in using his wealth in the formation of brotherhoods, keeping them together with financial underpinning. He began to realize that his inheritance of riches made it even more important to find a proper purpose for his life. In his early phase at Oxford Burne-Jones seriously considered founding a monastery. He was attracted by the brotherhood of chastity. He had been schooled in ideals of endurance. At Oxford one of the favourite novels of the Set had been Charlotte M. Yonge's The Heir of Redclyffe. Dixon, in old age, still considered it ‘unquestionably one of the finest books in the world'. Like Yeast this was a book almost designed for Morris. The hero, Guy Morville, is dark, rich and very wilful. In his tempers he bites his lips and cuts through pencils, as uncouth as William Morris. The theme of this gripping surplice-ripper is, through faith and self-discipline, the schooling of the wild. With The Heir of Redclyffe we are in those High Victorian realms of self-sacrifice and sexual abnegation. Guy, after many trials, attains his love and marries her. On honeymoon in Italy he catches fever from the former enemy he nurses forgivingly. Philip recovers. Guy, alas, does not. Idealized, implicit in one of the most full-blown death scenes in any novel of the period, is the Tractarian principle of chastity, the aim of forgoing temporary earthly pleasure in exchange for the spiritual victory and riches in the afterlife. Did Morris read The Heir of Redclyffe with an intimation that sexual abnegation was to loom large in his life? When death is coming near And thy heart shrinks in fear And thy limbs fail, Then raise thy hands and pray To Him who smooths the way Through the dark vale. In his final hours Guy had asked Amy, so soon to be his widow, to repeat their favourite lines from Sintram and his Companions. It was The Heir of Redclyffe that led Morris on to Sintram, thewinter' story in the collected tales, one for each of the four seasons, by the German Baron Friedrich de la Motte Fouqué. In Oxford Morris and Burne-Jones had come upon a translation of this early nineteenthcentury romance. The frontispiece was a woodcut copy of Dürer's engraving of ‘The Knight and Death', the knight riding on his horse through a desperation valley of gnarled trees and jagged rock-forms. Though the print was badly made the woodcut fascinated them and they pored over it for hours. The meanings of Sintram fascinated them as well. The solemn mystic story of the hero travelling through the icy landscape, embattled with his own wild and troubled temperament, set up reverberations which would last for life for both of them. They took to it at Oxford not as an escapist narrative but as a blueprint for the living of real lives. Sintram too is a chronicle of self-discipline, self-sacrifice. Sintram's mother is a nun, majestic, grey-haired, sexless. She is unable to receive him in her cloister until he is pure in mind and body, as unsullied as the snowy plains around the convent. Sintram, looking at his shield and on that shiny surface coming face to face with his own image, realizes how far he is from that ideal. In a moment of frenzy he reaches for his dagger and cuts off his black hair, ‘so that to look upon he was almost like a monk'. The dwarf, his sexual tempter, the Little Master', is as horrid as the lubricious yellow midget in Morris's own 189os'fairytale The Wood beyond the World. One of the Oxford models for William Morris's monastery was in the nearby countryside. Morris and Burne-Jones both knew of the community at Littlemore, where early in the 184os Newman bought land beside the church with the intention of founding ‘a half college, half monastery' developed out of an L-shaped block of six cottages and stable. The stable was converted to make the library. The monastic accommodation at Littlemore was austere enough to have impressed the Italian Passionist priest Father Dominic Barberi: nothing to be seen but poverty and simplicity - bare walls, floor composed of a few rough bricks without a carpet, a straw bed, one or two chairs, and a few books; this composed the whole furniture'. Though Morris loved his pleasures there was also in his nature a self-flagellating instinct, and his yearnings for the monastery involved a way of living at the opposite extreme from the home comforts of Walthamstow, with its welcoming window-seat, its apricots ripening in the kitchen garden. He was craving a dramatic volte-face and subduing of the flesh. Burne-Jones, with his town background, was even more attracted to ideas of a mixed community of monastic and lay members working together in the centre of London, on the pattern suggested in Hurrell Froude's Project for the Revival of Religion in Great Towns. Burne-Jones hoped to recruit Cormell Price to this community. He wrote to him in May 1853, ‘I have set my heart on our founding a Brotherhood. Learn Sir Galahad by heart; he is to be the patron of our Order.' He described William Morris as being already involved in the project heart and soul’. Burne-Jones made it very clear the Brotherhood would be a chaste one. A few months later he was writing to Price still more persuasively: 'We must enlist you in this Crusade and Holy warfare against the age.' Why this emphasis on chastity? One has to remember that chastity was then in fashion, especially amongst those with advanced aesthetic tastes making their own protest against vast Victorian families. There was the example of the Nazarenes, so called because of their return to the dress and indeed hairstyles of the Bible. This brotherhood of German painters, Lukasbrüder, or the Brotherhood of St Luke, had been founded in 18o9. The leaders were Friedrich Overbeck and Franz Pforr. They moved to Rome in 18ro, where they took over the disused monastery of S. Isidoro. There they were joined by Peter von Cornelius. In Rome Overbeck became a Roman Catholic. Their work is suffused by a religious solemnity. They believed the moral purpose of art had dissipated since the Middle Ages. 'They put a renewed emphasis on teaching through the workshops, and living monastically in a community. The Nazarenes were purist but they also had a certain flamboyance. They revived the art of the monumental fresco. They forsook the world to flood it with immense and crowded canvases. Their connection with the English Pre-Raphaelites is patent. There too in the orbit of the Nazarenes is Morris, of the second generation of Pre-Raphaelites, with his combination of reticence and splendours. His mediaevalism edged towards the outré: vast chambers hung with tapestries, preposterous stained glass. Another of the models for William Morris's monastery was the plan put forward by George Edmund Street, one of the leading English Gothic architects and a vigorous Anglo-Catholic. In $\tau 8 4 8$ he had drawn up his proposals for an English artistic and religious foundation, a society or college in which the students and the masters would be under certain religious ordinances and live a life in strict accord with the lofty character of their work'. By the time Morris had arrived at Exeter, Street was diocesan architect of Oxford. There he later built the great North Oxford church of St Philip and St James, known to future generations as Phil-Jim. He and Morris did not at this stage know each other, but in their ideals of artistic celibacy there is an obvious link. The monastic connection ran from William Morris to the later English communities of craftsmen: in its most dramatic form to Eric Gill at Ditchling, putting on the habit of the Third Order of St Dominic, complete with the girdle of chastity. It was not always as convincing as it might have been; but a constant element of Arts and Crafts in England was its purism and separatism, the creation of small rural worlds apart from the distractions of flesh. For Morris and Burne-Jones the ideal of chastity provided a convenient postponement of decision. They were young for their years, with a hazy sexuality. Georgiana Burne-Jones may have had a vested interest in registering an impression of her husband's early purity, but there is no reason to question her assertion of the sexual naïveté prevailing in the Set. She was confident that ‘the mystery which shrouds men and women from each other in youth was sacred to each one of them'. She says they had no conquering airs with women: to this extent Burne-Jones and Morris were Mr Verdant Greens. If anything their leanings at this stage were homosexual, but a world away from the knowingness of Oxford homosexuals of the 189os. They had that particular mid-nineteenth-century romantic openness. Burne-Jones had been nervous about Morris's reception of his first and best Birmingham friend, Cormell Price. But he need not have worried. Price was stalwart, gentle, handsome, with a face that looked permanently sunburnt, and Morris loved him from the first. It was Crom Price who was the confidant of one of William Morris's rare emotional outbursts, in the earliest surviving letter from his Oxford years. He and Price, at the end of term, had somehow missed each other. Morris wrote from home: I won't make any excuses: please forgive me. As the train went away from the station, I saw you standing in your scholar's gown and looking for me. If I hadn't been on the other side, I think I should have got out of the window to say goodbye again. In those few phrases one looks into a small world of male tendresse. A fixed memory of the Oxford of that period is of William Morris reading Ruskin out loud to his friends in the mighty singing voice which was chanting more than reading. He declaimed from The Seven Lamps of Architecture, Modern Painters and The Stones of Venice. He almost hurled these works towards his audience, defying them not to be impressed by Ruskin's descriptions of the slave ship or his eloquent defence of Turner's skies. Morris the omnivorous reader was already familiar with the two published volumes of Ruskin's Modern Painters before he came to Oxford. But the second volume of The Stones of Venice, published in 1853, was an Oxford book, the Oxford book of that whole period when the reading of Ruskin seemed to Morris to have been asort of revelation’. He was particularly dazzled by the chapter in The Stones of Venice entitled ‘On the Nature of Gothic Architecture: and herein of the true functions of the workman in art'. When this chapter was published in the 189os in one of the first of the Kelmscott Press editions he explained the great impact it had had on him originally: in future days it will be considered as one of the very few necessary and inevitable utterances of the century. To some of us when we first read it . . . it seemed to point out a new road on which the world should travel. Burne-Jones was a natural convert. But to others of the Set Ruskin's verbal torrent, with his passion for the visual, was unfamiliar and at first bewildering. Morris's championing of Ruskin shows how quickly his approval could sway the taste of others. Dixon recollected ‘we soon saw the greatness and importance of it'. In Stalky & Co. Beetle is reading Fors Clavigera. Evidently Cormell Price later recommended Ruskin's books to the boys in his charge at Westward Ho. Morris always insisted that Ruskin came at the right time and that he was the prime mover in the turning of the tide away from a blind faith in materialist progress and towards a perception of the damage to society this implied. Ruskin was in his middle thirties when Morris was at Oxford. His Seven Lamps of Architecture, a precise and inspired disquisition on the Gothic, was one of the handbooks of the Gothic revival. In the early 185os his intervention in defence of the Pre-Raphaelites profoundly influenced public attitudes towards them. Ruskin had by this time acquired the authority of the minor sage. His ‘On the Nature of Gothic', part description, part polemic, is a wonderfully lucid essay on morality, eccentric and impassioned, written in a soaring and idiosyncratic Biblical prose. Morris fell upon it, finding in it what he described later as the ‘marvellous inspiration of genius' that took Ruskin to ‘the centre of mediaeval art'. This insight had to do with art and national culture: it was the perception that the art of any epoch was the expression of its social coherence. Ruskin took his argument to an extreme critique of contemporary morals, appealing to Morris both as mediaevalist and as the conscience-stricken heir of the City finance houses. Ruskin's claim was that the social structures of the Middle Ages allowed the workman freedom of individual expression tragically absent in the Victorian age. Morris at one stage commented that Ruskin appealed more directly to working-class than middle-class audiences because they could see the prophet in him rather than the fantastic rhetorician. Morris too had the simplicity to cut through the swathes of Ruskinian elaboration to seize his central truths. Ruskin argued against the division of labour in the Victorian factories and the way it inevitably dehumanized the operatives: if you will make a man of the working creature, you cannot make a tool'. He attacked the monotony of the Victorian industrial system, with its morally destructive cycles: boredom and monotony at work, sweated or otherwise, followed by pursuit of leisure completely unconnected with the work or work place. In that disconnection social neurosis lies. Ruskin challenged the traditional view that a designer should not also be a maker: it seemed to him unsatisfactory to the point of immorality for one man's thoughts to be executed by another man's hands. His most startling proposals arose from what he saw as an incorrect distinction between manual labour and intellect: We are always in these days endeavouring to separate the two; we want one man to be always thinking, and another to be always working, and we call one a gentleman, and the other an operative; whereas the workman ought often to be thinking, and the thinker often to be working, and both should be gentlemen, in the best sense. Leaving aside the ‘gentlemen', this statement is so radical that it still strikes one as relatively modern: Eric Gill preached something like it in the 193os and so did Raymond Williams in the 196os. As it has seemed to commentators in the 199os, no wonder that the National Curriculum is so unsatisfactory – arrived at by Westminster and Whitehall ‘gentlemen', more than a century too late. Morris at Oxford read the works of other English social critics widely. Amongst his belongings still kept at his old college, the jumble of pipes, pens, compasses, spectacles, there is a copy of Carlyle's Past and Present. He was affected by Carlyle deeply and lastingly: especially by Carlyle's dour view of the present in relation to the moral vigour of the past. But he was always more attuned to Ruskin's high-flown clarities. He found Carlyle too grotesque: he once said somebody should have been beside Carlyle to punch his head every five minutes. The ferocity of Carlyle's gloom stood as a warning to him. The influence of Ruskin was always to be greater because Ruskin was ecstatic and allowed him chinks of light. Ruskin founded his Guild of St George with the purpose of transplanting on English soil the laws and methods of life already proven in the great cities of Venice and Florence at the high point of their cultural achievements. Ruskin sat down by the roadside, while his Hinksey roadworks were in progress, perching himself on a heap of rubble. learning from a stone-breaker how to break flints. Ruskin's progress was heroic, containing a whole series of such emblematic episodes. Morris's life was also to be a bit like that. As late as 185o an Oxford college library refused to purchase any books by John Ruskin. But during the period Morris was at Oxford the town became gradually Ruskinized. Ruskin was himself involved with Dr Henry Acland in the initiative for the University Museum, the building intended to house ‘all the materials explanatory of the organic beings placed upon the globe'. Acland was in Scotland with John Ruskin, Ruskin's wife and Millais in that notorious summer of 1853 which led to Effie's nullity suit for non-consummation against her husband. Effie later married Millais. It is strange that in the year in which Morris was absorbing Ruskin's proposals to remedy society Ruskin himself was undergoing such painful and humiliating trials of the heart. The Museum building was started two years later. The architect was Benjamin Woodward from Dublin, grave, silent, sensitive, and though only middle-aged already terminally ill. That whole Museum project, with its earnest aspirations, its slight touch of melancholy, was true to the spirit of the Oxford of that time. ‘The Museum rose before us like an exhalation,' wrote a contemporary don, admiring how every detail of the building, even panelling and skirting boards, gas burners and door handles, was an object lesson in art. He noted the ironwork, plastically trained' into flower forms and leaf shapes. In between the shafts of the interior arcades were instructive displays of British rocks, and the columns of the buildings were themselves designed as scientific specimens, showing the character of different materials, stone, granite and marble. They rose like the pillars of a great cathedral in shades of grey and buff and pink and white. Ruskin saw the Museum as the first building raised in England since the close of the fifteenth century, which has fearlessly put to a new trial this old faith in . . . the genius of the unassisted workman who gathered out of nature the materials he needed'. Literally so: the red-bearded O'Shea brothers and their nephew, part of the contingent who had come over from Ireland with Woodward, brought in plants from the Botanic Gardens to use as their sources for the carving of the pillars. When they started to caricature leading Oxford figures they had to be got rid of. Ruskin's theories of creative freedom had been seen to go too far. Ruskin himself, who was frequently on site advising and encouraging, is said to have worked personally on the carving of a column, which one of the workmen later took down. The immense rib-vaulted portal with its lavish marble carving was designed by Hungerford Pollen. Pollen was the artist who had painted the roof of Merton college chapel with a bold cross-hatching of green and black and russet. In their first term at Oxford Morris and Burne-Jones had spent many silent afternoons in the chapel which they rated with the cloisters at New College as their chief local shrine. It was fortunate for them that they had come to Oxford at a time of such cross-currents. There was the connection between art and the scientists, of which Dr Acland, medical practitioner and Reader in Anatomy and architectural patron, was the supreme example. There was also the connection between art and the Tractarians. Morris and Burne-Jones belonged to the Plain-Song Society which practised regularly in the Music-Room at Holywell. Other members were Woodward and G. E. Street, the architects, and the well-known chivalric painter William Dyce. When they went to the gymnasium in Oriel Lane their instructor was Archibald MacLaren, a sportsman of unusual erudition. He wrote books on physical education and commissioned Burne-Jones to illustrate a collection of fairytales. MacLaren, about twelve years their senior, was intrigued by Morris and Burne-Jones and would ask them out to his house in Summertown, then in the country. He was partly a father figure, partly older brother. He supported them and teased them. These visits to MacLaren were their first joint contact with the outside world. It was a low white house, with a rose-covered veranda and a little enclosed garden, a model for Morris's many enclosed gardens, real and imagined, boxed in with white walls. There they met MacLaren's young wife, hardly more than a girl. When he saw the studies of landscape and foliage Burne-Jones had been making in the country around Oxford MacLaren was impressed and gave him great encouragement. Morris was at this stage drawing not flowers but buildings: windows, arches and gables. He was arriving at his sense of the centrality of architecture as the basis of all arts. The Pre-Raphaelite painters had preceded them to Oxford. Here already, in the early 185os, the Pre-Raphaelites had found their first important patron, Thomas Combe, leading Tractarian and Printer to the University. He purchased Millais'sChrist in the Carpenter's Shop'; Charles Collins's ‘Convent Thoughts', painted partly in Combe's own garden in Oxford; Holman Hunt's‘Converted British Family Sheltering a Christian Missionary from the Persecution of the Druids’. In a way it seems surprising that the first intimation of the Pre-Raphaelites for Morris and Burne-Jones came so indirectly, from the publication of Ruskin's Edinburgh lectures in 1854. I was working in my room,' wrote Burne-Jones, when Morris ran in one morning bringing the newly published book with him: so everything was put aside until he read it all through to me. And there we first saw about the Pre-Raphaelites, and there I first saw the name of Rossetti. So for many a day after that we talked of little else but paintings which we had never seen.’ Combe had also purchased from Millais ‘The Return of the Dove to the Ark', an oil painting exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1851. It shows the homing dove with its sprig of laurel being cradled by two wives of the sons of Noah. They are very young and girlish, one in an emerald green dress, the other in a floating white robe. Very shortly after they first heard of the Pre-Raphaelites, this painting was on show in Oxford, in James Wyatt's picture dealers in the High Street; and then', said Burne-Jones, we knew'. In the autumn of 1854 Morris had moved into new rooms at Exeter. These adjoined Burne-Jones's rooms in the Old Buildings of the college, since demolished. They were complicated buildings, gabled, pebbledashed and rambling. Small dark passages led from the staircase to the sitting-room; steps up to the window seat, steps down to the bedroom. Doors banged in people's faces; there was a certain claustrophobia, a Charley's Aunt atmosphere of incipient farce. It was here in the Old Buildings that Morris became a poet. ‘Here, one morning,'recorded Burne-Jones, just after breakfast, he brought me in the first poem he ever made. After that, no week went by without a poem.' The news spread around the Set. Crom Price and Richard Dixon went to Exeter, found Morris with Burne-Jones who announced it to them wildly: "He's a big poet." "Who is?" asked we. “Why Topsy."' Topsy was the name Burne-Jones had given Morris, an in-joke referring to his mop of hair. Topsy was the little slave girl in Harriet Beecher Stowe's recently published Uncle Tom's Cabin. It was Topsy who maintained she had no father and no mother and, when questioned on her origin, said ‘I 'spect I grow'd'. Dixon, late in life, remembered the scene vividly: We sat down and heard Morris read his first poem, the first that he had ever written in his life. It was called ‘The Willow and the Red Cliff’. As he read it, I felt that it was something the like of which had never been heard before. It was a thing entirely new; founded on nothing previous: perfectly original, whatever its value, and sounding truly striking and beautiful, extremely decisive and powerful in execution ... I expressed my admiration in some way, as we all did; and I remember his remark, 'Well, if this is poetry, it is very easy to write'. Morris himself contributed to the legend of the instant Oxford poet, recording in his long autobiographical letter to Scheu: 'While still an undergraduate, I discovered that I could write poetry, much to my amazement.'In fact it seems unlikely that ‘The Willow and the Red Cliff' was the first poem he had written. In the 192os a small cache of early Morris poems and fragments not published in his first collected ## OXFORD 1853-55 volume was retrieved from a drawer of a bureau which had belonged to Morris's sister Emma. Amongst these is a long poem in Tennysonian blank verse about the destruction and rebuilding of the temple. ‘The Dedication of the Temple' was the subject for an Oxford prize poem in December 1853. As an undergraduate Morris would not himself have been eligible to enter, but the subject must have struck him as irresistible. ## it is sweet To see the many marble pillars stand, To see within, the many archèd cross: To see the arches other arches make In dark and light upon the marble floor. This is an unmistakably Ruskinian temple. Morris's narrative has a certain vigour although it is obviously immature. Morris seems to have obliterated from his memory the poems in this collection. Looking at them now, some naïve ballad quatrains seem almost juvenilia, and there are poems that may date back to Marlborough, written out in Emma's careful and affectionate hand. Morris probably considered these false starts. What does seem obvious is that in his second year at Oxford he started writing poetry with sudden new seriousness and much increased facility. Morris's enthusiasms came in cycles. Each new enthusiasm quickly eclipsed the old one. Morris's own letters show the extent to which the writing of poems had now become obsessive. In his poetic phase the urge to make a poem came nagging at him constantly like one of his compulsive physical activities, a mental equivalent of his netting or his weaving. On Tuesday in Holy Week (3 April 1855) he wrote to Crom Price from Walthamstow enclosing a poem he described as‘exceedingly seedy': the poem begins ‘Twas in Church on Palm Sunday'. It is an accumulative poem about kisses, Easter kisses, lovers' kisses, death-bed kisses, unmeant kisses: Willow standing 'gainst the blue, Where the light clouds come and go, Mindeth me of kiss untrue In another letter he tells Price the idea of Kisses' came to him in church: not at sermon-time, but as the second lesson, the history of Judas's betrayal, was being read. One gets the impression that this inner life of poetry, exhausting and compulsive, was making his home life seem more remote and even less congenial. He complains to Price from Walthamstow, 'there are no facts here to write about; I have no one to talk to, except to ask for things to eat and drink and clothe myself withal; I have read no new books since I saw you, in fact no books at all. His Oxford life had taken over from his old life. When Burne-Jones had come to stay and his mother had embarked on childhood reminiscences, seeing Burne-Jones was fond of him, Morris had been embarrassed and had shut his mother up. It is curious that Dixon laid so much stress on Morris's originality. ‘The Willow and the Red Cliff' is particularly Keatsian, and indeed close to the poetry Dixon himself was writing: About the river goes the wind And moans through the sad grey willow And calls up sadly to my mind The heave and swell of the billow. For the sea heaves up beneath the moon, And the river runs down to it. It will meet the sea by the red cliff, Salt water running through it. That cliff it rises steep from the sea On its top a thorn tree stands, With its branches blown away from the sea As if praying with outstretched hands To be saved from the wind, from the merciless wind That moaneth through it always, And very seldom gives it rest When the dark is falling pallwise. One day when the wind moaned through that tree, As it moans now through the willow, On the cliff sat a woman clasping her knee O'er the rise and fall of the billow Keats was being read within the Set in those days. Morris always admired Keats with a ‘boundless admiration' and liked to refer to him as one of his masters. Wordsworth, he later confessed, was a poet whom at Oxford he only pretended to have liked. By 1855 he had read a little Shelley and had liked the poems he had read: “The Skylark" was one: wHAT a gorgeous thing it is!’ But a later conclusion was that Shelley had no eyes. What he found and related to so easily in Keats was his supreme visual quality. Morris drew the distinction between poets of rhetoric, in which category he put Milton and Swinburne, and poets who were primarily makers of pictures, visually observant poets such as Chaucer and Keats. Morris too was by instinct a picture-making poet, though he had yet to find his own poetic voice. Morris had no high opinion of his early Oxford poetry. When it was suggested in the 189os that some of his unpublished poems should be reclaimed and printed Morris shuddered. He did not want the ingenuous callowness' of them revealed to public gaze. In a way what had been more important than the poems themselves had been the context of their writing. Poetry at Oxford had been a group activity. Fulford, booming reader, was himself a poet. Dixon, dark, pale-faced, sad-voiced, shabby, beautiful and dirty, became a poet of small output but strange visionary quality. When Tennyson died not just Morris's name but Dixon's was being bandied around as his possible successor as Poet Laureate. It was an atmosphere of intense creative interplay and Morris, for the first time in his life, was at the hub of it, alert, hectic, exhortatory, beaming, directing operations, giving and receiving. This scenario came to be so necessary to him he would attempt to recreate it in successive bands of brothers grouped around him, most notably in Morris, Marshall Faulkner & Co. Morris at Oxford was exuberant and noisy. A little more piano sir, Madox, his scout at Exeter, is said to have suggested. There were tales of Morris shouting for his scout out of the window while the man was actually standing in the room. Such tales accumulated. It was while he was at Oxford that Morris's wild temper began to take on the quality of legend. In these rages he was accredited with superhuman strength: driving his head against the wall hard enough to make a deep dent in the plaster; biting practically through the woodwork of a window frame; using his teeth to lift up heavy weights. Dixon described his masochistic habit of beating his own head, dealing himself vigorous blows, to take it out of himself'. MacLaren complained that Morris's bills at the gymnasium for broken sticks and foils equalled those of all the rest of his pupils put together. Unimpressed with the quality of the Christmas pudding served at Red Lion Square Morris hurled it down the stairs. These were stories which persisted, in one form or another, until Morris was middle-aged. They were passed round and embroidered, like the tales in Nordic sagas. What was behind them, and indeed how true were they? It does seem certain that Morris's famous rages at their worst could develop into something more alarming: a kind of seizure in which he partially lost consciousness. The most graphic description comes, again, from Dixon in notes supplied for but played down in Mackail's biography. Morris had gone to stay with him in Birmingham: When he was to go, we both (I think) misread the railway guide, and drove to the station when there was no train: and there was nothing for it but to wait to next day. I was made aware of this by a fearful cry in my ears, and saw Morris translated'. It lasted all the way home. It then vanished in a moment: he was calm as if it had never been, and began painting in watercolours. I wanted to get him some wine: but he said he was all right, and he manifestly was. There has been such a conspiracy of silence over Morris's true medical condition that it is difficult now to piece the evidence together. But it does seem likely that the incident described by Dixon is a typical example of a relatively minor disappointment and annoyance triggering an involuntary physical response out of all proportion to its cause. It appears that in these states Morris did not actually fall to the ground but remained immobile, unaware of his surroundings for what could be many minutes, in what would now be described as partial seizure. When Bernard Shaw, fascinated as he was by medical phenomena and particularly gleeful at pointing out the weakness in anyone so apparently robust, first broached the subject he used the word ‘eclampsia' to describe Morris's condition. This term is now used mainly to refer to quasi-epileptic fits during pregnancy, dangerous if not controlled by drugs. Shaw was using it in a more generalized sense to suggest that Morris's rages in fact were pathological and that Morris's loss of physical control when crossed or irritated was not quite sane. One of the puzzles that remain is whether Morris's ‘translation' was followed by amnesia, an involuntary obliteration of the incident from his memory, or whether the almost ingratiating quietness that followed on his outbursts was the result of his dismay and his embarrassment. But Shaw echoes Dixon in his comment that these rages left Morris shaken ‘as men are shaken after a fit’. ## OXFORD 1853-55 Inevitably these illnesses engendered a kind of separation from the male friends Morris by now so much depended on. There was his immediate frightening removal into the ‘absent' state. Equally, there was the state of anxious tension in the aftermath, the moments of returning to reality. It seems his friends made light of it, sharing his own embarrassments and hoping to contain these incidents by the chaff and horseplay the Set was always prone to. There was a youthful cruelty in their behaviour. After one of his ‘storms' in the late 185os Faulkner stuck a label He is mad’ on William Morris's hat, before they went out. What is interesting is the way Morris himself colluded, as if desperate to make himself more socially acceptable. He turned himself almost into a cartoon character for the entertainment of the Set. He was willing to stagger around holding a coal scuttle in his teeth, in imitation of the passengers alighting from a cross-Channel steamer. In London, slightly later, He would imitate an eagle with considerable skill and humour, climbing onto a chair.' He went along with the sobriquet of Topsy more than was absolutely necessary, sometimes signing his letters not with his name but with the sign of the small boy's spinning top. Morris's Socialist colleagues were furious at the way the name Topsy was still lingering among his old acquaintances up till the 18gos. They felt that it demeaned him. Bernard Shaw pondered this problem: There must have been a moment in which he realised that there was no such person as Topsy.' Indeed there was; but it did not happen yet. Morris's writings make great use of rages, trances and translations. The Black Knight in The Water of the Wondrous Isles casts himself down, rolls about and paws the ground. In the same novel, when Birdalone returns to him, Arthur in thanksgiving sinks his forehead to the earth: he rolls over, his limbs stretch out, blood gushes from his mouth. In ‘The Hollow Land', a story of Morris's Oxford period, a dizzving swoon precedes Arnold's benign vision of his love clad in loose white raiment sitting on a great grey stone. He consistently dwells on the prophetic power of swooning. The most vocal of Morris's prophets, the Hall-Sun in The House of the Wolfings, is a swooner. It is also significant that she is a woman. Perhaps those who have experienced this sort of other-worldliness have the equipment to get closer to the truth. By the end of William Morris's second year in Oxford hopes for the monastery seem to have been waning. Price wrote: 'Morris has become questionable on doctrinal points, and Ted is too Catholic to be ordained.' Other things preoccupied them. In the summer vacation of 1855 Morris went to the Royal Academy exhibition in London. It was here he first met Georgiana Macdonald. She was then fifteen, demure, shy, incandescent with intelligence. Burne-Jones already knew her. Her father, the Rev. George Macdonald, a leading Wesleyan Methodist, had been a minister on the Birmingham circuit in the early 185os. Georgie's brother Harry was at King Edward's Grammar School with Ned. She had once answered the door to him, the small girl in her pinafore. The Macdonald family had now returned to London. Slowly, tentatively, she and Ned had renewed acquaintanceship. A remarkable female dynasty emerged from that Methodist background of plain living and high thinking. Georgie's elder sister Alice was Rudyard Kipling's mother. Of her three younger sisters Agnes married the artist and later Royal Academician Edward Poynter; Louisa married the Midlands ironmaster Alfred Baldwin, MP for Bewdley, and their son was Stanley Baldwin, Conservative prime minister three times between 1923 and 1937. Even in such a family of formidable women Georgie stood out for her asperity and firmness. Rossetti, who knew these clever daughters as young women, had predicted it was only Louisa who would grow up to be the equal of 'Mrs. Ned'. The oldest daughter, Mary, had died in early childhood, like Morris's elder brother: this was one bond between them. Another was a concentration on essentials so dogged as to constitute a kind of blindness. As a child it had never occurred to Georgie to wonder if her family were rich or poor. The Academy meeting was an unpropitious start to Morris's friendship with the woman Sydney Cockerell described as his ‘spiritual affinity'. Georgie was accompanied there by Wilfred Heeley, a friend of her brother's, another of that close-knit group of Birmingham young men. Heeley said, ‘That's Morris,' pointing at the stolid figure standing closely scrutinizing Millais's painting of ‘The Rescue'. Heeley introduced them. She thought him very handsome, of an unusual type, reminiscent of the statues of mediaeval kings. He had no moustache in those days so the shaping of his mouth, which she always felt was his most expressive feature, stood out clearly. His hair waved and curled 'triumphantly'. ## OXFORD 1853-55 But his eyes seemed inward-looking: he looked as if he scarcely knew me,' she wrote later. At their next meeting the following summer, the impasse had remained. Georgie wondered how this awkward, unresponsive man had ever written the poem ofRapunzel and Golden Guendolen'. He did not appear poetic. Other people at the time observed this same incongruity.