# KELMSCOTT MANOR 1871-75 ## SCENE II (St. Fames's Hall) Topsy is discovered lecturing in Architectural Restoration. Top (reads). Our forefathers had thus reared for us, with superhuman labour, temples worthy of Christian worship – nay, almost worthy in themselves of some portion of the homage which the worshippers'– (Aside through his teeth, – I can't have written rot like this' – turns the page to skip, but finding he cannot, goes on).–which the worshippers bestowed on that Power which alone could have inspired such mighty achievements.'(Aside, as before) I know that damned Ned has stuck it in!’– (goes on) – ‘Little could those great yet humble ones have dreamed that a too puffed-up posterity' – (Scratches the seat of his trousers, and looks uneasily at the curtain behind him) –would have devoted all their efforts only to the defacement of the noble structures bequeathed to their keeping by godlike minds and hands.'(Aside through the curtains) – I say, Ned, damn you.' E. BURNE-JONEs (from behind curtain). I didn't do it, Top – you wrote it yourself. It's very bad, but go on or the audience will hiss. (Topsy goes on, lurching a great deal, and at last concludes amid great applause: he bows and goes behind curtain.) Top. I say, Ned, mustn't they just be fools! I'll pay you out another time, I must get down to the Wardles, as I said I'd take tea there. E. BURNE-JONES. They always take coffee. Top. O do they? will you come? E. BURNE-JONEs. No thank you. I say, Top, one of the workmen has chalked a large T on your back. Top. Well, damn you, why don't you rub it out? (They have now reached the door, and E. Burne-Fones bolts down the street.) ## SCENE III A Private Apartment. Wardle and Madeline seated at a table, with cups and saucers etc. MADELINE. Is the deed signed? WARDLE. Yes (A crash without. Enter ToPsY.) Top. I say, I'm very sorry, but I was laying down my hat on a chair outside, and somehow my hand went through it. MADELINE. I pray don't mention it, Mr. Morris, it's of no consequence. Top (to Wardle). I say, old chap, Ned told me just now that someone had chalked a T on my back. (Tries to see it) Do you see it? WARDLE. No, of course. Top. Blow that Ned! (Aside through his teeth) I should like to tread his guts out. WARDLE. He hasn't got any. Top. O I say, talk about guts – what's become of mine? (He stands up, and taking a quartern loaf from the table, stuffs it into the waistband of his trousers to show how much room there is, – then pulls it out again and puts it back on the plate.) There, now you mind you don't call me fat any more. wARDLE. I never did, – I always thought you a fine figure. MADELINE. Mr. Morris, you're letting your coffee get cold. George dear, hand the cup. Top (taking cup from Wardle). All right old chap (Drinks). Hullo! how can I have the gripes now that I've got no belly? Hullo! Blow! (dies). ## SCENE IV ## (Same as in Scene I) Wardle places a ladder against the Upholsterer's shop, and mounting it erases the name of Morris, substitutes Wardle Co. FIRST CABMAN (passing). Hi! Who's the Co.? SECOND CABMAN (passing). Why, coffee, course. (Topsy is carried out on a stretcher, while Stennett is seen passing at the head of a funeral; he stops and gazes intently. Old Brown goes by on the top of an omnibus, and turning round, stares in stupefaction at the altered name over the door.) EMMA (from within the omnibus). Did you see that, Ford? oLD B. Yes, Emma (He raises his eyes and his hands to heaven) (The ghost of Warington Taylor is heard tapping at a Medium's door.) ## SCENE V ## (The Medium's house) MRs. GUPPY seated at a table of Victorian design, with ghosts and others. Enter the Ghost of Warington Taylor. GHOST OF TAYLOR. Topsy you fool, come along. Here's a chance for you. Spit on 'em through that table, & let 'em catch it as they deserve. GHosT OF ToPsY. Get out, it's beastly rot. Do you think I'm going to believe in bogies merely because I'm one myself? And besides, you don't suppose, you idiot, that I'd talk through a blowed table of such a damned shape as that! (Indulges in language after his kind). MRS. GUPPY. That is the very lowest class of spirit of which I ever had experience. May not the essence of such misused humanity rank even below the soulless beasts that perish? – Who shall say? Well, he is gone my friends, – I dread to think whither. (She turns to the table) Shelley, are you there? GHOST OF PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY: Hi diddle diddle The cat & the fiddle – MRS. GUPPY. Hush – my friends, now indeed we shall hear something. (Curtain) The scene with Mrs Guppy, famous medium of the period, was an obvious barbed attack on the phlegmatic Morris. The occult was a bond between Janey and Rossetti who used to go to seances together. Janey had a definitely spiritualist tendency, giving vivid accounts of ghost activity at Kelmscott: mysterious carriages being driven to the house. But Morris had a dampening effect on any medium. Burne-Jones recalled: Once I went with Mr. Morris to a séance at a house where we dined first with the medium, which I always thought was a mistake.' The disbanding of the Firm affected Morris more profoundly than he wanted to admit. It was another abandonment of brotherhood. His recalcitrant partners' had, he felt, behaved so badly that he was at one point tempted to throw the whole affair into the law courts. It was a saddening and disillusioning time. But Morris, though depressed, emerged from it defiant, even a bit triumphant at getting the top side of those who had for ages been teasing and tormenting him and sucking at his brains. The episode shows Morris as the avenger too, ousting Rossetti from his Firm if not his marriage. He wrote in May 1875, 'I have got my partnership business settled at last, and am sole lord and master now.' In that same year, with a comparable decisiveness, he resigned his directorship of Devon Great Consols, having disposed of most of his shares. Edward Carpenter, the poet and free-thinker, feeling the call to Socialism, discarded his dress clothes. The Victorians were given to these symbolic dramas. On the day he resigned from his Consols directorship Morris deliberately sat down on his top hat.