# KELMSCOTT HOUSE 1879–81 And while he thought of this and that, Upon his perch the falcon sat Unfed, unhooded, his bright eyes Beholders of the hard-earned prize. Morris's new involvement in the technical processes of weaving released new creative energies, as dyeing had done earlier. His weaves are in a way more interesting than his chintzes because of the permutations of the textures: silk and cotton, wool and silk. Perhaps the most splendid is ‘St James's’, Morris's design for the palace, in woven silk damask combined with figured silk. Morris designed some special broché silks for dresses but these met with resistance from the London dressmakers who had their own favourite sources of supply. However May's and Janey's best gowns were of Anemone', a rich black silk brocade designed by Morris. Janey also had two dresses made from the fabrics for St James's Palace: the golden silk damask, described by May as ‘fit only for her stately figure', and the green ‘Oak' silk with its 'moonbeam lights'. Morris had been designing floor coverings since the middle 187os. The first of his designs to be registered in June 1875 was in fact for a printed linoleum called ‘Corticine floor cloth' in an African marigold design. His first designs for the machine-made carpets produced for him by outside manufacturers were registered in that same year, and he was gradually able to arrive at better colours by stipulating that the carpets should be woven in the yarns he and Wardle were developing at Leek. But when it came to making his own carpets these were not loom-woven but handknotted carpets, made on the Eastern model. Such carpets had not been made before in Britain on anything like the scale Morris envisaged. Again he was entering new creative territory. He explained that his aim was to make England independent of the East for the supply of handmade Carpets which may claim to be considered works of art'. Like his love of illuminated manuscripts Morris's ardour for the carpets of the East had begun when he was young. Carpets answered to his craving for the rare and the exotic: the carpet, magic artefact of Eastern narrative, became part of Morris's personal reverie. He had been collecting fine examples of old carpets since his days at Red House, and had built up such reserves of expert knowledge that by the 187os the South Kensington Museum keepers were coming to Morris for advice on their own purchases. As his plans for carpet making were advancing, his enthusiasm for prize examples of old Eastern art intensified. In 1877 he wrote to Wardle: I saw yesterday a piece of ancient Persian time of Shah Abbas (our Elizabeth's time) that fairly threw me on my back: I had no idea that such wonders could be done in carpets.' In Venice in the following spring he got so heated bargaining with a dealer over two fine Persian carpets that George Howard had to intervene and the gondolier, watching idly from the doorway, was surprised to see the ‘grande poeta' so beside himself. One of these two purchases was destined for the Tapestry Room at Kelmscott House. On the way back home through Paris Morris was still pursuing carpets, as Janey told Rosalind, showing her irritation: we had but a dreary day there going in a cab to different curiosity shops, finding many fine carpets full of holes, but fortunately buying none.' Before Morris started on the making of his carpets there was the usual inquisitive, investigative phase in which he analysed an ancient Persian carpet in great detail, teaching himself from it the processes involved. Next he had a frame set up in the attic in Queen Square, anxiously supervising the first trial squares. In 1879 production was moved to Hammersmith, where several carpet frames were installed in the coachhouse and stables. A professional carpet weaver from Glasgow came down for a few weeks to give technical assistance, and Morris's first carpet makers were recruited. There were usually to be about six of them, all female. They were expected to hand-knot two inches of carpet a day. The carpets were marketed as Hammersmith' carpets. A hammer and a zig-zag, to represent the river, were woven into the border: a primitive logo, curiously close to the hammer-and-the-sickle adopted by the USSR in 1923. When a large carpet came off the loom at Hammersmith, the family would be called across the garden to view it before it was sent to the showroom. For the first few years in Hammersmith, as at Queen Square, family life went on close to work. Kelmscott House, and the stables, were vulnerable to flooding and one Sunday afternoon a rescue operation was mounted by the Morris family and several Sunday guests to save the Naworth carpet, still in progress on the loom, from an abnormally high tide. There was no attempt to integrate the workers with the family, as there would be later with May and her embroideresses or as would be attempted in more socially radical Arts and Crafts communities of c.19oo. But the impression visitors were given was of a peculiarly domestic industry. When Octavia Hill went to Kelmscott House to visit Morris she wrote excitedly: He took us all over the garden and into his study, and such an interesting carpet factory ... It was just in his own garden. The tapestry he had been making himself in his own study was beautiful!!' In the early design stages Morris delegated little. He drew out the design on a piece of scaled-up paper, filling in one section only if it was a repeat design, and colouring the drawing very prettily in gouache. The Victoria and Albert Museum has dozens of these delicate part-finished designs, showing Morris's work in progress: they give one a remarkable impression of his technical assurance and visualizing skill. May commented perceptively how these 'designs in little were beautiful for their mosaic-like filling of rich colour – a strange contrast to the lovely tangle of flowers in the illuminations of earlier days'. She remembered clearly 'with what relish he added the firmly drawn outlines of white or pale orange'. Working out new ways of colouring for the special technical demands of carpet making seemed to them both a hugely enjoyable new game. For his pattern designing Morris kept an all-purpose set of ordinary water-colours in tubes: Prussian blue, yellow ochre, gamboge, raw umber, Venetian red, crimson lake, Chinese white, lamp black and Chinese ink. 'What a lot of raw umber and Chinese white we used sometimes!'wrote May in a glow of sentimental recollection of a time when she herself was discovering her métier. Her role was as her father's technical assistant, helping in the tracing and enlargement of the designs to full size on to point paper under his instructions. These were the kind of tasks allotted to the fifteen-year-old Frank Brangwyn, who started his career as an apprentice at Queen Square in 1882. How successful was the episode? How Eastern were these carpets? It has to be admitted that Hammersmith rugs and carpets have little of the finesse of the Persian examples that Morris had in theory set out to emulate. This was partly their technique: Morris, being realistic about his makers' capabilities, and also aware of the limits of his market, did not attempt to use the ancient Persian knotting method. His carpets are made using the coarser Turkish, or Ghiordes, type of knot. Morris's smaller-scale rugs, which were often duplicated and which soon became a decorator's cliché, are amongst the most disappointing of his products: they often seem uncomfortably cramped and almost crude, like a poor man's miniature carpets. Unlike, say, the abstract rugs made later in the Omega Workshops, they lack their own creative life. It is in the later large-scale and unique handmade carpets, centrepieces of the firm's ambitious country-house interiors, that Morris's designs and techniques merge triumphantly. Even these are not, in any real sense, Eastern-style carpets. The idiom is different, the iconography is English, with its oak leaves and fritillaries, its river birds, its reminiscences of English woods and meadows. The colouring is particular to Morris. The enormous Clouds' carpet, now at Regent House in Cambridge, is a marvellous example: a bright peacock-blue background, Morris's celebration colour, with a flowing, tangling pattern of deep greens and fawns. A letter to Janey, sent from Hammersmith in summer 188o, shows Morris at his happiest.Breakfast is over and I have been carpeteering: the Orchard, spread out on the drawing room floor, though not perfect as a piece of manufacture is not amiss; as a work of art I am a little disappointed with it: if I do it again it shall have a wider border I think . . . The 3 yellow bordered pots are not so flat as they should be: I fear the worsted warp is to blame for this: I shall use cotton in future, and perhaps dye it blue roughly.'Morris had a broad vision, broader than most of his Victorian contemporaries. Unlike anyone else he had this concurrent capacity for practical experiment. It is in his combination of the thinking and the doing that Morris's true originality is found. Morris regarded tapestry as the summit of what could be achieved in textiles. He saw it as essentially wall decoration, ‘a mosaic of pieces of colour made up of dyed thread’. Morris liked its exactness: in a tapestry, he argued, nothing vague or indeterminate is possible'. He admired the depth of tone, the richness of colour and the subtle variations of tone feasible in tapestry; and especially he warmed to ‘that crispness and abundance of beautiful detail' characteristic of mediaeval embroidery and weaving. It was this vividness of detail he had noticed when he first saw the Bayeux Tapestry. To Morris the mediaeval tapestry was the equivalent of a Chaucer poem, precise in its narrative, human in its range of reference, eloquent, alive. Tapestry, like stained glass, was a story-telling medium. It was public art, immediately accessible. Morris loved woven pictures, even as a child. He had kept these ambitions in abeyance until the Firm's carpet making was progressing satisfactorily. To his annoyance Queen Victoria had preempted him. In 1875 The Windsor Tapestry Works had been established, under the Queen's patronage, on royal land at Old Windsor. Morris complained to Wardle: ‘The Widow Guelph has been enticing customers from us and has got an order for tapestry that ought to have been ours.'However, by the end of 1877 he and Wardle had entered into practical discussions about plans for making tapestry. It appears that Wardle's aims were more commercial than artistic. Perhaps he saw a Leek equivalent of the royal works at Windsor. Morris felt this would be pointless: Let's clear off what you say about the possibility of establishing a non-artistic manufactory: you could do it of course; 'tis only a matter of money and trouble: but, cui bono?' Morris's own plans were artistically purist and once again he had no obvious points of reference. As he told Aymer Vallance in an interview on ‘The Revival of Tapestry Weaving' in The Studio, the looms in use at Windsor, which Morris had investigated, were horizontal looms operated by a weaver working opposite the picture he was making. Morris considered this method mechanical and artistically limiting. He intended to pursue the high-warp or haute-lisse method, as used to make the mediaeval Flemish tapestries, in which the weaver works from behind the tapestry, watching the progress of the picture through a mirror. This method gave the weaver more creative freedom. Morris also liked to think that Penelope and other ancient tale-tellers had created picture stories on just such an antique loom. Though the high-warp loom was still in use in Paris, at the Gobelins works where Morris much despised its products, there was no more local source of information and Morris, once again, fell back on ancient technical manuals, in this case a book from the Arts et métiers series published in eighteenth-century France. Morris knew in theory the qualities he looked for in a maker of tapestries. He had listed them out in a letter he sent Wardle: 1. General feeling for art, especially for its decorative side. 2. He must be a good colourist. 3. He must be able to draw well; i.e. he must be able to draw the human figure, especially hands and feet. 4. Of course he must know how to use the stitch of the work. He continued, I have no idea where to lay my hands on such man, and therefore I feel that whatever I do I must do chiefly with my own hands.'Morris had an experimental loom erected in his bedroom at Kelmscott House. He got up very early and worked at his loom almost every morning through the summer of 1879. Morris left a small black diary of the progress of the tapestry that started as‘Acanthus and Vine' and was later to be renamed'Cabbage and Vine' as the acanthus leaves became wilder, like a wondrous vegetable quite beyond control. Cabbage and Vine' is averdure' pattern, swirling: based on pairs of leaves and pairs of birds. Morris began it on 1o May. Some mornings he worked for one hour or for two hours; some days he records as much as six or seven hours; occasionally he spent a day of nine or ten hours at the loom. In June there is a note in the margin: a month: weather very bad all this time, often dark'. May would sit at the end of his long bench and watch him working as the great curling leaves grew on the warp threadsunder the nervous swift-moving fingers’. Morris bent his head from time to time to peer between the warp threads and check on the design reflected in the mirror on the right side of the web. The record breaks off on 17 September. The ‘Cabbage and Vine' was by no means completed. But Morris had acquired the basic technique he needed. 'I have taught myself the art of tapestry-weaving, the signs of which might amuse you,'he wrote in October to William Bell Scott. He set up another loom at Queen Square and transferred a young craftsman, J. H. Dearle, from the stained-glass painting workshop to the tapestry department. Dearle was still with Morris & Co. in 193o, at which point his retirement began to be discussed. Two unskilled young boys were taken on as tapestry apprentices. The foundations were laid for the development of high-warp tapestry at Merton Abbey in the 188os on a grander scale. Morris had discovered a new kind of therapy. Tapestry weaving became almost a drug to him. He was back at the loom in his bedroom in the morning brightness of the summer months of 188r. The manual activity would soothe him. Where his loom was there his home was. The well-known Burne-Jones cartoon of Morris weaving, the back view exuding great waves of concentration, shows him almost literally grafted to the loom. In moments of stress he would be seized with a great longing for the life of the small-timer, the artist-artisan, with its limited horizons and its occupational certainties: Lord bless us how nice it will be when I can get back to my little patterns and dyeing, and the dear warp and weft at Hammersmith!' The Empress Brown is hard at work at her rival establishment: I am sure she expects to get the whole of the ornamental upholstery of the Kingdom into her hands: let her tremble! I will under-sell her in all branches. Morris's personal dislike of Queen Victoria, amounting almost to a physical revulsion from a queen so unaesthetic, was for its period unusually strong. In the spring of 1877 his position as a general household furnisher was strengthened when the Firm leased a shop at No. 264 (later 449) Oxford Street, on the corner of North Audley Street. The not especially distinguished red-brick block was new. It gave the Firm a reasonable frontage with two windows, though references to clerks working in back passages suggest that, as in most shops, the staff areas were relatively cramped. Morris claimed to be lukewarm about his company's incursions into the commercial heart of London, saying that ‘a shed with a half dozen looms in it' would have pleased him more. But there is no doubt that shop so close to Morris's most fashionable competitors – Liberty's in Regent Street, Morant's in Bond Street – contributed enormously to the future expansion of the Firm. At Queen Square the atmosphere had been relatively casual. One day Georgie arrived there just after the Princess of Wales had paid a visit: both Mr. Morris and Mr. Wardle were out and she had been received by underlings'. The regime was given a new professionalism by the appointment of two brothers, Robert and Frank Smith. To start with, one brother was employed to manage the new shop whilst the other Mr Smith remained at the old showroom. Morris wrote from Queen Square to Charley Faulkner's sister Lucy: You are very welcome to any information our Misters Smith can give you either he of Oxford St. or he of here.' But when Queen Square was closed down, as the Firm moved out to Merton, both Smiths seem to have gravitated towards Oxford Street. The smooth service disconcerted some of Morris's old clients. De Morgan complained about the airs and condescension of the ‘shopmen at Morris's: 'I wish to goodness', he remarked as he left, ‘they would not treat us as if they were all Ptolemies.' As Morris became involved in new forms of manufacturing the shop's range of its own exclusive merchandise increased. By the early 188os Morris & Co. could offer: Painted Glass; Embroidery, and material for same; Arras tapestry; Hammersmith carpets; Axminster, Wilton and Kidderminster carpets; Damasks for wall-hangings, curtains and furniture in wool, wool and silk, cotton and silk, and all silk; Stamped velvets; Printed cloths for wall-hanging, curtains etc; Wallpapers'. No other London decorating firm could compete with such a range of products either made in its own workshops or produced to its strict specifications by outside suppliers. At Morris & Co., as at Heal & Son later, the great selling point was the sense of a personal artistic control. A review in Building News in r88o emphasized ‘the spirit of individuality and unity' pervading the shop in Oxford Street: we do not see a variety of conceptions in different styles, nor a number of patterns by various artists; all the work is exceptionally good, and is due to Mr. Morris himself we believe.' Morris'smerchandising for the firm' had been continuing. The regular, repeatable furniture and furnishings were supplemented by Morris's own choice of special objects, which gave the shop its feeling of serendipity, The Building News reviewer, on his visit, noticed ‘two fine Vases of Oriental design and glazing, and a Spanish lustre': all these ‘of bold design'. On his visit to Venice Morris had attempted to commission some glass from one of the small workshops at Murano. He, Janey and the girls stood in the little shed, with its sudden fiery glow as the furnace door was opened. May remembered how her father drew the outline of a tumbler on the dusty floor. The glass blower then produced a sample: a simple little glass of slightly coloured, bubbly metal'. But at this point the negotiations stopped because the craftsman was not convinced that Morris was in earnest. On another day they met a barrow piled with glasses in the street and Morris indicated that he was prepared to buy some. The man asked him how many. Oh, a thousand or two,' Morris had replied. He had kept many of his original clients, the friends and fellow-artists from Pre-Raphaelite circles for whom patronizing Morris had become a habit. He and Ned were occupied with the decorations of the Howards London house, No. 1 Palace Green, into the early 188os, and the account books at Castle Howard reveal that house's huge consumption of Morris & Co. wallpapers through the 188os and 189os. Sixteen rolls of ‘Sunflower' for the Yellow Schoolroom; 9 rolls ofDaisy' for the Boys Schoolroom; 24 rolls of 'Bird and Anemone' for the High Saloon, covering over the eighteenth-century frescoes by Pellegrini. Morris's 'Venetian' pattern was chosen for the Gatehouse. Morris and Rosalind, the supplier and the client, opened up new realms of possibility in that relationship: Item, I can do the most ravishing yellows, rather what people call amber: what would you say to dullish pink shot with amber; like some of those chrysanthemums we see just now? The poet as salesman. Morris's persuasive use of language gives an almost flirtatious quality to their exchange. When he sends Rosalind samples from Oxford Street he marks them ‘recommended' and ‘specially recommended'. He conveys the feeling that choice is as important to him as it can be to her. Morris's aristocratic clientele had been developing. In January 1877 he had visited the Duke of Westminster to discuss the decoration of Alfred Waterhouse's new chapel at Eaton Hall. Perhaps this was the encounter described by Luke Ionides between Morris and an unnamed duke: ‘Everything', said Morris, ‘was so frightfully ugly I didn't know where to begin.'Later that year, Morris had been summoned to the Countess of Charleville at Tullamore, near Kildare in southern Ireland. He set off on the mail train to Holyhead from Euston carrying his patterns of carpets, silks and chintzes. On the road south of Dublin he noticed the extreme poverty of the villages he passed through: ‘the cotters' houses in outside appearance the very poorest habitations of man I have yet seen, Iceland by no means excepted'. In 188o the radical spokesman and vilifier of the Widow Guelph was recalled to St James's Palace first to decorate the entrance and staircases, then to work through the main sequence of great State Rooms culminating in the Throne Room. In 188ı Morris wrote to Janey, 'Work at St. James all finished and happily, with good profit: so don't spare to ask for cash if you want it when shall I send you some?' By the early 188os Morris had also acquired more customers from the ranks of rich industrialists and provincial entrepreneurs, the traditional clientele of the Pre-Raphaelite painters. These are the patrons whose collections, undervalued for a century in the galleries of Birmingham, Manchester, Newcastle, Bradford and other provincial cities, have now come into their own. The purchasers were solid successful men of business with a yearning for the culture of faërie and mediaevalist romance. This was a particular form of rich man's snobbery, the wistfulness of practical people for the world of the imagination. When the lawyer Walter Bagehot commissioned Morris & Co. to decorate his house in Queen's Gate, London, he boasted 'the great man himself, William Morris, is composing the drawing room as he would an ode'. In these close-knit families one commission could generate commissions spreading outwards to sons and daughters as they married. William Morris designed for the whole dynasty of the northern ironmaster Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell, as we have seen. Towards these faithful clients Morris evinced mixed feelings. He was becoming more conscious of his falseness of position in ‘ministering to the swinish luxury of the rich'. As his sympathies with the poor and disadvantaged deepen, his outbursts against his clients show the edginess he felt, to the point of neurotic shrillness. He complains about the ‘sadly stupid', 'monstrously rich' Catherine Lorillard Wolfe, the American philanthropist: hurrah therefore for the social revolution!' He rejects the demands for after-sale service from Mrs Clark at Brentford, who had purchased Morris's curtains: really,' he tells Jenny, when one sells a body porridge one should not be expected to put it in their mouth with a spoon'. Perhaps it was as well for the fortunes of the Firm that by the 188os customers extended far beyond those with whom Morris had personal dealings. Morris & Co. had become a household word: supplier of furnishings to the new artistic middle class. When the Bedford Park estate was laid out in west London, mainly in the Queen Anne style, the majority of residents selected Morris wallpapers and chintzes: so much so, wrote Moncure Conway in his Travels in South Kensington, 'that a branch of the Bloomsbury establishment will probably become necessary in the vicinity of Bedford Park'. Morris products contributed to a style, a look', an alternative aesthetic. They combined to create the fantasy land that had delighted W. B. Yeats as a child when he moved to a house in Bedford Park. We were to see De Morgan tiles, peacock-blue doors and the pomegranate pattern and the tulip pattern of Morris, and to discover that we had always hated doors painted with imitation grain, the roses of mid-Victoria, and tiles covered with geometrical patterns that seemed to have been shaken out of a muddy kaleidoscope. We went to live in a house like those we had seen in pictures and even meet people dressed like people in the story-books. It is ironic that Norman Shaw, chief architect of Bedford Park, was one of the few people who knew Morris and disliked him. He thought Morris was a humbug, overcharging for his wallpapers, ‘full of cranks and general stubbornness . . . Being an advanced Socialist he cannot do with much less than from 100% to 250% clear profit in his work, and so his work is dear!!!'Reginald Blomfield, fellow architect and admirer of both men, pointed out their basic incompatibility of temperament: Morris was impetuous and fanciful, he was not called “Topsy" by his friends without reason; Shaw was a cool-headed Scot, of first-rate ability, with immense power of concentration, with no strong instincts for poetry.’ A whole cultural history could be written in terms of Morris furnishings. They have always been the safe choice of the intellectual classes, an exercise in political correctitude. North Oxford of the 188os was all Morris. Morris's Daily Telegraph obituary recorded: ‘when married tutors dawned upon the academic world, all their wives religiously clothed their walls in Norham-gardens and Bradmore road with Morrisian designs of clustering pomegranates.' Those were days of ‘green serge gowns and Morris papers. Every lady of culture had an amber necklace,'wrote Elizabeth Wordsworth, the first principal of Lady Margaret Hall. Edward Johnston the calligrapher used Morris's 'Willow Boughs' in all his houses. Oscar Wilde had an embossed Morris wallpaper in the smoking-room of his house in Tite Street: when you poked it with your finger, it popped and split'. There were Morris furnishings in the house of Stewart Headlam, where Wilde was taken on his return from Reading Gaol. Hubert Bland was puzzled by the ‘strangely designed wallpapers' and ‘sad coloured velveteens' of the Fabian aesthetic. Beatrice Webb chose Morris wallpaper and furniture, hoping to make her home in Grosvenor Road as beautiful as possible considering her limited cash and still more limited taste'. Bernard Shaw commented, astutely, that Morris's sense of rightness, so obvious in his own interiors at Hammersmith and Kelmscott, could easily go wrong in other people's hands. The Pankhursts were brought up with Morris in the background: when a penniless Italian refugee arrived on Sylvia Pankhurst's doorstep in the 193os she called him ‘William Morris' because he was an artist. Frances Partridge remembered ‘dark and jungly' Morris patterns in her parents' fine old creaking house in Bedford Square: birds eating strawberries on her mother's curtains, parrots on the wall of her father's drawing-room where she would find him in bed in frogged pyjamas. Aldous Huxley was a child inchintzy rooms, modern with William Morris'. In the Keynes family house in Harvey Road in Cambridge the walls of ‘the rather dark dining room were clad in deep blue and crimson William Morris paper of such quality that, except for occasional patching, it never needed renewal'. In another house in Cambridge, Sydney Cockerell's study was heavily curtained in Morris fabrics, a suffocating shrine. T. E. Lawrence, a fan of Morris, was in ecstasies on visiting ‘the perfect Morris house' at Broad Campden in the Cotswolds. This was the ancient Norman Chapel converted by Ananda Coomaraswamy and hung with Morris tapestries. The low galleries were screened with Morris chintz, the long refectory tables and shelves were ‘full of the Kelmscott printings'; the purpose-made oak lectern displayed the Kelmscott Chaucer. Coomaraswamy's act of homage was completed by the purchase of the very hand press Morris himself had used’. In the late 1g2os, Kenneth Clark chose Morris paper for the bedroom of the house he moved into with his wife in Tufton Street in Westminster: the house, he wrote, was otherwise irredeemable'. To his colleagues' disapproval at the ultra-modernist Architectural Review in the 193os, John Betjeman had his top-floor office papered in a Morris wallpaper, ‘ingeniously enlivened by the addition of coloured transfers of butterflies and insects'. G. D. H. Cole, the twentiethcentury Socialist theorist, was devoted not just to Morris's writings but to his wallpapers and his fabrics, which he sensibly praised for their qualities of wearing. Howard Coster photographed the Coles at home in 1938. Cole stands in a booklined study, his elbow on the table. Mrs Cole, later Dame Margaret, the Labour party activist, sits reading ensconced in an armchair covered in Morris's Corncockle' chintz. Her brother, Raymond Postgate, had a whole shelf of Morris's Kelmscott Press books. What has been the reason for such longevity that even the welleducated middle classes of late-twentieth-century Britain and America can measure out their generations in William Morris rooms? It is partly that no one has approached Morris's sheer mastery of pattern. When Lethaby says that Morris was ‘the greatest pattern-designer we ever had or ever can have', it is difficult to disagree. But there is more to it. The thing that has made Morris's patterns so enduring is their extra quality of reminiscence, the secret inner messages that May herself, more susceptible than anybody to her father's nuances, understood so well. May wrote: 'to some people a “Morris paper" is one definite thing they themselves have chosen perhaps long ago, pieces of pattern so full of life that, as part of the background of childhood or of young married days, they keep a remembrance of it with gratitude and pleasure, feeling the nearness, the human-ness of Morris's work.' In a way that has enormous relevance to Morris, Freud was to disinter the meaning of the object, the significance of pattern recollected through our histories. His consulting room in twentieth-century Vienna was crowded with ancient artefacts and textiles, books and objects, photographs and plaques, many given by friends, all holding many memories of people, of places and the mesh of past events. Freud's patients were conscious of an almost sacred hush in the apartment. The famous couch was piled high with pillows and covered with a precious Shiraz rug. In 1878, when Morris was in Venice, St Mark's was one of the few buildings that gave him real pleasure. Once he had managed to limp into the interior he had found deep satisfaction, and rest for the eyes'. But he had been incensed at the restorations already under way in the building he considered ‘a marvel of art and treasure of history'. Mediaeval mosaics were being stripped out of the baptistry. In his fury Morris smashed up George Howard's hat, imagining it was his own. The restoration of the west front of St Mark's was the subject of the SPA B's first convincing venture into foreign propaganda. St Mark's was the great issue of the autumn of 1879. Morris was the strategist and chief spokesman for this campaign, which brought the society out of the shadows of vaguely well-meaning liberal activity and into the forefront of public consciousness. The society had been aware of dangers threatening innumerable important foreign buildings. Right from the beginning the manifesto was translated into French, German and Dutch, as well as Italian. Foreign honorary secretaries had been appointed, where they could be found, to alert the SPAB to obvious atrocities, and British committee members and their friends brought back their own reports when travelling abroad. But now for the first time these uncoordinated international activities found a proper focus. As Morris would soon become so painfully aware in the context of Socialist politics it was difficult to galvanize public activity without a well-defined and emotionally charged cause. Morris's initial moves display more energy than tact. In his first public letter on behalf of the society, to The Daily News, he criticized the Italians for their ‘headlong rashness' and accused them of cultural vandalism in preferring‘gilding, glitter, and blankness, to the solemnity of tone, and the incident that hundreds of years of wind and weather have given to the marble, always beautiful, but from the first meant to grow more beautiful by the lapse of time'. The Italian response was indignant, and Morris soon learned to soft-pedal, in this and in subsequent SPAB campaigns. St Mark's gave him an education in diplomacy, so far as that was possible. Two thousand signatures were collected for the petition. Protest meetings were held in Oxford, Birmingham and Manchester. The society strengthened its base as Morris gathered in support from the most influential people of the day. He wrote ingratiatingly to Ruskin, imploring him to write a letter to The Times expressing his indignation: Ruskin sent a personal message to the Oxford meeting. held at the Sheldonian, and provided notes for an exhibition of photographs of the threatened building to publicize the SPAB campaign. Morris also wrote to Browning, asking him to speak against the proposals and stressing the strength of his personal involvement: to me such a thing happening would mean never going to Venice again'. Browning refused to speak: 'I never speak,' he informed Morris. But he offered a good deal of moral support. Crom Price was contacted to provide the names of his colleagues in the public schools. Even Ned was prevailed upon to speak in public at Oxford, for the only time in his life. Through Morris's zeal the issue was seen as rising to a level above mere party politics. Gladstone signed the petition. So did Disraeli, by now Lord Beaconsfield. In this context there is a fascinating reference in a letter from the artist Charles Keene to Joseph Crawhall to the flurry of activity within theAnti-Restoration Society' over the proposals for St Mark's: ‘Have you had a circular? I see that eminent Conservative (for the nonce), Burne-Jones, has been haranguing about it at a meeting and W. Morris too, – pestilent Reds, at the same time.' Morris put enormous time in on the SPAB, especially in these formative years. He was the dominating figure at the annual general meetings, both reporting in detail on the progress of case histories and rousing the troops in a series of long speeches that show Morris at his most powerful and lucid, putting forward the case for ancient buildings as real and living history', which must be guarded ‘both from thoughtlessness and sordid destruction, and from rash falsification'. Without such food as genuinely old buildings can give it the consciousness of history will starve and fade. In the intervals between these formalized orations Morris was writing constantly on SPAB business: official letters to the press and the SPAB file reports on individual buildings blister with his purposeful and vitriolic prose. In the background were long hours of discussion and drudgery. The minutes show how conscientiously Morris attended the evening SPAB committee meetings, held weekly, in the early period, at Morris's own premises in Oxford Street. In eight months, between April and November 1878, Morris was at twenty-eight meetings, missing only nine. In 1879 he is registered as present at twelve out of the total nineteen committee meetings. He was also involved in SPAB sub-committees, in particular the Restoration 26, Queen Square, Bloomsbury,,London, Nor- yth 1879 Bey de rouming I dont knou if Yow have lean'd yy the propored Wbrildmg of the front of S7 Marks at Vemice, Shich terrifed us Snddeuly I nit a litite sice thowh he tnew it bould our day Come, twe Thonght lorald be put off fear a fer yfeur t is Srodt vuly a malter of Committee, and the separate St Mark's Committee, formed partly as a sop to the Italians, to monitor developments in Venice independently of the SPAB. All this was at a time when Morris was immersed in much of the administrative detail of his recently reconstituted firm. It is not perhaps surprising that Morris's poetic output in these years of such flurry of activity was meagre. In October 1879 he wrote to Georgie: As to poetry, I don't know, and I don't know. The verse would come easy enough if I had only a subject which would fill my heart and mind: but to write verse for the sake of writing is a crime in a man of my years and experience. Morris's main literary outlet now lay in his public speeches and the lectures: at least eight in 1879, including two in Birmingham and the protest meeting over St Mark's in Oxford; six in 188o, one of which was a speech at the Annual Meeting of the Women's Protective and Provident League at the Society of Arts in London in which Morris seconded a resolution on women's rights. These may appear small totals in comparison with the workload of Morris's Socialist period, with 91 recorded public engagements in 1886, 105 in 1887, 94 in 1888. But at this point Morris was not confident enough for extended extempore speaking. At the time of the Eastern Question Association protests he told Janey: I even tried to flit a few words at a small meeting we had at Lambeth yesterday: I can't say I got on very well, but I did manage to get a few words out and get to the end.' His public lectures were all written out carefully in lined exercise books, often corrected over. Many of these scripts are in existence. They are strangely moving documents, showing the time and energy that Morris would expend on them. I have been working my head off,'he told Janey, in the middle of composing 'The Beauty of Life' lecture he was due to give in Birmingham. A tremendous anti-jingoist diatribe ""Our country right or wrong?". The tribal banner!' was completed late at night at Kelmscott House in Hammersmith. Morris signed it in triumph at two-thirty a.m. These early lectures show his thought processes in progress. They convey a strong sense of Morris's growing desperation. The lectures have innocuous titles: 'The History of Pattern Designing'; ‘Some Hints on House Decoration'; Some of the Minor Arts of Life'. But as some of his audiences – the provincial art societies, professional institutes – were startled to discover, these lectures were only partially on these subjects. When he spoke to the Nottingham Kyrle Society his audience was 'polite and attentive': 'but', he told Janey, 'I fear they were sorely puzzled at what I said; as they might well be, since if they acted on it Nottingham trade would come to an end'. Morris starts his lectures quietly, almost technically, giving his views on, say, surface decoration, tracing the history of Byzantine textiles, giving his audience an expert guided tour of the palaces of the Assyrian kings. From here he would launch onwards, outwards, into a passionate analysis of the relevance of art to society and his hopes and fears for civilization itself. Morris on the platform is in a sense unstoppable: like the child who writes down his house number, street, town, country, continent, the World, the Universe. He often complained of performance nerves. He was never to be an easy speaker from the platform and these early lectures, as he grappled with the techniques of delivery and struggled to establish a rapport with his audience, were an evident ordeal. Those who loved him watched anxiously as he fiddled with his watch chain, shifting nervously from one foot to another, feeling the ground', as a cat does to establish its terrain. He spoke with heavy concentration, seeming almost literally to be digging out his words. Georgie found it strange how Morris, who called himself the ‘word-spinner', could be so verbally inhibited in public: ‘in his early addresses the difficulty was painful, but sheer weight and volume of meaning burst the barriers at last'. Here there is an interesting parallel with Morris's twentieth-century political champion, E. P. Thompson, who found his own public voice relatively late in life, in the early 198os, becoming a thrillingly eloquent supporter of the new East-West anti-nuclear initiatives in the revival of CND. Morris attributed some of his problems to the fact that his lectures were all repeat performances: after all I have only one thing to say and have to find divers ways of saying it'. It is largely true that Morris only ever gave one lecture; what is remarkable is that within that format so much light and shade and human vulnerability comes over. In many respects the content echoes Ruskin; but Morris in performance is more original and volatile, not so much the sage. Morris's range of reference is less predictable than Ruskin's. His lectures have a ruggedness, a closeto-home approachability that is not bonhomie but something deeper felt. Already Morris is showing what he means, or thinks he means, by human fellowship. He lectures doggedly, feeling it his duty to speak on the most serious of subjects that a man can think of: for 'tis no less than the chances of a calm, dignified, and therefore happy life for the mass of mankind'. In ‘The Art of the People', a lecture Morris gave in 1879 in Birmingham Town Hall at the annual prize-giving of the Birmingham School of Design, the familiar structure is already in place. The innocent start, with its scorpion tail of warning: 'I am among friends, who may forgive me if I speak rashly'. The detailed exposition of the specialist subject, in this case derivations of art and the distortions of history: 'History (so called) has remembered the kings and warriors, because they destroyed; Art has remembered the people, because they created.'So far so formal. Morris is ascending gently, playing with aphorisms, not yet on the attack. He then arrives at a level central plateau, asking questions, stirring memories, citing his own experience: 'the little grey church that still so often makes the common-place English landscape beautiful, and the little grey house that still, in some parts of the country at least, makes an English village a thing apart'. How were these things arrived at? What gives them such significance? What can they still tell us about human happiness? Human happiness: 'that last word brings me to the very kernel and heart of what I have come here to say to you, and I pray you to think of it most seriously – not as to my words, but as to a thought which is stirring in the world, and will some day grow into something. Just over half-way through his lecture Morris is launched into his great theme tune, which recurs with variations in all the lectures he ever gave: That thing which I understand by real art is the expression by man of his pleasure in labour. I do not believe he can be happy in his labour without expressing that happiness; and especially this is so when he is at work at anything in which he specially excels. Dogs hunting, horses running, birds flying: Morris arrives at a transcendental vision of frenetic activity, in which human labour takes its place in the natural cosmic order. He stands in Birmingham Town Hall not as the failed parson but as the visionary prophet, offering vistas ‘of the spring meadows smiling, of the exultation of the fire, of the countless laughter of the sea'. By the end of his speech Morris is established as grandiloquently tactless, like the Old Testament Amos. He has condemned fiercely the environmental despoliation of ‘your Black Country yonder'. He has accused the British manufacturers, who included a good proportion of his audience, of cynical exploitation of the countries of the Empire, supplying them with goods which were sub-standard and in any case unneeded: giving ‘to the people whom we have made helpless scorpions for fish and stones for bread'. In this speech above all a modern reader feels the need for a video-recorder to capture the expression on the faces of Morris's quasi-artistic middle-class provincial audience when he states:I have never been in any rich men's houses which would not have looked the better for having a bonfire made outside of it of nine-tenths of all that it held.' His peroration is a furious indictment both of the social classes Morris himself came from and could be seen in some sense to belong to still. His lectures have an added force because they are self-scourging. In his examination of the slavery of consumption Morris does not exonerate himself: For those of us that are employers of labour, how can we bear to give any man less money than he can decently live on, less leisure than his education and self-respect demand? or those of us who are workmen, how can we bear to fail in the contract we have undertaken, or to make it necessary for a foreman to go up and down spying out our mean tricks and evasions? or we the shopkeepers – can we endure to lie about our wares, that we may shuffle off our losses on to some one else's shoulders? or we the public – how can we bear to pay a price for piece of goods which will help to trouble one man, to ruin another, and starve a third? Or, still more, I think, how can we bear to use, how can we enjoy something which has been a pain and a grief for the maker to make? Employer; craftsman; shopkeeper (with an establishment in, of all places, Oxford Street); compulsive purchaser: Morris was all these things. In the autumn of 1879 Morris, at Kelmscott Manor, wrote Georgie what amounted to a farewell letter: I am sitting now, 1o p.m., in the tapestry-room, the moon rising red through the east-wind haze, and a cow lowing over the fields. I have been feeling chastened by many thoughts, and the beauty and quietness of the surroundings, which latter, as I hinted, I am, as it were beginning to take leave of. That leave-taking will, I confess, though you may think it fantastic, seem a long step towards saying good-night to the world. At the time of his disillusionment with the Eastern Question Association he had forsworn active politics. Now, only eighteen months later, he was once more in the thick of it, as treasurer of the National Liberal League, founded in the late summer of 1879. This was a largely working-class association, a regrouping of the EQA protesters. George Howell was the chairman and Henry Broadhurst the secretary. On 17 October Morris was writing to the editor of the Daily News to inform his readers of the organization which, ‘though but in its infancy', had already begun its 'missionary labour'. The league's aims, Morris wrote, are based on Liberal principles at once decided and broad'. The National Liberal League was a disappointing episode. In the election of r88o it played a crucial role in organizing the London workers in support of Gladstone; Morris, Ned and William De Morgan campaigned for Sir Charles Dilke, before his fall from grace in the divorce courts. Morris was to make a carpet for Charles Dilke. But with the decisive Liberal victory Morris suffered characteristic depression and a dwindling of the old confrontational vigour, beginning to look back with nostalgia to the activism of the EQA and its glow of camaraderie. He wrote to Anthony Mundella, re-elected as Radical MP for Sheffield and Morris's old ally in the EQA: I wonder sometimes as I walk through the streets and look at the people if they are the same flesh and blood as made things so pleasant for us in the spring of '78; and I feel inclined to say, what the deuce then was it all about?' One of the new Liberal MPs was Henry Broadhurst who had led the singing of 'Wake, London Lads!' back in what now seemed the heroic days of ferment. Morris wrote to congratulate him on his election, wishing him all health and happiness in his new sphere of usefulness'. But Broadhurst was in fact a prize example of the type of man that Morris meant when he spoke about the possible dangers of social corruption that awaited politically successful members of the working class: ‘When a man has gifts for that kind of thing he finds himself tending to rise out of his class before he has begun to think of class politics as a matter of principle, and too often he is just simply “got at” by the governing classes, not formally but by circumstances, I mean. Broadhurst, the ex-stone-mason, was too easily manipulated by Mundella and lulled into forgetfulness of the old class loyalties. A preposterous, pathetic passage in his memoirs gives an account of his friendly reception by the royal family: 'I left Sandringham with the feeling of one who had spent a weekend with an old chum of his own rank in society rather than one who had been entertained by the Heir-Apparent and his Princess. Looking back on the NLL, Morris explained that he once thought ‘one might further real Socialistic progress by doing what one could on the lines of ordinary middle-class Radicalism'. He had come to realize this was a fallacy: 'that Radicalism is on the wrong line, so to say, and will never develope [sic] into anything more than Radicalism: in fact that it is made for and by the middle classes and will always be under the control of rich capitalists'. These rich capitalists, whilst not opposing political development, will not allow social ones ‘if they can help it'. Morris became disillusioned with a parliamentary system in which those with vested interests would always keep control. He also finally rejected Gladstone, his old hero. Formerly he used to claim that Gladstone was a genuine progressive, only encumbered by reactionary colleagues. Now he started to view him as a shifter of his ground: refusing to reverse Disraeli's policy, which he had once attacked as morally outrageous, in the annexation of the Transvaal. 'I am in hopes', wrote Morris, the matter will be taken up somewhat by people outside parliament for inside it all or nearly all people seem to be behaving ill.' He was also apprehensive of the government's policy in Ireland after the notorious Coercion Bill was passed in 188r. This and the ‘Stockjobbers'Egyptian War', in which Alexandria was shelled by British warships, destroyed completely any hopes for the Liberals Morris had ever had. By this time he had resigned as treasurer of the NLL with a disgusted flourish, saying how much he hated ‘everything vague in politics as well as in art'. In that same year Morris, still casting around for a political agenda to which he could commit himself, helped in the foundation of the Radical Union, an amalgam of London radical working-class groups.'Set agoing the Radical Union', he noted in his diary on 15 January 1881. At this point, according to George Wardle, he was hoping to organize a strong political party out of the radical elements or out of the trades unions'. The intention was to set up a convincing alternative to the Liberals. Morris was a member of the executive committee and some of the evening meetings were held at Queen Square where the leaders of the working-class Radical clubs repaid his hospitality by confronting him with their current theories on profit-sharing. Why could Morris & Co. not be run more like the Maison Leclaire in Paris, a contracting and decorating firm whose proprietor, Edmé Jean Leclaire, had introduced full profit-sharing in 184o? Morris took such criticism seriously enough to discuss past profit-sharing experiments in detail with Wardle who pointed out that any full-blown system of profit-sharing in the Morris workshops would involve a huge increase in book-keeping, a thing that Morris loathed. However, over the next year or two, a bonus was ## WILLIAM MORRIS evolved which benefited half a dozen of the key employees. Morris's Radical Union initiative was not successful. The workingmen Radicals themselves were unresponsive, being too preoccupied with local and trades union politics to be interested in Morris's wide-ranging views. Wardle, who attended many of the meetings, remembered them as uniformly lacklustre: especially dispiriting was a meeting held at Lambeth Baths. But what is interesting about the episode is that it shows Morris at the beginning of his serious attempts to exert political influence over individual members of the working class. Morris was entranced with the idea of the journey up the Thames by boat from one Kelmscott to the other. The first river expedition was in August 188o, and the journey up river was repeated the next year. On the morning of departure he had got up very early. As he wrote to Georgie: 'Little things please little minds; therefore my mind must be little, so pleased am I this morning . . . item, it is scarcely a little thing that the sky is one sheet of pale warm blue, and that the earth is sucking up the sun rejoicing.' Before breakfast he and Jenny had gone out to see the houseboat, called The Ark, hired from an Oxford boat firm. A rowing boat, the Alfred, had been hired as well. Morris described The Ark as'odd but delightful', like a largish steamer with a small omnibus on board. To May it appeared a sort of insane gondola'. There was room for two rowers in the front. Morris liked the new view of the country The Ark gave him and the feeling of such close proximity to his surroundings: what a joy (to a little mind) to see the landscape out of a square pane of glass, and to sleep a-nights with the stream rushing two inches past one's ear.' Three boisterous bachelors were in the party: Crom Price, William De Morgan (alias ‘Meorgan'), and the Hon. Richard Grosvenor, a friend of De Morgan's and a member of the SPAB. Since Oneglia, Janey had been in a precarious condition with fainting fits and back pains. Not long before, she had consulted Rossetti about the efficacy of seaweed baths at Ramsgate in which, as she explained, 'One is made into a kind of pie with the sea-weed'. But she had gathered enough strength to join the river trip. Morris watched her on board fondly, busy with her embroidery, lying down and working quite at home'. May and a young friend, Elizabeth Macleod, completed the party. The housemaid, Eliza, from Kelmscott House, went with them for the first part of the journey, returning home by train from Hampton Court. On their first night they got as far as Sunbury, arriving in the dark. They went to the Magpie Inn for a late supper of pickled salmon, poached eggs and ham. On arrival at the inn, Morris exclaimed, 'What a stink.'The waiter had answered: It is nothing sir I assure you.' Richard Grosvenor intervened: Is it a sewer?’ The waiter replied, ‘Yes sir quite sure.' The exchange, and many similar, were noted in the journal to which almost all the travellers contributed accounts of jokes and quips and Morris's expletives. This log book is almost frenetically cheerful, with the particular Victorian male humour Morris always found consoling: on The Ark he is with the jovial crew' again. ‘Note by our Communist,' runs one entry in the journal: A mountain before a plain: a plain before a suburb; a suburb before a dust-heap; a dust-heap before a sewer; but a sewer before a gentleman's house.' Crom and Morris spent the first night in The Ark whilst the rest of the party braved the inn. The next day Morris, relieved to be leaving Cockney waters', gazed around with unexpected pleasure at unfamiliar stretches of river between Chertsey and Staines, full of strange character in many places'. They lunched luxuriously on the bank a little beyond Lalehamwith its enormous willows and queer suggestions (at any rate) of old houses on the banks'. They had a picnic tea on the grass at Runnymede ‘on such an afternoon as one can scarcely hope to see again for brightness and clearness'. Morris, in his contentment, reaches out for the superlatives, as he did in Iceland and in northern France. They reached Windsor and he described it as a wonderful place, in spite of all drawbacks'; he distanced himself from Queen Victoria and her tapestries. Dick Grosvenor took all of them except Janey on a tour of Eton, to the buildings and playing fields. Here again Morris overcame political objections: in spite of drawbacks it is yet a glorious place'. Jobs were handed out. Crom Price was appointed‘boteler by acclamation (his own)' and provided liquor for the party. The log book reports how when they stopped at Surly Hall to take in water and soda water, Crom was inspired to give an entertainment gratis with an umbrella and shawl and a champagne bottle'. Nine years later this atmosphere was recaptured uncannily in the famous comic novel of a river expedition: Three Men in a Boat by Jerome K. Jerome. Morris was cook on board The Ark, secreting himself in the cabin, then emerging like the high priest at the critical moment pot in hand'. When they arrived at Maidenhead the Regatta was in progress. Both banks of the river were crowded with spectators. They had to drop the tow rope earlier than planned and the crowds jeered to see The Ark advancing slowly with Morris sitting on the roof steering while De Morgan laboured at the sculls. They travelled on in the shadow of Cliveden Woods. Here Morris's social conscience was alerted: he found the woods ‘rather artificial' and remembered Mr Twemlow, the poor relation of Lord Snigsworthy in Our Mutual Friend. But when he got to Cookham he felt that he was back in ‘the real country, with cows and sheep and farm-houses, the work-a-day world again and not a lacquey's [sic] paradise'. His feeling for the rural reality of Cookham was a satisfaction Stanley Spencer was to share. Late that night, in the streets of Marlow, where they had delivered the ladies to their lodging house, Crom and Morris saw the streamers of the Northern Lights flickering all across that part of the sky'. It was ‘very mysterious and almost frightening' to see them shining down upon the English summer greenery. The last time Morris saw the northern lights they had been shining on the harbour of Tórshavn, in 1871. They travelled through what was still fresh countryside for Morris, a new England of the riverbank. He thought it ‘very beautiful'. At Hurley Lock, after they had waited to be passed by the big passenger-steamer that travelled regularly down the Thames between Kingston and Oxford, he stood up in the lock and saw to his delight ‘a long barn-like building two Gothic arches and then a Norman church fitting on to it and joined into a quadrangle by other long roofs'. It was Lady Place, originally a monastery, then a Jacobean mansion, by this time reduced to a farmhouse, somewhat gammoned'. They went ashore and spent an hour ‘in great enjoyment' examining the buildings. They found ‘a huge dovecot', one of Morris's loved structures, with carefully moulded fifteenth-century buttresses. The church was still recognizable in outline but had been ‘miserably gammoned' too. They left London on a Tuesday. By Friday they reached Henley, stopping by a bank to eat the dinner Morris had prepared for them. Here they were invaded by swans ‘who retired without breaking any man's arm', says the journal. 'Miss Macleod took a baby on board the Ark; Price offered to adopt it and was feeding it on the spot with honey out of a spoon.' The Ark then ran aground on a mud bank at Wargrave where ‘all the males of the party gave conflicting orders in loud tones’, De Morgan finally taking off his boots and socks to push her off. At seven-thirty The Ark arrived at Sonning, where they ate an excellent supper at the White Hart: lady howling song overheard; great hilarity. Mrs. M. and Miss Jenny slept at the Inn, Miss Macleod and Miss May at the clergy house, RCG and DM at Mrs. Brown's (note by R.C.G. domestic insects), WM and Price in the Ark. It was at Sonning, on their second expedition the next summer, that the young Violet Hunt, who had been at school with Jenny and May, spotted them in midstream. She stood on the parapet of the old bridge watching the progress of the oddly assorted pair of craft. Her account imbues the scene with a mythic quality, part comic, part grotesque: I recognised the occupants of the first boat that waited a little as the other negotiated the archway. In a flash I realised that they were the right people to be rowing in this bit of purely medieval England. Standing up and shouting indecorously worded advice to the other boat was the man who loved a battle shout better than a symphony, the Defender of Guinevere [sic] and of Gudrun, straddling, legs apart in the boat as erstwhile waggishly depicted by his pals on the ceiling of the Oxford Union, the Viking in the blue byrnie, the maker of my mother's dining-room table; now, in the afternoon of his life, self-styled, the idle singer of any empty day', the Hector of Hammersmith and Varangian Guard of his own Metropolitan District – William Morris. . . . Behind him, sitting up very stiffly, as a weary queen on her dais of Turkeyred cushions, was the historic Janey – Pandora' – Proserpina'’–Aurea Catena’ - 'Astarte Syriaca', and 'La Pia' of the Purgatorio – gaunt, pale, ashen-coloured hair and all.'Scarecrow', as she called herself but still a ‘Stunner', to use the Pre-Raphaelite term of praise, she looked just then, in the morning glare, very like the forlorn wife of Nello Di Pietro, the lady undone by the miasma of the marshes: ## Siena mi fe, Maremma mi disfecemi. By now they were approaching more familiar territory, travelling via Wallingford where Morris drank five lemon squashes at a sitting, and pulling in at Dorchester. Here the whole party, except Mrs. M.', alighted and walked up to Dorchester Dykes, with its view of Dorchester Abbey in one direction, and in the other Sinodun Hill. Morris recognized the exact spot where they had stopped for refreshments on the Oxford summer holiday with Charley and his family thirteen years before. Nearing Oxford he noticed with dismay how the banks of the river had been spoiled since he last saw them. The party stayed overnight in Oxford where, as De Morgan comments, in spite of Mr. Morris's dreadful revolutionary sentiments we slept in the King's Arms'. In Oxford, Janey left them and went on by train to Kelmscott to prepare the house for the arrival of the voyagers. As The Ark proceeded up the river towards Kelmscott Manor, Morris saw the sight that always roused emotion in him: they were haymaking on the flat flood-washed spits of ground and islets all about Tadpole; and the hay was gathered on punts and the like.' It was Monday. The Ark had taken six days to reach Kelmscott, trundling through the English countryside. Morris wrote to Georgie: Night fell on us long before we got to Radcot, and we fastened a lantern to the prow of our boat, after we had with much difficulty got our boats through Radcot Bridge. Charles was waiting forus with a lantern at our bridge by the corner at 1o p.m., and presently the ancient house had me in its arms again: J. had lighted up all brilliantly, and sweet it all looked you may be sure. The journey up the river, and especially that homecoming, was drawn upon by Morris for the novel News from Nowhere. When his fictional travellers reach their destination a little crowd is waiting to greet them on the bank. Out of this crowd steps forward a tall handsome stately lady: ‘for stately is the word that must be used for her'. She is waving her hand gracefully in welcome. Inevitably her hair is black and wavy and the lady has deep-set grey eyes.