advance with a banner on a cross-pole, Morris's most marvellous banner, like the Adam and Eve in an early stained-glass window, showing‘a man and woman half-clad in skins of beasts seen against a background of green trees, the man holding a spade and the woman a distaff and spindle rudely done enough, but yet with a certain spirit and much meaning'. Beneath the linked figures, symbol of the early world and man's first contest with nature', runs the message on the banner: # When Adam delved and Eve span Who was then the gentleman. John Ball himself, the rebel priest, refers respectfully to his ‘unwedded wife', with whom he dwelt in love after he joined the priesthood. The narrative shimmers with half-hints and provocations, a startling early exercise in sexual politics. Readers tended to read into it the things they wanted. Morris commented early on how it was ‘much admired by people of various opinions', and decided to have it reprinted as a book. The 1888 Reeves & Turner edition was reprinted many times, and A Dream of Fohn Ball, set in Morris's Golden type, with Burne-Jones's frontispiece, is one of the most poignant of all the books produced in the 18gos by the Kelmscott Press. Morris liked to read, or rather chant, the story to an audience. He read it to his family, preceded by Brer Rabbit. He read it to the Socialist meetings: we all felt as though it were John Ball himself who was speaking to us and we were the yeomen assembled around him,' wrote an impressionable member of the audience at the Glasgow Branch of the Socialist League. The story quickly entered Socialist history. Beatrice Webb, in her diary, describes Sidney's courting of her on the late express train from Sheffield· by telling her the story of his examination triumphs and reading her to sleep with John Ball's Dream'. John Ball stayed in the minds, and was very often quoted, by the architects of the Labour party in the twentieth century, R. H. Tawney and G. D. H. Cole. Harold Laski, visiting Northumberland miners in the Great Slump of the 193os, found copies of A Dream of Fohn Ball and News from Nowhere in house after house', even when most of the furniture had been sold. Why has John Ball had such a lasting impact, even through periods when much of Morris's writing was forgotten or ignored? And why can it still prick the conscience of Labour party in Britain, in the 199os and in a very different mood? The reason is surely the sheer strength of Morris's argument for fellowship, a term modern politicians are aware of losing sight of in an age of opportunism and individualism. With his childlike lucidity, Morris arrives at a statement of the unanswerably obvious: fellowship is life and lack of fellowship is death'. Fellowship was always easier in theory than practice. In the early summer of 1886 May had -announced her engagement to her fellowcomrade Henry Halliday Sparling. From May's point of view the Mystic Betrothal to Shaw had been seriously waning. The break seems to have come a few months earlier, at the point at which Shaw's mistress, Jenny Patterson, with sublime lack of diplomacy, had joined the Hammersmith Branch of the Socialist League. May and Sparling had been thrown together as colleagues at the Farringdon Road offices. They had, for instance, gone together as delegates to ‘a merrymaking and speechifving' at the International Working Men's Educational Club in Commercial Road in November of 1885. May told Scheu how at this Club the Socialists spoke in various languages and sang “Rose Freiheit” and played a one-act revolutionary play very earnestly and simply, though ending in the funniest Liberty Fraternity and Equality Tableau I ever saw'. In such surroundings love had blossomed, and by April May was reporting, 'We are among the brightest and most unsubstantial of clouds.' The announcement to her parents had, however, not been easy. She wrote to Scheu of the ‘extreme terror' with which she had informed first the father and then the mother of our “folly"! Such a chicken hearted creature I found myself to be.' May's fears had been well founded. Morris tried hard with Sparling, already his comrade in the office and his brother in the Cause. By Christmas he was managing to refer to him as ‘my future son-in-law Sparling'. He wrote around his friends to solicit work for him in library research and jobbing journalism. But his comments on ‘Master Harry' tend to be a little slighting. Morris evidently felt the tall, thin, immature Sparling, with his unattractive mixture of the pretentious and the ingratiating, was no substitute for Bernard Shaw whom he accepted as on his intellectual level: the sparring partner, almost the adoptive son. Janey's woe at the engagement was patent. Sparling was the son of an Essex farmer, socially not so far above Janey's own relations. As well as Sparling's inexperience and charmlessness Janey's objection was a basic one of class. In August 1887 she wrote to Rosalind, ‘May is away at Kelmscott Manor alone learning cooking and how to live on a few shillings a week. She is bent on marrying without waiting till her future husband gets employment. I have said and done all I can to dissuade her, but she is a fool and persists.' A few weeks later, staying at Naworth, she poured out her indignation to Rosalind and Blunt. With a callous enjoyment of everyone's discomfiture Blunt weighed up the situation as he saw it: Mrs. Morris's daughter May wants to marry a socialist with whom she has fallen in love. She [Janey] describes him as stupid and helpless, but I do not see how she is to prevent it. The girl has been brought up in the mill of Socialism. She is 25 and has a will of her own. I am in favour of the marriage – Mrs. Howard opposes it. This led to a grand discussion. Morris himself it seems says he has no authority to interfere but at the same time will not give any money or let the young man live in his house. May's fiancé was, however, taken to be presented to Mrs Morris senior who made the best of it, commenting to Jenny: I thought the young gentleman very young, I should have said he was no more than twenty, he seems good tempered and gentle.' May would be the ruling spirit, she assumed.