CHAPTER TWENTY # Return to Kelmscott 1896 and after Since the early 188os Burne-Jones had been working on his masterpiece, Arthur in Avalon'. This stupendous canvas, now in Puerto Rico, shows the king lying outstretched on his bier in the Celtic Isle of the Blest' to which he was carried after his death. Above him is a canopy with scenes from the Quest of the Holy Grail sculpted in relief. Avalon had been Ned's ‘own cherished design', an emotional investment; he painted and repainted it obsessively in a large-scale studio he took especially for this one painting in Campden Hill Road. But during the terrible months of Morris's illness Ned had not had the spirit to continue with King Arthur. Avalon gets to look vile,' he wrote. William Morris's funeral took place on Tuesday 6 October, on what began as a cold wet morning and worked up into a storm of Saga-like ferocity as the day progressed. By eight a.m. a little crowd had gathered in Hammersmith to watch the coffin being borne out of Kelmscott House en route for St George's church at the other Kelmscott, its final resting place. Some of the Socialists, including John Burns and H. M. Hyndman, were amongst these mourners. There were also Morris's work people from the Kelmscott Press, conspicuous among them a big broad-shouldered press man, probably Stephen Mowlem. The small procession followed the hearse slowly along Rivercourt Road towards the station. With a final irony Morris's body was to travel from Paddington to Lechlade by the ‘abhominable' train. At Paddington another crowd was waiting, a more cosmopolitan assembly of the deputations of the Russian and Polish and Jewish Socialist societies, bearing their wreaths and their garlands of bright flowers. According to the Daily Chronicle reporter many of these people were 'obviously very poor and very downcast'. Prince Kropotkin the Anarchist was on the platform. There were none of the conventional trappings of the funeral: no undertakers and very few black funereal top hats. Morris in his coffin was loaded into a section of the guard’s van, with his feet towards the platform in what seemed like a little mobile private chapel. The coffin was now surrounded by the wreaths. Morris's mourners collected in a reserved section of the train. Janey and May were supported on the journey by Ned, Emery Walker and the avuncular Crom Price. There was a halt at Oxford. It was by now late morning. Rain was pouring down in torrents. No representatives of the University met Morris's coffin: he had become as ambivalent to Oxford as Oxford was to him. The special portion of the train travelled on another twenty-five miles to Lechlade. As the passengers stepped out on to the wet and windswept platform local carts on the bridge halted and the drivers gazed inquisitively over the parapet. The station road was absolutely empty except for one solitary policeman. There was a long pause. Then several single-horse carriages, sent to transport the mourners back to Kelmscott Manor, could be seen filing down slowly to the station. With them was a traditional harvest-cart painted yellow with red wheels. Poles attached to all four corners were intertwined with willow boughs. Twine strung across the poles was festooned with vine leaves. The roan mare pulling the cart had vine leaves in its blinkers. The bottom of the cart was lined with moss. This funeral cart struck Arthur Hughes, the painter, as looking like a page out of a Morris magic story. It was the creation of Detmar Blow, who had gone ahead from London the previous day to organize the décor of the funeral. Blow himself drove this hearse, dressed in a wagoner's smock which made him ‘look coeval with the Saxon Chronicle'. Four countrymen in moleskin conveyed the coffin gently to its place on the moss carpet. Over it was laid the precious fragment of Broussa brocade from Morris's hoard of textiles, and a laurel wreath. Janey, looking ‘sadly white and shaken', leaning on Ned's arm, entered the first of the carriages. She was followed by Jenny, weeping piteously. May, in a new relation towards an ailing mother and invalid sister, was appearing relatively calm. Harry Sparling had returned from France for Morris's funeral and was staying with the family at Kelmscott Manor. Morris's sisters Henrietta and Isabella, the latter in her deaconess's bonnet, were installed in another of the carriages, with two brothers' of Morris, presumably Edgar and either Stanley, the southern counties farmer, or Arthur, the Colonel, who had retired from the Army six years before. In all there were about forty mourners from London: F. S. Ellis; Morris's neighbours in Hammersmith, the Richmonds; Walter Crane; poor John Carruthers, exhausted by his vigilance in Norway, with his daughter; Janey's sister Bessie Burden. Philip Webb does not appear to have made the journey, nor is there any record that Aglaia was there. The local carter, in his mackintosh cape, took the mare by the rein and the funeral procession started off, winding its way through Lechlade, a News from Nowhere village of ancient grey stone houses with their stone slate roofs. Villagers, with their children, stood in doorways watching as the horses splashed along the road and past the now saturated meadows. Rain-drenched hedges on either side of the three-mile route to Kelmscott still glowed with hips and haws. Arthur Hughes, who had never been to Kelmscott church before, called it ‘the simplest barn form with a tiny open arch belfry at one end very very rural on a flat damp land'. Morris had loved the primitive beauty of this miniature twelfth-century church and defended it even more fiercely than most other ancient buildings because he felt it a part of his own countryside and history. He had financed the releading of the roof of the chancel, and provided a new stone roof for the nave. When the cortège reached Kelmscott church a group of villagers were waiting with the Rev. William Fulford Adams, vicar of the neighbouring village of Little Faringdon. All those years before, Adams had been at Marlborough and then at Exeter with Morris, another potent connection with the past. The church bell was ringing quietly. Rain was still falling hard. Local labourers heaved the coffin up on to their shoulders and carried it through the double file of mourners and the lime-trees lining the stone-flagged churchyard path. The church was decorated for the harvest festival, with pumpkins, marrows, carrots, enormous shiny apples and sheaves of corn heaped up around the font. Deep red autumn leaves cascaded from the pillars of the nave. The lamps in the church were wreathed with ears of oats and barley. Morris's country funeral was the absolute antithesis of Tennyson's burial in Westminster Abbey in 1892. Almost uncannily the service at Kelmscott was fulfilling to the letter one of Morris's last recorded sentences: I want to get Mumbo Jumbo out of the world.' In the simple village pews, intermingled with the family, were old Socialist Leaguers, workmen from Merton Abbey, salesmen and clerks from Morris & Co. in Oxford Street, Arts and Crafts colleagues, and people from Kelmscott village in their normal working clothes. Parson Adams's sermon was low-key and deeply felt, a gentle rural eulogy, taking as its text the words from 2 Corinthians, As unknown, and yet well known'. He did not venture into the controversial territory of Morris's religion of the Cause. But Adams reached a truth about Morris, emphasizing his twenty-five years of Kelmscott associations and his unknown and unpublicized acts of kindness to his country neighbours. In St Paul's words he approached the central paradox: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things'; as dying, and, behold, we live’. The rain stopped temporarily as the coffin was carried out from the church to the grave, although the winds were still rushing through the branches of the elm trees, blowing up towards the storm. Morris's grave had been dug at the south-east side of the churchyard. As the coffin was lowered a small group of red-cheeked villagers, men and boys like John Ball's peasants, gaped across the churchyard wall. The grave was filled almost to the brim with wreaths and garlands, composed of so many of the flowers Morris had used as a basis for his textiles and his wallpapers. At the foot of the grave stood a curious tribute from the workers at Merton, a Welsh harp with a frame of purple flowers. His family and friends stood dankly round the grave in a long silence that, according to Georgie, could be heard'. Philip Webb designed the tomb for Morris. He observed sadly, beginning this commission: It seems to me that I've been designing nothing but tombs all my life.'Morris had always had mixed feelings about monuments. The memorials in Westminster Abbey had appalled him as the most hideous specimens of false art that can be found in the whole world; mere Cockney nightmares and aberrations of the human intellect'. The wonderfully quirky tomb that Philip Webb designed him would, we can assume, have pleased Morris rather more. The tomb has a coped roof like a small house or a large dog kennel. The design was inspired by a piece of fourteenth-century stonework found lying around the churchyard. It was typical of Webb, with his love of paradox, to base his monument on an objet trouvé. The foundations were dug by Giles, the Kelmscott Manor gardener. The wILLIAM MoRRIs inscription has an idiosyncratic looped letter-form. The tomb is carved with trees sprouting along its big flat sides. Morris's tomb is like an early Frank Lloyd Wright organic building, pushing up out of the soil in its English churchyard setting. It is also peculiarly, startlingly Icelandic, a tomb that would encourage one of those Nordic heroes to rise singing from his grave. Three days after the funeral Janey went to stay with Wilfrid Blunt at Newbuildings. She took May with her. In the middle of November Blunt invited them both to El Hashish, Blunt's joke name for El Kheysheh, the romantic Pink House he had built in the desert at Sheykh Obeyd in Egypt for Mary Elcho. After a few days he was writing in his diary, 'Mrs. Morris's visit has been rather a disappointment - her daughter May is an obstinately silent woman . . . Neither of them ride, not even donkeys, though Mrs. Morris has made an attempt, and life here without riding is impossible. One cannot walk on account of the heavy sand, so they sit indoors all day. I go to see them twice a day but with May it is impossible to keep up any conversation and I am at my wits end how to amuse them for I cannot make love to either of them and what else is to be done.' This problematic holiday ended in April and Janey installed herself at Kelmscott for the summer. Blunt advised her to set up a dairy farm ‘as old age without a hobby is sad’. Janey, like Blunt himself, was now fifty-six. After May's divorce in 1899 she reverted to the name May Morris and entries under her married name were expunged from Kelmscott Manor Visitors' Book. Her emotional life became a little gloomy. ‘The pain touched woman in a dark dress', as Philip Webb described her anxiously, noting how she had inherited some of her father's shyness. 'Majestic ... Mournful ... Morose', wrote Janet Ashbee after Mary's performance as St Helena in 1899 in the Art Workers' Guild Masque. May became more than ever fixated on her father, commemorating each anniversary of his funeral by laying a wreath of laurel on his tomb. A short play she wrote in 19o3, White Lies, centres on the figure of the absconding father: it is full of images of resentment and of loss. But May's own design work flourished. Her embroideries of the early 19oos are perhaps the most original and certainly the most technically accomplished of their period. May developed Morris's range of visual reference, flowers, vines, birds, heraldry, mediaeval detailing, with a richness and fluency that was her own. She became the virtual leader of the craftswomen in England, showing some of her deaconess aunt Isabella's proselytizing vigour, and in 1907 she founded the Women's Guild of Art. Accounts of Jenny's later life make painful reading. She felt lost at Morris's death. He had been not just her father but her main companion and in a sense her last real link with the outside world. She hated the idea of a biography of Morris: 'Oh Sydney, what wretched thing a biography is for those who knew the subject,' she wrote to Sydney Cockerell. Cockerell, who was brotherly and kind to her, described her after Morris's death as infinitely pathetic and brave and frank'. For the rest of her life she was in and out of nursing homes or attended at home by nurses and companions, one of whom proved so incapable and brutal' she had to be dismissed. Her condition was a ceaseless source of worry to her mother. By 1go9 her epileptic attacks had increased in violence and her sedation had to be increased. In 1914, when her mother died in Bath, after a quiet but surprisingly resilient old age, Jenny was present at her funeral at Kelmscott, a tragic sobbing figure clutching Sydney Cockerell's arm. Jenny herself lived on till 1935. May found it heartbreaking to see her at that period with just occasional flashes of her old self' coming back. Jenny still came to stay at Kelmscott sometimes and would be found wandering around the garden: I often walk here in the evening hoping to meet my dear father, he was such a sweet companion,'she said. Ned survived Morris by only two years. After Morris's death he had slowly tried to gather his life together and recover his old energy. But the blow had been so heavy that he never quite got over it. Sundays without Topsy were particularly hard. In 19o6 Aglaia Coronio, in a condition of acute depression on the day after the death of her daughter Calliope, committed suicide at home in Kensington, using embroidery scissors to stab herself repeatedly in the abdomen and throat. Philip Webb died in 1915, after a sad old age in which the ‘baffling clouds' descended. He had had a whim for his ashes to be scattered in the cloisters of New College Chapel in Oxford, but when the college authorities refused permission Emery Walker took them up on top of the White Horse Hill in Berkshire that he and Morris used to visit and flung them to the winds. Georgie lived on until 192o, increasingly strong-minded and formidable, a 'little, very upright figure', still in her sweeping Pre-Raphaelite skirts. Her young granddaughter went with her on some of her uplifting visits to the poor, watching in embarrassment as Lady Burne-Jones sat in some small cottage ‘with her large blue eyes fixed on some gnarled unlettered old woman, telling her tidings of comfort from Fors Clavigera.'Mackail, in his beautiful and almost reckless Times obituary, stressed the great importance to her of her rapport with Morris and identified her similarclear flame-like spirit – lucerna ardens et luceus.' Wilfrid Blunt died in 1922, with little diminution of selfcongratulation or the habit of pursuit. In 1898 Janey had given him the scrubbed oak dining-table used first at Red House, then for the Socialist suppers at Kelmscott House in Hammersmith. Blunt wrote an execrable poem for it: At this fair oak table sat . . . William Morris, whose art's plan Laid its lives in ample span. Morris's table is at Newbuildings still. In 1911 Mary Elcho brought her daughter, also Mary, to meet Wilfrid Blunt, her father, for the first time. Blunt gave the girl of seventeen, a miracle of beauty', the barbaric ornament' he had purchased years before for her. This ornament contained a lock of William Morris's hair. In the year before her death Janey had finally purchased Kelmscott Manor and 9¾ acres around it, for £4,ooo. May lived on at Kelmscott through the years between the wars. She completed the great task of editing the twenty-four volumes of her father's works in 1915, and in the 193os assembled two final volumes of his writings with biographical commentary. These were published in 1936. In 1924 and 1931 she made journeys to Iceland, retracing his steps. After another abortive affair, this time with John Quinn the New York lawyer and literary patron, May had finally found love and devoted companionship with the former land-girl Mary Frances Vivian Lobb, who had come to work at Kelmscott in the First World War. May was by now looking tall and rather haggard, moving with dignity, and clad in garments of a rich design and stately in a fashion that was all her own'. The observant noticed that the Socialist daughter and Pre-Raphaelite beauty had grown a faint moustache. Miss Lobb, as she was known, was large, hearty, cropheaded and always dressed in an old knickerbocker suit'. They settled down together like the two lesbian ladies of Llangollen, the source of speculation and just a little ridicule, especially from the bright young aesthetes of the 193os. Evelyn Waugh, John Betjeman and Osbert Lancaster rediscovered Kelmscott Manor with a shriek of joy and created around it their own fantastical version of a Pre-Raphaelite soap opera. Waugh wrote the biography of Rossetti. Osbert Lancaster drew a lewd cartoon of Morris, Janey and Rossetti sitting in a line on the antique triple lavatory they found in the farm buildings. Betjeman even installed himself at Kelmscott for a while. In October 1934, the centenary of Morris's birth, Kelmscott became once again a place of pilgrimage. After years of begging letters around the Morris circles, May's dream of a village Memorial Hall with meeting-room, reading-room and recreation room, a News from Nowhere concept, was realized at last. The Hall, a simple Cotswold building, had been designed by Ernest Gimson, one of Morris's young Art Workers' Guild henchmen, before his own death in 1919. With distant echoes of the Mystic Betrothal the Hall was opened by Bernard Shaw who said that Morris was a saint and in a more sensible age' would perhaps have come to be called St William of Kelmscott. Oxford can do many wonderful things,' said Shaw, with a Socialist swipe at quite a lot of the people who had helped support the building, 'but it cannot turn out a man like Morris, except in the sense of turning him out of the door.' They sang Onward Christian Soldiers', which Shaw claimed to have led with ‘stentorian vigour', while Morris ‘turned in his grave around the corner'. There was a surprise appearance of Ramsay Mac-Donald, the Labour prime minister, at that time the leader of the National Coalition government. He was hardly able to push his way through the crowded Memorial Hall to reach the platform. MacDonald, as a young recruit to the SDF, knew Morris in days of Red Flag Socialism and regaled the audience with Farringdon Road memories before they adjourned for country cakes and tea. May died in October 1938, followed only a few months later by Miss Lobb. May's funeral was said to have been a repeat of her father's, also in St George's church. Mackail, Morris's biographer, ageing himself, was too tired to attend. Kelmscott was left in trust to Oxford University. In July 1939, two months before the outbreak of the Second World War, a sale was held at Kelmscott Manor of final remaining Furnishings and Effects'. Final sales are always poignant. This one, held on a damp morning with desultory bidding in the garden of the manor, was more desolate than most. There were dresses, brocades, embroidery, catalogued as ‘made by or worn by the late Mrs. Morris or late Miss Mary Morris'. Three peasant aprons. A green silk dress, embroidered by Miss Morris. A blue eastern Djibbah. A cashmere bodice, worn by Mrs William Morris. An Italian bolero and an Eastern vest. A white embroidered cot quilt, embroidered by Mrs Morris. Two hanks of wool, labelled dyed by William Morris’. Morris's French working blouse, and his silk handkerchief with worked initials 'WM'.