# Acknowledgements I am grateful for facilities and information from the following institutions, and for the relevant permissions to quote: Bad Ems Town Archive; the Bancroft Library, University of California at Berkeley; the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University; the Bodleian Library, Oxford; Boston Public Library Rare Books Collection; the British Library Manuscripts Room; the British Library Newspaper Library; the Brotherton Library, University of Leeds; Duke University, Durham, North Carolina; Exeter College, Oxford; the Syndics of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge; the National Library of Iceland; the International Institute of Socialist History, Amsterdam; Leek Library, Nicholson Institute; Morden Library Local Collection; the Oxford Union; the Public Record Office, Home Office papers; the Royal Society of Arts Library; the John Rylands Library, University of Manchester; Worcester College, Oxford. Also to Felicity Ashbee for permission to quote from her father C. R. Ashbee's journals in King's College Library, Cambridge; Lorraine Price for her help in making accessible the Price family papers; Christopher Walker for his assistance with the Richmond-Meyrick family papers; and the Howard family for permission to quote from the Castle Howard archives, York. For assistance well beyond the bounds of duty I need to thank: Alan Powers at the Art Workers' Guild; Stephen Wildman at Birmingham Museums and Art Gallery; Christine Hopper at Bradford City Art Gallery, Cartwright Hall; Christopher Sheppard at the Brotherton Collection, University of Leeds; Eeyan Hartley, Keeper of Archives at Castle Howard; George Breeze, Helen Brown and Sophia Wilson at Cheltenham Museum and Art Gallery; Jeffrey Seddon at Epping Forest Museum; Simon Jervis, Paul Woudhuysen and Elizabeth Orton at the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge; Anna Manthorpe at Hammersmith and Fulham Archives; Dóra Ásgeirdóttir at the Embassy of Iceland; Donald and Pat Chapman at Kelmscott Manor; Douglas Matthews at the London Library; D.C.R. West at Marlborough College Archive; Tish Newland at the Marx Memorial Library; Meg Sweet at the National Art and Design Library Archive; Terence Pepper at the National Portrait Gallery Archive; Bernard Nurse at the Society of Antiquaries of London; Cecily Greenhill at the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings; Anders Clason of the Swedish Embassy; Stephen Astley and Lionel Lambourne at the Victoria and Albert Museum; Jennifer Harris at the Whitworth Art Gallery, University of Manchester; Norah Gillow, Peter Cormack and Liz Wood at the William Morris Gallery, Walthamstow; David Rodgers at the William Morris Society, Hammersmith. Dr Winston Leigh gave a very helpful professional opinion on the history of epilepsy in the Morris family. I am grateful for his time and patience. I am also indebted to Elaine Quigley for her expert assessment of William Morris's handwriting. In my travels in pursuit of Morris & Co. stained glass I would like to thank the following for opening their churches to me specially and supplying useful background information: Rev. Peter Atkinson at All Saints, Dedworth; Rev. Roy Davis at All Saints', Selsley; Rev. R. I. Davison at Christ Church, Bishopswearmouth, Sunderland; Rev. Edward Farley at St Edward the Confessor, Cheddleton; Adrian Gunning at St Mary Magdalene, Paddington; Rev. Canon C. J. Hawthorn at St Martin'son-the-Hill, Scarborough; Fr Frederick Jackson at St Michael and All Angels, Brighton; Rev. Ben de la Mare at St Oswald's, Durham; Ernest Paulson, St Helen's, Darley Dale; Prebendary Eric Rastall at All Saints, Denstone; Rev. Oliver Simon, St Michael and St Mary Magdalen, Easthampstead; Rev. G. C. Thomas, All Saints, Middleton Cheney; Rev. Keith Yates, Holy Trinity Church, Sloane Street. My special thanks for help, information, hospitality and the flood of conversation and discussion that has made the research for this biography so pleasurable: Floss Adkins; Gary L. Aho; Dr Ian Allan; Philip Athill; Colin Banks; James E. Benjamin; Sanford Berger; Detmar and Isabella Blow; Professor Florence Boos; Marilyn Carter; Eileen Cassavetti; Philip Clayton; Alan Crawford; Brooke Crutchley; Jane Darke; John Dreyfus; Penelope Fitzgerald; Richard Garnett; Mr and Mrs C. Gazely; David Gentleman; Candida Lycett Green; Laura and Christopher Hampton; Thomas Hinde; Julia Ionides; James Joll; Joan Larkin; Magnus Magnusson; Jan Marsh; Margaret Marshall; Christopher Miele; Dorothy W. Morgan; Dawn Morris; Linda Parry; Adam Pollock; David Puttnam; John Randle; Dr Bernard Richards; Andrew Saint; Nicholas Salmon; Douglas E. Schoenherr; Lionel Selwyn; Fr Brocard Sewell; Peyton Skipwith; Frances Spalding; the late Heather Tanner; Ina Taylor; Kate Thirkell; Anthony Thwaite; Ray Watkinson; Allan Wilkinson. During my research I have much appreciated the friendship and generous encouragement of Professor Norman Kelvin, nearing the end of his own thirty years' labour on the Collected Letters of William Morris. His meticulous approach has been a constant inspiration. My successive literary editors, Philip Howard of The Times and Michael Ratcliffe of The Observer, deserve thanks for their patience with and interest in this project. An unknown facet of the literary editors' task is their nurturing of their own reviewers' books in progress. My colleague Nicci Gerrard has also been warm in her support. Christopher Driver read the first draft of my typescript and his comments have, as always, been invaluable. Betty Wilson transferred this book from manuscript on to word processor with great attentiveness and skill. Giles de la Mare, my editor at Faber and Faber, has given much good advice over my five years' work on William Morris. Both he and Charles Elliott, my editor at Knopf, have been unstinting in their enthusiasm for what turned into an epic enterprise. I was glad of Elfreda Powell's and Anthony Turner's careful copy-editing, and Stephen Stuart-Smith's sympathetic co-ordination of the final text. Working with Ron Costley on the design for William Morris has been as pleasureable as it was for Eric Gill.