# Bibliography Nearly 500 titles appeared in the bibliography to the first edition of this book. More than 200 more have been added. Having just written a book on design as a multidisciplinary approach, I have tried to make the bibliography multidisciplinary as well. Consequently books (and, occasionally, journals, catalogs, and pamphlets) dealing with ecology, ethology, economics, biology, planning, psychology, literature, anthropology, politics, and the behavioral sciences are listed together with books on the future, the environment, popular culture, and design. The function of this bibliography is to suggest some titles that would make a good start for a designer or design student wishing to read in other areas in order to see the interrelation of design with other disciplines. From the linear thinking of the Renaissance (that great setting of the sun, which man mistook for the dawn), when men still thought all their knowledge classifiable, we have inherited our graphs, divisions, classifications, and lists. Typically when we wish to classify areas of knowledge too vast to be so comprehended, we make the crowning mistake: we educate specialists. But as we go toward the year 2000, as we see divisions that the last few generations have painstakingly erected out of the quicksand of their statisticians' minds crumble away, we find no need for more such distinct areas but for unity. Not the specialist then, but the synthesist. This is the way in which a meaningful organic pattern, unity, synthesis, will grow between you and each book you read. Out of all the battles you have with the author, the enlightenments and insights his book gives you, the mistakes and confusions you will discover in his work, there will grow a new entity, and it will be your gain. In the preface to the first edition I wrote, ". . . the one book I wanted to read, the one book I most wanted to hand to my fellow students and designers, was missing . . . . So I decided to write the kind of book that I'd like to read."Nearly a dozen books on design have been published since then. Several of these are excellent. Mayal, W.H. Principles in Design. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1979. Nelson, George. How to See. Boston: Little Brown & Co., 1977. . On Design. New York: Whitney Publications, 1979. Pile, John F. Design: Purpose, Form, and Meaning. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1979. Potter, Norman. What is a Designer: Things, Places, Messages. Reading, England: Hyphen Press, 1980. Pye, David. The Nature and Aesthetics of Design. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1978. Williams, Christopher. Origins of Form. New York: Architectural Book Publishing Co., 1981. Unfortunately none of these books addresses itself to the social and human dimensions of design. Critchlow, Keith. Time Stands Still. London: Gordon Fraser, 1979. Doczi, Gyorgy. The Power of Limits. Boulder, Colorado: Shamnbhala Publications, 1981. Lawlor, Robert. Sacred Geometry. London: Thames & Hudson, 1982. These three excellent volumes deal with the relationship between design, biology, and geometry. Finally I have found two books that deal with the relationship between culture and design, design and society. Keller, Goroslav. Dizajn. Zagreb: Vjesnik, 1975. Selle, Gert. Ideologie und Utopie des Design: zur Gesellschaftlichen Theorie der Industriellen Formgebung. Cologne: DuMont, 1975. Both are difficult to read in the original language and have not been translated. ## STRUCTURE, NATURE, AND DESIGN Alexander, Christopher. The Linz Cafe/Das Linz Cafe. New. York: Oxford University Press, 1981. \_. Notes on the Śynthesis of Form. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1964. "Systerns Cenerating Systems," in Systemat. Inland Steel Co., 1967. \_. A Timeless Way of Building. New York: Oxford University Press, 1979. Alexander, Christopher; Ishikawa, Sara; and Silverstein, Murray. A Pattern Language. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977. Alexander, R. McNeill. Animal Mechanics. Sidgwick & Jackson, 1968. Architectural Research Laboratory. Structural Potential of Foam Plastics for Housing in Underdeveloped Areas. Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1966. Baer, Steve. Dome Cookbook. Corrales, New Mexico: Lama Foundation, 1969. Bager, Bertel. Nature as Designer. Frederick Sarne, 1971. "Bionik." Special number of Urania magazine. Leipzig, Germany, August, 1969. Blake, Peter. Form Follows Fiasco. Boston: Atlantic, Little, Brown, 1977. Bootzin, D., and Muffley, H.C. (eds.). Biomechanics. New York: Plenum Press, 1969. Borrego, John. Space Grid Structures. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1968. Boys, C. V. Soap-Bubbles. London: Heinemann Educational Books, 1960. Brand, Stewart (ed.). The Whole Earth Catalog (all issues). Menlo Park, California, 1968-1970. Burkhardt, Dietrich; Schleidt, Wolfgang; and Altner, Helmut. Signals in the Animal World. London: Allen & Unwin, 1967. Clark, Sir Kenneth. The Nude. Middlesex: Penguin, 1970. Cook, Theodore Andrea. The Curves of Life. London: Constable & Co., 1940. Critchlow, Keith. Order in Space. London: Thames & Hudson, 1969. Cundy, M. Martyn, and Rollet, A.P. Mathematical Models. (2d ed.). New York: Oxford University Press, 1962. Doczi, Gyorgy. The Power of Limits: Proportional Harmonies in Nature, Art and Architecture. Boulder, Colorado: Shambhala Publications, 1981. Fathy, Hassan. Architecture for the Poor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973. Ganich, Rolf. Konstruktion, Design, Aesthetik. Germany: Esslingen am Neckar, 1968. Gerardin, Lucien. Bionics. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1968. Grillo, Paul Jacques. What Is Design? Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1962. Hertel, Heinrich. Structure, Form and Movement: Biology and Engineering. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1966. Heythum, Antonin. On Art, Beauty and the Useful. Stierstadt im Taunus, Germany: Verlag Eremiten-Presse, 1955. Hoenich, P.K. Robot Art. Haifa, Israel: Technion, 1962. Holden, Alan, and Singer, Phyllis. Crystals and Crystal Growing. London: Heinemann Educational Books, 1961. Huntley, H.E. The Divine Proportion. New York: Dover, 1970. Jenny, Hans. Cymatics: The Structure and Dynamics of Waves and Vibrations. Basel: Basilius Presse, 1967. Kare, Morley, and Bernard, E.E. (eds.). Biological Prototypes and Manmade Systems. New York: Plenum Press, 1962. Katavolos, William. Organics. Hilversum, Holland: De Jong & Co., 1961. Keller, Goroslav. Dizajn. Zagreb: Vjesnik, 1975. . Ergonomija za Dizajnere. Belgrade: "Ergonomija," 1978. Lawlor, Robert. Sacred Geometry. New York: Crossroad, 1982. Negroponte, Nicholas. The Architecture Machine. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1970. Oliver, Paul. Shelter and Society. London: Barrie & Jenkins, 1970. .. Shelter in Africa. New York: Praeger, 1971. . Shelter, Sign and Symbol. New York: The Overlook Press, 1977. Cables, Nets and Membranes, Vol. 2 of Tensile Structures. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.1.T. Press, 1969. Pawlowski, Andrzej. Fragmenty Prac Naukowo-Badawczych. Krakau, Poland, 1966. Baer, Steve. Sunspots. Seattle: Cloudburst Press, 1979. Pearce, Peter. Structure in Nature is a Strategy for Design. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1978. Pearce, Peter, and Pearce, Susan. Experiments in Form. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1978. Polyhedra Primer. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1978. Popko, Edward. Geodesics. Detroit: University of Detroit Press, 1968. Ritterbush, Philip C. The Art of Organic Forms. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Press, 1968. Schillinger, Joseph. The Mathematical Basis of the Arts. New York: Philosophical Library, 1948. Schwenk, Theodor. Sensitive Chaos: The Creation of Flowing Forms in Water and Air. Rudolf Steiner Press, 1965. Selle, Gert. Ideologie und Utopie des Design. Cologne: DuMont, 1973. Sinnott, Edmund W. The Problem of Organic Form. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1963. Thompson, Sir D'Arcy Wentworth. On Growth and Form (2 vols.). Čambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1952. Turner, John F. C. Housing by People: Towards Autonomy in Building Environments. London: Marion Boyars Ltd., 1976. Watkin, David. Morality and Architecture. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977. Wedd, Dunkin. Pattern & Texture. New York: Studio Books, 1956. Weyl, Hermann. Symmetry. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1952. Whyte, Lancelot Law. Accent on Form. New York: Harper, 1954. . Aspects of Form. London: Lund Humphries, 1951. . The Next Development in Man. New York: Mentor, 1950. Williams, Christopher. Origins of Form. New York: Architectural Book Publishing Company, 1981. Zodiac (magazine). Vol. 19. Milan, Italy, 1969. ## DESIGN AND THE ENVIRONMENT Arvill, Robert. Man and Environment. Middlesex: Penguin, 1967. Boughey, Arthur S. Ecology of Populations. New York: Macmillan, 1968. Calder, Ritchie. After the Seventh Day. New York: Mentor, 1967. Commoner, Barry. Science and Survival. London: Gollancz, 1966. Consumer's Association of Penang. Development and the Environmental Crisis: A Malaysian Case. Penang: Consumer's Association of Penang, 1982. Curtis, Richard, and Hogan, Elizabeth. Perils of the Peaceful Atom. London: Gollancz, 1970. DeBell, Garrett (ed.). The Environmental Handbook. New York: Ballantine, 1970. Dubos, Rene. Celebrations of Life. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981. Man, Medicine, and Environment. Middlesex: Penguin, 1970. . The Wooing of Earth. New York: Charles Scribner, 1980. Ehrlich, Paul. "Eco-Catastrophel" Ramparts, September, 1968. . The Population Bomb. New York: Ballantine, 1970. Giedion, Siegfried. Mechanization Takes Command. New York: Oxford University Press, 1948. \_. Space, Time and Architecture. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1949. . The Beginnings of Architecture. Vol. 2. Princeton, New Jersey: Bollingen Series, Princeton University Press, 1964. . The Eternal Present: The Beginnings of Art. Vol. 1. Princeton, New Jersey: Bollingen Series, Princeton University Press, 1962. Johnson, Warren. Muddling Toward Frugality. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1978. Kaprow, Allan. Assemblage, Environments and Happenings. New York: Abrams, 1966. Kouwenhoen, John A. The Beer Can by the Highway. New York: Doubleday, 1961. . Half a Truth is Better than None. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982. . Made in America. New York: Doubleday, 1948. Kuhns, William. Environmental Man. New York: Harper & Row, 1969. Linton, Ron. Terracide: America's Destruction of Her Living Environment. Boston: Little, Brown, 1970. Lippard, Lucy R. Overlay: Contemporary Art and the Art of Pre-History. New York: Pantheon, 1983. Lovelock, j. E. Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth. New York: Oxford University Press, 1979. Lynes, Russell. The Tastemakers. New York: Harper, 1954. .. Confessions of a Dilettante. New York: Harper & Row, 1967. . The Domesticated Americans. New York: Harper & Row, 1963. McHarg, Ian L. Design with Nature. New York: Natural History Press, 1969. Marine, Gene. America the Raped: The Engineering Mentality and the Devastation of a Continent. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1969. Marx, Wesley. The Frail Ocean. New York: Ballantine, 1970. Mitchell, John C. (ed.). Ecotactics. New York: Pocketbooks, 1970. Mollison, Bill. Perma-Culture One. Melbourne: Transworld, 1978. Perma-Culture Two. Stanley, Tazmania: Tagari Books, 1979. Mumford, Lewis. Technics and Civilization. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1934. . The Brown Decades. New York: Dover, 1955. . The City in History. Middlesex: Penguin, 1966. . The Condition of Man. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1944. . The Conduct of Life. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1951. . The Culture of Cities. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1938. . From the Ground Up. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1956. . Sticks and Stones. New York: Dover, 1955. Paddock, William, and Paddock, Paul. Famine 1975/ Boston: Little, Brown, 1967. Palmstierna, Hans. Plundring, Svält, Forgiftning. Orebro, Sweden: Rabén & Sjögren, 1969. Ramo, Simon. Cure for Chaos. New York: David McKay, 1969. Rienow, Robert, and Train, Leona. Moment in the Sun. New York: Ballantine, 1970. Shepard, Paul. Man in the Landscape. New York: Knopf, 1967. Shepard, Paul, and McKinley, Daniel. The Subversive Science: Essays Toward an Ecology of Man. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1969. Shurcliff, William A. S/S/T and Sonic Boom Handbook. New York: Ballantine, 1970. Smithsonian Institution. The Fitness of Man's Environment. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Press, 1967. Sommer, Robert. Big Art. Philadelphia: Running Press, 1977. . Design Awareness. San Francisco: Rinehart Press, 1972. . Personal Space: The Behavioral Basis of Design. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1969. . Street Art. New York: Links Books, 1975. Tight Spaces. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1974. Sotamaa, Yrjö (ed.). Teollisuus, Ymparisto, Tuotesuunnittelu [Industry, design, environment] (4 vols., trilingual). Helsinki, Finland, 1969. Still, Henry. The Dirty Animal. New York: Hawthorn, 1967. Taylor, Gordon Rattray. The Biological Time Bomb. London: Panther, 1969. Todd, John, and Todd, Nancy. Tomorrow is our Permanent Address. New York: Harper & Row, 1979. United Nations. Chemical and Bacteriological (Biological) Weapons and the Effects of Their Possible Use. New York: Ballantine, 1970. Whiteside, Thomas. Defoliation. New York: Ballantine, 1970. ## DESIGN AND THE FUTURE Allaby, Michael. Inventing Tomorrow. London: Abacus Books, 1977. Allen, Edward. Stone Shelters. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1969. Calder, Nigel. The Environment Game. London: Panther, 1968. —(ed.). The World in 1984. 2 vols. Middlesex: Penguin, 1965. Chase, Stuart. The Most Probable World. New York: Harper & Row, 1968. Clarke, Arthur C. Profiles of the Future. London: Collancz, 1962 Cole, Dandridge M. Beyond Tomorrow. Madison, Wisconsin: Amherst Press, 1965. Cook, Peter. Experimental Architecture. New York: Universe Books, 1970. Ellul, Jacques. The Betrayal of the West. New York: The Seabury Press, 1978. . The Technological Society. New York: Vintage, 1967. . The Technological System. New York: Continuum, 1980. Ewald, William R. Jr. Environment and Change. The Next Fifty Years. all: Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 1968. . Environment and Policu. The Next Fiftu Years. -(ed.). Environment for Man. The Next Fifty Years. Fuller, R. Buckminster. Education Automation. Čarbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press, 1964. . Ideas and Integrities. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1963. .. Nine Chains to the Moon. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott, 1938. . No More Secondhand God. Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press, 1963. Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth. Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press, 1969. Untitled Epic Poem on the History of Industrialization. Highlands, North Carolina: Jonathan Williams Press, 1962. . Utopia or Oblivion. London: Allen Lane, 1970. (ed.). Inventory of World Resources, Human Trends and Needs (World Science Decade 1965–75: Phase I, Document 1). . The Design Initiative (Phase 1, Doc. 2). . Comprehensive Thinking (Phase 1, Doc. 3). (ed.). The Ten Year Program (Phase 1, Doc. 4). . Comprehensive Design Strategy (Phase I, Doc. 5). . The Ecological Context: Energy and Materials (Phase II, Doc. 6). . Synergetics. New York: Macmillan, 1975. . Synergetics 2. New York: Macmillan, 1979. . Critical Path. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1981. Hellman, Hal. Transportation in the World of the Future. New York: J.B. Lippincott, 1968. Kahn, Herman, and Wiener, Anthony J. The Year 2000: Scenarios for the Future. New York: Macmillan, 1967. Krampen, Martin (ed.). Design and Planning. New York: Hastings House, 1965. . Design and Planning 2. New York: Hastings House, 1967. McHale, John. The Future of the Future. New York: George Braziller, 1969. Marek, Kurt W. Yestermorrow. New York: Knopf, 1961. Marks, Robert W. The Dymaxion World of Buckminster Fuller. New York: Reinhold, 1960. Morgan, Chris. Future Man? London: David & Charles, 1980. Prehoda, Robert W. Designing the Future. New York: Chilton, 1967. Ribeiro, Darcy. The Civilizational Process. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Press, 1968. Schell, Jonathon. The Fate of the Earth. London: Pan Books, 1982. Skinner, B.F. Walden Two. New York: Macmillan, 1948. Toward the Year 2000: Work in Progress. Daedalus, summer 1967. ## AGGRESSION, TERRITORIALITY, BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS, AND DESIGN Ardrey, Robert. African Genesis. London: Collins, 1961 . The Hunting Hypothesis. New York: Atheneum, 1976. . The Social Čontract. London: Collins, 1970. . The Territorial Imperative. London: Collins, 1967. Bates, Marston. The Forest and the Sea. New York: Vintage, 1965. Bateson, Gregory. Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity. New York: E.P. Dutton, 1979. Birdsal, Derek. The Living Treasures of Japan. London: Wildwood House, 1973. Bliebtreu, John N. The Parable of the Beast. London: Paladin, 1970. Blond, Georges. The Great Migration of Animals. New York: Collier, Macmillan, 1962. Broadhurst, P. L. The Science of Animal Behavior. Middlesex: Penguin, 1963. Brooks, John. Showing Off in America: From Conspicuous Consumption to Parody Display. Boston: Little, Brown, 1981. Brunwald, Jan Harold. The Vanishing Hitchhiker: American Urban Legends and Their Meanings. New York: W.W. Norton, 1981. Burton, John. The Oxford Book of Insects. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981. Buxton, Jean. Religion and Healing in Mandari. Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1973. Callan, Hilary. Éthology and Society: Towards an Anthropological View. Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1970. Charter, S.P.R. For Unto Us a Child is Born: A Human Ecological Overview of Population Pressures. San Francisco: Applegate, 1968. . Man on Earth. San Francisco: Applegate, 1965. Cohen, Abner. Custom and Politics in Urban Africa. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1969. . Two-Dimensional Man. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1974. Critchfield, Richard. Villages. New York: Doubleday, 1981. Darling, F. Fraser. A Herd of Red Deer. Oxford University Press, 1937. Douglas, Mary. Implicit Meanings. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1975. . Natural Symbols. New York: Pantheon, 1982. . Purity and Danger. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966. Risk and Culture: An Essay on the Selection of Technical and Environmental Dangers. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982. . The World of Goods. New York: Basic Books, 1979. Dowdeswell, W.H. Animal Ecology. London: Methuen, 1966. Eiseley, Loren. The Firmament of Time. New York: Atheneum, 1966. . The Immense Journey. New York: Vintage, 1957. Elgin, Duane. Voluntary Simplicity. New York: William Morrow, 1981. Evans-Pritchard, E. E. Essays in Social Anthropology. London: Faber and Faber, 1962. . A History of Anthropological Thought. London: Faber and Faber, 1981. . The Nuer. Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1940. . Nuer Religion. Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1956. . The Position of Women in Primitive Societies and Other Essays in Social Anthropology. London: Faber and Faber, 1965. Social Anthropology. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1951. . Theories of Primitive Religion. London: Faber and Faber, 1965. . Witchcraft Oracles and Magic Among the Azande. London: Faber and Faber, 1937. -(ed.). Man and Woman Among the Azande. London: Faber and Faber, 1974. (ed.). The Zande Trickster. London: Faber and Faber, 1967. Evans-Pritchard, E. E., and Fortes, M. African Political Systems. London: Oxford University Press, 1940. Farb, Peter, and Armelagos, George. Consuming Passions: The Anthropology of Eating. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1980. Fogg, William. The Living Arts of Nigeria. London: Studio Vista, 1971. Ford, E. B. Moths. London: Collins, 1955. Fox, Robin. Encounter with Anthropology. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1973. Gabus, Jean. Au Sahara: Arts et Symboles. Neuchâtel: La Baconniere, 1958. Gray, James. How Animals Move. Middlesex: Penguin, 1959. Grey, Walter W. The Living Brain. Middlesex: Penguin, 1961. Hali, Edward T. Beyond Culture. New York: Doubleday, 1976. . The Dance of Life. New York: Doubleday, 1976. . The Hidden Dimension. London: Bodley Head, 1969. . The Silent Language. New York: Doubleday, 1959. Hill, Polly. Rural Hausa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972. Ingle, Clyde. From Village to State in Tanzania. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1973. Koenig, Lilli. Studies in Animal Behavior. New York: Apollo Editions, 1967. Koestler, Arthur. Bricks to Babel. New York: Random House, 1980. The Case of the Midwife Toad. New York: Random House, 1971. . The Ghost in the Machine. London: Hutchinson, 1967. . Insight and Outlook. New York: Macmillan, 1949. . Janus: A Summing Up. New York: Random House, 1972. . Kaleidoscope. London: Hutchinson, 1959 . The Roots of Coincidence. New York: Random House, 1972. . The Sleepwalkers. London: Hutchinson, 1959. Kohr, Leopold. The Breakdown of Nations. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1978. .. Development Without Aid. New York: Schocken Books, 1979. The Overdeveloped Nations. New York: Schocken Books, 1979. Lévi-Strauss, Claude. The Raw and the Cooked. Vol. 1. of Introduction to a Science of Mythology. London: Jonathan Cape, 1970. From Honey to Ashes. Vol. 2 of Introduction to a Science of Mythology. New York: Harper & Row, 1973. \_. The Origin of Table Manners. Vol. 3 of Introduction to a Science of Mythology. New York: Harper & Row, 1978. . The Naked Man. Vol. 4 of Introduction to a Science of Mythology. New York: Harper & Row, 1981. . Tristes tropiques. Paris: Plon, 1955. . The Way of the Masks. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1982. LeVine, Robert A. Culture, Behaviour, and Personality. London: Hutchinson, 1973. Lienhardt, Godfrey. Divinity and Experience: The Religion of the Dinka. Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1961. Lindauer, Martin. Binas Sprak. Stockholm: Bonniers, 1964. Lorenz, Konrad. Behind the Mirror. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1977. \_. Civilized Man's Eight Deadly Sins. London: Metheun, 1974. .. Darwin hat recht Gesehen. Pfullingen, Germany: Guenther Neske, 1965. . Der Vogelflug. Pfullingen, Germany: Guenther Neske, 1965. \_. Er redete mit dem Vieh, den Vögeln, and den Fischen. Vienna, Austria: Borotha-Schoeler, 1949. . Man Meets Dog. London: Methuen, 1955. . On Aggression. London: Methuen, 1966. \_. Studies in Animal and Human Behavior. Volume I. Methuen, 1970. \_. Ueber tierisches und menschliches Verhalten. 2 vols. Munich, Germany: Piper, 1966. . The Year of the Greylag Goose. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978. Marais, Eugene. The Soul of the Ape. New York: Atheneum, 1969 Morris, Desmond. The Biology of Art. London: Methuen, 1966. . The Naked Ape. London: Jonathan Cape, 1967. Mumford, Lewis. Technics and Human Development. Vol. 1 of The Myth of the Machine. London: Secker & Warburg, 1967. . The Pentagon of Power. Vol. 2 of The Myth of the Machine. London: Secker & Warburg, 1971. National Museum of Chad. L'Art Sao. N'djamena: Debroisse, 1960. Paturi, Felix R. Nature, Mother of Invention: The Engineering of Plant Life. Middlesex: Pelican, 1978. Riefenstahl, Leni. The Last of the Nuba. New York: Harper & Row, 1974. . The People of Kau. New York: Harper & Row, 1976. . Vanishing Africa. New York: Harmony Books, 1982. Rifkin, Jeremy. Entropy. New York: The Viking Press, 1980. Shepard, Paul. The Tender Carnivore and the Sacred Game. New York: Charles Scribner, 1973. . Thinking Animals. New York: Viking Press, 1978. Sheppard, Mubin. Living Crafts of Malaysia. Singapore: Times Books International, 1978. Siebert, Erna and Forman, Werner. L'Art des Indiens d’Amerique. Paris: Editiones Cercle d'Art, 1967. Sikes, Sylvia K. Lake Chad. London: Eyre Methuen, 1972. Singer, Peter. The Expanding Circle: Ethics and Sociobiology. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1981. Stavrianos, L. S. Global Rift: The Third World Comes of Age. New York: William Morrow & Co., 1981. .. The Promise of the Coming Dark Age. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman & Co., 1976. Storr, Anthony. Human Aggression. Middlesex: Allen Lane, Penguin Press, 1968. Taylor, Gordon Rattray. The Biological Time Bomb. London: Panther, 1969. Telfer, William, et al. (eds.). The Biology of Organisms. New York: Wiley, 1965. . The Biology of Populations. New York: Wiley, 1966. Thompson, William Irwin. At the Edge of History. New York: Harper & Row, 1971. . Darkness and Scattered Light. New York: Doubleday, 1978. . Evil and World Order. New York: Harper & Row, 1976. . Passages About Earth. New York: Harper & Row, 1974. Thurow, Lester C. The Zero-Sum Society. New York: Basic Books, 1980. Tiger, Lionel. Optimism: The Biology of Hope. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1979. Tinbergen, Nicolaas. The Herring Gull's World. London: Collins, 1967. . Social Behavior in Animals. London: Methuen, 1953. \_. The Study of Instinct. London: Oxford University Press, 1951. von Frisch, Karl. Animal Architecture. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978. . Bees, Their Vision, Chemical Senses and Language. London: Jonathan Cape, 1968. . The Dancing Bees. London: Methuen, 1966. . Man and the Living World. New York: Harvest, 1963. Wickler, Wolfgang. Mimicry in Plants and Animals. London: Wiedenfeld and Nicholson, 1968. Wilson, Edward O. Sociobiology. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1974. and Lumsden, Charles J. Promethian Fire. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1974. Wilson-Hoffenden, J. R. The Red Men of Nigeria. London: Frank Cass Ltd., 1967. Wylie, Philip. The Magic Animal. New York: Doubleday, 1968. Zipf, George K. Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort: An Introduction to Human Ecology. Boston: Addison-Wesley Press, 1949. ## ERGONOMICS, HUMAN ENGINEERING, AND HUMAN FACTORS DESIGN Alger, John R.M., and Hays, Carl V. Creative Synthesis in Design. New York: Prentice-Hall, 1962. Anthropometry and Human Engineering. London: Butterworth's, 1955. Asimov, Morris. Introduction to Design. New York: Prentice-Hall, 1962. Banham, Reyner. Theory and Design in the First Machine Age. London: Architectural Press, 1960. Buhl, Harold R. Creative Engineering Design. Ames, Iowa: lowa State University Press, 1960. Consumers' Union (ed.). Passenger Car Design and Highway Safety. Mount Vernon, New York: Consumers Union, 1963. Diffrient, Niels; Tilley, Alvin; and Bardagjy, Joan. Humanscale 1/2/3. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1974. . Humanscale 4/5/6. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1981. . Humanscale 7/8/9. Cambridge: M.1.T. Press, 1981. Glegg, Gordon L. The Design of Design. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969. Goss, Charles Mayo (ed.). Gray's Anatomy. (27th ed.) Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1959. Jones, J. Christopher, and Thronley, D.G. Conference on Design Methods. New York: Permagon Press, 1963. McCormick, Ernest Jr. Human Engineering. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957. Nader, Ralph. Unsafe at any Speed. New York: Grossman, 1965. Schroeder, Francis. Anatomy for Interior Designers. (2d ed.) New York: Whitney Publications, 1948. Starr, Martin Kenneth. Product Design and Decision Theory. New York: Prentice-Hall, 1963. U.S. Navy (ed.). Handbook of Human Engineering Data (Second Edition) U.S. Navy Office of Naval Research, Special Devices Center, by NAVEXOS P-643, Report SDC 199-1-2 (NR-783- 001. N6onr-I99. TOI PDSCDCHE Project 20–6–1). Tufts University, Medford, Mass., n.d. Woodson, Wesley, E. Human Engineering Guide for Equipment Designers. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1954. ## GESTALT, PERCEPTION, CREATIVITY, AND ## RELATED FIELDS Adorno, T.W. et al. The Authoritarian Personality. New York: Harper, 1950. Allport, Floyd. Theories of Perception and the Concept of Structure. New York: Wiley, 1955. Berne, Dr. Eric. Games People Play. London: Penguin, 1970. \_. Principles of Group Treatment. London: Oxford University Press, 1966. . The Structure and Dynamics of Organizations and Groups. New York: J.B. Lippincott, 1963. \_. Transactional Analysis in Psychotherapy. New York: Grove Press, 1961. Bettelheim, Bruno. The Empty Fortress: Infantile Autism and the Birth of the Self. New York: Free Press, 1967. The Informed Heart: Autonomy in a Mass Age. London: Paladin, 1970. DeBono, Edward. New Think. New York: Basic Books, 1968. Freud, Sigmund. Beyond the Principle. Translated by Strachey. London: Hogarth Press, 1961. . Moses and Monotheism. Translated by Jones. London: Hogarth Press, 1951. . On Creativity and the Unconscious. New York: Torchbooks, n.d. .. Totem and Taboo. Translated by Brill. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1950. Fromm, Erich. The Art of Loving. London: Allen & Unwin, 1957. . The Revolution of Hope. New York: Harper, 1968. Ghiselin, Brewster (ed.). The Creative Process. New York: Mentor Books. Gibson, James J. The Perception of the Visual World. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1950. Gordon, William J.J. Synectics. New York: Harper, 1961. Gregory, R.L. The Intelligent Eye. London: Wiedenfield & Nicholson, 1970. Gregory, R.L., and Gombrich, E. H. (eds.). Illusion in Nature and Art. London: Duckworth, 1973. Grotjahn, Martin. Beyond Laughter. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957. Gunther, Bernard. Sense Relaxation. London: MacDonald, 1969. Jung, C.G. Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious. 2 vols. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1922. . Psychology of the Unconscious. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1922. Katz, David. Gestalt Psychology. New York: Ronald Press, 1950. Koehler, Wolfgang. Gestalt Psychology. rev. ed. New York: Liveright, 1970. Koestler, Arthur. The Act of Creation. London: Hutchinson, 1969. Kofka, K. Principles of Gestalt Psychology. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1935. Korzybski, Alfred. The Manhood of Humanity. Chicago: Library of General Semantics, 1950. .. Science and Sanity. Chicago: Library of General Semantics, 1948. Kubie, Lawrence S. The Neurotic Distortion of the Creative Process. Lawrence, Kansas: The University of Kansas Press, 1958. Leonard, George B. Education and Ecstasy. London: John Murray, 1970. Lindner, Robert. Must You Conform? New York: Rinehart, 1956. . Prescription for Rebellion. New York: Rinehart, 1952. Neumann, Erich. The Archetypal World of Henry Moore. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1959. Parnes, Sidney, and Harding, H. A Source Book of Creative Thinking. New York: Scribner, 1962. Perls, F.S. Ego, Hunger and Aggression. New York: Random House, 1969. Gestalt Therapy Verbatim. Edited by J. Stephens. Lafayette, California: Real People Press, 1969. \_. In and Out of the Garbage Pail. Lafayette, California: Real People Press, 1969. Petermann, Bruno. The Gestalt Theory and the Problem of Configuration. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1932. Rawlins, Ian. Aesthetics and the Gestalt. London: Nelson, 1953. Reich, Wilhelm. The Cancer Biopathy. New York: Orgone Institute Press, n.d. . The Function of the Orgasm. London: Panther, 1968. . The Mass Psychology of Fascism. New York: Orgone Institute Press, 1946. \_. Selected Writings: An Introduction to Orgonomy. New York: Vision Press, 1972. \_. The Sexual Revolution. New York: Vision Press, 1969. Rolf, Dr. Ida P. Structural Integration. Santa Monica, California: Esalen Press, 1962. Ruesch, Jurgen. Communication. New York: Norton, 1951. . Disturbed Communication. New York: Norton, 1957. .. Non-Verbal Communication. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1956. Shanks, Michael. The Innovators. Middlesex: Penguin, 1967. Smith, Paul. Creativity. New York: Hastings House, 1959. Spence, Lewis. Myth and Ritual in Dance, Game and Rhyme. London: Watts Ltd., 1947. Vernon, Magdalen D. A Further Study of Visual Perception. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1952. Wertham, Fredric. Dark Legend. New York: Paperback Library, 1966. . Seduction of the Innocent. New York: Macmillan, 1954. . The Show of Violence. New York: Paperback Library, 1966. . A Sign for Cain: An Exploration of Human Violence. New York: Macmillan, 1966. Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics. New York: Wiley, 1948. . The Human Use of Human Beings. London: Sphere, 1969. ## POPULAR CULTURE, SOCIAL PRESSURES, ## AND DESIGN Adams, Brooks. The Law of Civilization and Decay. New York: Vintage, n.d. Arensberg, Conrad M., and Niehoff, Arthur H. Introducing Social Change. Chicago: Aldine, 1964. Boorstin, Daniel J. The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-Events in America. New York: Harper & Row, 1964. Brightbill, Charles K. The Challenge of Leisure. New York: Spectrum, 1960. Brown, James A.C. Techniques of Persuasion. Middlesex: Penguin, 1963. Cassirer, Ernst. An Essay on Man. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1944. . Language and Myth. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1946. . The Myth of the State. London: Oxford University Press, 1946. Galbraith, John Kenneth. The Voice of the Poor. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1983. Goodman, Paul. Art and Social Nature. New York: Arts and Science Press, 1946. . Compulsory Mis-education. Middlesex: Penguin, 1971. . Drawing the Line. New York: Random House, 1962. . Growing Up Absurd. London: Sphere, 1970. .. Like a Conquered Province: The Moral Ambiguity of America. New York: Random House, 1967. . Notes of a Neolithic Conservative. New York: Random House, 1970. .. Utopian Essays and Practical Proposals. New York: Vintage, 1964. Gorer, Geoffrey. Hot Strip Tease. London: Graywells Press, 1934. Gurko, Leo. Heros, Highbrows and the Popular Mind. New York: Charter Books, 1962. Hofstadter, Richard. Anti-intellectualism in American Life. London: Jonathan Cape, 1964. Hofstadter, Richard, and Wallace, Michael. American Violence. New York: Knopf, 1970. Jacobs, Norman (ed.). Culture for the Millions? Boston: Beacon, 1964. Joad, C.E.M. Decadence. London: Faber, 1948. Kefauver, Estes. In a Few Hands: Monopoly Power in America. Middlesex: Penguin, 1966. Kerr, Walter. The Decline of Pleasure. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1964. Kronhausen, Dr. Phyllis, and Kronhausen, Dr. Eberhard. Erotic Art. London: W.H. Allen, 1971. The First International Exhibition of Erotic Art. Catalogue. Copenhagen, Denmark: Uniprint, 1968. \_. The Šecond International Exhibition of Erotic Art. Catalogue. Copenhagen, Denmark: Uniprint, 1969. Künen, James Šimon. The Strawberry Statement: Notes of a College Revolutionary. New York: Random House, 1969. Larrabee, Eric, and Meyersohn, Rolf (eds.). Mass Leisure, New York: Free Press, 1958. Legman, Gershon. The Fake Revolt. New York: The Breaking Point Press, 1966. . Love and Death: A Study in Censorship. New York: The Breaking Point Press, 1949. (ed.). Neurotica: 1948–1951. New York: Hacker, 1963. . Rationale of the Dirty Joke: An Analysis of Sexual Humour. London: Panther, 1972. Levy, Mervyn. The Moons of Paradise: Reflections on the Female Breast in Art. New York: Citadel, 1965. MacDonald, Dwight. Masscult and Midcult. New York: Random House, 1961. McLuhan, Marshall. Culture is Our Business. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970. The Gutenberg Galaxy. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1962. . The Mechanical Bride. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1967. Understanding Media. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964. and Carpenter, Edmund. Explorations in Communication. London: Jonathan Cape, 1970. and Watson, Wilfred. From Cliché to Archetype. New York: Viking, 1970. and Fiore, Quentin. The Medium Is the Message. Middlesex: Penguin, 1971. and Parker, Harley. Through the Vanishing Point. New York: Harper & Row, 1968. and Papanek, Victor J. Verbi-voco-Visual Explorations. New York: Something Else Press, 1967. and Fiore, Quentin. War and Peace in the Global Village. New York: Bantam, 1968. Mannheim, Karl. Ideology and Utopia. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966. Mehling, Harold. The Great Time Killer. New York: World, 1962. Mesthene, Emmanuel G. Technological Change. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1970. Molnar, Thomas. The Decline of the Intellectual. New York: Meridian, 1961. Myrdal, Jan and Kessle, Gun. Angkor: An Essay on Art and Imperialism. London: Chatto & Windus, 1971. O'Brian, Edward J. The Dance of the Machines. New York: Macaulay, 1929. Packard, Vance. The Hidden Persuaders. Middlesex: Penguin, 1970. . The Status Seekers. Middlesex: Penguin, 1971. \_. The Wastemakers. Middlesex: Penguin, 1970. Palm, Goran. As Others See Us. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1968. Reich, Charles A. The Greening of America. Middlesex: Penguin, 1972. Repo, Satu (ed.). This Book is About Schools. New York: Pantheon Books, 1970. Riesman, David. Faces in the Crowd. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1952 . Individualism Reconsidered. New York: Free Press, 1954 \_. The Lonely Crowd. rev. ed. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1950. Rosenberg, Bernard, and White, David M. Mass Culture. New York: Free Press, 1957. Roszak, Theodore. The Making of a Counter Culture. London: Faber, 1971. Ryan, Willima. Blaming the Victim. Orbach & Chambers, 1971. Snow, C.P. The Two Cultures: And a Second Look. Cambridge: Camnbridge University Press, 1963. Thompson, Denys. Discrimination and Popular Culture. Middlesex: Penguin, 1970. Toffler, Alvin. The Culture Consumers. New York: St. Martin's, 1964. Veblen, Thorstein. The Theory of the Leisure Class. London: Allen & Unwin, 1971. Wagner, Geoffrey. Parade of Pleasure: A Study of Popular Iconography in the USA. London: Derek & Verschoyle, 1954. Walker, Èdward L., and Heyns, Roger W. An Anatomy for Conformity. London: Brooks-Cole, 1968. Warshow, Robert. The Immediate Experience. New York: Doubleday, 1963. Young, Wayland. Eros Denied: Sex in Western Society. London: Corgi, 1968. ## DESIGN AND OTHER CULTURES Austin, Robert, and Ueda, Koichiro. Bamboo. Tokyo: Weatherhill, 1978. Belo, Jane. Traditional Balinese Culture. New York: Columbia University Press, 1970. Benrimo, Dorothy. Camposantos. Fort Worth, Texas: Amon Carter Museum, 1966. Beurdeley, Jean-Michel. Thai Forms. Freiburg: Office du Livre, 1979. Bhagwati, Jagdish. The Economics of Underdeveloped Countries. London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 1966. Carpenter, Edmund. Eskimo. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1959. Cavarrubias, Miguel. Bali. New York: Knopf, 1940. . Mexico South. New York: Knopf, 1946. Cordry, Donald, and Cordry, Dorothy. Mexican Indian Costumes. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1968. Cushing, Frank Hamilton. Zuni Fetishes. Flagstaff, Arizona: KC Editions, 1966. de Bermudez, Graciela Samper (ed.). Artesanias de Colombia. Bogota: Litografia Arco, 1978. Dennis, Wayne. The Hopi Child. New York: Science Editions, 1965. DePoncins, Contran. Eskimos. New York: Hastings House, 1949. Eliade, Mircea. Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964. Gardi, René. African Crafts and Craftsmen. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1969. . Architecture sans Architecte. Bern: Buchler & Co., 1974 Glynn, Prudence. Skin to Skin: Eroticism in Dress. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1982. Grass, Antonio. Animales mitologicos. Bogota: Litografia Arco, 1979. . Diseno Precolumbina Colombiano. Bogota: Museo del Oro, 1972. Harris, Marvin. Cultural Materialism. New York: Random House, 1979. Harrison, Paul. Inside the Third World. Middlesex: Penguin, 1979. . The Third World Tomorrow. Middlesex: Penguin, 1980 Heineken, Ty, and Heineken, Kyoko. Tansu: Traditional Japanese Cabinetry. Tokyo: Weatherhill, 1981. Herrigel, Eugen. Zen in the Art of Archery. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1953. Hiler, Hilaire. From Nudity to Raiment. London: W. & G. Foyle Ltd., 1930. Hokusai. One Hundred Views of Mount Fuji. New York: Frederik Publications, 1958. Kasba 64 Study Group. Living on the Edge of the Sahara. The Hague: Government Publishing Office, 1973. Kwamiys, Takeji. Katachi: Japanese Pattern and Design in Wood, Paper and Clay. New York: Abrams, 1967. Jenness, Diamond. The People of the Twilight. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, Phoenix, 1959. Kakuzo, Okakura. The Book of Tea. Tokyo: Tuttle, 1963. Kitzo, Harumichi. Cha-No-Yu. Tokyo: Shokokusha, 1953. . Formation of Bamboo. Tokyo: Shokokusha, 1958. . Formation of Stone. Tokyo: Shokokusha, 1958. Kubler, George. The Shape of Time. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1962. Lee, Sherman E. The Genius of Japanese Design. Tokyo: Kodansha, 1981. Leppe, Markus. Vaivaisukot. Helsinki, Finland: Werner Soderstrom, 1967. Liebow, Elliot. Tally's Corner. Boston: Little, Brown, 1967. Linton, Ralph. The Tree of Culture. New York: Knopf, 1955. Lip, Evelyn. Chinese Geomancy. Singapore: Times Books International, 1979. Lopez, Oscar Hidalgo. Manual de construcción con bambú. Bogotá: National University of Colombia, 1981. McPhee, Collin. A House in Bali. New York: John Day, 1946. . Music in Bali. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1966. Malinowski, Bronislaw. Magic, Science and Religion. New York: Anchor, 1954. . Sex and Repression in Savage Society. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1927. Manker, Ernst. People of Eight Seasons: The Story of the Lapps. New York: Viking, 1964. Mead, Margaret. Coming of Age in Samoa. Middlesex: Penguin, 1971. Cultural Patterns and Technological Change. New York: Mentor, n.d. . Growing up in New Guinea. Middlesex: Penguin, 1970. . Male and Female. Middlesex: Penguin, 1970. . Sex and Temperament. New York: Morrow, 1935. Meyer, Karl. Teotihuacan. Milan: Mondadori, 1973. Michener, James A. Hokusai Sketchbooks. Tokyo: Tuttle, 1958. Mookerjee, Ajit. Tantra Art. New Delhi, India: Kumar Gallery, 1967. Mowat, Farley. People of the Deer. New York: Pyramid, 1968. Nicolaisen, Johannes. Ecology and Culture of the Pastoral Tuareg. Copenhagen: National Museum of Copenhagen, 1963. Oka, Hideyuki. How to Wrap Five Eggs. New York: Harper & Row, 1967. Ortega y Gasset, José. The Dehumanization of Art. Translated by Weyl. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1948. Ortiz, Alfonso. The Tewa World: Space, Time, Being, & Becoming in a Pueblo Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969. Page, Susanne, and Page, Jake. Hopi. New York: Abrams, 1982. Pianzola, Maurice. Brasil Barroco. Rio de Janeiro: Edicao Funarte, 1980. Ramseyer, Urs. The Art and Culture of Bali. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977. Reichard, Gladys A. Navajo Religion: A Study of Symbolism. Princeton, New Jersey: Bollingen Series, Princeton University Press, 1950. Richards, Audrey I. Hunger and Work in a Savage Tribe. New York: Meridian, 1964. Rodmnan, Selven. Popular Artists of Brazil. Old Greenwich: Devin-Adair, 1977. Roediger, Virginia More. Ceremonial Costumes of the Pueblo Indians. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1961. Rudofsky, Bernard. Architecture without Architects. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1964. . Are Our Clothes Modern? Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1949. . Behind the Picture Window. New York: Oxford University Press, 1954. . The Kimono Mind. London: Gollancz, 1965. . The Prodigious Builders. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1977. . Streets for People. New York: Doubleday, 1969. The Unfashionable Human Body. New York: Doubleday, 1971. Saunders, E. Dale. Mudra: A Study of Symbolic Gestures in Japanese Buddhist Sculpture. London: Řoutledge & Kegan Paul, 1960. Schafer, Edward H. The Golden Peaches of Samarkand: A Study of T’ang Exotics. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1963. \_. Tu Wan's Stone Catalogue of Cloudy Forest. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1961. Scully, Vincent. Pueblo: Mountain, Village, Dance. New York: Viking Press, 1975. Sesoko, Tsune. The I-Ro-Ha of Japan. Tokyo: Cosmo Corporation, 1979. Spencer, Robert F. The North Alaskan Eskimo: A Study in Ecology and Society. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1969. Spies, Walter, and de Zote, Beryl. Dance and Drama in Bali. London: Faber, 1938. Suzuki, Daisetz T. Zen and Japanese Culture. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1959. Sze, Mai-Mai. The Tao of Painting. 2 vols. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1957. Tange, Kenzo, and Gropius, Walter. Katsura: Tradition and Creation in Japanese Architecture. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1960. Tange, Kenzo, and Kawazoe, Noboru. Ise: Prototype of Japanese Architecture. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1965. Thiry, Paul and Mary. Eskimo Artifacts: Designed for Use. Seattle: Superior Publishing Co., 1977. Valladares, Clarival and do Prado. Artesanato brasileiro. Rio de Janeiro: Edição Funarte, 1980. Vazquez, Ramirez. Mexico: The National Museum of Anthropology. Lausanne: Helvetica Press, 1968. Viezzer, Moema. Si me permiten hablar . . . . Bolivia: underground pamphlet, 1977. Wagley, Čharles. Welcome of Tears: The Tapirape Indians of Central Brazil. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977. Watts, Alan R. Beat Zen, Square Zen and Zen. San Francisco: City Lights, 1959. . The Joyous Cosmology. New York: Pantheon Books, 1962 . Nature, Man and Woman. New York: Pantheon Books, 1958. Wichmann, Siegfried. Japonisme. New York: Harmony Books, 1981. Wyman, Leland C. (ed.). Beautyway: A Navajo Ceremonial. Princeton, New Jersey: Bollingen Šeries, Princeton University Press, 1957. Yee, Chiang. The Chinese Eye. New York: Norton, 1950. . Chinese Calligraphy. London: Methuen, 1954. Yoshida, Mitsukuni, et al. Japan Style. Tokyo: Kondansha, 1981. ## PERSONAL STATEMENTS BY DESIGNERS ## AND OTHERS Åkerman, Nordal. Kan Vi Krympa Sverige? Stockholm: Rabén & Sjögren, 1980. Brecht, Bertolt. Gesammelte Werke. Frankfurt, Germany: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1967. Cleaver, Èldridge. Soul on Ice. London: Jonathan Cape, 1969. .. Eldridge Cleaver: Post-Prison Writings and Speeches. London: Jonathan Cape, 1969. Debray, Régis. Revolution in the Revolution. Middlesex: Penguin, 1968. Deshusses, Jeromne. The Eighth Night of Creation. New York: The Dial Press, 1982. Dow, Alden B. Reflections. Midland, Michigan: Northwood Institute, 1970. Fanon, Frantz. The Wretched of the Earth. Middlesex: Penguin, 1967. Fischer, Ernst. The Necessity of Art: A Marxist Approach. Middlesex: Pelican, 1964. Freire, Paulo. Cultural Action for Freedom. Middlesex: Penguin, 1972. .. Educação como Prática da Liberdade. São Paulo: P. P. C., 1967. . Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Middlesex: Penguin, 1972. Frisch, Bruno. Die Vierte Welt: Modell einer neuen Wirklichkeit. Stuttgart: DVA, 1970. Gardner, John. On Moral Fiction. New York: Basic Books, 1977. Gonzales, Xavier. Notes About Painting. New York: World, 1955. Greene, Herb. Mind & Image: An Essay on Art and Architecture. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1976. Greenough, Horatio. Form and Function. Washington, D.C.: privately published, 1811. Guevara, Ché. Bolivian Diary. London: Cape & Lorrimer, 1968. \_. Guerrilla Warfare. Middlesex: Penguin, 1969. Harris, Marvin. Cultural Materialism: The Struggle for a Science of Culture. New York: Random House, 1979. Kennedy, Robert F. To Seek a Newer World. London: Michael Joseph, 1968. Koestler, Arthur. Arrow in the Blue. London: Hutchinson, 1969. . Dialogue with Death. London: Hutchinson, 1966. . The Invisible Writing. London: Hutchinson, 1969. . Scum of the Earth. London: Hutchinson, 1968. Laing, R.D. The Politics of Experience. Middlesex: Penguin, 1970. Mailer, Norman. The Armies of the Night. Middlesex: Penguin, 1970. .. Miami and the Siege of Chicago. Middlesex: Penguin, 1971. Mao Tse-tung. Collected Writings. 5 vols. Peking: Foreign Language Press, 1964. . On Art and Literature. Peking: Foreign Language Press, 1954. . On Contradiction. Peking: Foreign Language Press. On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the People. Peking: Foreign Language Press, 1957. Marcuse, Herbert. Das Ende der Utopie. Berlin: Maikowski, 1967. . One-Dimensional Man. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964. Marin, John. The Collected Letters of John Marin. New York: Abelard-Schuman, n.d. Miller, Henry. My Bike and Other Friends. Santa Barbara, California: Capra Press, 1978. Myrdal, Jan. Confessions of a Disloyal European. London: Chatto & Windus, 1968. Report from a Chinese Village. Middlesex: Penguin, 1967. .. Samtida. Stockholm: Norstedt, 1967. Perlman, Janice E. The Myth of Marginality: Urban Poverty and Politics in Rio de Janeiro. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976. Richards, M.C. Centering: In Pottery, Poetry and the Person. Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1964. Saarinen, Eliel. Search for Form. Detroit: Kennikat Press, 1970. Safdie, Moshe. Beyond Habitat. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1970. \_. For Everyone a Garden. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.1.T. Press, 1974. . Form and Purpose. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1982. St. Exupéry, Antoine de. Bekenntnis einer Freundschaft. Düsseldorf, Germany: Karl Rauch, 1955. . Carnets. Paris: Gallimard, 1953. . Flight to Arras. Middlesex: Penguin, 1967. Freiden Oder Krieg? Düsseldorf, Germany: Karl Rauch, 1957. . Gebete der Einsamkeit. Düsseldorf, Germany: Karl Rauch, 1956. . Lettres a l'amie inventee. Paris: Plon, 1953. . Lettres a sa mere. Paris: Gallimard, 1955. . Lettres de jeunesse. Paris: Gallimard, 1953. . The Little Prince. Middlesex: Penguin, 1970. . Night Flight. Middlesex: Penguin, 1939. . A Šense of Life. New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1965. . Wind, Sand and Stars. Middlesex: Penguin, 1971. . The Wisdom of the Sands. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1952. Servan-Schreiber, Jean Jacques. The American Challenge. London: Hamish Hamilton, 1968. . The World Challenge. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1981. Shahn, Ben. The Shape of Content. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1957. Soleri, Paolo. Arcology: The City in the Image of Man. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1970. Sontag, Susan. On Photography. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1977. Sullivan, Louis H. The Autobiography of an Idea. Chicago: Peter Smith, 1924. . Kindergarten Chats. Chicago: Scarab Fraternity, 1934. Thoreau, Henry David. Walden and Essay on Civil Disobedience London: Dent. Van Gogh, Vincent. The Complete Letters of Vincent Van Gogh in Three Volumes. London: Thames & Hudson, 1958. Weiss, Peter. Notizen zum Kulterellen Leben in der Demokratischen Republik Viet Nam. Frankfurt, Germany: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1968. Wills, Philip. Free as a Bird. London: John Murray, 1973. . On Being a Bird. London: David & Charles, 1977. . Where No Birds Fly. London: Newnes, 1961. Wright, Frank Lloyd. Autobiography. New York: Duel, Sloane & Pearce, 1943. . The Disappearing City. New York: William Farquhar Payson, 1932. . The Living City. New York: Horizon, 1958. The New Frontier: Broadacre City. Springreen, Wisconsin: Taliesin Fellowship Publication, vol. 1, no. 1, October, 1940. . A Testament. New York: Horizon, 1957. . When Democracy Builds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1945. Wright, Olgivanna Lloyd. The Shining Brow. New York: Horizon, 1958. Yevtushenko, Yevgeny. Collected Poems. London: Calder & Boyars, 1969. . A Precocious Autobiography. New York: Dutton, 1963. ## THE BACKGROUND OF DESIGN Arnheim, Rudolf. Art and Visual Perception. London: Faber, 1967. . Film as Art. London: Faber, 1967. . Toward A Psychology of Art. London: Faber, 1967. Bayer, Herbert, and Ġropius, Walter. Bauhaus 1919–1928. Boston: Branford, 1952. Berenson, Bernard. Aesthetics and History. New York: Pantheon Books, 1948. Biederman, Charles. Art as the Evolution of Visual Knowledge. Red Wing, Minnesota: Charles Biederman, 1948. Boas, Franz. Primitive Art. New York: Dover, 1955. Burckhardt, Lucius. Der Werkbund. Stuttgart: DVA, 1978. Conrads, Ulrich, and Sperlich, Hans G. The Architecture of Fantasy. New York: Praeger, 1962. Danz, Louis. Dynamic Dissonance in Nature and the Arts. New York: Longmans Green, 1952. . It is Still the Morning. New York: Morrow, 1943. . Personal Revolution and Picasso. New York: Longmans Green, 1941. The Psychologist Looks at Art. New York: Longmans Green, 1937. . Zarathustra Jr.. New York: Brentano, 1934. Dorfles, Gillo. Kitsch: An Anthology of Bad Taste. London: Studio Vista, 1970. Ehrenzweig, Anton. The Hidden Order of Art. London: Paladin, 1970. Feldman, Edmund B. (ed.). Art in American Higher Institutions. Washington, D.C.: The National Art Education Association, 1970. Friedmann, Herbert. The Symbolic Goldfinch: Its History and Significance in European Devotional Art. Princeton, New Jersey: Bollingen Series, Princeton University Press, 1946. Gamow, George. One, Two, Three . . . Infinity. rev. ed. New York: Viking, 1961. Gerstner, Karl. Kalte Kunst? Basel, Switzerland: Arthur Niggli, 1957. Gilson, Étienne. Painting and Reality. Princeton, New Jersey: Bollingen Series, Princeton University Press, 1957. Gombrich, E.H. Art and Illusion. Oxford: Phaidon, 1962. . Ideals and Idols. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1979. The Image and the Eye. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1979. \_. Meditations on a Hobbyhorse. Oxford: Phaidon, 1963. . The Sense of Order. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1979. Graves, Robert. The White Goddess. London: Faber, 1952. Hatterer, Lawrence J. The Artist in Society: Problems and Treatment of the Creative Personality. New York: Grove Press, 1965. Hauser, Arnold. The Social History of Art. 4 vols. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1951. Hinz, Berthold. Art in the Third Reich. New York: Pantheon, 1979. Hogben, Lancelot. From Cave Painting to Comic Strip. New York: Chanticleer Press, 1949. Hon-En Historia. Catalogue. Stockholm: Moderna Museet, 1967. Huizinga, Johan. Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-element in Human Culture. London: Paladin, 1970. Hulten, K.G. Pontus. The Machine as Seen at the End of the Mechanical Age. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1968. Illich, Ivan. Energy and Equity. London: Calder & Boyars, 1974. . Tools for Conviviality. London: Calder & Boyars, 1973. Keats, John. The Insolent Chariots. New York: Crest Books, n.d. Klingender, Francis D. Art and the Industrial Revolution. London: Paladin, 1972. Kracauer, Siegfried. From Caligari to Hitler. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1947. Kranz, Kurt. Variationen über ein geometrisches Thema. Munich, Germany: Prestel, 1956. Langer, Susanne K. Feeling and Form. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1953. . Philosophy in a New Key. New York: Scribner, 1942. . Problems of Art. New York: Scribner, 1957. Le Corbusier. The Modulor. London: Faber, 1954. . Modulor 2. London: Faber, 1958. Lethaby, W.R. Architecture, Nature and Magic. New York: George Braziller, 1956. Malraux, André. The Metamorphosis of the Gods. New York: Doubleday, 1960. . The Voices of Silence. New York: Doubleday, 1952. Maritain, Jacques. Creative Intuition in Art and Poetry. Princeton, New Jersey: Bollingen Series, Princeton University Press, 1953. Middleton, Michael. Group Practice in Design. London: Architectural Press, 1968. Moholy-Nagy, Sibyl. Native Genius in Anonymous Architecture. New York: Horizon, 1957. Neumann, Erich. The Great Mother: An Analysis of the Archetype. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1955. Neutra, Richard. Survival through Design. New York: Oxford University Press, 1954. Nielsen, Vladimir. The Cinema as Graphic Art. New York: Hill & Wang, 1959. Okaley, Kenneth P. Man the Tool-maker. London: British Museum, 1963. Ozenfant, Amedee. Foundations of Modern Art. New York: Dover, 1952. Panofsky, Erwin. Gothic Architecture and Scholasticism. Latrobe, Pennsylvania: Archabbey Press, 1951. . Meaning in the Visual Arts. Middlesex: Penguin, 1970. Rapoport, Amos. House, Form and Culture. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1969. Read, Sir Herbert. The Grass Roots of Art. New York: Wittenborn, 1955. . Icon and Idea? London: Faber, 1955. . The Philosophy of Modern Art. London: Faber, 1965. Rosenberg, Harold. The Tradition of the New. London: Paladin, 1970. Sahlins, Marshall. Stone Age Economics. London: Tavistock Publications, 1974. Scheidig, Walther. Crafts of the Weimar Bauhaus. London: Studio Vista, 1967. Sempter, Gottfried. Wissenschaft, Industrie und Kunst. Mainz, Germany: Florian Kupferberg, 1966. Singer, Charles (ed.). A History of Technology. 5 vols. Oxford University Press, 1954–1958. Snaith, William. The Irresponsible Arts. New York: Atheneum, 1964. Thompson, E. P. William Morris: Romantic to Revolutionary. New York: Pantheon, 1977. Von Neumann. Game Theory. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1953. Willett, John. Art & Politics in the Weimar Period. New York: Pantheon, 1978. Wingler, Hans M. The Bauhaus. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1969. Youngblood, Gene. The Expanded Cinema. London: Studio Vista, 1971. ## THE PRACTICE OF DESIGN AND ITS PHILOSOPHY Albers, Anni. On Designing. New Haven, Connecticut: Pellango Press, 1959. Anderson, Donald M. Elements of Design. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1961. Art Directors' Club of New York. Symbology. New York: Hastings House, 1960. —. Visual Communication: International. New York: Hastings House, 1961. Baker, Stephen. Visual Persuasion. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1961. Bayer, Herbert. Visual Communication, Architecture, Painting. New York: Reinhold, 1967. Bill, Max. Form. Basel, Switzerland: Karl Werner, 1952. Text in German, English, French Doxiadis, Constantinos. Architecture in Transition. London: Hutchinson, 1965. . Between Dystopia and Utopia. London: Faber, 1966. . Ekistics. London: Hutchinson, 1968. Gropius, Walter. Scope of Total Architecture. New York: Harper, 1955. Itten, Johannes. The Art of Color. New York: Reinhold, 1961. . Design and Form. New York: Reinhold, 1963. Kandinsky, Wassily. On the Spiritual in Art. New York: Wittenborn, 1948. .. Point to Line to Plane. New York: Guggenheim Museum, 1947. Kepes, Gyorgy. Language of Vision. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1949. . The New Landscape in Art and Science. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1956. . Vision-Value Series. Vol. 1, Education of Vision. Vol. 2, Structure in Art and Science. Vol. 3, The Nature and Art of Motion. Vol. 4, Module Proportion Symmetry Rhythm. Vol. 5, The Man-made Object. Vol. 6, Sign, Image, Šymbol. New York: George Braziller, 1966. (ed.). The Visual Arts Today. Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1960. Klee, Paul. Pedagogical Sketch Book. London: Faber, 1968. . The Thinking Eye. London: Lund Humphries, 1961. Kranz, Stewart, and Fisher, Robert. The Design Continuum. New York: Reinhold, 1966. Kuebler, George. The Shape of Time. New York: Schocken, 1967. Kumnar, Satish (ed.). The Schumacher Lectures. London: Blond & Briggs, 1980. Larrabee, Eric, and Vignelli, Massimo. Knoll Design. New York: Abrams, 1981. Lethaby, W. R. A Continuing Presence: Essays from Form in Civilization. Manchester, England: British Thornton Ltd., 1982. \_. Architecture, Mysticism and Myth. New York: George Braziller, 1975. .. Architecture, Nature & Magic. New York: George Braziller, 1956. Lovins, Amory B. Soft Energy Paths. New York: Harper & Row, 1979. Malevich, Kasimir. The Non-objective World. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1959. Mayall, W. A. Principles in Design. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1979. Moholy-Nagy, László. The New Vision. 4th ed. New York: Wittenborn, 1947. . Telehor. Bratislava, Czechoslovakia: 1968. . Vision in Motion. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1947. Moholy-Nagy, Sibyl. Moholy-Nagy: Experiment in Totality. New York: Harper, 1950. Mondrian, Piet. Plastic and Pure Plastic Art. New York: Wittenborn, 1947. Mundt, Ernest. Art, Form & Civilization. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1952. Nelson, George. How to See. Boston: Little, Brown, 1977. . On Design. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1979. . Problems of Design. New York: Whitney Publications, 1957. Newton, Norman T. An Approach to Design. Boston: Addison-Wesley Press, 1951. Niece, Robert C. Art: An Approach. Dubuque, Iowa: William C. Brown & Co., 1959. Papanek, Victor. "Big Character" Poster No. 1: Work Chart for Designers, Charlottenlund, Denmark: Finn Sloth Publications, 1973. . Design For Human Scale. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983. “Die Aussicht von Heute" [The view from today] in Design ist Unsichtbar (Design is Invisible). Vienna, Austria: Löcker Verlag, 1981. .. “Kymmenen Ympäristöá" [Environments for discovery]. Ornamo magazine (bilingual). Helsinki, Finland: February, 1970. "Socio-Environmental Consequences of Design."In Health & Industrial Growth. Holland: Associated Scientific Publishers, 1975. (CIBA Symposium XXII). “Areas of Attack for Responsible Design."In Man-made Futures. London: Hutchinson, 1974. “Friendship First, Competition Second!" Casabella (Milan), December 1974. —-—. "Project Batta Köya." Industrial Design, July-August 1975. "On Resolving Contradictions Between Theory and Practice." Mobilia (Denmark), July-August 1974. Papanek, Victor, and Hennessey, James. How Things Don't Work. New York: Pantheon Books, 1977. . Nomadic Furniture. New York: Pantheon, 1973. . Nomadic Furniture 2. New York: Pantheon, 1974. Pentagram. Living by Design. London: Lund Humphries. 1978. . Pentagram. London: Lund Humphries, 1972. Pile, John F. Design. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, i979. Potter, Norman. What is a Designer: Things, Places, Messages. London: Hyphen Press, 1980. Pye, David. The Nature & Aesthetics of Design. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1978. Rand, Paul. Thoughts on Design. London: Studio Vista, 1970. Schumacher, E. F. Good Work. New York: Harper & Row, 1979. Vignelli, Massimo, and Vignelli, Lella. Design: Vignelli. New York: Rizzoli, 1981. INDUSTRIAL AND PRODUCT DESIGN Aluminum Company of America. Design Forecast No. 1 & No. 2. Pittsburgh: Aluminum Company of America, 1959, 1960. Beresford, Evans J. Form in Engineering Design. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1954. Black, Misha. Australian Papers. Melbourne: Trevor Wilson, 1970. Braun-Feldweg, Wilhelm. Industrial Design Heute. Hamburg, Germany: Rowohlt, 1966. .. Normen und Formen Industrieller Produktion. Ravensburg, Germany: Otto Maier, 1954. Chase, Herbert. Handbook on Designing for Quantity Production. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1950 The Design Collection: Selected Objects. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1970. Doblin, Jay. One Hundred Great Product Designs. New York: Reinhold, 1969. Drexler, Arthur. Introduction to Twentieth Century Design. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1959. . The Package. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1959. Dreyfuss, Henry. Designing for People. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1951. Eksell, Olle. Design = Ekonomi. Stockholm: Bonniers, 1964. Ekuan, Kenji. Industrial Design Lectures. Melbourne: Trevor Wilson, 1973. Farr, Michael. Design in British Industry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1955. Friedman, William. Twentieth Century Design: U.S.A. Buffalo, N.Y.: Albright Art Gallery, 1959. Functie en Vorm: Industrial Design in the Netherlands. Bussum, Holland: Moussault's Uitgeverij, 1956. Gestaltende Industrieform in Deutschland. Düsseldorf, Germany: Econ, 1954. Gloag, John. Self Training for Industrial Designers. London: Allen & Unwin, 1947. Hiesinger, Cathryn B., and Marcus, George H. (eds.). Design Since 1945. Philadelphia: Museum of Art, 1983. Holland, Laurence B. (ed.). Who Designs America? New York: Anchor, 1966. Jacobson, Egbert. Basic Color. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1948. Johnson, Philip. Machine Art. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1934. Latham, Richard. Industrial Design Lectures. Melbourne: Trevor Wilson, 1972. Lippincott, J. Gordon. Design for Business. Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1947. Loewy, Raymond. Never Leave Well Enough Alone. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1950. Lucie-Smith, Edward. A History of Industrial Design. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983. Noyes, Eliot F. Organic Design. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1941. Pevsner, Nikolaus. An Enquiry into Industrial Art in England. Cambridge: Cambridge Üniversity Press, 1937. . Pioneers of Modern Design. Middlesex: Penguin, 1970. Read, Sir Herbert. Art in Industry. London: Faber, 1966. Teague, Walter Dorwin. Design this Day. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1940. Van Doren, Harold. Industrial Design. 2d ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1954. Wallance, Don. Shaping America's Products. New York: Reinhold, 1956. Yran, Knut. . . . A Joy Forever. Melbourne: ID1A, 1980 Zanuso, Marco. Industrial Design Lectures. Melbourne: Trevor Wilson, 1971. The following magazines were also consulted: Architectura Cuba (Cuba) Arkkitehti-Lehti (Finland) Aspen (U.S.A.) China Life (Peking) Craft Horizons (U.S.A.) Der Spiegel (Germany) Design (Éngland) Design & Environment (U.S.A.) Design in Australia (Australia) Design Quarterly (U.S.A.) Design Studies (England) Designcourse (U.S.A.) Designer (England) Designscape (New Zealand) Domus (Italy) Dot Zero (U.S.A.) Draken (Sweden) Environment (U.S.A.) Form (Sweden) form (Germany) Form & Zweck (German Democratic Republic) Graphis (Switzerland) IDÉA (Japan) IDSA Journal (U.S.A.) Industrial Design (U.S.A.) Journal of Creative Behavior (U.S.A.) Kaiser Aluminum News (U.S.A.) Kenchiko Bunko (Japan) Mimar: Architecture in Development (Singapore) Mobilia (Denmark) Modo (Italy) Newsweek (U.S.A.) Ornamo (Finland) Ottagono (Italy) Start (Yugoslavia) Stile Industria (Italy) Sweden NOW (Sweden) Time (U.S.A.) Ulm (Germany) &/sdo (Helsinki and Stockholm) News items from the following sources were also used as references: All Things Considered (U.S.A.) BBC (England) CBC (Canada) NBC (U.S.A.) CBS (U.S.A.) ABC (U.S.A.) ABC (Australia) PBS (U.S.A.) Associated Press United Press International ## Index Aarikka, Kaija, 127 abstraction, 43–44 acceleration, 323 accidents, 48 acculturation, 125 Act of Creation, 153 adaptation, 220, 290 additive design, 246 advocates, 110, 146 aesthetics, 5–8, 21–23, 291-92, 326-29 After the Seventh Day, 259 aggression, 47 aging, 293 AIA. See American Institute of Architects alienation, 87, 250, 251 American Institute of Architects, 89 American Society of Interior Designers, 18 Animal Architecture, 189 anomie, 250, 251 applied design ethics, 321 appropriate solutions, 36, 79–85 architects, 32, 215, 216–19, 228, 294 Arcturus IV project, 182–84 Arnold, John, 174, 182–83 Aronson, James, 261 Arp, Jean, 48 art, 31, 40–53 artificial obsolescence, 34-35, 100 Ashby, W. Ross, 190 association, 19–21, 46 associational blocks, 161-63 automation, 154, 292 autonomy, 156 avoidance mechanismn, 45-46 Baer, Steve, 12 barbarism, 53 Bauhaus, 30-31, 285-86 Bead Game, 42, 50 Beethoven, Ludwig von, 6 behavioral sciences, 251-52 Bel Geddes, Norman, 32 Bernard, E.E., 188 Best, Alastair, 146 Bettelheim, Bruno, 332 bi-association. See Bisociation biological limitations, 72-77 biological prototypes, 181, 186-214 Biological Prototypes and Man- Made Systems, 188 biomechanics, 181, 301 "Colorbox," 324-25 Biomechanics, 189 common denominator, 21, 25, 214 biomedical equipment, 242-43, 316-20 communication, 13–15, 304 biomorphic phylogenetic chain, 193-94 complexity, level of, 26, 295 comprehensive anticipatory design, 279. See also Integrated design bionics, 181, 186, 188–92, 210–11, 301 computer design, 216–17 Bionics, 188 conformity, 154–56 confrontations, 322–24, 325 biosocial givens, 21-23 consciousness, 4, 46 biotype, 186–87 consequence, 23–26, 102 bisociation, 177-81 conspicuous consumption, 36, 277 Blaisdell, George Grant, 230–31 consumer protection, 256 blocks, 155–72 consumer rights, manifesto of, 339 Bonet, Durchan, 119 consumers. See End-users botanic architecture, 201-5 control, 233 brainstorming, 172–73 cooperation, 36 "Breakfast with Marie," 48 Cornell, Joseph, 46 breakthrough concepts, 246-47, 267-68 crafts, 31, 40–53, 99–100 Brownian motion, 295 Creative Behavior Guide Book, 173 Built Form & Culture, 301 creative process, 4, 157–58 Burandt, Ulrich, 112 creativity, 152–56 Burkhardt, François, 114 crowding, 213–14, 248–84 crystallography, 206–10 Cage, John, 49 cultural blocks, 163–67 Cal Arts. See California Institute of the Arts culture, 19-21 Calder, Alexander, 8 curricula, 30–31, 283–84, 286, 299-302, 345 Calder, Nigel, 288–89 Calder, Ritchie, 259 Dadaist movement, 44, 46, 48, 51 Calhoun, John, 214 Dali, Salvador, 41, 46 California Institute of the Arts, 51, 137-38 Dalton, Roger, 79–80 Carpenter, Edward, 163, 164 data retrieval, 340–41 da Vinci, Leonardo, 22–23, 189 Carreiro, Joe, 227–28 de Saint-Phalle, Niki, 47–48 Carson, Rachel, 38 design, definition of, 4 Cellini, Benvenuto, 44 designed goods, 69–70 Cerebral Palsy Crusader magazine, 134, 318 designed solutions, 262–77 Designer magazine, 146 change, 184, 248, 277, 287, 292, 323-25, 332, 336–38 acceleration of, 260, 277, 323 Design for Human Scale, 71 Designing for People, 29, 110 Design magazine, 39 Chapman and Yamasaki, 227-28 design problem, 56–62 Chapman, David, 333-35. See also Chapman and Yamasaki "Design since 1945," 52 Deskey, Donald, 32 choice, 42, 48, 223 de Stijl movement, 7, 40–41 clothing, 15–16 Collage, 47 Diffrient, Niels, 110 disparity. See Polarization displacement, 44 disposability, 87, 97, 99, 100, 125 FAO Production Yearbook (1977), 280 dissatisfaction, 109 Ferrari-Hardoy designers, 119 distribution of wealth, 35–36, 331. See also Polarization Fibonacci sequence, 5 Filipowski, George, 194 Doblin, Jay, 106–7, 118–19 Finnegan's Wake, 6 Doesburg, Theo van, 41 flow chart, 308–16, 346 Dreyfuss, Henry, 29, 32, 110 forcing, 182–84 "Drop City," 12–13 Ford, Henry, 154 Duchamp, Marcel, 44, 47 foreign aid, 146–47 foreign experts, 85, 141 eclectic design, 217 Form magazine, 136 ecology, 213, 248–84, 330–31 education, 19–21, 184, 187, 332-33, 342 "Forms Arranged According to the Laws of Chance,"48 Frank, Robert, 60 Education and Ecstasy, 286–87 eidetic givens, 21–23 Fuller, R. Buckminster, 210, 216, 290, 326, 332, 340 elegance, 26–27 function, 6, 214, 295, 326–29 emotional blocks, 160-61 end-user participation, 71-72, 114, 134, 141, 227, 304 function complex, 7–27, 74, 277, 295, 327 Futurist, 104–5 end-users, 188 engineers, 215, 293 Gans, Carl, 189 environment, 19–21, 329–30, 332, 342, 343 Gatti, Piero, 120 Gaudi designs, 41 environmental blocks, 171 general cases, 305-8, 316 environmental design, 213–14, 248-84, 344-46 generalist, 287, 291–95, 299, 326 geodesics, 210 environmental education, 63 Gerardin, Lucien, 188 Environment Game, 288–89 Gestalt, 21–23, 190 ergonomics, 110, 117 "Global Village" concept, 213 Ernst, Max, 44 GNP. See Gross National Product Eroica, 6 goal formation, 15–17, 325, 331 ethics, 38–39, 321, 335 good taste, 227 ethology, 211, 213 Ġordon, William J.J., 173 events, 307 Greenough, Horatio, 6 exclusivity, 61–62, 67–68, 223, 291, 342-43 Gresham's Law of Design, 17 Gropius, Walter, 30–31 exhibits, 51–52 Gross National Product, 147, 252 Exner, Bonnie, 257 Groth, George W., Jr., 166–67 expectations, 21, 228, 247 "Guernica,"6 experience, 23, 182 experimentation, 184, 244-45 Habitat, 218-19 extinction, 300, 326 habitat, limitations of, 72–77 Eyre, John L., 145, 146 Haldane, J.B.S., 249 Hall, Edward T., 186, 276–77 fads, 102–47 Harman, David, 110 failure, 184, 217, 221, 277, 326 Harrison, Paul, 37 Fallingwater, 6 Hausman, David, 130 Hennessey, James, 109, 133, 283 Hertel, Heinrich, 188 International Congress of Graphic Artists and Designers. See ICO-GRADA Hesse, Hermann, 42 Hidden Dimension, 186 Hiesinger, Catheryn, 247 International Council of Anticipatory Comprehensive Design, 341 History of Industrial Design, 135 internship, 302 Hochschule für Gestaltung (Ulm), 227 intervention, 227, 251 intraspecific selection, 5 Hogan, Paul, 141 intuition, 4, 153 honest design, 33–34 invention, 151–85 horizontal exchange, 141 Irresponsible Arts, 217 "Horse," 8 Hubbard, Elbert, 30 Japanese culture, 17-19 Hultén. K.G. Pontus, 77 human condition, 339–40 Japanese Touch For Your Home, 18-19 human dignity, 274, 279 Johnson, Phillip, 292 human factors design. See Ergonomics Joyce, James, 6 Humanscale charts, 110 Kahn, Herman, 259 hunger, 33, 142, 278–80 Kansas City Art Institute, 318 Hutschnecker, Arnold, 155 Katavolos, William, 210 Huxley, Julian, 276 Kelley, Petra, 256 Klein, Yves, 46–47 Knoll, Hans, 119 ICOCRADA (Dublin), 324–25 ICSID/Kyoto Honors Award 1980/1981,84 Koestler, Arthur, 153, 169–70, 177, 211 identity, 15–17, 250, 331 Konstfackskolan (Stockholm), 136, 238 imagination, 90, 154 Korpijaakko, Pekka, 126 implementation, 276, 311 Krech, David, 329 indigenous designers, 85, 298 Kubelka, Harald, 110-11 Industrial Design, 32, 189 Kulvik-Siltavuori, Barbro, 113–14 industrial design profession, history of, 28–39 Kunstgewerbeschule (Austria), 30 kymmenykset, 68–69, 72, 341 industrial design societies, 30 Industrial Revolution, 30, 193 Lanquist, Solbrit, 133 Infordesign magazine, 112 "Last Supper," 22–23 inhibitors, 158–72 Lautreamont, Comte de, 46 innovation, 39, 62, 101, 114, 122, 151–85, 189, 246, 338, 342 Lavelle, Rita, 258 Le Corbusier, 6–7, 41 Insight and Outlook, 153, 177 learned skill, 286 integrated design, 293–321, 322, 332,344 leisure, 102–47, 288 Leonard, George B., 286–87 intellectual blocks, 169–71 Lichtenstein, Roy, 47 intent, 5 Life magazine, 93–94 interaction, 287, 289, 290, 300–302, 326, 347 Lindner, Robert, 72–74 linguistics, 157–58 interior designers, 294 Interiors magazine, 117 Loewy, Raymond, 32, 37, 107, 163 Loved One, 222 Lucie-Smith, Edward, 135 Luddite antimachine philosophy, 30, 250 needs, 15–17, 33, 36, 39, 56–57, 60–68, 72, 184–85, 219–20, 228, 234, 295–97, 324, 331, 333, 341-42, 344 Luttges, Marvin, 191 neglected areas, 234–47 neutrality, 104 MacDonald, Dwight, 46 machine à habiter, 6–7 Never Leave Well Enough Alone,37 Machine Art, 121 New England Journal of Medicine, 253 Machine as Seen at the End of the Mechanical Age, 77 newness, 42, 48, 182, 184–85 MacIntosh, Charles Rennie, 41 Newsweek magazine, 256–57 Magister Ludi, 42 New Vision, 286 Malone, Bob, 298 New York Times, 33 Malthusian doctrine, 279-80 Nixon, Richard Milhous, 155 manipulation, 33, 154 nomadic furniture, 114 mass production, 109, 154, 215–16, 219, 220, 230 nonprofit, 344 nonspecialization, 287-88, 347 materialism, 49, 98–99 Nriagu, Jerome, 253 material obsolescence, 34-35 materials, 8–13, 24, 33, 95, 101, 114, 126 Maurice, John, 260–61 obsolescence, 16–17, 34–35, 86–101, 109, 193–94, 230–31, 293 McKinnon, George, 49 Oliver, Chad, 156 McLuhan, Marshall, 213 One Hundred Great Product Designs, 106–7, 118 meaning, 6 Mechanix Illustrated magazine, 189 open-endedness, 90 Open University, 342–43 mechanization,44-50 Organic Design, 121, 122 media advertising, 20–21, 154 Osborne, Alexander, 173 Mendini, Alessandro, 291 overcompensation, 45 "Merzbau, " 44–45 method, 8–13 owning patterns, 16–17, 98, 100-101 methodology, 151, 172–84 misdesign. See Failure packaging, 25, 221–23, 251 Moholy-Nagy, László, 285–86 Paddock, William, 278 Mondrian, Piet, 41, 45, 324 Paolini, Cesare, 120 Monroe, Marilyn, 47 Papanek, Jenni Satu, 115 morphological analysis, 173-75 Papanek, Nicolette, 171 Morris, William, 30 Parnes, Sidney, 173 mortality, limitations of, 72–77 Parturi, Felix, 189 Museun of Modern Art (New York), 8, 45, 52, 121, 122 patterns, 4–5 perception, 21-23, 163-65 mutations, 31, 249, 292 perceptual blocks, 158–60 myths, 40–53, 230–34 perfection, 44–50 performance, 33, 70 Nader, Ralph, 38, 88 permanence, 126 nature, 4–5, 17–19, 188, 194, 248 Nature, Mother of Invention, 189 perspectives, historical and social, 295-98 Philadelphia Museum, 52 philosophy, 230–34, 299 research, 62–67, 194, 244–45, 339-41 photography, 43–44 phylogenocide, 28–39 responsibilities, social and moral, 54–85, 102–3, 215–47, 312-16, 321, 342, 343, 346–47 Picasso, Pablo, 6 polarization, 35-36, 146–47 rightness, 5–6 Pollock, Jackson, 48 round-table, 71 pollution, 24, 25–26, 63, 95, 248-84 Sacre du Printemps, 6 population growth, 36, 252, 278, 280 Safdie, Moshe, 218–19 satirization, 44-45 possession, 98, 100–101 satisfaction, 26–27 poverty, 35-36 Saturday Evening Post, 189 Practice of Creativity, 173 precision, 26–27 scale, 36–39, 56–62, 70, 193, 227–28, 274-76, 280–81, 341–44 Prescription for Rebellion, 72–74 Schlumbohm, Peter, 122–23, 233 pricing, 94, 97, 99, 101, 127, 223, 244-45 School of Architecture and Design (Kansas), 301 Princes, George, 173 Schreiner, Charly, 134 problem identification, 304 Schumacher, E.F., 38 problem solving, 151–85, 186, 198, 302–11, 324, 345–46 Schwitters, Kurt, 44–45 Scudder, Thayer, 258 processes, 8–13, 24, 217, 322, 326 seed project, 84–85 Products That Think magazine, 233 Seegers, George, 224 self-destruction, 97 professional blocks, 167-69 self-gratification, 40, 47–48, 291 profit, 252, 333 Senn, Robert, 129, 242, 246 Prolss, Wilhelm, 145 Sesame Street, 124–25 psychological aspects, 157-72 Shadows in the Sun, 156 Purdue University, 318–20 Shaping America's Products, 32 pure design, 104 Shoeffler, Douglas, 138 Silence, 49 quality, 62, 70, 100, 126, 223, 233-34, 266 simplicity, 26–27 simultaneity, 295, 346 quality of life, 274 sliding scales, 175–77 Snaith, William, 217 Social Darwinism, 331 randomness, 50, 175, 196 society, 17–19, 289–90 random-order system, 5 Soleri, Paolo, 9 Rauschenberg, Robert, 47 Sotamaa, Yrjö, 134, 318 real problem, 56–62 Sottsass, Ettore, 112, 291 rebellion, 151-85 sources of design, 194–96 recycling, 113–14, 141, 166–67 special cases, 304–8 Redemnske, Ralph, 192 specialization, 28, 187, 289–94, 299-300, 326, 332–33 reference point, 46 Reinhardt, Ad, 42–43 relationships, 189, 214, 311, 325-26 special needs, 63-68, 115–17, 126–41, 219, 241–42, 316–20 Renaissance, 18, 44 Spoerri's “Breakfast with Marie," 48 stage designers, 32 Tinguely, Jean, 45 Stone, Edward Durrell, 217 Tinney, E. Roy, 252 strategies, 101 tithe. See Kymmenykset Stravinsky, Igor, 6 tools, 8–13, 13–15, 190, 290–91, 300, 324-25 stream-of-consciousness flow, 178-80, 181 total design, 193 stress, 213–14 tradition, 23, 182, 289 Structure, Form and Movement, 188 triad of limitations, 72–77, 297 triangulation, 158 stylists, 34, 292–93 trisociation, 181 Sullivan, Louis, 6 Sullivan, M.W., 331–32 Umweltgestaliung (Stuttgart), 112 Sunset magazine, 18 unity, 294–97 Surrealist movement, 45-46 use, 13–15, 35 survival, 15–17, 245–46, 322–47 used products, 100 Sweden NOW, 103 Sweet's Catalogue, 216, 217 symbol, 13-15 value, 72–77, 86–101, 102, 124, 214, 277, 297 symmetrical-order system, 5 van der Rohe, Ludwig Mies, 122 synectics, 173 Van Doren, Harold, 32 Synectics, 173 vantage points, 157-58 synthesists, 28–29, 37, 187, 299–300, 332 Veblen, Thorstein, 277 Vennola, Jorma, 126 systems, 189, 267, 276, 326 Venus of Lespugue, 288 verbalization, 170-71 Tanning, Dorothea, 46 verticalization, 299 teaching design, 183-84, 285–321, 336-46 Vision in Motion, 286 visual designers, 294 Teague, Walter Dorwin, 32 visual solution, 170-71 Teal, John, 211 vital measurements, 110-11 teams, 28–29, 187–88, 213, 276–77, 285–321, 323–25, 338, 343-44, 347 von Foerster, Heinz, 190 von Frisch, Karl, 189 Von Material zu Architektur, 285 technological bias, 17-19 technological fixes, 253 Wallance, Don, 32 technological obsolescence, 34-35 Walter, W. Grey, 190 Teggart, Frederick J., 323 telesis, 17-19 wants, 15, 21, 219, 228, 231–33, 234, 247, 334 Teller, Edward, 217 Warhol, Andy, 47 tetrakaidecahedron, 206 Warner, William, 146 Third World, 79–85, 140-42, 227–28, 234–41, 250–51, 256 Watson and Crick, 4 Waugh, Evelyn, 222 Thomasias, Dr., 189 Weckstrom, Bjorn, 69 Thompson, D'Arcy Wentworth, 211-12 Werkbund (West Germany), 30 Whole Earth Catalog, 166 thought, modes of, 152–53 Wiener, Norbert, 190 threshold cases, 5 Will, George F., 50–51 Tilley, Alvin, 110 Willendorf Venus, 288 Time magazine, 42-43 window dressers, 32 work flow, 311-12 work load, 63–68 Wright, Frank Lloyd, 6, 30, 247, 272, 274, 343 Wright, Russell, 32 Wylie, Philip, 14 Yagi, Koji, 18–19 Yamasaki, Minoru, 217. See also Chapman and Yamasaki Zipf, George K., 186 Zomes geometry, 12-13