## Notes ## Preface l . For an analysis of the values of the 'old bourgeoisie', see P. Bourdieu and M. de Saint Martin, 'Le patronat', Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Sociales ( subsequently abbreviated to Actes ) , 20-2 1 ( 1 978 ) , 3-82, and for the basis of a comparison between Germany, England and France, F. K. Ringer, Education and Society in Modern Europe ( Bloomington and London, Indiana University Press, 1 979 ) . 2 . This contradicts the belief, held by many intellectuals i n every country, that cultural diferences are withering away into a common culture. For example: 'Art has become increasingly autonomous, making the artist a powerful taste-maker in his own righ t : the "social location" of the individual ( his social class or other position ) no l onger determ ines his life-style and his values . . . . For the majori ty of the society . . . this general proposition may still hold true. But it is increasingly evident that for the significant proportion of the population, the relation of social position to cultural style-particularly if one thinks in gross dimensions such as working class, middle class and upper class-no longer holds'; D. Bell , 'The Cultural Con tradictions of Capital ism', The Public Interest, 2 1 ( Fall 1 970 ) , 1 6-4 3, esp. 1 9-20. A glance at an evening's TV programmes or the magazine racks of a Boston or Philadelphia newsagent is enough to convince one of the contrary; but one could also point to the work of the pioneers of the sociology of culture ( see W. Lloyd Warner and Paul S. Lunt, The Social Life of a Modern Community [ New Haven, Yale University Press, 1 94 1 } , esp. ch. 1 9; and Russell Lynes, The Tastemakers [ New York, Harper, 1954}, esp. ch. 1 3 ) ; not to mention market research, which, being exposed to the sanctions of the market, is infinitely more 'realistic' than most academic studies ( see, for example, P. Martineau, 'Social Classes and Spending Behavior', journal of Marketing, 23 [October 1 958}, 1 2 1 - 1 30 ) . 3 . A . Minton, ' A Form o f Class Epigraphy', Social Forces, 2 8 ( March 1950 ) , 2 50-262. 4. Such homologies no doubt underlie international rapprochements and even alliances. For example, William Barrett's penetrating description of the meeting between the envoys of Les Temps Modernes and the Partisan Review group (see W. Barrett, The Truants: Adventures among Intellectuals (New York, Doubleday Anchor Books, 1 982 } , pp. 1 1 3- 1 2 3 ) gives a fairly accurate picture of the afini ties associated with homologous positions in the intellectual and political fields and also the diferences due to the specificity of national traditions. 5. See S. Sontag, 'Notes on "Camp" ', Partisan Review, 31 ( Fall 1 964 ) , 5 1 5 - 5 3 1 . 6. E. A. Poe, ' Philosophy of Furniture', Selccted Prose and Poetry ( New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1 950 ) , p. 386. 7. P. Bourdieu, 'The Economics of Linguistic Exchanges', Social Science Information, 1 6 ( December 1 977 ) , 645 -668, and Ce que parle veut dire ( Paris, Fayard, 1982 ) . 8 . I a m grateful to my translator for having been as faithful to the intention of my style as the demands and tradi tions of English will allow. 9. Readers who may suspect me of a secret indulgence towards the model of the total intellectual are referred to my analyses of the historical conditions of the creation and functioning of this model; P. Bourdieu, 'Same', Londn Review of Books, 2 ( 20 November-3 December 1980 ) , 1 1 - 1 2 , and 'The Philosophical Establishment' in A. Montefiore, ed., Philosophy in France Today ( Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1 982 ) . ## Introduction 1 . Bourdieu et aI. , Un art moyen: essai sur les usages sociaux de la photographie ( Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1 965 ) ; P. Bourdieu and A. Darbel, L'Amour de I'art: res musees et leur public ( Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1 966 ) . 2. The word dispoition seems particularly suited to express what i s covered b y the concept of habitus ( defined as a system of dispositions )-used later in this chapter. It expresses first the result of an organizing action, with a mean ing close to that of words such as structure; it also designates a way of being, a habitual state ( especially of the body) and, in particular, a predisposition, tendcy, propensity or inclination. [ The semantic cluster of 'disposition' is rather wider in French than in English, but as this note-translated li terally-shows, the equivalence is adequate. Translator. } P. Bourdieu, Outline of a Theory of Practice ( Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1 977 ) , p. 2 1 4, n. l . 3. E . Panofsky, 'Iconography and Iconology: A n I ntroduction to the Study o f Renaissance Art', Meaning in the Visual A rts ( New York, Doubleday, 1 95 5 ) , p. 28. 4. I t will be seen that this internal ized code called culture functions as cultural capital owing to the fact that, being unequally distribu ted, i t secures profits of distinction. 5. The sense of familiarity in no way excludes the ethnocen tric misunderstanding which results from applying the wrong code. Th us, Michael Baxandall's work in historical ethnology enables us to measure all that separates the perceptual schemes that now tend to be applied to Quattrocento paintings and those which their immediate addressees applied. The 'moral and spiritual eye' of Quattrocento man, that is, the set of cognitive and evaluative dispositions which were the basis of his perception of the world and his perception of pictorial representation of the world, difers radically from the 'pure' gaze ( purified, first of all, of reference to economic value) with which the modern cultivated spectator looks at works of art. As the con tracts show, the clients of Filippo Lippi, Domenico Ghirlandaio or Piero della Francesca were concerned to get 'value for money'. They approached works of art with the mercan tile dispositions of a businessman who can calculate quantities and prices at a glance, and they applied some surprising cri teria of appreciation, such as the expense of the colours, which sets gold and ultramarine at the top of the hierarchy. The artists, who shared this world view, were led to include arithmetical and geometrical devices in their compositions so as to flatter this taste for measurement and calculation; and they tended to exhibit the technical virtuosity which, i n this con tex t, is the most visible evidence of the quantity and quality of the labour provided; M. Baxandall, Painting and Experience in Fifteenth-Century Italy: A Primer in the Social History of Pictorial Style ( Ox ford, Oxford Universi ty Press, 1972 ) . 6 . See P. Bourdieu, ' Le marche des biens symboliques', L'Annee Socilgique, 22 ( 197 3 ) , 49- 1 26; and 'Outline of a Sociological Theory of Art Perception', International Social Science Journal, 20 ( Winter 1968 ) , 589-6 1 2 . <sup>7.</sup> Le Monde, <sup>9</sup> 1 965. 8. F. Chenique, 'Hair est-il immoral ?' Le Monde, 28 January <sup>1970.</sup> ## 1. The Aristocracy of Culture 1 . The 1TIIJndain, the 'man of the world', is discussed later in this chapter in the section ‘Scholars and Gentlemen'(translator). 2. Scholastic terms and abbreviations: CEP: Certificat d'etudes primaires, formerly marking completion of primary schooling. CAP: Certificat d'aptitude professionnelle, the lowest trade certificate. BEPC: Brevet d'etudes du premier degre, marking completion of the first part of secondary schooling. baccalaureat (bac ) , examination at end of secondary schooling. petite kole: minor tertiary technical college. licence: university degree ( three-year course in a faculte ) . agregation: competitive examination to recruit top category o f secondary teachers (agreges ) . grandes koles: set o f selective higher-education colleges ( parallel, but generally superior, to the facultes ), awarding their own diplomas or training candidates for the agregation. The academically most prestigious are the Ecole Normale Superieure ( ENS) ( in the rue d'Ulm, Paris) and the Ecole Poly technique ( Polytechnique) . The former trains Iyde and university teachers; the latter trains 'enginers' who in fact subsequently work as top technical civil servants or ( after fulfilling their obligation to the State, or 'buying themselves out' ) as top managers in private industry. The 'business schools' form a sub-set of grandes koles; the best known of these is the Ecole des Hames Etudes Commerciales ( HEC) . The following are also often classified with the grandes ecoles: the I nstitut des Sciences Politiques ( Sciences Po) , an elite college teaching mainly political science, law etc.; and the Ecole Nationale d'Administration (ENA), which specifically trains its graduates (marques ) for the civil service ( translator ) . 3 . The clearest manifestation o f this efect in the world o f legitimate music is the fate of Albinoni's 'famous Adagio' ( as the record-jackets call it) , or of so many works of Vivaldi which in less than twenty years have fallen from the prestigious status of musicologists' discoveries to the status of j ingles on popular radio stations and petit bourgeois record-players. <sup>4.</sup> M. Proust, 'Sentiments filiaux d'un parricide' in Pastiches et melanges ( Paris, Gallimard, 1970 ) , p. <sup>200.</sup> S. G. Bachelard, Le rationnalisme applique ( Paris, PUF, <sup>1</sup> <sup>949),</sup> p. <sup>1</sup> <sup>0</sup>6. 6. The word titre can mean educational qualification, title, title-deed ( translator) . <sup>7 .</sup> The strongest resistance to the survey came from the most highly qualified subjects, who thereby indicate that, being cultured by definition, they are not to be questioned as to their knowledge, but only as to their preferences. ( I t is well known that writers and artists tend to respond eagerly to 'literary surveys', which they see as acts of homage to the universality of their talent-spotting genius. ) 8. This essentialism, which can remain tacit so long as the belief supporting the social value of titles remains i ntact, necessarily achieves expression, at least in the inverted form of racism, when the capital is threatened ( e.g., in declining aristocracies) . 9. This legitimate o r soon-to-be legitimate culture, i n the form o f practical and conscious mastery of the means of symbolic appropriation of legitimate or soon-to-be legitimate works, which characterizes the 'cultivated man' ( according to the dominant definition at a given moment), is what the questionnaire sought to measure. 10. This efect of assignment by status is also largely responsible for the diferences observed betwen the sexes ( especially in the working and middle classes) in all the areas which are assigned to men, such as legitimate culture ( especially the most typically masculine regions of that culture, such as history or science) and, above all, politics. 1 1 . One of the most obvious 'advantages' bestowed by high educational capital in in· tellectual or scientific competition is high self-esteem and high ambition, which may equally be manifested in the breadth of the problems tackled ( more ' theoretical' ones, for example) , the loftiness of the style adopted etc.; see P. Bourdieu, 'The Specificity of the Scientific Field', Social Science Information, 14 ( December 1975),19-47. 1 2 . The ini tials C.S. followed by a roman n umeral refer to an entry in the list of statistical sources given in appendix 2, 'Complementary Sources'. 13. At equal levels, knowledge of film directors is considerably stronger in Paris than in Lille, and the further one moves from the most scholastic and most legitimate areas, the greater the gap between the Parisians and the provincials. In order to explain this, it is no doubt necessary to invoke the constant reinforcements which the cultivated disposition derives from all that is called the 'cultural atmosphere' , that is, all the incitements provided by a peer group whose social composition and cultural level, and therefore its cultural dispositions, are defined by its place of residence; and also, inextricably associated with this, from the range of cultural goods on ofer. 14. It is among the petite bourgeoisie endowed with cultural capital that one finds most of the devoted 'film-bufs' whose knowledge of directors and actors extends beyond their direct experience of the corresponding films. Some 3 1 percent of the ofice workers name actors in films they have not seen and 32 percent of those working in the medical and social services name the directors of films they have not seen. ( No craftsman or small shopkeeper is able to do this, and only 7 percent of the skilled workers and foremen name actors in films they have not seen. ) 1 5 . E. Panofsky, Meaning in the Visual A rts ( New York, Doubleday Anchor Books, 195 5 ) , p. 1 2 . 1 6 . I b i d . , p . 1 3 . 1 7 . For a more extensive analysis o f the opposition between the specifically aesthetic disposition and the 'practical' disposirion, and the collective and individual genesis of the 'pure' disposition which genesis-amnesia tends to constitute as 'natural ' , see P. Bourdieu, 'Disposition esthetique et competence artistique', Les Temps Modernes, 295 ( 1 97 1 ) , 1 34 5 - 1 378, and 'L'invention de la vie d'artiste', Actes, 2 ( 1975 ) , 67-93. For an analysis of the aesthetic ilusio and of the coilusio which produces it, see P. Bourdieu, 'The Production of Belief', Media, Culture and Society, 2 (July 1980 ) , 261 -293. 18. J. Ortega y Gasset, 'La deshumanizaci6n del arte' ( 192 5 ) in Obras Completas ( Ma· drid, Revista de Occidente 1 966 ) , I I I , 3 5 5 - 3 56. 19. S. K. Langer, 'On Significance in Music' in L. A. Jacobus, ed., A esthetics and the A rts ( New York, McGraw-Hili, 1 %8 ) , pp. 1 82-2 1 2; quotation on p. 1 83. ( One recognizes the Kantian theme-endlessly reinvented even without any conscious reference to Kant--of the antinomy of pure pleasure and the pleasure of the senses, which is analysed in the Postscript. ) 20. Ortega y Gasset, 'La deshumanizaci6n del arte', pp. 356- 3 5 7 . 2 1 . The 'cul tivated' spectator's concern with distinction i s paralleled b y the artist's concern ( which grows with the autonomy of the field of production ) to assert his autonomy vis-a-vis external demands ( of which commissions are the most visible form ) and to give priority to form, over which he has full control , rather than function, which leads him, through art for art's sake, i.e., art for artists, to an art of pure form . 22. A number of surveys confirm this hostility towards any kind of formal experiment. One study found a large number of viewers disconcerted by 'Les Perses', a stylized production which was dificult to follow because of the absence of dialogue and of a visible plot-Les Telespectatelrs en 1 96 7, Rapport des etudes de marche de I'ORTF, I, 69f. Another, which compares reactions to the 'UNICEF gala', classical in style, and the less traditional 'Allegro', establishes that workingclass audiences regard unusual camera angles and stylized decor as an impoverishment of reality and often perceive over-exposed shots as technical failures; they applaud what they call 'atmosphere', i.e., a certain quality of the relationship between the audience and the performers, and deplore the absence of a compere ( master of ceremonies ) as a l ack of 'warmth' ( ibid., p. 78) . 2 3 . The department store is, in a sense, the poor-man's gallery: not only because it presents objects which belong to the familiar world, whose use is known, which could be inserted into the everyday decor, which can be named and judged with everyday words ( warm/cold; plain/fancy; gaudy/dull; comfortable/austere etc. ) ; but more especially because, there, people d o not feel themselves measured against transcendent norms, that is, the principles of the life-sryle of a supposedly higher class, but feel free to judge freely, in the name of the legitimate arbitrariness of tastes and colours. 24. Joseph Garat, in his Memoires slr la vie de M. SlIard, tells us that Rousseau's DiscOlrs slr Ie retablissemnt des leltres et des arts provoked 'a sort of terror' in a readership accustomed to take nothing seriously. 2 5 . Virginia Woolf, 'Mr. Bennett and Mrs. Brown', Colected Essays ( London, Hogarth Press, 1 966 ) , I, 326- 3 2 7 . 26. The capacity to designate unremarkable objects as suitable for being transfigured by the act of artistic promotion performed by photography, the most accessible of the means of artistic production, varies in exactly the same way as knowledge of directors. This is understandable since in both cases a relatively scholastic measurement is applied to a competence more remote from formal education than the competence implied in the expression of preference in m usic or painting. 27. The documents on which these analyses are based will be found in P. Bourdieu et aI. , Un art moyen: essai slr les Isages socialx de la photographie ( Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1965 ) , pp. 1 1 3- 1 34 . 2 8 . Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgemnt, trans. J. C. Meredith ( London, Oxford University Press, 1952 ) , p. 6 5 . 29. E. H. Gombrich, Meditations on a Hobby Horse ( London, Phaidon Press, 1 963 ) , p. 104 . 30. The populist image o f the proletarian a s a n opaque, dense, hard 'in-itself', the perfect antithesis of the intellectual or aesthete, a self-transparent, insubstantial 'for-itsel f', has a certain basis here. 3 1 . I nterest in form, when it is expressed, is still rooted in the schemes of the ethos. I t only takes on i t s true meaning when related to i t s real principle; the taste for neat, careful work which inspires it stems from the same dispositions as hyper-correction in language, strict correctness of dress and sobriety in interior decoration. 32. The posture of good intentions combined with i nsecurity which characterizes the rising petite bourgeoisie is expressed in the ' refuge' choice of saying that the objects could make an 'interesting'-as opposed to beautiful, ugly or meaningless-­ photograph. Thus, 40 percent of the j unior executives and clerical workers consider that a snake would make an interesting photo ( as against 2 2 . 5 percent of the new petite bourgeoisie, who are more inclined to say it could make a beautiful photo) . 33. This i s sen clearly i n l iterature and i n the theatre ( e.g., the American ' new wave' of the 1 960s ) . 34. Dickens could also have been cited. 35. P. J. Proudhon, Contradictiom iconomiques ( Paris, Riviere, 1 939 ) , p. 2 26; italics mine. 36. I b id . , p. 7 1 ; i talics m i ne. 37. Ibid., p . 1 66. 3 8. Ibid., p . 2 7 1 . 39. P . J . Proudhon, D u principe de I'art et de sa destination sociale ( Paris, Riviere, 1939 ) , p. 49. 40. Proudhon, Contradictiom iconomiques, p. 2 56. It is impossible completely to understand the acceptance of the theses of Zdanov, who is very close to Proudhon in several respects, without taking into account the correspondences between his 'aesthetic' and the working-class or petit-bou rgeois ethos of a number of the leaders of the French Communist Party. 4 1 . E. H. Gombrich, A rt and Illusion ( London, Phaidon Press, 1960 ) , p. 3 1 3 . 4 2 . P. Benichou, Le sacre de i'ecrivain, 1 75 0- 1 83 0 ( Paris, Jose Corti, 1973 ) , p. 2 1 2 . 4 3 . For a similar criti<Jue o f the application o f a n empty opposition ( between 'soft focus' and 'hard focus' ) to the German Romantic painters, see E. H . Gombrich, In Search o/ Cultural History ( Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1969 ) , p. 33. 44. Proust, Pastiches et melanges, p. 173. 4 5 . Eveline Schlumberger, ' Le charme enivrant de Chateau-Margaux', Connaissance des A rts, November 1973, pp. 1 0 1 - 1 05. 46. 'Misrecognition' ( meconnaissance ) combines subjective non-recognition ( blindness) with objective recognition ( legitimation) ; for example, a teacher who observes his pupils' 'gifts', or lack of them, and who i magines he is indiferent to social class, objectively helps to legitimate the causes and efects of cultural ine<juali ty ( translator) . 47. For an analysis of the relationship between the scholastic environment ( a world apart, exercises which are an end in themselves ) and the relation to language which is re<juired in all 'oficial' situations, see P. Bourdieu, ' Les doxosophes' , Minuit, 1 ( 197 3 ) , 26-45, and P. Bourdieu and L. Boltanski, ' Le fetichisme de la langue', Actes, 4 (July 1 97 5 ) , 2-32. 4 8 . Virtually every treatise written in t h e classical period expl icitly makes t h e link between ease and elegance of style and elegance of life-style. Consider, for example, the doctrine of sprezzatura, the nonchalance which, according to Castiglione, distinguishes the perfect courtier and the perfect artist. 49. Two examples, chosen from among hundreds, but paradigmatic, of explicit use of the scheme 'something other than': 'La Fiancee du pirate is one of those very rare French films that are realy satirical, realy funny, because it does not resort to the carefully defused, prudently inofensive comedy one finds in La Grande VadrouiLle and Ie Petit Baigneur . . . . I n short, it is something other than the dreary hackwork of boulevard farce' (J. L. Bory, Le Nouvel Observateur, 8 December 1%9; italics mine) . 'Through distance, or at least, through diference, to endeavour to present a text on pictorial modernity other than the hackneyed banalities of a certain style 0/ art criticism. Betwen verbose aphasia, the textual transcription of pictures, exclamations of recognition, and the works of specialized aesthetics, perhaps marking some of the ways in which conceptual, theoretical work gets to grips with contemporary plastic production' ( G. Gassiot-Talabot et aI. , Figuratiom 1 960-1973 [ Paris, U n i o n generale des editions, 1 97 3 ] , p. 7; italics mine ) . 50. This essential negativity, which i s part o f the very logic o f the consti tution of taste and its change, explains why, as Gombrich points out, 'the terminology of art history was so largely built on words denoting some principle of exclusion. Most movements in art erect some new taboo, some new negative principle, such as the banishing from painting by the impressionists of all "anecdotal" elements. The posi tive slogans and shibboleths which we read i n artists' or critics' manifestos past or present are usually much less well defined' ( E. H. Gombrich, Norm and Form: Studies in the A rt of the Renaisance [London, New York, Phaidon Press, 1 966] , p. 89 ) . 5 1 . This is seen clearly i n the case o f the theatre, which touches more directly and more overtly on the impl icit or explicit principles of the art of living. Especially in the case of comedy, it presupposes common values or interests or, more precisely, a complicity and connivance based on immediate assent to the same self-evident propositions, those of the doxa, the totality of opinions accepted at the level of pre-reflexive belief. ( This explains why the institutions supplying the products, and the products themselves, are more sharply diferentiated in the theatre than in any other art . ) 5 2 . For a n analysis of 'art for art's sake' a s the expression o f the artistic life-style, see P. Bourdieu, 'L'invention de la vie d'artiste,' A ctes, 2 ( 1 97 5 ) , 67-93. 5 3 . This is true despite the apparent exception in which some artists return to certain popular preferences, which had a totally diferent meaning in a cultural configuration dominated by choices which for them would be quite improbable or even impossible. These returns to the 'popular' style, which often pass for a return to the 'people', are determined not by any genuine relationship to the working classes, who are generally spurned-even in idealization, which is a form of refusal-but by the internal relations of the field of artistic production or the field of the dominant class. ( This point has a general validity, and one would need to examine what the writings of intellectuals on the working classes owe to the specific interests of intellectuals in struggles in which what is at stake, if not the people, is the legitimacy conferred, in certain conditions, by appearing as the spokesman for popular interests. ) 54. It is in these two categories that we encounter the most marked refusal of souvenir photos ( ' Souvenir photos are stupid and banal'; 'The main point of a photo is to preserve the images of those one loves' ) , of realism in painting ( ' A beautiful picture should reproduce what is beautiful in nature' ) or in photography ( ,For a photograph to be good, you j ust have to be able to recognize what it shows' ) , and the most resolute assertion of faith in modern painting ( in refusal of the opinion: 'Modern painting is j ust slapped on anyhow . . . ' ) . 5 5 . One of the maj or limi tations imposed b y the list o f pre-formed choices is that it does not bring out these 'conflicts' and the strategies aimed at getting around them. A respondent who has, 'against the grain', chosen Georges Brassens or Jacques Douai might have been able to indicate his refusal of song, while showing his 'open-mindedness', by citing ( with an implicit redefinition ) something by Kurt Weill or an old Neapolitan song. (The France-Musique radio programme of 'personal selections' , 'Le concert egoiste', is very revealing in this respect. ) 56. Saint-Cloud: second to ENS rue d'Ulm in the hierarchy of the Ecoles normales superieures ( translaror ) . 57. This dogma i s still recognized and professed i n less advanced sectors o f the field of artistic production, as this typical declaration shows: ' However, I will say that these paintings by Gaston Planet are totally incomprehensible. I will say that I like them to be so. Not enigmatic. But entirely m u te. Without points of reference. Without distractions' ( Paul Rossi, Gaston Planet catalogue) . 58 . So i t is always what is essential that gets left out when, as almost always happens, the s urvey i tself, or the analysis, ignores the modal ity of practices, tastes or opinions. This modali ty, which is one of the best indicators of deep-rooted dispositions, is the object of very close attention in all societies. One could enumerate countless cases in which manner, and manner alone, reveals the social truth of dispositions, i.e., the true principle for u nderstanding and predicting practices. 59. That is why the legi timate modali ty, especially i n relation to works of art, which is one of the best practical indices of seniority within the bourgeoisie, remains incomparably more profitable, in the 'high-society' market at least, than the scholastic modality ( and the knowledge that i s only learnt i n school-spelling, grammar or mathematics ) . 60. I t would have seemed somewhat cruel to quote one or another of the texts in which the 'cultivated' express their image of the 'peti t-bourgeois' relation to culture and the 'perversions' of the autodidact. The reader's own references ( or experience) can no doubt fill the gap. 6 1 . 'A picture is not seen at a glance. This illusion belongs only to those who are incapable of "seeing" and are content to "recognize" an image by connecting it, not with a visual experience, but with intellectual ized knowledge'; P. Francastel, 'Problemes de la sociologie de l'art' in G. Gurvitch, Traite de soci% gie ( Paris, PUF, 1963 ) , I I , 278-279. 62. P. de Pressac, Considerations sur la cuisine ( Paris, NRF, 193 1 ) , pp. 2 3 -24. ( The italics, which are mine, are intended to bring out more clearly the series of oppositions which are all taken from the tradi tion of cultural consumption: natural gift and instinct/rules and education; connoisseur/pedant; literary sense/grammar. ) One could equally well have quoted Proust ( who never fails co relate manners co the manner of acquisition ) : 'She annoyed me, which was all the more unfair, inasmuch as she did not speak like this to make me think she was an intimate friend of "Meme", but owing co a toO rapid education which made her name these noble lords according to what she believed to be the custom of the country. She had crowded her course into a few months, and had not picked up the rules'; M. Proust, The Cities of the Plain, pc. I, trans. C. K. Scott Monc rief ( London, Chatto and Windus, 1 94 1 ) , p. 84. 63. Mystical discourse on the work of art is strictly inexhaustible and there is inevi tably a sense of arbitrariness when, to give a concrete ill ustration of the analysis, one cites a specimen such as the following, which, though it says scarcely less than the profound meditations of Gilson or Heidegger, perhaps owes i ts exemplary character to its very banality, as is attested by i ts pl ace of publication: 'Ignorant or initiated, we are each of us disarmed before that mystery, the masterpiece. Uncertainly searching the canvas, we await the moment of grace when the artist's message will come co us. The silent clamour of Rembrandt, the infinite gentleness of Vermeer, no culture will make these things comprehensible to us if we have not restored the calm, created the expectation, prepared within ourselves the void that is propitious to emotion' ( Rea/itiJ, March 1 960 ) . 64 . Within the dominant class, diferences by social trajectory are very closely linked co diferences in capital composition; the proportion of newcomers increases as one moves towards the dominated fractions (except for writers and artists ) . The fact remains that within each fraction ( especially the dominant fraction ) diferences in trajeccory are very strongly felt. 65. See R. Bray, La formation de La doctrine daJsique m France ( Paris, Nizet, 1 95 1 ) . 6. See M . Magendie, La politme mondaine et /es theories de I'honnetete m France, au X VI/e sied, de 1600 a 1 660 ( Paris, PUF, 1 92 5 ) . 67. See H. Kantorovitch, The King's Two Bodies: A Study in Mediaeval Politicaf Theolot:Y ( Princeton, Princecon University Press, 1957 ) . 68. G . Post, ' Plena Potestas and Consent' i n Studies in Medieval Legal Thought, Public Law and the State, 1 1 00- 1 322 ( Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1 964 ) , pp. 93- 162. 69. G. Doncieux. Un jiJuite homme de letlres au X VI/e siede: Ie Pere Bouhours ( Paris, Hachette, 1 886 ) . 7 0 . See P . Bourdieu and M. de Saint Martin, 'Le Patronat', ACles, 20- 2 1 ( 1 978 ) , 3-82 . 7 1 . N. Elias, The Civilizing Process ( Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1978 ) . 7 2 . R . Barthes, 'The Grain o f the Voice', i n Image, Music, Text, trans. S . Heath ( London, Fontana, 1977 ) , pp. 1 79- 1 89; quotation from p. 185. 7 3 . There is a protocol of objects which brings the hierarchy of things into line with the hierarchy of persons. Thus we learn from an article on the Marigny residence, furnished to accommodate the President's foreign guests: 'The protocol is strict: the h ierarchy is measured in space, i n the style of fu rniture and the qual ity of the drapery. Rare furniture and Lyons silks for the suites reserved for Heads of State; Napoleonic mahogany and velvet for the Prime Minister's first-floor suite; satin and flowered cotton on the second floor for the technical advisers' rooms.' ). Michel, Le Monde, 27 January 1 97 5 . 7 4 . One only has t o recall that appropriated objects, of a l l sorts, are objectified social ( class) relations in order to see how one might be able to develop a sociology of the world of objects that would be something other than the record of a projective test masquerading as a phenomenologico-semiological analysis ( I am thinking of). Baudrillard, Le systeme des objets [ Paris, Gallimard, 1 968 } ) . 7 5 . Here one might invoke, not so m uch the erotic theory of rhythm ( used, for example, to explain accelerations in rhythm leading to a peak followed by a rest) , as the theory which points to a broader concordance or correspondence between musical tempo and inner rhythms, marked for example by the tendency to produce movements in time with music. See, for example, P. Fraisse, Les structures rhythmiques ( Paris, Erasme, 1956) , and Psychologie du temps, 2nd ed. ( Paris, PUF, 1967 ) . 76. For the biographical information, see C. Brunschwig, L. ). Calvet, and J. C. Klein, 100 am de chamon franl,aise ( Paris, Ed. du Seuil, 1972 ) ; and Who's Who in France. 77. The fact that mathematics and physics have now become the main criteria for exclusion or relegation no doubt helps to rei n force the irrationalism and anti-intellectualism that are encouraged by an ambivalent relationship to the educational system and a decl i ning or spuriously rising trajectory. ( This false-trajectory efect impinges on all those who aim for the fut u re which, in an earl ier state of the system, was i mplied in their educational qualification or position. ) 78. G . G. Scholem, On the Kabbalah and Its Symbolism ( London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1 96 5 ) , p. 2 5 . 79. A s i s shown, for example, b y the value which the editors and readers o f popularizing journals set on highly qualified or high-ranking academic contributors whose role is that of institu tional guaran tors. 80. See G. Razzan, ' Ethnic Dislikes and Stereotypes', Journal of Abnormal Social Psycholgy, 4 5 ( 1950 ) , 7-27. 81. Although the legitimate definition of culture, or of the relation to culture, or the hierarchy of the diferent arts, genres, works or authors is the stake in a permanent struggle, it would be naive to use this as an argument for denying the existence, at every moment, of a legitimate hierarchy. The struggles which aim, for example, to transfo rm or overturn the legi timate h ierarchies through the legi timating of a still illegitimate art or genre, such as photography or the strip cartoon, or through the rehabilitation of 'minor' or 'neglected' authors etc., or to impose a new mode of appropriation, linked to another mode of acquisition, are precisely what creates legitimacy, by creating belief not in the value of this or that stake but i n the value of the game in which the value of all the stakes is produced and reproduced. I t would b e no less naive t o treat these hierarchies, which reproduce in their own logic, i.e., in a transfigured form, the power relations between the groups, as an absolute order, grounded in nature, although they derive most of their symbolic eficacy, that is, their legi ti macy, from the fact that they are seen in this way. 82. The dominant manners, pronunciation, 'ease', 'distinction' tend to impose themselves on the dominated classes themselves, and can only be devalued in the name of en tirely 'extra-cultural' principles, such as the values of virility, which constitute the dominant modality as an index of efeminacy. 83. On all these points, and especially on the opposition between ENA and Poly technique, see Bourdieu and Saint Martin, 'Le patronat', Actes, 20- 2 1 ( 1 978 ) , 3-82. 84. I t is well known what con tempt the members of the dominant class, especially the fractions richest i n cultural capi tal, have for TV or radio quiz shows, which, l ike sociological questionnaires, appear t o them a s parodic negations o f the legitimate relation to legiti mate culture. 85. See in particular E. Demolins. A quo; t;ent la superiorite des anglo-saxons? ( Paris, Firmin-Didot, 1 897 ) ; L'Mucation nouvele, !'Ecole des Roches ( Paris, Firmin-Didot, 1 898 ) ; ( Paris, Firmin-Didot, 1 899 ) ; P. de Coubertin, L'Mucation en Angfeterre ( Paris, Hachene, 1 888 ) ; L 'education anglaise en France ( Paris, H achene, 1 889 ) . 86. See Bourdieu and Saint Martin, ' Le patronat'. 87. G. Bachelard, L'activite rationaliste de la physique contemporaine, 2nd ed. ( Paris, PUF, 1 965) , p. 60. 88. Everything suggestS that this violence increases in ro ortion to the distance between the ersons questioned and legitimate culture-symbolized, rightly or wrongly, by the interviewer and his questionnaire. 89. We know that the division within the business bourgeoisie according to the dominant ty e of capital ( economic or educational ) corresponds to the division by seniority. 90. Hofmann evokes in his Kreislerbuch one of the most typical fantasies of all racism in his parable of the 'cul tivated young man', an ape who had been taugh t to s eak, read, write and play music, but who could not help betraying his 'exotic origin' in 'a few l i ttle details', such as the 'inner movements' which agitated him when he heard nuts being cracked. ## 2. The Social Space and Its Transformations 1 . The ex tension of the su rvey to the whole range of material o r cultural practices, legitimate or not, which can give rise to j udgemen ts of taste-<:ooking and art, clothing and music, cinema and decoration-was in tended to provide the means of examining the relationship between the dispositions generally regarded as aesthetic and the system of disposi tions which constitute the habitus. 2. Need i t be said that the sociologists who are aware of this pre-condition are not legion, especially among those who profess a concern for methodology ' 3. I t could no doubt be shown in connection with a number of technical objects, as I have done for photography-Po Bourdieu et a!. , Un art moyen: essai sur les usages sociaux de la photographie ( Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1965 )-that apart from what is i mpl ied in the negative determi n isms, the l i m i ts, scarcely anything to do with the social uses of objects can be derived from their technical properties. 4. Economists--and a number of sociologists least burdened by a sense of theoretical inquiry and atten tion to the complex ity of reality-are past masters in the art of formalizing the ' l ived experience' or the unconscious of a cl ass. It is dificult to resist the perverse pleasure of evoking a recent study in which Gary S. Beckerwho has put his model-making imagination to bener use at other times--attempts to account for the paradox whereby the demand for certain goods steadily increases with experience; G . J. Stigler and G. S . Becker, ' De gustibus non est disputandum', A merican Economic Review, 67 ( March 1977 ) , 76-90. To account for dispositions such as ' melomania', typical of 'benign manias', Becker invokes in one case the decline in the cost of production of 'm usical pleasure' which results from the accumulation of the specific human capital, and i n the other the increased cost of production of the 'euphoria' which results from the declining capacity for euphoria. QED. 5. For another example of this paradoxical neglect, see P. Bourdieu, Travail et travail/eurs en Algerie ( Paris, Mouton, 1963) , and Algeria 1960 ( Cambridge, Cambridge Un iversi ty Press, 1 979 ) . 6. The objective class must not be confused with the mobilized class, the set of individuals brought together, on the basis of the homogeneity of the objectified or embodied properties which define the objective class, for the purpose of the struggle to preserve or modify the structure of the distribution of objectified properties. 7 . Jean Benzecri puts this well: 'Let us assume individuals $\alpha \beta _ { 1 } \gamma _ { 1 } , \alpha \beta _ { 2 } \gamma _ { 2 } , \ldots , \alpha \beta _ { \mathrm { n } }$ $\gamma _ { \mathfrak { n } } ,$ each described as possessing three features. Leaving aside the last two elements in each description, we can say that all the individuals belong to a single species defined by feature a, which we can call species a. But although feature a enables us to define this species and recognize its individuals, we cannot study the former without considering features {3, Y of the latter. From this standpoint, if we call B the sum of $\beta$ modalities which the second feature can assume, and C the sum of the Y modalities of the third feature, then studying species a means studying aBC, i.e., in addition to the fi rst, stable feature, every form which the first ( B ) or the second ( C) may take; and also the possible associations between the latter ( e.g., (3 with Y rather than with $\gamma ^ { 1 }$ or $\dot { \gamma } ^ { 2 } )$ .' J. Benzecri, 'Definition logique et definition statistique: notes de lecture sur un chapi tre de Ernst Cassi rer', Cahiers de l'Analyse des Donnees, 3 ( 1978 ) , 2 39-242. 8. To construct the classes and class fractions on which the subsequent analyses are based, systematic account was taken not only of occupation and educational level ( which are the basis of INSEE's socio-occupational groups) but also, in each case, of the available indices of the volume of the diferent sorts of capital, as well as age, sex and place of residence. 9. There are many obstacles to making such a mode of thought accessible and acceptabl�including the practical logic of data collection and analysis, and the conception of scientificity which is current in the social sciences. There is every incentive to ask technology to resolve a problem which it merely displaces. This happens, for example, when in an article of unusual rigour for this sort of exercise, Goldberg resorts to the technique of 'causal inference' to test diferent explanatory models, with the aid of parrial correlations expressing the most determinant 'causal relations' for a particular area such as voting behaviour; ( see A. S. Goldberg, 'Discerning Causal Pattern among Data on Voting Behavior', American Political Science Review 60 ( 1 966 ) 91 3-922 . And yet perhaps it is not j ust metaphysical nostalgia to refuse to be satisfied with the countless parrial models that have been produced ad hoc to account for religious behaviour, political choices or eating habits, and to wonder whether the fragmentation of the explanatory theories derives from the logic of what is to be explained or the logic of the mode of explanation. 10. Between 1968 and 1 97 5 , the proportion of women in the most skilled categories of workers declined even faster than before. In the semi-skilled and unskilled categories, after declining between 1962 and 1 968 the proportion of women rose from 24 percent in 1 968 to 28 percent in 197 5 ; see L. Thevenot, 'Les categories sociales en 1 97 5 : I'extension du salariat', Economie et Statistique, 91 (July-August 1977 ) , 3-3 1 , esp. 6. 1 1 . The fact that the mode of acquisi tion is especially visible in certain contexts is a parricular manifestation of this efect ( e.g., mismatch between the scholastic mode of acq uisition and 'high society' situations ) . 1 2 . The directions taken by these 'deviant' traj ectories are not entirely random: i t seems, for example, that in cases of decline, individuals originating from the professions tend to fall into the new middle-classs fractions whereas the children of teachers tend to decline into the established petite bourgeoisie. 1 3 . This efect is i tself an essential dimension of the efect of inculcation, since the slope of the father's trajectory helps to shape the initial experience of dynamic insertion i n the social universe. 14. It is a mistake to conceive rising groups i n terms of simple symmetry. Although for rising groups the educational qualification is a means of defense against exploitation-the more so the more dominated they are-it always tends to function, even i n this case, as a means of distinction and legi timation. 15. It may be wondered whether individual decl ine has the same social efects as collective decline. The latter is no doubt more conducive to collective reac tions ( such as the Poujadiste movement ) than the former. 16. Of course, one does not rule out the use of indicators which combine the essen tial conten t of the information contained in a set of factors, such as the indicator of socio-cultural status constructed by Ludovic Lebart and Nicole Tabard to 'summarize' the information suppl ied on each family by its occupation, the occupation of the paternal and maternal ascendants and the educational level of the tWO spouses. However, as the authors rightly point out, this synthetic variable cannot be credited with an 'explanatory power' unless the word 'explanatory' is understood in a purely statistical sense; see L. Lebart, A. Morineau and N. Tabard, Techniques de la description statistique: methodes et logiciels pour l'analyse des grands tableaux ( Paris, Dunod, 1 977 ) , p. 2 2 1 . Far from assisting resea rch, naive use of such indices would have the efect of excluding the g uestion of the particular configuration of the variables which is operative in each case. 1 7 . A fuller presentation of the fundamental principles of this construction, i . e . , the theory of the diferent sorts of capital, their specific properties and the laws of conversion between these diferent forms of social energy, which is simultaneously a theory of the classes and class fractions defined by possession of a given vol ume and structure of capi tal, is reserved for another book, so as nor to overcomplicate the present analysis of the j udgement of taste. 18. The gaps are more clear-cut and certainly more visible as regards education than income, because information on incomes ( based on tax declarations ) is much less rel iable than information on qual ifications. This is especially true of industrial and commercial employers ( who, in the CESP survey-CS. V-provided, along with doctors, the highest rate of non-response to the questions about income) , craftsmen, shopkeepers and farmers. 19. The category ' medical and social services' is characterized by the fact that it contains men mainly drawn from the working classes and women of whom a considerable proportion come from the upper classes ( see the two histograms in figure 5 ) . 20\_ A number of cultural properties are acquired by virtue of posi tion i n geographical space, partly through the q uality of the social contacts favoured by spatial proximity. One of the most crucial is pronunciation, which unmistakably designates a stigmatized or prestigious origi n . 2 1 . T h e distribution of a class or class frac tion in socially ranked geographical space--in particular its distance from the economic and cultural 'centres'-al mosr always manifests also i ts i nternal hierarchies. For example, secondary analysis of the 1 967 I NSEE survey on leisure activities shows that, in all socio-occupational categories, cultural activity increases with the size of the town ( a good indicator of cultural supply) : this is no doubt partly because the apparent homogeneity of the categories conceals diferences, within the categories themselves, by size of town, especially with respect to cultural capital . 2 2 . I n English in the original text ( t ranslator) . 2 3 . Gerhard Lenski, who, to his credit, sees the problem of discrepancies between the diferent sorts of capital and points to some of the hidden efects they can produce ( in particular, the tendency to ' l iberalism' associated with strong 'decrystal l i zation' of status) , is no doubt prevented from developing all the consC9uences of his intuition by the posi tivist ritual of constructing an index . See G . Lenski, 'Status Crystall ization: A Non-Vertical Dimension of Social Status', A merican Sociological Review, 1 9 ( 1 954 ) , 405-4 l 3 . 24. Sources: M. Praderie, ' Heritage social e t chances d'ascension' in Darras, Le partage des benefices ( Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1 966 ) , p. 348; INSEE, Recensemnt general de la population de 1 968 ( Paris, Imprimerie nationale, 1 97 1 ) . 2 5 . A. Villeneuve, ' Les revenus primaires des menages en 1 9 7 5 ' , Economie et Statistique, 103 ( September 1978) , 6 1 . 2 6 . See M. Mangenot, N . Alise and F . Remoussin, Les jeunes face a I'emploi ( Paris, Ed. universitaires, 1 97 2 ) , p. 2 30. 27. These new strategies combine with or replace tried and tested strategies, such as provision of financial aid (a son of advance inheritance) , reconversion of the fam· ily's social capital through a profitable marriage, or a move into less competitive markets in which economic, social or cultural capi tal is better rewarded ( e.g., in the past, the colonies; or prestigious-Dr at least honourable-i nstitutions such as the Army or the Church, which could be entered without economic or even cultural capi tal ) . 28. O n the evolution o f the diferent socio-occupational categories, see Thevenot, 'Les categories sociales en 197 5', and on the steady development, between 1 962 and 197 5, of the 'business consultancy' sector-legal , accountancy and financial consultants, advenising agents, architectural advisors etc.-see P. Trogan, 'Croissance reguliere de l 'emploi dans les activites d'etudes et de conseils', Economie et Statistique, 93 ( October 1 977 ) , 73-80. 29. See C. Baudelot and R. Establet, L 'Ecole capitaliste en France ( Paris, Maspero, 1 97 1 ) . ( Translator's note. ) 30. M. Grif, 'Les conlits i n terieurs de I'artiste dans une societe de masse', Diogme, 46 ( 1964 ) , 6 1 -94. This article gives a very precise description of the devices which advertisers, 'commercial artists', use on thei r apprentices, who are often would-be artists, so as to induce disinvestmen t ( ' running errands' etc . ) and reinvestment i n a ' lower' field. 3 1 . A proportion of the surpl us products of the educational system find employment in managing the social problems and conlicts created by educational 'overproduction' and by the new 'demands' it has created ( e.g., the 'need' for continuing education ) . 32. R. Boudon, ' La crise universitaire fran<;aise: essai de diagnostic sociologigue', Annales, 3 ( May-June 1 969 ) , 747-748. 33. A. Peyrefitte, Le mal fran(ais ( Paris, Pion, 1 978 ) , esp. pp. 408-409 and 509-5 1 1 . 34 . See L . Stone, 'The I nflation of Honours, 1 5 58- 1 64 1 ', Past and Present, 1 4 ( 1 958 ) , 45-70. 35. See L. Stone, 'Theories of Revolution', World Politics, 1 8 (January 1 966 ) , 1 )9- 1 76. ## 3. The Habitus and the Space of Life-Styles 1 . I t follows from this that the relationship between conditions of existence and practices or the meaning of practices is not to be understood i n terms either of the logic of mechanism or of the logic of consciousness. 2. J. Riviere in M. Proust and J. Riviere, Correspondance, 1 9 1 4 - 1 922 ( Paris, Gallimard, 1 976 ) , p. 326. 3. In contrast to the aromistic approach of social psychology, which breaks the unity of practice to establ ish partial 'laws' claiming to account for the products of practice, the opus operatum, the aim is to establish general l aws reproducing the l aws of production, the modus operandi. 4. Economic theory, which treats economic agents as interchangeable actors, paradoxically fails to take account of the economic dispositions, and is thereby prevented from really explaining the systems of preferences which define incommensurable and independent subjective use-values. 5. An ethic, which seeks to i mpose the principles of an ethos ( i .e., the forced choices of a social condition ) as a universal norm, is another, more subtle way of succumbing to amor fati, of being content with what one is and h as. Such is the basis of the fel t contradiction between ethics and revol utionary intent. 6 . ' Bourgeois' is used here as shorthand for 'dominant fractions of the dominant and ' i n tellectual' or 'artist' fu nctions in the same way for 'dominated fractions of the dominant class'. 7 . F. Nietzsche, Der Wile zur Macht ( Stuttgart, Alfred Kroner, 1964 ) , no. 94 3, p. 630. 8. Bananas are the only fruit for which manual workers and farm workers haye h igher annual per capita spending ( FF 2 3 . 2 6 and FF 2 5 .20) than all other classes, especially the senior executives, who spend most on apples ( FF 3 1 .60 as against FF 2 1 .00 for manual workers ) , whereas the rich, expensive frui ts--grapes, peaches and nuts--are mainly eaten by professionals and industrial and commercial employers ( FF 29.04 for grapes, 19.09 for peaches and 1 7 . 3 3 for nuts, as agai nst FF 6.74, 1 1 .78 and 4.90 respectively, for manual workers ) . 9 . This whole paragraph is based on secondary analysis of the tables from the 1972 INSEE survey on household expenditure on 39 i tems by socio-occupational category. 10. A fuller translation of the original tex t would incl ude: ' "les nourritures a la fois les plus nourrissantes et les plus economiques " ( the double tautology showing the reduction to pure economic function ) .' ( Translator's note. ) 1 1 . I n the French: 'Ie gros et Ie gras, gros rouge, gros sabots, gros travau x , gros rire, grosses blagues, gros bon sens, plaisan teries grasses'-cheap red wine, clogs ( i .e., obviousness) , heavy work, belly laughs, crude common sense, crude jokes ( translator) . 1 2 . The expression ' tastes of l u x u ry' will be used rather than 'tastes of freedom' so that it is not forgotten that the tastes of freedom are also the product of a social necessi ty defined by the ' facilities', i.e., the distance from necessi ty, which it ofers. 1 3 . N. Tabard, Besoins et aspirations des familIes et des jeunes ( Paris, CREDOC and CNAF, n . d . ) , p. 1 5 3 . 1 4 . J. W. Thibaut and A. W. Riecken, ' Some Determinants and Consequences of the Perception of Social Psychology', Journal of Personality, 24 ( 1956 ) , 1 1 3- 1 3 3 . I S . K . Marx, Capital, I ( Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1 976 ) , 482 ( translator) . 1 6. One fine example, taken from Bohm·Bawerk, will demonstrate this essentialism: 'We must now consider a second phenomenon of human experience-one that is heavily fraught with consequence. That is the fact that we feel less concerned about future sensations of j oy and sorrow simply because they do lie in the future, and the lessening of our concern is in proportion to the remoteness of that future. Consequently we accord to goods which are intended to serve future ends a value which falls short of the true i n tensity of their fu ture margi nal u t i l i ty . We systematicaly undervalue our future wants and also the means which serve to satisfy them. ' E. Bohm-Bawerk, Capital and Interest, I I ( South Holland, Ill., 1959 ) , 268, quoted by G. L. Stigler and G. S. Becker, 'De gustibus non est disputandum', American Economic Review, 67 ( March 1977 ) , 76-90. 1 7 . We may assume that the deep-seated relation to the future ( and also to one's own person-which is valued more at h igher levels of the social h ierarchy) is reflected in the small proportion of man ual workers who say that ' there is a new life after death' ( I S percent, compared with 18 percent of craftsmen and shopkeepers, ofice workers and m iddle managers, and 32 percent of senior executives ) . 1 8 . I t i s not superfluous to point o u t that this art, which has i ts recogn ized vi rtuoso, the 'life and soul of the party', can sink i n to the caricature of j okes or remarks that are defined as stereotyped, stupid or coarse in terms of the criteria of popular taste. 19. The oppositions are much less clear-cu t in the m iddle classes, although homologous diferences are found between primary teachers and ofice workers on the one hand and shopkeepers on the other. <sup>20.</sup> La boufi: 'grub', 'nosh'; grande boufi: 'blow-out' ( translator) . 21. The preference for foreign restaurants—Italian, Chinese, Japanese and, to a lesser extent, Russian—rises with level in the social hierarchy. The only exceptions are Spanish restaurants, which are associated with a more popular form of tourism, and North African restaurants, which are most favoured by j unior executives (C.S. XXXIV) <sup>22.</sup> Les gros: the rich; grosse boufi: bulk food ( cf. grossiste: wholesaler; and English 'grocer' ) . See also note <sup>20</sup> above ( translator) . <sup>23.</sup> That is why the body designates not only present position but also trajectory. <sup>24.</sup> In 'The Economics of Linguistic Exchanges', Social Science Information, <sup>26</sup> ( December 1977 ) , 64 5-668, Bourdieu develops the opposition between two ways of speaking, rooted in two relations to the body and the world, which have a lexical reflection in the many idioms based on two words for 'mouth': fa bouche and la gueule. La bouche is the 'standard' word for the mouth; but in opposition to la gUfule--a slang or 'vulgar' word except when applied to animals--it tends to be restricted to the lips, whereas la gueule can include the whole face or the throat. Most of the idioms using fa bouche imply fastidiousness, efeminacy or disdain; those with la gUfule connote vigour, strength or violence ( translator's note ) . <sup>2 5 .</sup> This means that the taxonomies applied t o the perceived body ( fat/thin, strong/weak, big/small etc. ) are, as always, at once arbitrary ( e.g., the ideal female body may be fat or thin, in diferent economic and social contexts) and necessary, i.e., grounded in the specific reason of a given social order. <sup>26.</sup> More than ever, the French possessive pronouns--which do not mark the owner's gender-ought to be translated 'his or her' . The ' sexism' of the text results from the male translator's reluctance to defy the dominant use of a sexist symbolic system ( translator) . <sup>27.</sup> Oddly but accurately over-determined in English by droll/drawl ( translator) . <sup>28.</sup> One could similarly contrast the bowl, which i s generously filled and held twohanded for unpretentious drinking, and the cup, into which a little is poured, and more later ( 'Would you care for a little more cofee?' ) , and which is held between twO fingers and sipped from. <sup>29.</sup> Formality is a way of denying the truth of the social world and of social relations. Just as popular ' functionalism' is refused as regards food, so too there is a refusal of the realistic vision which leads the working classes to accept social exchanges for what they are ( and, for example, to say, without cynicism, of someone who has done a favour or rendered a service, 'She knows I'll pay her back' ) . Suppressing avowal of the calculation which pervades social relations, there is a striving to see presents, received or given, as 'pure' testimonies of friendship, respect, afection, and equally 'pure' manifestations of generosity and moral worth. <sup>30.</sup> Throughout this analysis, it is the whole set of convergent tendencies that should be considered, rather than the scale of the diferences, which are in any case minimized by the fact that the dominant class is divided into fractions whose tastes, especially in food, vary in opposite directions. <sup>3 1 .</sup> Fish is an exception: it is eaten more at higher social levels, the diference between the classes being particularly marked in the case of sole and salmon, which are associated with luxury, and relatively small in the case of hake and fresh-water fish. <sup>32.</sup> This is true for men, but for women the opposition takes a quite diferent form, because the division of labour between the sexes takes very diferent forms in the dominated fractions ( where it is minimized) and in the dominant fractions ( where women's exclusion from economic responsibili ties tends to align them with 'young' and 'artistic' roles: bourgeois or artiscocratic women-and their salons--have traditionally been mediators between the world of art and the world of business ) . 33. Cf. J-P. Same, Being and Nothingness ( London, Methuen, 1969 ) , pp. 339-3 5 1 . 34. W. D. Dannenmaier and F. J. Thumin, 'Authori ty Status as a Factor in Perceptual Distortion of Size', Journal of Social Psychology, 63 ( 1 964 ) , 361-365. 3 5 . See J. Defrance, ' Esquisse d'une histoire sociale de la gymnastique ( 1 760- 1 870 ) ' , Actes, 6 ( December 1976 ) , 2 2-47. 36. The disposi tions which practitioners drawn from the working classes or the lower strata of the middle classes bring into these collective sports--in particul ar, the hope of a miraculous escape from their clas�orrespond to the demands of rationalized training and playing. 37. See Collections de l'INSEE, ser. M, no. 2 ( July 1 970 ) . 38. Here too there i s a hierarchy o f legitimacies which defines the value assigned to the diferent Sports in bourgeois conversation. Le Monde illustrates this fai rly clearly by devoting serious 'critical' articles, often by wel l-known wri ters, to tennis and rugby ( and secondarily athletics ) , whereas football and cycling get much more distant and impersonal treatment. 39. M . Proust, The Captive, pt. II, trans. C. K. Scott Moncrief ( London, Charto and Windus, 194 1 ) , p. 2 36. Jean Renoir's film La Grande Ilusion ( 1937 ) depicts the chivalrous code of French and German pilots in the First World War. British readers will remember the morto of the R.A.F., per ardua ad astra, 'thtough difticulties--and the heigh ts--to the stars', which similarly li nks heroic disti nction with heigh t ( translator ) . 40. Another distinctive feature, which sums up the opposition between two relations to the body and to social interactions: two-thirds ( 59.8 percent ) of the teachers say they never dance, whereas dancing is very common in the professions ( only 1 8 percent, the lowest proportion in the whole population, say they never dance ) ( C.S. I V ) . 4 1 . More than half the members of the Saint-Nom-Ia-Breteche golf club are bankers, industrialists, commercial entrepreneurs or company directors, 26 percent are managing directors, executives or engineers and 16 percent are members of the professions. 42. Equally relevant would be the analysis of the relations between the li terary field, as the field of production of a universe of linguistic possibil ities, and class habitus-­ se P. Bourdieu and L. Bol tanski, 'Le fetichisme de la langue', Actes, 4 (July 197 5 ) , 2-32, and Bourdieu, 'Economics of Linguistic Exchanges'-or the relations, examined in chapter 8, between the space of the newspapers or the space of the political parties and the expectations of the diferen t social cl asses. ## 4. The Dynamics of the Fields 1 . A few examples all the same: 'What is Equality i f not the negation of all liberty, all superiority, and nature itselP. Equali ty is slavery . That is why I love art' ( Flaubert to Louise Colet, 1 5- 1 6 May 1 8 5 2 , Correspondance ( Paris, Conard, 1 926- 1 933 ) . 'In the reign of equali ty, and i t is almost upon us, everything that is not covered with warts will be flayed alive. The masses couldn' t give a damn for Art, poetry, style. Give them vaudeville, treatises on prison labour, on housing estates and the material interests of the momen t. There is a permanent conspiracy against original i ty' ( 20 June 1 8 5 3 , ibid. ) . 'But it seems to me that one truth has emerged: that we have no need of the vulgar, of the numerous element of majorities, of approval, of consecration; '89 destroyed royal ty and the nobility, '48 the bourgeoisie, and ' 5 1 the people. There's nothing left, except a loutish, imbecile mob. We are all wading in universal mediocrity. Social equality rules the roost. Books for everyone, A rt for everyone, science for everyone, j ust like railways and warming-rooms. Humanity is furiously intent on moral abasement and I resent being part of it' ( 28-29 September 1 8 5 3 , ibid. ) . One could also cite Mallarme's TArt pour tous' or 'Le mystere dans les lemes', Oeuvres completes ( Paris, Gallimard, 1 94 5 ) , pp. 257-260, 382-387. 2. E. H . Gombrich, Meditatiom on a Hobby Horse ( London, Phaidon Press, 1 963 ) , pp. 17-18. 3. N. Elias, Die hofische Geselschajt ( Darmstadt, Luchterhand, 197 5 ) , p. 92. 4. Durkheim, unlike Popper, for example, whose theses he anticipates--cf. K . Popper, Objective Knowledge An Evolutionary Approach ( Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1972 ) , esp. ch. 3--poses the problem of the relationship between the world of science, ' the result of concentrated, accumulated human existence', and individual reason; but immediately obscures it by answering it in the language of participation, the basis of the illusion of cultural communism: 'Philosophers have often speculated that, beyond the bounds of human understanding, there is a kind of universal and impersonal understanding in which individual minds seek to participate by mystical means; well , this kind of understanding exists, and it exists not in any transcendent world but in this world itself. I t exists in the world of science; or at least that is where it progressively realises i tsel f; and it constitutes the ultimate source of logical vitality to which individual human rationality can attain.' E. Durkheim, The Evolution of Educational Thought ( London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1977 ) , pp. 34 1 -342. 5 . Because the possession of works of art is supposed to attest not only the owner's wealth but also his good taste, it tends to be perceived as merited and to constitute a guarantee of legitimacy in its own righ t. 6. The more 'modern' a work of 'high' art is, the rarer is the competence it demands. 'Modernity' is defined in terms of the stages of the relatively autonomous history of the fields of production. This history is quasi-cumulative because belonging in the field and the history of the field ( ,epoch-making' ) implies a self-definition by reference to, and generally in opposition to, the immediately previous art. ( In the field of music, for example, this leads in certain periods to a constant extension of the field of accepted harmonies or the range of acceptable modulations . ) This explains why the history of individual tastes tends to reproduce, with a few deviations, the history of the corresponding art. 7. I am grateful to Jean-Daniel Reynaud for this reference. 8. Thus E. B. Henning has been able to show that the constitution of a relatively autonomous field of artistic production ofering stylistically diversified produers depends on the existence of two or more patrons with diferent artistic needs and an equal power to choose works corresponding to their needs. E. B. Henning, 'Patronage and Style in the Arts: A suggestion concerning their Relations', The Journal of Esthetics and Art Criticism, 1 8 Uune 1960 ) , 464-47 1 . 9 . This system of the ethical, aesthetic or political 'possibles' which are efectively available at a given moment is no doubt an essential dimension of what makes up the historicity of ways of thinking and world views, and the con temporaneity of individuals and groups linked to the same period and place. 10. Advertising for luxury goods systematically exploits the association of a product with a group. In no other field are institutions more overtly defined by their clientele than in the luxury trades, no doubt because here the virtually exclusive function of the products is to classify their owners. The link between the value of emblems and the value of the group which owns them is very clear in the antiques market, in which the value of an objeer may derive from the social standing of its previous owners. 1 1 . The internalized classifications of taste have to reckon, at every moment, with the classifications objectified in institutions, such as the agencies of cultural consecration and conservation, and with all the objectified hierarchies of which they are always partly the product. But in return, the dominant taxonomies are constantly challenged and revised in the classification struggles through which the diferent classes or class fractions endeavour to impose their own taxonomy as legitimate, either directly or through the professionals who compete in the specialized fields of production. 1 2 . Rather than elaborate here all the presuppositions of analysis in terms of field ( in particular, the interdependence between specific capital and the field in which i t is v a l i d a n d produced i ts efects, I shall merely refer t h e reader to earlier tex ts i n which these ideas are developed. See, in particular: P. Bourdieu, 'Le marché des biens symboliques', L'Annie Sociologique, 22 ( 197 1 ) , 49- 1 26; 'Genese et structure du champ religieux', Revue Frant;.aise de Sociologie, 1 2 ( 197 1 ) , 295-334; 'Champ du pouvoir, champ in tellectuel et habitus de classe' , Scolies, 1 ( 1 97 1 ) , 7-26; 'Le cout urier et sa grife', A ctes, 1 ( 1975 ) , 7-36; 'L'inven tion de l a vie d'artiste' , A Cles, 2 ( 1975 ) , 67-93; 'L'ontologie poli tique de Martin Heidegger', ACles, 5-6 ( 1 975) , 1 09- 156; 'The Specificity of the Scientific Field', Social Science Information, 1 4 ( December 1975) , 1 9-47; and especially 'The Production of Belief', and Society, 2 (July 1 980 ) , 261 -293 1 3. See Bourdieu, ' Le couturier et sa grife.' 14. See Bourdieu, 'The Production of Belief.' 1 5. J.-J. Gautier, Theatre d'aujourd'hui ( Paris, Julliard, 1972 ) , pp. 25-26. We may take Gautier at his word when he declares that the eficacy of his reviews stems not from a calculated adj ustment to the expectations of his readership but from an objective harmony of view, allowing a perfect sincerity which is essential in order to be believed and therefore efective. 1 6. See A. Desrosieres, ' Marche matrimonial et structure des cl asses sociales', 20- 2 1 ( 1978 ) , 97-107. 1 7. See P. Bourdieu and M. de Saint Martin, 'Les categories de l'entendement professoraI', Acles, 3 ( 1975 ) , 87, 90. 18. See Ezra N. Suleiman, Politics, Power and Bureaucracy in France: The Administrative Elite ( Princeton, Princeton Un ivers i ty Press, 1 974 ) , p. 69. 19. See J. Marceau, 'The Social Origins, Educational Experience and Career Path s of a Young Business Elite', Final report for SSRC grant of 1 973- 1 975, Paris, 1 975. 20. See P. Bourdieu and M. de Saint-Martin, 'Le patronat' , Actes, 20- 2 1 ( 1978 ) , }-82\_ 2 1. Before pointing to all the counter-cases of discord and divorce, one needs to consider how strong the cohesive forces consti tuted by the harmony of habitus have to be in order to counterbalance the contradictions inherent in the matrimonial enterprise as defined by custom and social law. 22. The intuition of the habitus provides an immediate understanding ( wh ich would take some time to j ustify expl ici dy) of the fact that, when invited to choose from a list of personali ties those whom they would l i ke to invite to d i nner, the sen ior executives and professionals choose more often than all other classes Simone Veil , Giscard, Barre, Franc;oise Giroud and Chi rac, b u t also Gicquel and Mourousi, whereas the working classes most often choose Coluche, Poulidor, Thevenet and Marchais, while the middle classes most often choose Le Luron, Mitterrand, Princess Caroline of Monaco, Platini and Jaufret ( C.S. XLIII) . ( Veil, Barre, Giroud: m i n isters in the G i scard presidency. For Giscard, Marchais, Mitterrand, see appendix 4. Roger Gicq uel and Yves Mourousi: TV and radio personalities; Coluche, Thierry Le Luron: entertai ners; Poulidor, Thevenet: cyclists; Platini: footballer; Jaufret: ten nis p layer-translator. ) 23. 'The Master's deep gaze has, as he passed, / Calmed the unquiet wonder of Eden, / Whose final shudder, in his voice alone, awakens / For the Rose and the Lily the mystery of a name' ( Mallarme, 'Toast Funebre' , Oeuvres completes, p. 5S [ translator] ) . 2 4 . An inexhaustible discourse of resentmen t reinforces contentment with what one h as; e.g., 'Just think what i t must h ave cost them to ren t a villa right by the sea" 25. The notion of si tuation, which is cent ral to the i n teractionist fallacy, enables the objective, durable structure of relationship between oficially constituted and guaranteed positions which organizes every real interaction to be reduced to a momentary, local, fluid order ( as in accidental encounters between strangers ) , and often an artificial one ( as in socio-psychological experiments) . I nteracting individuals bring all their properties into the most circumstantial in teractions, and their relative positions in the social structure (or in a specialized field) govern thei r positions in the interaction. On the opposition between 'situation' and field or market, see P. Bourdieu, 'The Economics of Linguistic Exchanges', Social Science Information, 16 ( December 1977 ) , 645-668. 26. See F. de Saussure, Course in General Linguistics ( London, Peter Owen, 1960 ) , p. 1 2 1 ; Saussure's example is a nice one: the distinction between chaise, an ordinary chair, and chaire, a professorial chair ( translator's note) . 27. Here too the new petite bourgeoisie distinguishes itself by a particularly fre<Juent choice of the adjectives which most clearly declare the intention of distinction, such as 'studied' for interior decoration or 'chic and stylish' for d ress. Similarly, advertisements for the would-be luxury shops of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine declare overtly the 'values' which the luxury shops ( Faubourg Saint-Honore) merely hint at ( by references to art, for example) , thereby exposing them to the charge of 'vulgarity' in striving for 'efect': 'The furniture of Claude Deco [a shop in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine] has that "je ne sais quoi" which is the soul of elegance and distinction.' 28. The fallacy in the 'trickle-down' model is that it reduces to an intentional pursuit of diference what is in fact an objective, automatic efect of the diferentiation of the consumers' conditions and dispositions and the diferentiation of the field of production, which may or may not be intentionally reinforced. See B. Barber and L. S. Lobel, 'Fashion in Women's Clothes and the American Social System', Social Forces, 3 1 ( 19 5 2 ) , 1 24- 3 1 ; L. A. Fallers, 'A Note on the "Trickle Efect" ', Public Opinion Quartely, 18 ( 1954 ) , 3 1 4-32 1 . 29. See Bourdieu, 'The Production o f Belief. 30. F. Nietzsche, Vber die ZukunJt unserer Bildungsantalten in Werke, I I I ( Munich, Carl Hanser, 1 966 ) , 1 89. 3 1. Seen in the smug, joking names given to suburban houses: '�a m'sufit', \a m'plait' ( 'good enough for me', 'suits me' ) . 32. I n the Conclusion I try to show that such a postulate underlies Erving Gofman's vision of the social world, a sort of social marginalism which reduces the reality of the social order to the sum of the ( subjective) representations which agents have of the ( theatrical ) presentations given to them by other agents. 33. Precisely because of its essential ambivalence, which induces alternating submissiveness and aggression, and also because of the constant risks of humiliation which it entails, the relationship between the pretentious 'pretender' and the selfassured possessor is emotionally charged and generates resentment. 34. Durkheim's celebrated precept that 'social facts should be treated as things' con· tains i ts own negation: there would be no need to state this methodological principle with such emphasis if ordinary perception, which is a social fact and which also plays a part in making social fact, treated social facts as science re<Juires them to be treated. 3 5 . The aristocratic ideology of disinterestedness is no doubt the basis of a number of condemnations of 'consumer society' which forget that the condemnation of consumption is i tself a consumer's idea. ## 5. The Sense of Distinction 1. From a whole set of research projects on the diferent fractions of the dominant class ( the findings of some of which have already been published separately ) , only what is indispensable in order to account for the basic diferences in life-styles is included here. 2. On the method of analysis, see L. Leban, A. Morineau and N. Tabard, Techniques rk La rkscription statistique: mhhorks et logiciels pour " analyse rks grands tableaux ( Paris, Dunod, 1 977 ) ; and for the theoretical foundations and logical conditions of use, J. Benzecri, L 'analyse rks donnees: le(ons sur l'anaLyse factoriele et La reconnaissance rks formes et travaux du Lahoratoire rk statistiqueJ rk tUniversite rk Paris VI, 2 vols. ( Paris, Dunod, 1973 ) . 3. Throughout this paragraph, and i n the rest o f this book, the figures i n parentheses represent the absolute inputs of the variables in question to the corresponding factor. 4. Also i n terms of this logic, opi nions expressed vis-a-vis pre-formed j udgements, such as 'Abstract painting i nterests me as much as the classical schools', or ' Paintings are nice but dificult', or the choice of singers such as Leo Ferre, Georges Brassens or Jacques Douai, are strongly explained by the first facror. 5. The private-sector and public-sector executives, who are widely dispersed in the plane diagram ( figures 1 1 , 1 2 ) , are not represented by a box. 6. This means that the first factor in the factorial analysis corresponds to the second dimension of the social space and the second factor to the third dimension. 7 . I n the analyses which were performed successively, either for the same set of indicators ( especially the one chosen for the final synthesis) or for the diferen t sets, the first factor proved to be more stable ( its significance was not altered by any permutation in the relative position of the factors ) than the second; in some areas, seniority in the bourgeoisie was relegated to third rank. 8 . I n general, i t is found that cultural practices vary more strongly as a function of income, within the limits of cultural capi tal of course, when they have a higher direct cost ( e.g., theatre or exhibi tions ) or when they imply possession of expensive equipment ( e.g., l istening to records, playing an instrumen t such as the piano, or amateur filmmaking) . Visiting an museums ( which are-relativelymore equally distributed geographically than theatres or concert-halls ) would depend exclusively on cultural capital ( to the extent, of course, that prices are kept low) if tourism, which is closely linked to economic capital, did not intensify this practice ( which explains why the represen tation of the economically richest fractions of the dominant class is higher in museums with high tourist attraction than in 'ordinary' museums ) . 9 . I t has been shown that the price of the seats represents only a proportion of the cost of theatre-going ( which incl udes transport costS, the cost in time, the price of dinner and baby-sitting expenses ) , and that all these expenditures rise with income; see T. Moore, 'The Demand for Broadway Theater Tickets', The Review of Economics and Statistics, 48 ( February 1966 ) , 79-87 . This means that the overall cost of a visit to the theatre must rise very rapidly as one moves from the i n tellectuals to the professions and the industrial and commercial employers. 10. See P. Martineau, 'Social Classes and Spending Behavior', joumaL of Marketing, 2 3 ( October 1958 ) , 1 2 1 - 1 30. 1 1 . The phrases in quotation marks are taken from Jean:Jacques Gautier's ideal-typical review of Fran"oise Dorin's no less ideal-typical play Le Toumant ( Le Figaro, 1 2 January 1973 ) . 1 2 . A playwrigh t or his play i s said to be 'well served' by the actors. 1 3 . R. Lynes, The T aJtemaken ( New York, Grosset and Dunlap Universal Library, 1954 ) , p. 62. 14. Secondary and higher-education teachers ( who represented 16.3 percent of the dominant class in 1%8 ) constitute, respectively, 54 .4 percent, 39. 5 percent, 34 . 1 percent, 27.7 percent and 1 3 . 5 percent of the dominant-class users o f libraries--se 'La lecture publique en France', Notes et Eturks Documentaires, no. 3948, 1 5 December 1972�f theatres of the consecrated avant-garde, the Odeon, TEP, TNP, Montparnasse ( C.S. XIV ) , of museums ( cf. our complementary survey, 1965 ) , of the 'classic' theatres, Atel ier, Comedie Fran<;aise, a n d of boulevard theatres ( C.S. XIV ) . Secondary analysis of the I N SEE 'leisure' survey ( C.S. I V ) shows that teachers ( 1 7 . 3 percen t of the dominant class in the sample) represent, respectively, ( a ) 40.9 percent, ( b ) 38 percen t, ( c ) 2 7 . 1 percen t, ( d ) 1 9.4 percent, ( e ) 1 6. 1 percent and ( f) 6 percent of the dominant-class members who say ( a) they go to a library at least once a month, ( b ) go to a concert at least five or six times a year, ( c ) have been to an art exhibi tion i n the last six mon ths, ( d ) regularly visit a museum, ( e ) go to the theatre at least five or six times a year, ( f) have been to a variety show at least once in the year. The proportion of industrial and commercial employers varies in a systematically opposite way, and they represent, for example, 18.6 percent of the dominant-class members who have been to a variety show. 1 5 . Since the density of the pertinent information seemed no less i mportan t than its quality, all the quotations used here are taken from a single issue of Connaissance des Arts-November 1 97 1 . A close study of two years' issues ( 1972-7 3 ) confirms i ts represen tativeness. 16. K. Marx, 'Excerpts from James Mill's Elements of Poli tical Economy' in Early Writings ( Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1 974 ) , p. 266 ( translation slightly modified ) . 1 7 . I t can be seen that the inclination to personalism and to all forms o f glorification of the uniqueness of the person is deeply rooted in the habitus. What vary between the fractions, i.e., according to the types of capital which are the main determinant of class membership, are the properties constitutive of the person ( de facto and de j ure)-intellectual value, moral and spiritual value etc.-which are especially exalted. 1 8 . A French equivalent of Readr's Digest ( translator ) . 19. The administ rative executives ( in the very broad INSEE definition ) , a fairly large proportion of whom are of working-class or middle-class origin, are very close, in the asceticism of their tastes, to the secondary teachers, although, educationally less q ualified, they are more inclined to less p restigious cui t u ral practices, such as visiting monuments and chateaux. 20. Some 14.5 percen t of the j udges and 1 3. 5 percent of the doctors appearing in Who's Who in France ( as against 9.7 percent of the senior civil servants, 4.2 percent of the employers and company directors ) have published at least one non-specialized ( political o r l i terary ) work. 2 1 . K. Marx, Capital, I ( Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1976) , 74 1 . 2 2 . Centre de recherche economique sur l'epargne, Enquete sur les comportements patrimoniaux des medecins exerc.ant une activite liberale ( Paris, CREP, 1 97 1 ) . 2 3 . The same form o f disposition, the product o f an analagous discrepancy between cultural and economic capital, is found in members of the new-middle-class fractions ( see, in chapter 6, the i n terview with a n urse who 'lives passionately' ) . 24. Le Quotidien du Medecin, no. 7 10, 3-4 May 1974. 2 5 . More strongly than all other fractions, the employers and professionals reject as ugly the photograph of a wounded man. 26. On the essential time-lag between production and consumption which assigns the most advanced producers to posthumous markets and profits, see P. Bourdieu, 'Le marche des biens symboliques', L'Annie Sociolgque, 2 2 ( 197 3 ) , 49- 1 26, and 'The Production of Belief', Media, Culture and Society, 2 Uuly 1 980 ) , 261 -293. 27. To designate life-styles, one always has the choice between a neutral, but colourless, terminology ( ascetic taste ) , and the 'native' labels ( pedantic taste, bourgeois taste) which are l iable to pull one back to the symbolic battlefield on which they were forged. 28. Some interesting indications of the ways in which artists use time are to be found in B. Rosenberg and N. Fliegel, The Vanguard Artist ( Chicago, Quadrangle Books, 1965 ) , esp. p. 3 1 2 . 29. The classificatory systems used i n the oficial statistics, which necessarily correspond to an outdated state of the classification struggle, inevitably fail to record the diferences resulting from the emergence of new occupations and the decline or redefinition of old ones. 30. In this respect, the teachers occupy an intermediate position between the professions and the engineers or executives. Unable to control the conditions of entry, they have endeavoured, at least in higher education, to control the conditions of promotion. See P. Bourdieu, L. Boltanski and P. Maldidier, ' La defense du corps', Social Science In/ormation, 1 0 ( 1 97 1 ) , 4 5 -86. 31. The same is true, in the other sector of the field, of a number of big and medium entrepreneurs, who have 'fought their way up' and whose habitus, like a ship continuing on i ts course under its own momentum, tends to prolong the virtues of asceticism and saving, the tastes and interests of their early days. In o ther words, the employers are distinguished not only according to the size and status of their firms and their property ti tles or qualifications, but also, although to a lesser extent, by the trajectories that have led them to their positions. ( These analyses have been verified and specified by analysis of the characteristics of the heads of the two hundred largest French firms: see P. Bourdieu and M. de Saint Martin, 'Le patronat', Actes, 20-2 1 ( 1 978J , 3-82 . ) 3 2 . The SOFRES survey shows that 2 2 percent of the private-sector executives are under 35 and 49 percent are under 49, compared to 14 percent and 40 percent respectively of the public-sector administrative executives ( CS. V ) . Senior executives in the civil service had, in 1970, an average taxable household income of 47,323 F as against 62 ,803 F for other senior executives (CS. I) . 33. Partly because it was designed to bring out deep dispositions which are relatively independent of time, the 1963 survey was not the best tool for grasping the variations in practices and systems of preferences linked to histOrical conditions. This is why recourse was had to secondary analysis of a market survey on 'executives' consumption' (CS. V ) , which, aiming to predict the demand for luxury goods, was well adapted to the most distinctive elements of the new life-style. 34. Some 81 percent of the private-seCtor executives, 80 percent of the engineers, 74 percent of the members of the professions, 69 percent of the public-sector executives, 62 percent of the industrial employers, 60 percent of the commercial employers and 58 percent of the teachers say they always keep a bottle of whisky at home; 80 percent of the industrial employers, 7 5 percent of the commercial employers and members of the professions, 73 percent of the private-sector executives, 72 percent of the public-sector executives and engineers and 49 percent of the teachers say they keep champagne at home. 3 5 . Entreprise, caracterisliques professionnelcs des lecteurs: resultats de l'enquete [FOP (Paris, Regie Presse, 1 97 3 ) . 36. J . Marceau, 'The Social Origins, Educational Experience and Career Paths of a Young Business Elite', Final report for SSRC grant of 1973-7 5 , Paris, 1 97 5 . 3 7 . I n these struggles, i n which accounts of the social world-including allegedly scientific ones-are almost always (unconscious) strategies for symbolic imposition, recourse to 'authorities' plays a very important role. H ence the high symbolic yield of 'American research', which is spontaneously credited with the objectivity of a 'science' that is in a sense doubly neutral because foreign. Consider the use made of the studies by John MacArthur and Bruce Scott, who argue that the French firm gives priority to technical problems rather than financial management and marketing, to the future of the firm conceived in terms of technological progress and the search for new processes rather than in terms of really profitable mass production. 38. See L'Expansion, April and July-August 1 97 5 . 39. See P . Bourdieu, 'Le couturier e t sa grife', Actes, 1 (January 1975 ) , 7-36. 40. On this world view, see P. Bourdieu and L. Boltanski, 'La production de l'ideologie dominante', Actes, 2 Oune 1 976 ) , 3-8. 4 1 . The dominant fractions are what they are if and only if the economic principle of stratification asserts i ts real dominance, which it does, in the long run, even in the relatively autonomous field of cultural production, where the divergence between specific value and market value tends ro disappear in the course of time. 42. See A. Boime, 'Entrepreneurial Patronage in Nineteenth Century France', in E. Carter II, R. Forster and J. Moody, eds., Enterprises and Entrepreneurs ( Baltimore and London, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976 ) , pp. 1 37-208. ## 6. Cultural Goodwil l . The opinions expressed on music only have to be compared with the knowledge of works for it to be seen that a high proportion ( two-thirds ) of those who choose the most 'distinguished' answer ( 'All music of qual i ty i nterests me' ) have little knowledge of classical m usic. 2. D. Barnes, Nightwood, 2nd ed. ( London, Faber, 1950 ) , pp. 2 1 -24. 3. J. Frank, The Widening Gyre ( Bloomington and London, I ndiana University Press, 1963 ) , p. 6. 4. Like the very content of these products ( with, for example, their conspicuous references ro legitimate works ) , the advertising for middle-brow cultural goods is a permanent encouragement to cultural allodoxia. I t emphasizes both the economic and cultural accessibiliry of the products ofered and also their high legitimacy, by invoking cultural authori ties ( e.g., Academicians or prize j u ries) whose authority is i tself an allodoxia efect, since the recognition it is given tends to vary in inverse ratio to competence. 5. Similar defence mechanisms in which the consumers make themselves the accomplices of the vendors are also found in other areas. Thus a market research specialist suggests that one of the most important functions of advertising may be ro provide purchasers with arguments to reassure themselves after the purchase; J. F. Engel, 'The Influence of Needs and Attitudes on the Perception of Persuasion' in S. A. Greyser, ed., Toward Scientifc Marketing ( Chicago, American Marketing Association, 1964 ) , pp. 1 8-29. These ideological mechanisms of reassurance explain the disparity between the agents' own evaluation of their cultural practices and the objective truth of these practices. Everything takes place as if, at all levels of the hierarchy of degrees of consecration, agents were always inclined ro attribute more value to their practices than the structure of the field objectively confers on them. 6. Thus there is no need ro invoke censorship or 'political complicity' ( although this is not unknown ) ro explain why the most typically academic products, and also the most typically middle-brow products, have derived considerable reinforcement from television. Partly through the economic efect of the publicity supplied by television and the corresponding changes in publishing and marketing strategies, this tends to modify the relations between the field of restricted production and the field of large-scale production. 7 . Fel ix in Barnes's Nightwood (p. 24 ) shares this taste for oddities: 'Conversan t with edicts and laws, fol k srory and heresy, taster of rare wines, thumber of rarer books and old wives' tales-tales of men who became holy and of beasts that became damned-read in all plans for fortifications and bridges, given pause by all graveyards on all roads, a pedant of many churches and castles, his mind dimly and reverently reverberated to Madame de 5evigne, Goethe, Loyola and Brantome. 8. I t is no accident that surveys on cultural practices and opinions tend to take the form of an examination in which the respondents, who are and always feel measured against a norm, obtain results that are ranked in accordance with their degree of scholastic consecration and express preferences which always correspond fairly closely to their educational Gualifications, both in their con tent and in their modality. 9. The image which the formally educated have of the self-educated is a fine example of the partial, sel f-interested truths produced by the partial l ucidity of ordinary perception and of the ( unconscious ) strategies through which each art of living is reinforced in its conviction of its own excellence by comparing itself flatteringly with other arts of living. 10. Need it be said that these two celebrated examples are chosen so as to invite the reader to reason a fortiori ? 1 1 . Ferdinand Cheval ( 1 836- 1 924 ) , a rural postman, built his ' Ideal Palace' singlehanded, from 1879 to 1 9 1 2 , with stones which he collected on his round and carried back to his home at Hauterives ( Drome ) . This ex traordinary 'monument' ( classified as such by Malraux when Minister of Cul ture) includes all the features mentioned in the text, and more. La Veile del Chaumiem was a magazine which brought serialized historical romances ( accompanied by engravings) ro a mainly peasant readership. ( Translator's note. ) 1 2 . 'Though the Wei Bodhisattvas and those of Nara, Kh mer and Javanese sculpture and Sung painting do not express the same communion with the cosmos as does a Romane5<jue tympanum, a Dance of Siva or the horsemen of the Parthenon, all alike express a communion of one kind or another, as does even Rubens in The Kermme. We need but glance at any Greek masterpiece to see at once that its triumph over the mystery-laden East does nor stem from any process of the reasoning mind, but from "the innumerable laughter of the waves". Like a muted orchestra the surge and thunder, already so remme, of ancient tragedy accompanies bur does not drown Antigone'S immortal cry.' A. Malraux, The Voim o[ Silence, crans. S. Gilbert ( London, Secker and Warburg, 1954 ) , pp. 635-636. 1 3 . They are by Ferdinand Cheval, among the inscriptions on his Ideal Palace ( translator ) . 1 4 . See P. Benichou, Le lacre de f'icrivain ( Paris, Jose Corti, 197 3 ) , pp. 1 77-178. 1 5 . Harpagon: Mol iere's Miler; Arnolphe: the protagonist o f his Ecole del [emmel, obsessed by marital infidel ity ( translator) . 16. Attributed to the pol i tician Edouard Herriot ( t ranslator ) . 1 7 . What i s said here about the middle positions ( because it i s most obvious i n this case ) is, of cou rse, CG ually true of all positions in social space-time. 18. C. Baudelot, R. Establet and J. Malemort, La petite bourgeoisie en France ( Paris, Maspero, 1 974 ) , p. 1 5 3 . 19. Among the properties of the strongly predetermined posi tions in the civil service ( such as those of the j unior administrative executives) the most significant from the point of view considered here is undoubtedly the fact that they ofer, through their guaranteed career-structures, the assurance of a relatively predictable individual trajectory. 20. The placement of these positions is understandable since their emergence is to a large extent due to changes in the educational system. 2 1 . The example of the craftsmen provides a good opportunity to re-emphasize that, in treating as a point what is in fact a space ( and sometimes a genuine field ) , one inevitably simplifies. This simplification is entailed by the endeavour to grasp the social space as a whole ( and so to avoid the errors almost inevitably incurred, as a direct conseGuence of autonomization, by monographs devoted to a particular 'occupation' ) . 2 2 . Some 19.5 percent of all the 'junior executives' ( administrative executives, technicians, primary teachers) and 20.3 percent of the ofice workers are enrolled in a l ibrary ( as against 3.7 percent of the commercial employees and 2 . 2 percent of the small employers) ; 18.5 percent and 1 2.9 percent respectively collect stamps ( as against 3.7 percen t and 2.8 percent ) ; 1 4 . 2 percent and 1 0 . 3 percent follow correspondence courses or evening classes ( as against 0 percent and 2 percent ) ( C.S. I V ) . 2 3 . The notion of 'preference' in legitimate culture is only appropriate at and above a certain level of competence ( corresponding approximately to a certificate of secondary education ) . This is seen clearly in the fac t that, below this level , the respondents treat questions of preference as questions of knowledge, saying they prefer the painters they know, and that the proportion of respondents who know more or as many composers as the number of works they say they know rises with level of education, while the most cultivated respondents refuse to acknowledge value in some of the works they know. 24. The ofice workers, especially the youngest ones, who have seen a high proportion of the films mentioned ( 3 . 5 on average, compared with 2 .4 for the skilled manual workers and foremen, 2.3 for the craftsmen and small shopkeepers) , are more interested in actors than directors ( on average they name 2.8 actors and only 1 director, and often name the actors in films they have not seen ) . So if they had seen Visconti's Rocco and His Brothers more than any other category, it was probably because of the stars, Annie Girardot and Alain Delon. 25. The distinctive feature of the constellation of choices of the techn icians ( who, as a whole, occupy the positions closest to the cent re of gravity ) l ies in the fact that they read many more scientific or technical books and more often go in for photography and home movies. 26. This law plays an important role in determining the choice of an artistic career rather than a less risky career ( o r vice versa) and, among the artistic careers, the choice of those which, at the moment in question, are the most risky ( genre, manner etc. ) . 27. Another indication of the ambiguous posi tion of the socio-medical services may be seen in the fact they are much more fam iliar with the smart sports than the other members of the middle classes ( for example, only 4 1 .6 percent of [hem say they have never played tennis, as against 70.4 percent of the primary teachers; for skiing, the corresponding figures are 4 l .6 percent and 78.5 percent ) . 28. The commercial j unior executives and the secretaries, who have slightly less cultural capital than the members of the socio-medical services, make more disparate choices. They are interested in the films favoured by the working classes or the small employers ( The Longest Day, The Magnifcent Seven, Vice and Virtue ) , more than the teachers and the socio-medical services, while also being in terested in the favourite films of the latter (Salvatore Giuliano, The Trial, Les dimanches de Ville d'Avray ) . 29. This pursuit of conformity to the i deal of distinction is revealed in the combined choice of 'pot-luck' meals and 'original and exotic' meals--'Iittle Chinese restaurants'-{)r in series such as Fran<;oise Hardy, Bufet, Van Gogh, which may be combined with the teachers' Kandinsky or the professionals' Concerto for the Left Hand. 30. This is tcue despi te the fac t that p rovincials may rel y on magazi nes for a substitute for what they would derive from residence in Paris, i.e., that sense of being 'where the action is' which is the real basis of cul t u ral flair or chu tzpah ( this i s perhaps the chief function of La Nouvel Observateur ) . 3 l . Because the opportunities ofered by the cultural environment are most profitably exploited by those with the highest cultural capital, and because the conformityinducing pressu res of the group on its members also rise with c u l t u ral capital, the gaps between the Parisians and the provincials become more pronounced at higher levels of education . 3 2 . Georges Perec's novel Les choses ( Paris, Jull iard, 1965 ) captures in its own way the relationship which a couple of these mystified mystifiers ( social psychologists working i n a market research agency) entertain with things whose whole value lies in the words used about them. <sup>33.</sup> See M. Villette, 'La carriere d'un "cadre de gauche" apres <sup>1968',</sup> Actes, <sup>29</sup> <sup>( 1979 ) ,</sup> 64-74. <sup>34.</sup> One of the many determinants which incline the members of the new occupations to a sub·versive representation of the relations between the sexes is the fact that it is in the middle class-and especially, no doubt, its new fractions-that women most frequently have higher educational qualifications or occupational status than their husbands, and that the husbands' higher occupational statusgiven identical qualifications-is, no doubt, most resented. <sup>35.</sup> Anticipating the point of view of the old morality on what can only be, in these terms, a sort of ' unthinkable', Kant writes: 'An obligation to enjoyment is a pat· ent absurdity. And the same, then, must also be said of a supposed obligation to actions that have merely enjoyment for their aim, no matter how spi ritually this enjoyment be refined in thought ( or embellished), and even if it be a mystical, so-called heavenly, enjoyment.' I. Kant, The Critique of Judgemnt, trans. J. C. Meredith ( Oxford, Oxford University Press, <sup>1952 ) ,</sup> p. <sup>48n.</sup> <sup>36.</sup> M. Wolfenstein, 'The Emergence of Fun Morality' in E. Larrabee and R. Meyersohn, eds., Mass Leisure ( Glencoe, Ill. , Free Press, <sup>1958 ) ,</sup> pp. <sup>86-97.</sup> 3<sup>7.</sup> As readers of avant-garde film criticism well know, jouir/jouisance can be eroticized by playing on its colloquial meaning, 'to come' ( translator). 3<sup>8.</sup> The endeavour to objectify a social ethic-especially a young and therefore aggressively imposed one-of course entails many dangers; lucidity may be no more than the efect of adherence to a contrary ethic. Each of the words used to characterize two antagonistic moralities can, of cou rse, function as insults for champions of the opposite morality; it is therefore futile to hope to find a perfectly 'neutral' tone ( the psychoanalytic vulgate, for example, will identify 'ascetic' with 'masochistic'). In each case, one would need to restore the experiential content of what is sociologically objectified ( e.g. , the heroic dimension of the ascetic striving for virtue, which takes its pleasure in efort and in the exaltation of self-transcendence, or the generous innocence of the liberationist cult, which is based on an acute sense of the absurdity of social constraints and stakes); and, as has constantly been done here, the dispositions described have to be referred to their conditions of production: repressive dispositions, for example, have to be seen as the product of repression ( or social regression). 3<sup>9.</sup> If the opposition between politicization and psychologization is carried too far, i t may b e forgotten that participation i n a community of activists can also ofer a solution to existential dificulties-even when these are not the exclusive reason for joining-by providing all the assurances and reassurances of immersion in an integrated, separate, self-contained group, with its own laws, language and ritual, demanding and recognizing devotion and sacrifice; see D. Mothé, Le métier de militant ( Paris, Seuil, <sup>1973) .</sup> But reducing the logic of activism to that of group ther· apy may equally obscure the fact that psychological transactions, in particular the exchange of devotion and recognition ( 'the comrades' confidence'), are only the experiential ( but not on that account negligible) form of much deeper transac· tions between the 'total institution'-which, demanding total dependence, gives most to those who give it most of what they are and have outside of it-and its members, who give it most ( and receive most) when they expect most from it and have or are least outside of it. 40. See P. Bourdieu, Outline of a Theory of Practice ( Cambridge, Cambridge University <sub>Press,</sub> 1977) , <sub>pp.</sub> 92-93. 4 l . See N. Elias, The History of Mannm ( Oxford, Basil Blackwell, <sup>1978 ) ,</sup> and State Formation and Civilization ( Oxford, Basil Blackwell , <sup>1982 ) ,</sup> vols. I and II of The Civilizing ProceJS. 42. Though with no more evidence than the observations of ordinary existence and the indirect indications provided by our survey, I am inclined to think that the devotees of the sects organized around the new forms of bodily exercise are mainly recruited among the women of the new petite bourgeoisie, and that the theme of the liberated body takes i ts place in a problematic with a strong religious colouring ( at least in its vocabulary ) which also includes the 'problems of the couple', 'women's liberation' etc. 43. It is no surprise that these people should be so horrified by every form of sociological objectification and so fascinated by psychological or psychoanalytical enchantment. Nor that they should be ready to applaud all the fashionable variants of the old personalist denunciation of scientific 'reductionism', the elementary form of intellectual aristocratism, which has received unexpected reinforcement from the identification of every attempt at scientific objectification of practices with an ethical, even political condemnation ( with the theme 'science = Gulag', which has enabled some well-worn post-Heideggerian fossils to make an unlooked-for come-back in the intellectual weeklies) . Nor that the existence of a scientific sociology is as improbable as ever in times when the position of sociologist is one of the refuges for those intent on escaping classification. 44. Celestin Freinet, educationalist ( ,active method' ) ; Carl Rogers, inventor of 'group dynamics'; Wilhelm Reich, psychoanalyst ( translator's note ) . 4 5 . See, for example, E . Dich ter, La strategie du desir: une philosophie de la vente ( Paris, Fayard, l%l ) . ## 7. The Choice of the Necesa<sub>ry</sub> 1 . It is no accident that disregard of the habitus and its efects is common to all bourgeois visions of the people, from the conservative pessimism which naturalizes the properties produced by social conditions to the optimism of the idealist revolutionism which forgets that the working class is shaped by necessity, even in the form of i ts revolt against necessity. 2. Need i t be said that i t is not suficient to originate from these classes in order to produce a true representation of their view of their social world--if only because self-distancing can presuppose or induce relationships towards these classes (such as populist evangelizing) as radically closed as the simple distance of lifelong outsiders? 3. Norbert Elias relates ( ci ting Taine) a gesture by the Duc de Richelieu which shows that the art of spending without counting, which in the seventeenth century marked the distance between the aristocrat and the saving, profit-making bourgeois, just as it now marks the distance between the bourgeois and the petit bourgeois, may, in the limiting case of a class whose very existence depends on the reproduction of its social capital, be the object of an explicit lesson: 'The Duke gave his son a purse full of gold so that the young man would learn to spend it like a grand seigneur. When the young man brought the gold back unspent, his father seized the purse and, in front of his son, threw it out of the window.' N. Elias, Die hiifsche Gesellschaft ( Darmstadt, Luchterhand, 1 97 5 ) , pp. 103- 1 04. 4. K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology in Colected Works, V ( London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1 976) , 295. 5. Given that the amount of income devoted to food rises strongly in real terms, the proportions spent on other i tems decline relatively less, and the structure of expenditure remains much the same as that of skilled workers. Certain items nonetheless rise significantly: small household electrical equipment, maintenance and repairs, hairdressing and beauty care, telephone, books, newspapers and entertainments, school expenses, holidays ( C.S. I I I ) . 6. C. Roy, ' Les conditions de vie des menages, exploitation triennale, 1965 -66-67', Colections de I'lNSEE, ser. M, no. <sup>30</sup> ( December <sup>1</sup> <sup>97 3 ) .</sup> 7 . I t i s n o doubt the same 'real ism' which excludes from poli tical or union action everything which might give it a purely symbol ic air as regards the means used ( i n con trast to the exhibi tionism of studen t demonstrations ) and especially the goals pursued. 8. The members of the working classes, like the members of domi nated ethnic groups, may make it a point of honour to belie the image that the dominant have of their class. Thus the working-class cult of cleanness or honesty ( 'poor but honest' ) , like some forms of conspicuous sob riety, no doubt owes something to the concern to bel ie bourgeois prej udice. The same intention of rehabili tation underlies the discourse designed to persuade onesel f that 'all we lack is money' ( and not taste) and that 'if we had the wherewithal, we'd know what to buy' ( or 'how to dress properly' ) . 9 . See P . Bourdieu e t aI . , Un art moyen: essal 5ur ieJ u5age5 Jociaux de fa photographie ( Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1 965 ) , pp. 5 4 -64. 10. See Y . Del saur, 'L'economie du langage populaire', ActeJ, 4 ( 1 97 5 ) , 33-40 1 1 . This would explain the image that working-class women have of feminist demands. 12. A whole set of indices tends to show that the working classes remain attached to a more strict moral ity in everything concerned with sex uality and the sexual division of labour. Thus, as regards cloth ing, while-no doubt for fu nctional reasons--they readily accept that women should wear trousers for work, they rej ect them much more often than the other classes at home and outside; similarly, thev always strongly disapprove of miniski rts, especially at work and ou tdoors ( Sondages, 1 ( 1968} , 79 ) . Man ual workers and especially farm workers are less inclined ( 34 percent and 5 3 . 5 percent ) than j unior executives ( 57 percent ) and sen ior executives ( 59 percen t ) to say they attach no importance ro virginity; the proportion who consider that physical love has a fairly or very important place in l i fe increases slightly as one moves up the social h ierarchy; conversely, the proportion who say they have only loved one person in their lives declines as one moves up the h ierarchy, as does the proportion who say one cannot love two people at the same time, or that love chiefly brings tenderness ( rather than, say, physical pleasure), or that eroticism and infidelity destroy love (C.S. XLVI). 1 3. See H . Gournelle and A . Svakvary, 'Enquete sur Ie petit dejeuner en France', Annates d'Hygiene de Langue Fram;aise, <sup>3</sup> ( May-June 1967 ) , 28. 14. The reference to the division of labour between the sexes which connotes the representation of personal or collective identity ( for example, a manual worker, invited ro classify a set of occupations, put all the non-manual j obs i n a single class, saying, 'All pansies [ rous des pedes]!' ) evokes not so much the specifically sex ual dimension of practice as the virtues and capacities associated by status with the two sexes, i.e., strength or weakness, cou rage or cowardice, rather than potency or impotence, activi ty or passivity. 1 5 . This fact is underlined by the rapid devaluation of labour power which accompanies ageing. 16. See T. W. Adorno, 'On Popular Music', StudieJ in Philo5ophy and Social Science, 9 ( 1 94 1 ) . I t would be easy ro show, fo r example, that the most legit i mate music is used, through records and radio, no less passively and intermittently than 'popular' music, without thereby being discredi ted, and without being accused of the alienating effects that are attributed to popular music. As for repetitiveness of form, i t is greatest in Gregorian chant ( which nonetheless has a high distinctive value ) , i n much mediaeval music now in favour, and in much seventeenth- and eighteenth-century 'diverti men to' music originally composed ro serve as 'background music'. 1 7 . 'In Sud-Ouest Dimanche of 8 August, you publish a photograph of a Renault 5 transformed into a four-seater convertible. An article subtitled "When a coachbuilder and a couturier get together to dress a car" presents the coach-builder Lohr as the author of the car. This is quite unttue. I am the one who had the idea of this version of the vehicle, I designed it for Cacharel , and I hold the artistic copyright. I personally supervised i ts creation in the coach-builder's workshop; his role was purely technical. So a more accurate subtitle would have been: "When an artist and a coutu rier get together to dress a car'" ( Reader's letter, Sud-Ouest Dimanche, 22 August 1976 ) . 1 8 . A peasant i n the Beam explained why he had not thought o f becoming mayor, although he had won the most votes in the local elections, by saying: 'But I don't know how to talk!' 19. I t would be i n teresting to determine, by a specifically l i nguistic analysis, precisely how this frontier is defined in the area of language. If one accepts the verdict of the i nterviewers' 'social sense', a good measu re not of the l i nguistic status of the language used by the respondents but of the social image which educated interlocu tors may have of it ( the taxonomies used to classify speech and pronu nciation are those of scholastic usage) , it appears that this diference is in fact very marked between the manual workers ( and also the craftsmen and small shopkeepers ) and the clerical workers. Of the former, only 42 percent speak a French regarded as 'standard' (correct ) , as against 77 percent of the ofice workers ( to which must be added 4 percent of 'refined' [chatie ] speech, totally absent among the manual workers ) ; similarly, the proportion j u dged to have 'no accen t' rises from 1 2 . 5 percent to 28 percent. 20. Manual workers, the category who most often describe the ideal friend as 'bon vivant', are also those who most often-by far-say they are well-disposed towards someone who eats and drinks well ( 6 3 percent of them, as against 56 percent of the farmers and farm workers, 54 percent of the j unior executives and clerical workers, 50 percent of the shopkeepers and craftsmen, 48 percent of the employers, senior executives and professionals-C.S. XXXI V ) . In a similar vein, I have already noted the taste for everything which makes the 'atmosphere' of a show, and also a celebration, a meal, and for those who contribute to it; and also the strongly marked propensity to expect images to immortalize the 'good times' of life and the symbols of festivity. 2 1 . The 'career' available to manual workers is, no doubt, initially experienced as the opposite of the negative career which leads down into the sub-proletariat. What counts in 'promotion' is, together with financial advantages, the additional guarantees it gives against the ever present threat of fall ing back into insecurity and poverty. The potentiality of a negative career is as important in understanding the dispositions of skilled workers as is the poten tiali ty of promotion for clerical workers and j unior executives. 22. See G. Adam, F. Bon, J. Capdevielle and R. Mouriaux, L 'ouvrier jran(ais en 1 9 70 ( Paris, Armand Col in, 1 97 1 ) . ( The CGT is, of the three main l abour union organ izations, the one most closely l i n ked to a political party, the Com m unist Party, and strongest i n the traditional industries-translator. ) 2 3 . Some 10.5 percent of the semi-skilled and unskilled workers and 1 7 percent of the shopkeepers cite Rousseau among the painters, as against 6 percent of the skilled workers, 3 percent of the primary teachers and technicians and 0 percent of the j unior administrative executives. The name Brague, which is cited by 10.5 percent of the semi-skilled and unskilled workers and percen t of the skilled workers, had become unusually prominent on radio and TV at the time of the survey, because the artist's death coincided with the survey period. 24. The efects of diferences in age and diferences in education combine to produce fairly marked diferences in tastes in singers. The foremen and skilled workers tend to prefer the older, more established singers, but also those best placed in the hierarchy of cultural values--Piaf, Becaud, Brel , Brassens--whereas the semi-skilled and unskilled tend to prefer Johnny Hallyday and Fran<;oise Hardy. ## 8. Culture and Politics l . K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology, 2nd ed . ( London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1974 ) , p. 1 09. 2. It is the motor of conscious action if one accepts the C<Juation posited by Marx in The German Ideology ( ibid., p. 50) that 'language is real, practical consciousness' . 3. O n the historical genesis o f the philosophy o f the 'invisible hand' and its fu nction in economic and political thought, see A. Hirschman, The PaJsiom and the In/emts: Political Argumts for Capitlism before Its Triumph ( Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1 977 ) . 4 . Similarly, the field of artistic production delimits a t every moment the field of possible artistic positions. 5 . This very general relationship is also found in the area of arristic competence, where subjective exclusion ( 'That doesn' t in terest me' or 'That's not for the likes of us' ) is only the efect of an objective exclusion. 6. It is not possible, i n the present state of research, to grasp the logic of the variations in the rates of non-response to identical questions asked by the same organization at diferent times (a series of IFOP su rveys on nuclear energy, undertaken in 1974, 197 5 , 1 976 and 1 977 ) . Everything suggests, in any case, that these variations remain smaller than the variations in the diferent expressed opinions. 7 . G. Michelat and M. Simon, 'Categories socio-professionnelles en milieu ouvrier et comportement pol itique', Revue Fran{aise de Science Politique, 25 ( April 197 5 ) , 29 1-3 16. 8. The slightly higher figure for men may well be due to the fact that the question explicitly calls for the appreci ation of a principle: 'Do you think that girls of 1 8 should ( il faut ) b e allowed t o see the films they want to?' ( IFO P , March 1 97 1 ) . 9 . 'Do you think that i n i ndustrial dispu tes the Governmen t supports the workers' demands, supports the employers' in terests, or is neu tral ?' ( SOFRES, October 1970) . 10. 'Among the following trade unions and political parties, who, in your view, best defends employees' interests at the present time-UDR, Centrists, PCF, CFDT, CGT, PS, CGT-FO?' ( IFOP, 2 February 1980. ) 1 l . ' I n your view, is there or is there not a link between the Middle East conflict and the Vietnam War?’ (IFOP, 9 October 1967). (President de Gaulle had just asserted that there was-translator. ) 1 2 . Similar distributions ( 4 3 .4 percent of 'don't knows' among women, 19.6 percent among men, 38.9 percent among the least educated, 9.4 percent among the best educated ) are observed on a question on foreign policy: 'Are you satisfied or dissatisfied with the Government's performance in the following areas: . . . foreign policy?' ( IFOP 1 966 ) . 1 3. The link between indiference and impotence h as been noted b y various observers, for example: D. Riesman and N. Glazer, 'Cri teria for Pol itical Apathy', in A . W. Gouldner, ed., Studies in Leadership ( New York, R ussell and Russell, 1%5 ) , pp. 505- 5 59; E. K ris and N. Leites, 'Trends in Twen tieth-Century Propaganda', in G. Roheim, ed., Psychoanalysis and the Social Sciences ( New York, IUP, 1947 ) , esp. p. 400. 14. E. Deutsch, D. Lindon and P. Weill, Les familes politiques aujourd'hui en France ( Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1 966 ) , pp. 1 04- 1 0 5 . 1 5 . On political activists in general, the main sources consulted were as follows: J . Lagroye, G. Lord, 1. Monnier-Chazel and J. Palard, Les miltants politiques dam trois partis frant;.ais: PC, . PS, UDR ( Paris, Pedone, 1976 ) ; M. Kesselman, 'Systeme de pouvoir e t cultures poli tiques au sein des parris politiques fran<;ais', Revue Fram�aise Sociologie, ( October-December On Socialist activists: R, Cayrol, 'Les militants du Pani socialiste, contribution a une sociologie', Projet, 88 ( September-October 1 974 ) ; H. Ponelle and T. Dumias, 'Militants social istes a Paris', Projet, 1 0 1 (January 1 9 76 ) ; L'Unite, no, 2 5 7 , 1 -6 July 1 977; 'Qui sont les cadres du PS?', Le Point, no. 249, 2 7 June 1977. On Communist activists: F, Platone and F. Subileau, Les militants communistes de fa Fedration de Paris ( Paris, Fondation Nationale des Sciences Poli tiques, 1 97 5 ) . And on the Deputies: R. Cayrol, J.-e. Parodi and C. Ysmal, Le député français (Paris, Armand Colin, 1973); and M. Dogan, 'Les filieres de la carriere politique', Revue Fram;,aise de Sociologie, 8 ( 1 967 ) , 468-492, 16, These conclusions are based on a summary statistical analysis of the findings of a preliminary survey by extended interview ( n = 1 30 ) , carried out in the Paris region in 1970. ( The small sample obviously makes it impossible to see the regul arities which emerge as anything more than indications of tendencies, which will be used here as illustrations rather than demonstrations. ) In the first stage, the respondents were given a set of 1 5 cards, each bearing the name of a movement, grouping or party, and were asked co group the cards as they wished ( they were not explicitly asked to comment on the categories they applied or co attach names or descriptions to the groups they establ ished) , In the second stage, they were given a set of 24 cards, each bearing the name of a politician or trade unionist ( one fictitious name, Philippon, was included, so as to measure reactions to an unknown name ) ; they were first asked to say which group or party each individual belonged to, and then to group these cards. 1 7 . At the risk of appearing sacrilegious, it has to be pointed out that it was in the name of the same faith in the legitimacy conferred by cultural competence ( or, as it was often put at the time of the Popular Front, 'intell igence' ) that intellectuals were able to denounce the dangers of universal sufrage or, like Flaubert, to dream of the reign of the mandarins; j ust as they now feel both entitled and obliged, by virtue of their essmce, to produce and profess their opinions on the great problems of the day, 18, The respondents were presented with a list of 17 problems and invited to say which they thought were political . 19. This survey was carried out by the publication of a questionnaire in a large number of daily and weekly papers, between 1 and 1 5 August 1 969, at the request of the Association for the Expansion of Scientific Research ( AEERS) . ( The fact that L'Humanite and Le Parisim Libere did not publish it undoubtedly contributed to the under-representation of the working classes,) The questionnaire contained 20 questions on the organization of the school year, the situation of education, the changes in curriculum, teaching methods and university organization, the training, selection and salaries of teachers, the relations between teachers, parents and pupils or students, the powers of the diferent categories of staf, the functions of education ( vocational training, 'character-building' etc. ) , politics in educational establishments, the raising of the school-leaving age, subsidies for Church schools etc. It was preceded by a text of varying length, depending on the newspaper, presen ting the su rvey as a ' full-scale national consul tation' on a 'subject of capi tal importance' organized 'with the kind assistance of the press' by the AEERS, 'an independent, non-profit-making movement'. The 'events' of May 1 968 started with a student uprising in Paris, turned into a general strike and seemed to threaten the whole Gaullist regime. When order was restored, the new Minister of Education initiated reforms of the educational system, ( Translator'S note, ) 20. This population, in which the diferent groups are represented in proportion to their pretension to influence the educational system, is perfectly representative of the self-legitimated pressure group which has always managed to exert its influence, at every level o f the system. The ides/oms i t expressed thus foretold what indeed subsequently came to pass: for example, the 'great majority'-for once the term is appropriate-of the respondents desi red the con tin uation of the recruitment competi tions ( agregation etc. ) , the introduction of selection, the main tenance of the grandes ecoles, more emphasis on both general cul ture ( for themselves) and vocational training ( for other people ) etc. On all the points on which comparison was possible ( i .e., all the questions except those on the grandes ecoles and the agregation, which no su rvey insti tute has ever asked ) , the tendencies are stronger in the spontaneous sample than in the representative sample. 2 1 . It goes without saying that these capac i ties and disposi tions are l i n ked to those which are needed in order to set pen to paper to answer a questionnaire, which are in turn linked to educational capital . Ethical dispositions exert a specific efect here, which is clearly seen when the respondent is invited to p u t in regul ar, prolonged work, as in panel surveys. ( Thus the rate of response to the CESP surveys, in which the responden t has to note every quarter of an hour, for a month, the radi o stations he has been l istening to, varies to some ex ten t with the c u l t u ral goodwill that is man i fested in scholastic zeal . It is highest among j u n ior executives and foremen, who are characterized by relatively h igh rates of library use, collecting etc. ) One ough t also to consider the specific efects of selection by newspaper, and endeavour to determine how far the fact that the enq uiry was transmitted through the reader's usual newspaper rather than, for example, through the schools, an association, a union or a party may have afected the make-up of the population of responden ts ( for example, newspaper subscribers responded more often than occasional readers ) . 2 2 . The parents who retu rned thei r q uestionnaires to the Cornec Federation of par ents' associations ( rather than d i rectly to the AEERS) difer overall from the other parents by a lower social and educational level and by the h igher proportion of female respondents This suggests that previous mobilization with i n an organ ization and the additional 'authority' conferred by this membership tend to increase the propensi ty to i n tervene pol itical ly, other things being eq ual. ( This would perhaps explain why, among the teachers, the spontaneous, non-afiliated respondents have very diferen t characterist ics from the 'pedagogic' activists. mainly recruited among women agregees and certified ( non-agrege ) men; see J. M. Chapoulie and D. Merll ie, Les determinants sociaux et JCo/aires des pratiques professionneltes des enseignants du se(}nd degri et leurs transformations [ Paris, CSE, 1 974 ] . esp. pp. 1 20- 1 24 . ) I t i s remarkable that the Cornec Federation parents, under-selected in respect of social and cultural capi tal, are, although more mobil ized, generall y slightly less i n c l i ned to answer the various q uestions, except ( i n particular I the one on subsidies for Church education, for which they have a h igher rate of response. 2 3 . CET: College d'enseignement technique ( secondary technical school ) ; CEG: College d'enseignement generale ( 'general secondary school' ) . ( Translator'S note. ) 24. Every attempt to persuade the members of the working classes to express their vision of the social world ( e.g., their image of the cl ass structure ) comes up against the dificulty created by this sense of impotence and unworth iness ( ' I don't see why people l i ke you come and ask blokes like me-you know all that better than I do' ) . On the other hand, part of the horror aroused by sociology stems from the fact that it questions any Tom, Dick or Harry instead of consulting only the authorized spokesmen 2 5 . This analysis has the vi rtue of showing that, by emphasizing the dom inant agents ( 'great men' ) or personified collective entities, school history conveys a charismatic philosophy of h istory which leaves no room for social in terests or the conflicts between antagonistic groups and which calls for moral j u dgements rather than cri tical reflection on historical processes and their social conditions. 26. It is not uncommon for the demands of personal salvation ( evening classes or docility towards superiors) to come into conflict with the demands of collective salvation ( union activities etc. ) , for practical reasons and also because they spring from two to tall y opposed visions of the social world. Eforts at retraining or internal promotion ( competitions etc. ) would not be so positively sanctioned were it not that, in addi tion to technical improvement, they also guarantee adherence to the institu tion and to the social order. 27. One could point to a vast l i terature produced by the champions of the 'medical order' to defend the uniqueness of the medical art, freely performed by a free ( and soli tary ) individual, or the indignant p rotestations of the un ivers i ty establishment at the call for the recogni tion of collective student projects. 28. Th is proposition, which has i ts eq ui valen t in aes thetics, is a particular case of the more general proposition that the propensity and capacity ro subordinate verbal or practical posi tion-taki ngs to expl icit principles, which, as such, are subject to an intentional systematization ( those of an ethic or aesthetic or a pol itical theory, rather than those of an ethos ) rise with cultural capi tal-this rel ationship being established as much through the conditions of existence necessary for the acquisition of such capital as through the efect of the specific abili ties i t gives. 29. To demonstrate the analogy between surveys and voting, one would have to analyse both the political philosophy implied in the questioning itself and that which is impl ied in the methods of analysis ( in particular, the purely aggregative logic of statistics ) . It would be seen that the su rvey most overtly reveal s i ts t rue nature when, aiming to p redict the res u l t of an election or referendum, it invites the respondents to give the equivalent of a vote. 30. Sufice it to point out that two-stage choice is very common in the area of taste, where, as has often been shown, consumers choose a producer or distributor ( a shop, a theatre, a radio station etc. ) and, th rough this choice, the pre-selected products they ofer-when they do not simply delegate this choice ro mandated experts, such as decorators, architects, and other vendors of aesthetic services, who play a role somewhat similar i n such matters to that of the party . 3 1 . Thus party membership or allegiance is only one factor among others, whose effects could be studied in the same way as the efects of sex, age or occupation . Specifically poli tical principles function as factors, relatively au tonomous of economic and social determinants, which ( al though adherence ro these principles is not independent of these determinants) make it possible ro produce opinions or practices contrary ro immediate personal in terest. 32. Of all i n tellectuals, Sartre is no doubt the one who fel t most ' au thentically' the opposition between the abstract reality of 'commitment', which is always experienced as arbitrary inasmuch as it is the product of a deliberate choice, and the opacity of a choice i mposed by the conditions of existence. 3 3 . This analysis is based on the findings of a post-1 968 su rvey of a sample of 3,288 men, including 176 members of the intellectual occupations, presented by Mattei Dogan to a French Political Science Association colloquium on workers and politics i n western Eu rope. 34. See S. M. Lipset, 'Students and Pol itics in Comparative Perspective', Daedalus, Winter 1968, pp. 1-20. For a critique based on analysis of a survey of French stusee also Y . Delsaut, ' Les opinions pol i tiques dans le systeme des attitudes : etudiants en lemes et la politique' , Revue Fran"aise de Sociologie, II Oanuary-March 1970 ) , 3-33. 3 5 . I t is no acciden t that t h e procuration ( or assistance ) which is t h e pre-condition o f access to political opinion for those who are deprived of the means of production of 'personal opinion' is one of the more or less skilfully masked targets of conservative or ' revolutionary conservative' thought; see P Bourdieu, ' L'ontologie poli-<sub>tique</sub> <sub>de</sub> <sub>Martin</sub> <sub>Heidegger',</sub> <sub>Actes,</sub> 5-6 <sub>(</sub> <sub>November</sub> 197 5 ) , 109- 1 56. <sup>36.</sup> See G . Ansart, De I'usine J l'Assemble nationale ( Paris, Editions Sociales, <sup>1977 ) .</sup> 37. As independent producers of their own discourse, intellectuals always tend to demand that the institutions claiming a monopoly of the legitimate production of symbolic goods, such as churches or parties, allow them the righ t to sel f-managemen t of opinion. In this respect, the ecological movement, which refuses to behave as the 'owner' of its electors' votes, decl in ing one of the privileges of party apparatuses, represents the materialized ideal of the intellectual parry. ( I n the present French electoral system, parties less well pl aced in t�e fi rst round customarily u rge their voters to transfer their votes to another party in the second round-translator. ) 38. <sub>PSU:</sub> <sub>Parti</sub> <sub>socialiste</sub> <sub>unifie,</sub> <sub>a</sub> <sub>small</sub> <sub>left-wing</sub> <sub>party</sub> <sub>founded</sub> <sub>in</sub> 1 960, <sub>characterized</sub> by anti-statism and ideas of autogestion ( translator) . 39. <sub>In</sub> 1 96 <sub>de</sub> <sub>Gaulle</sub> <sub>withdrew</sub> <sub>French</sub> <sub>forces</sub> <sub>from</sub> <sub>NATO</sub> <sub>command</sub> <sub>(</sub> <sub>translator ) .</sub> 40. <sub>Here,</sub> <sub>too,</sub> <sub>there</sub> <sub>is</sub> <sub>a</sub> <sub>clear</sub> <sub>analogy</sub> <sub>with</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>cultural</sub> <sub>marker.</sub> <sub>Could</sub> <sub>'taste'</sub> <sub>fu nction</sub> as an in ternalized system of classification if it were suddenly deprived of all the markers, all the objectified classifications and, in particular, all the indices of position in the field of production provided by places of publication and exhibition etc. which poin t the way to what Flaubert called 'the smart opinion' ) 4 1 . <sub>For</sub> <sub>a</sub> <sub>classic</sub> <sub>statemen t</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>these</sub> <sub>theses,</sub> <sub>see</sub> <sub>S.</sub> <sub>M.</sub> <sub>Lipset,</sub> <sub>'Democracy</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Working</sub> Class Authoritarianism', American Sociological Review, <sup>24</sup> ( August <sup>1 9 59 ) , 482-50 1 .</sup> <sup>4 2 .</sup> H e mean t, ' I t's against the interests o f wage-earners ( la masse salariee ) ' ; masse salariale means the total wage bill ( translator) . 43. <sub>This</sub> <sub>discourse,</sub> <sub>totally</sub> <sub>opposed</sub> <sub>to</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>homogeneity</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>'pure'</sub> <sub>products</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>an</sub> ethos or a political ax iomatics, takes particular forms which could only be com· pletely accounted for by describing ( j ust as Bachelard describes 'epistemological profiles' ) the 'pol itical profiles' drawn by practices or discourses generated according to diferent principles, in diferent situations, i.e., in con tex ts in which the ef· fects of political inculcation or specifically poli tical control are very unequally exerted. 44. What distinguishes these organi zations in the universe of educational institutions is no doubt the fact that they perform their educative action within the primary groups, through agents-the activists-belonging to the group i tself. 45. This ethical liberalism can be traced back to its basis in the changes in the mode of reproduction of the dominant class, which are recorded in recent changes in family law. They have the efect of rendering the 'virtues' of the old bourgeoisie unnecessary or even dysfunctional ( the very vi rtues which the traditionalists, condemned to social decline by their inability to reconven, strive to perpetuate, as if they regarded the reversal of bourgeois val ues as the cause of the decl ine of which they are victims and pinned their hopes of social salvation on eth ical restoration ) . 46. <sub>Michelat</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Simon,</sub> <sub>'Categories</sub> <sub>socio-professionnelles</sub> <sub>en</sub> <sub>milieu</sub> <sub>ouvrier',</sub> <sub>esp.</sub> <sub>pp.</sub> 296-297. <sup>47.</sup> The Paris newspapers devote to international afairs, anecdotal news (jaits divers ) <sub>and</sub> <sub>sport,</sub> <sub>respectively,</sub> 1 4 .8 <sub>percent,</sub> 8.8 <sub>percent</sub> <sub>and</sub> 8 9 <sub>percent</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>their</sub> <sub>space;</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>provincial</sub> <sub>press</sub> <sub>these</sub> <sub>p</sub> <sub>roportions</sub> <sub>are</sub> <sub>reversed:</sub> 7.9 <sub>percent,</sub> 8.4 <sub>percent</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sup>16.5</sup> percen t; J. Kayser, Les quotidiens jran{ais ( Paris, Armand Colin, <sup>1</sup> <sup>963 ) ,</sup> pp. 1 2 5 - 1 27 . <sub>These</sub> <sub>diferences</sub> <sub>would</sub> <sub>be</sub> <sub>even</sub> <sub>more</sub> <sub>marked</sub> <sub>if</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>national</sub> <sub>papers</sub> whose readership is mainly drawn from the dominant class ( like Le Montie, Le Figaro ) were separated from the others, which ( at least in the case of Le Parisien Lihire) give as much space to jaits divers and sport as the provincial press. 48. <sub>In</sub> <sub>this</sub> <sub>struggle</sub> <sub>market</sub> <sub>research</sub> <sub>is</sub> <sub>a</sub> <sub>weapon-in</sub> <sub>that</sub> <sub>it</sub> <sub>enables</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>newspaper's</sub> 'penetration' to be demonstrated to advertisers, who provide a h igh proportion of a newspaper's income-much more than a means of knowledge assisting a better response to the expectations of the readership. 49. As opposed to those publications which are excluded as too 'marked' from places where reading-matter is traditionally supplied-waiting rooms, cafes, hairdressing salons etc.-the 'omnibus' weeklies which are specially designed to ofend no section of the potential clien tele ( Paris-Match, Jours de France, L 'Express ) are perfectly adapted to the situations in which they are asked to perform this very function ( Le Parisien Libere and France-Soir often fulfil this role in barber shops ) . 50. One o f the senior editors o f a major 'quality' newspaper, asked i f h e would have published an interview with a notorious criminal, like the editors of a weekly magazine which had j ust been prosecuted for doing so, replied, 'Of course, but in indirect speech. 5 1 . Dogan, 'Les filieres de la carriere politique.' ( Force Ouvriere is the union organization created in 1947-48 by anti-Communists who split away from the CGTtranslator) . 52. The proportion of under-25s in the readership, insignificant for Le Figaro, is 2 5 percent i n the case o f Le Nouvel Observateur; and i t i s remarkable that the papers which have declined most severely in the last ten years are, along with the omnibus papers ( Le Parisien Libert and France-Soir ) , L'Aurore and Le Figaro, with their small proportion of young readers. Their decline and the rise of Le Monde and Le Nouvel Observateur very directly reflect the morphological changes in the dominant class in favour of the fractions richest in educational capital . 5 3 . Just as what is transmitted through biological heredity is no doubt more stable than what is transmitted through cultural heredity, so the class unconscious inculcated by the conditions of existence is a more stable generative principle of j udgements and opinions than explicitly constituted political principles, precisely because it is relatively independent of consciousness. 54. This does not exclude all the essentially ambiguous political positions ( the paradigm of which is the 'conservative revolutionary' movement of pre-Nazi Germany) , which no doubt reproduce, in their indeterminacy, the contradictions inherent in the revolt against social decline (a sort of contradiction in terms ) or in the mismatch between individual trajectory and collective trajectory. 5 5 . This strategy is very common in interpersonal relations, and especially in the economy of domestic exchanges, in which the impeccability acquired by services rendered allows the benefactor the role of a living reproach. 56. To understand the political practices and opinions of old people, one has to consider not only the withdrawal efect which, with retirement from the work milieu and the weakening of social relations, tends to reduce collective pressure and support, but also, and especially, the efect of social decline, which is stronger and more rapid in less privileged classes and can no doubt be understood by analogy with the efect of declining social trajectories on individuals or groups. 57. The unification of the economic and symbolic market and the corresponding weakening of locally based social spaces tends to favour the 'politicization' of peasant farmers, who, increasingly afected by the mechanisms of the economy and pol itical decisions, have an increasing interest in being interested in pol itics. Al though 'politicization' is not, as it is for industrial workers, necessarily equ ivalent to a move to the left, nonetheless the real possibili ty of this choice appears, and conservatism itself takes on a quite diferent meaning. 58. On this point, see P. Bourdieu, Le sens pratique ( Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1979 ) . 59. This relative indeterminacy o f the ethos with respect t o the positions expressed no doubt explains the oscillations ( e.g., between Gaullism and the Communist Party) of the most deprived fraction of the working class. 60. This is the question de Gaulle put to the nation in a referendum in 1969 ( translator) . ## Conclusion 1 . 1. Kant, Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View ( Carbondale and Edwardsville, Southern I l l i nois U n i versity Press, 1 9 7 8 ) , p. 1 4 1 . 2 . G . W . Leibniz, 'Meditationes d e cogn itione, veri tate e t ideis' i n Opuscula Philosophical Selecta ( Paris, Boivin, 1 939) , pp. 1 - 2 ( see also Discours de Mhaphysique, par. 24 ) . It is remarkable that to illustrate the idea of 'clear but confused' knowledge, Leibniz evokes, in addition to the example of colours, tastes and smells which we can distinguish 'by the simple evidence of the senses and not by statable marks', the example of painters and artists who can recognize a good or bad work but cannot j ustify their j udgement except by invoking the presence or absence of a ' j e ne sais quoi 3. I t would be the task of a genetic sociology to establish how this sense of possibilities and impossibil i ties, ptoxi m i ties and distances is cons tituted. 4. Just as the opposition between the unigue and the mul tiple lies at the heart of the dominant philosophy of history, so the opposition, which is a transfigured form of i t , between the brilliant, the visible, the distinct, the disti ngu ished, the 'ou tstanding', and the obscu re, the d u l l , the greyness of the undiferentiated, indistinct, inglorious mass is one of the fundamental categories of the dominan t perception of the social world. 5 . See G. Duby, Les trois ordres ou I'imaginaire du jeodalisme ( Paris, Gallimard, 1978 ) . 6 . E . Durkheim, Elementary Forms of the ReligioUJ Life ( London, Allen and Unwin, 1 9 1 5 ) , p . 1 7 . 7. A more detailed account of t h e theoretical con tex t o f these analyses will b e found in P. Bourdieu, "Symbolic Power" in Identity and Structure, ed. D. Gleeson ( Drif. field, Naferron Books, 1977 ) , pp. 1 1 2 - 1 1 9; also in Critique of Anthropology, 4 ( Summer 1 979) , 77-85. 8. Cf. J.·P. Same, Being and Nothingness ( London, Methuen, 1 969 ) , pp. 5 5 7-565, esp. 562. 9. See H. Giles, 'Accent Mobility: A Model and Some Data' , Anthropological Lin· guistics, 1 5 ( 1 97 3 ) , 87- 1 0 5 . 1 0 . See G . Lenski, ' American Social Classes: Statistical Strata o r Social G roups )', A merican Journal of Sociology, 58 ( September 1 95 2 ) , 1 39- 144. 1 1 . These divergences also emerge, in the same survey, when the respondents are first asked ro define social classes at the level of their town and then at the level of the whole cou n t ry; the rate of non-response rises strongly in the l atter case, as does the n umber of classes perceived . 1 2 . Ordinary perception, which applies to practices the scheme of the broad and the narrow, or the expansive and the constrained, anticipates the discoveries of the most refined social psychology, which establ ishes the existence of a correlation between the room one gives oneself in physical space and the place one occupies in social space. On this point, see S. Fisher and C. E. Cleveland, Body Image and Personality ( New York, Van Nostrand, 1 9 58 ) . 1 3. This i s true i n the ordinary sense but also i n the sense o f Kafka [proces 'process' but also 'trial'--d. Kafka's Die Prozess, The Trial, Le Proces in French-translaror}, who ofers an exemplary image of this desperate striving to regain a social identity that is by defini tion ungraspable, being the infinite limit of all categoremes, all imputations. 14. The sophism of the heap of wheat and all the paradoxes of physical continua mean, as Poincare observed, that one has simul taneously ${ \bf A } = { \bf B } ,$ B = C and A < C, or again, $\mathbf { A } _ { 1 } = \mathbf { A } _ { 2 } , \mathbf { A } _ { 2 } = \mathbf { A } _ { 3 } , . . . \mathbf { A } _ { \mathrm { 9 9 } } = \mathbf { A } _ { 1 0 0 }$ and $\dot { \mathbf { A } _ { 1 } } < \mathbf { A } _ { 1 0 0 }$ . In other words, though it is clear that one grain does nor make a heap, nor do two grains, or th ree, it is not easy to say whether the heap begins at 264 grai ns or 2 6 5 ; in other words, whether 265 grains make a heap, bur not 264. 1 5 . See P. Bourdieu a n d M. d e Saint Martin, 'Les categories d e I'en tendement profes. soral', Actes, 3 ( 1 97 5 ) , 68-93. 16. See Duby, Les trois ordres, esp. pp. 422-42 3. 1 7 . Ibid., pp. 63-64, and 'Les "jeunes" dans la societe arisrocratique dans la France du Nord·Ouest au XI Ieme siecle', Annales, 19 ( September-October 1 964 ) , 835- 846. 18. Much the same could be said of women, were they not denied most of the advan tages of renouncing responsibil i ty, at least outside the bourgeoisie. 19. M . Billing and H. Taj fel, ' Social Categorization and Simi larity in I nter·group Be· haviour', European Journal of Social Psychology, 3 ( 1 97 3 ) , 27- 5 2 . 2 0 . See, for example, H . Taj fel, 'Quanti tative Judgement in Social Perception', British Journal of Psychology, 50 ( 1 959 ) , 16-2 1 , and H. Taj fel and A . L. Wilkes, 'Classifi· cation and Quanti tative Judgemen t', ibid., 54 ( 1963 ) , 1 0 1 - 1 04 ; and for an over· view of research in this area, W. Doise, L 'articulation psychosociologique et les relations entre groupes ( Brussels, A . de Boeck, 1976 ) , pp. 1 78-200. 2 1 . 'Wherever the groups and classes are set in sharp j u x taposition, the values and mores of each are j u xtaposed. Out of group opposition there arises an intense op· position of values, which comes to be projected through the social order and serves to sol idify social stratification'. L. Copel and, 'The Negro as a Contrast Con· ception' in E. Thompson, ed., Race Relations and the Race Problem ( Durham, Duke University Press, 1 9 59 ) , pp. 1 5 2 - 1 79. 2 2 . ' . . . Ie pouvoir unificateur du nom, du mot d'ordre'-the unifying power of the name/noun, the ral lying cry ( , order word' ) . ( Translator's note. ) 2 3 . One scarcely needs to point out the afinity between social physics and the positivist inclination to see classifications either as arbitrary, 'operational' divisions ( such as age groups or income brackets ) or as 'objective' cleavages ( discontinui· ties i n distributions or bends in curves ) which only need to be recorded. 24. Here is a particularly reveal ing expression ( even in its metaphor) of this social marginalism: ' Each individual is responsible for the demeanour i mage of h imself and the deference image of others, so that for a complete man to be expressed, individuals must hold hands in a chain of ceremony, each giving deferentially with proper demeanour to the one on the right what will be received deferentially from the one on the left.' E. Gofmann, 'The Nature of Deference and Demean· our', American Anthropologist, 58 Oune 1956) , 47 3-502. ' . . . rou tinely the ques· tion is that of whose opinion is voiced most frequently and most forcibly, who makes the minor ongoing decisions apparen tly required for the coordination of any joint activity, and whose passing concerns have been given the most weight. And however trivial some of these little gains and losses may appear to be, by sum· ming them all up across all the social situations in which they occur, we can see that their total efect is enormous. The expression of subordination and domination through this swarm of situational means is more than a mere tracing or symbol or ri tualistic afirmation of the social hierarchy. These expressions considerably consti· tute the h ierarchy.' E. Gofmann, 'Gender Display' . ( Paper presented at the Third I n ternational Symposium, ' Female Hierarchies', H arry Prank Guggenheim Poun dation, April 3 - 5 , 1 974 ) ; italics mine. ## Postscript 1 . M . Proust, ' E n memoire des eglises assassinees' i n Pastiches et melanges ( Paris, Gal· limard, 1 9 70 ) , p . 1 7 1 . 2 . Por a n aesthetic explicitly based o n the anti thesis o f the beautifu l and the facile, see S. Alexander, Beauty and Other Forms of Value ( London, Macmillan, 1933 ) , esp. pp. 40, 164. ( In French, facile corresponds t o both ' facile' and 'easy'-transla· tor. ) 3. Given in Engl ish in the text, and described as more distinguished than its French equ ivalent, racoleur ( translator) . 4. On several occasions, and in particular in an article on the relationship between psychoanalysis and art history-Meditatiom Of! a Hobby Horse ( London, Phaidon Press, 1%3 ) , esp. pp. 37-40-E. H. Gombrich refers to the refusal of elementary, vulgar gratifications which is the basis of legi ti mate taste, or the 'fashionable don 'ts ', as he calls them, 'so easily picked up', which define legi ti mate taste ( ibid., p. 146 ) . 5. A. Schopenhauer, The World as Wil and Idea ( London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1 8 8 3 ) , vol . I, bk. I, pp. 268-269. 6. On the essential points, Schopenhauer's aesthetic can be regarded as a somewhat heavy commentary on Kant's aesthetic, and Fauconnet is q uite j ustified in observ· i ng: 'Aesthetic j u dgement, which is essen tially disinterested, is opposed in Kant's work to other, self-interested j udgements, exactly as, in Schopenhauer, the voluntary action of the subject who knows only with a view to action is opposed to the contemplation of the pure subject.' A. Fauconnet, L'esthitique de Schopenhauer ( Paris, Alcan, 1 9 1 3 ) , p. 1 08. 7. By the same token, Brecht's 'alienation efect' might be the gap whereby, within popular art i tsel f, the i n tellectual asserts his distance from popular art, which makes popular art acceptable, i.e., acceptable to intellectuals, and, at a deeper level, his distance from the people, the distance presupposed by the intellectuals' leadership of the people. 8. I t was 'refusal', says Kant, which 'brought about the passage from merely sensual to spiri tual attractions. ' I. Kant, 'Conjectural Beginnings of H u man H istory' in On History, ed. L. W. Beck ( I ndianapolis and New York, Bobbs-Merrill, 1 963 ) , p. 57 . Having indicated that sexual attraction 'can be prolonged and even increased by means of the i magination' when 'its object is removed from the senses', Kant links the discovery of beauty to sublimation of the sexual instinct and concludes: 'Refusal was the feat which brought about the passage from merely sensual to spiritual attractions, from mere animal desire gradually to love, and along with this from the feeling of the merely agreeable to a taste for beauty' ( ibid. ) . 9 . Here and subsequently i n the text, page numbers i n parentheses refer to I . Kant, Critique of Judgemnt, trans. J C. Meredith ( London, Oxford University Press, 1 9 5 2 ) . 1 0 . The specific force of the agreeable is manifested in the fact that it demands an immediate satisfaction of desire, preventing 'the conscious expectation of the future': 'This capacity for facing up in the present to the often very distant fu ture, instead of being wholly absorbed by the enjoyment of the present, is the most decisive mark of the human's advantage.' 'Conjectural Beginnings', pp. 57-58. 1 1 . Ibid., p. 5 5 . 1 2 . Paragraph 4 1 , enti tled 'The empirical in terest in the beau tiful', all u des t o what El ias calls ' the process of civil isation'-'Only in society does i t occ u r to him to be not merely a man, but a man more refined after the manner of his kind ( the beginning of civilisation ) . . . '-bu t only to cast it into the merely empi rical in a single sen tence: 'This i n teres t, indirectly attached to the beautiful by the inclination towards society, and, consequently, empirical, is, however, of no importance for us here' ( Critque of Judgement, pp. 1 5 5 - 1 56, and also 1 3 2 ) . Another example of recognition of the social dimension of taste: 'A j udgement upon an object of our del ight may be wholly disin terested but wi thal very in teresti ng, i t rel ies on no in terest, but it produces one. Of this kind are all pure moral j udgemen ts. B u t, of themselves, they do not even set up any interest whatsoever. Only in society is i t interesting t o have taste' ( ibid., pp. 4 3 -44, note ) . 1 3 . Of music, Kan t says that ' i t is more a matter of enjoyment than of culture' ( ibid., p. 1 94 ) . And later he implicitly iden tifies the degree to which the arts 'cultivate' the mind with the 'expansion of the facul ties" they call for: ' I f, on the other hand, we estimate the worth of the fine arts by the culture they supply to the mind, and adopt for our standard the expansion of the faculties whose confluence in j u dgement is necessary for cogni tion, music . . . has the l owest place' ( ibid., p. 1 95 ) . 1 4 . 'But as for the beauty ascribed to the object on account of its form , and the supposition that i t is capable of being enhanced by charm, this is a common error and one very prej udicial to genuine, uncorrupted, sincere taste. Nevertheless, charms may be added to beauty to lend to the mind, beyond a bare delight, an adventitious delight i n the represen tation of the object, and thus to advocate taste and i ts cultivation. This applies especially where taste is as yet crude and untrained' ( ibid., p. 67; italics mine) ; 'he may even begin to harbour doubts as to whether he has formed his taste upon an acquaintance with a suficient n u mber of objects of a particular kind . . .' ( ibid., p. 1 39 ) ; 'the rectification and extension of our judgements of taste' ( ib i d. , p . 1 4 1 ) . 1 5 . Some indices of Kant's inclination to identify the universal with the universe of cultivated people: 'One would scarce think it necessary for a man to have taste to take more del ight in a circle than in a scrawled outline, in an eq uilateral than in one that is all iobsided [sic ] , and, as it were, deformed. The requirements of common understanding ensure such a preference without the least demand upon taste' ( ibid., p. 87; italics mine ) ; 'We demand both taste and feeling of every man, and, granted some degree of culture, we give him credit for both' ( ibid., p. 1 1 6; italics mine ) . See also i b i d . , p . 1 4 7 n . 1 6 . Pointing out the very early link between still life and the vanifas motif-e.g., the timepiece symbolizing temperance-Gombrich acknowledges that the 'Puritan spirit' may find in this rem inder an alibi for or antidote to the 'simple pleasu res of the senses' ofered by 'gorgeous flowers and appealing dishes', an i mmortalization of sensual enj oymen t that ' feasts the eye and stirs up memories and anticipations of feasts enj oyed and feasts to come'; but he observes that 'a pain ted still l i fe is ipso facto also a vanitas', because ' the pleasures it stimulates are not real, they are mere illusions' ( Meditations on a Hobby Horse, p. 1 04 ) . 1 7 . I t i s clear what i s h idden i n the Sollen contained i n the apparen tly constative utterances in which Kant presents the definition of pure taste. 1 8 . It follows that the mere intention of speaking scientifically about works of art or aesthetic experience or, more simply, of abandoning the style of the smart essay, which is less concerned with truth than originality, is bound to be seen as one of the sacrilegious degradations which reductive materialism indulges in, and therefore as the expression of a phil istinism which denounces what it is i ncapable of understanding or, worse, of feeling. ( On the significance of the Carnival, see appendix 4, note l o-translator. ) 1 9 . The most systematic attempt in recent ti mes to formulate this ideology is no doubt that by Malraux. Art, for Malraux, is the realm of freedom, and, as such, i t is the symbol of man's power to create a significant, fully human world or, at the very least, of man's eternal struggle to transcend serv itude and 'humanize the worl d . ' 20. By treating the work i n accordance with i ts i n tention, i.e., as a fi n al i t y without an end, the beholder re-produces the act of creation, in a mimesis of the mimesis of Genesis. ( The theory of 'creative reading' is also one of the ideological themes which, because they are indispensable to the reafi rmation of the 'spiritual point of honour' of the l i terate bourgeoisie, are endlessly reinvented. ) 2 1 . In that text, disdained by the commen tators ( who, because of i ts apparent triviali ty, have even wondered i f i t was not a product o f sen i l i ty ) , Kant fi rst distinguishes between 'scholars' , whether 'incorporated' ( i n the U nivers i ty guil d ) or ' independent', and mere 'men of letters' ( 'businessmen and technicians of scholar ship' ) , 'priests, judges and doctors', who purvey knowledge acquired at the Un iversity, and finally the cl ientele of the latter, 'the people, which is composed of ignoramuses' . He then contrasts the temporally dominant 'higher' facul ties, law, medicine and theology, with the temporally dominated but spiri tually dominant 'lower' faculty, that of philosophy, which has no temporal power but is ' i ndependent of the orders of government'; perfectly autonomous, knowing only its own l aws, those of reason , it i s thereby enti tled to exercise its critical power in total freedom. I. Kant, The Conflict of the Faculties ( New York, Abaris Books, 1 979 ) . 2 2 . N . Elias, The Civilizing Process, vol . I , The History of Manners ( Oxford, Basil Blackwell , 1978 ) , p. 9. 23. I. Kant, ' I dea for a Universal History' i n On History, p. 2 l . 24. Kant, 'Conjectural Beginnings', pp. 55-56 2 5 . Kant, ' I dea for a Universal H istory', p. 2 l . E l i as shows h o w t h e opposition between the court aristocracy and the cultured bourgeoisie was built up around the contrast between, 'on the one hand, superficiality, ceremony, formal conversation, [ and] on the other, i nwardness, depth of feeling, immersion in books, development of the individual personali ty'-in short, between the superficial and the deep ( The Civilizing Process, I, 1 9 ) . The whole of the second term of the opposition is contained in the 'slow eforts to improve the mind' to which Kant refers. 26. 'But that there i s any i ntrinsic worth i n the real existence of a man who merely lives for enjoyment, however busy he may be in this respect, even when in so doing he serves others--all equally with h imself intent only on enjoyment-as an excellent means to that end, and does so, moreover, because through sympathy he shares all their gratifications,-thi s i s a view to which reason w i l l never let i tsel f be brought round' ( Critique ofjudgemmt, p. 47 ) . And in a footnote Kant denounces the 'supposed obligation to actions that have merely enjoyment for their aim, no matter how spi ri tually this enjoyment be refined in thought ( or embellished ) , and even if i t be a mystical, so-called heavenly, enj oyment' ( ibid., p. 48n ) . 27. Another indication o f this can be seen i n the fact that Kant argues i n favour of the scholastic teac h i ng of art and the need to submit to rules. Th is is perfec tly in accord with the logic of his subterranean discourse in defense of the academic val ues of Kultur, but i n contradiction to his refusal of any empi rical genesis of taste, which ought to make him subscribe to the theory of untram melled genius ( which he precisely combats-Critique of jud,gemmt, p 1 8 3 ) . 28. The i nvarian ts o f the professorial condition, and more especially o f the posi tion of the teaching profession within the dom inant cl ass (a dominated fraction ) and within the class field as a whole, are suficien tly great, despite diferences of epoch and society, to establ ish afini ties of ethos which are the basis of the i l l u s ion of u n i versal ity. 29. Would-be systematic thinking appl ies its universal ly applicable schemes to every object. This can lead to some amusing efects, typical of what Schopenhauer calls 'comic pedantry', when these schemes ( the same ones that are at work in the Critique of judgement, but there with every appearance of necessity ) are too obviously running i n neu tral: ' I have outlived a good many of my friends or acquaintances who boasted of perfect health and lived by an orderly regimen adopted once and for all, while the seed of death ( i ll ness ) lay in them unnoticed, ready to develop. They felt heal thy and did not know they were ill; for while the cause of natural death i s always i l l ness, causality cannot be fel t. I t req u i res understandi ng, whose j udgment can err. Feeling, on the other hand, is i n fall ible; but we do not call a man i l l unless he feels i l l , although a disease which he does nor feel . . . ' etc. Kant, Conflict of the Faculties, p . 1 8 l . 30. J . Derrida, L a verite m peinture ( Paris, Flammarion, 1 978 ) . 3 l . I b i d . , p . 5 1 . 3 2 . Ph i l osophical denial i s here merely a particular form of artistic denial which, as is clearly seen i n the case of music, is inseparable from a neutral ization or denial of the pol i tical and social: 'If Faust represents the German soul, ' writes Thomas Mann, ' then he must be a musician; for the German's relationship to the world is abstract and mystical, in other words, musical.' T. Mann, 'Deutschland und die Deutschen', Essays, I I ( Frankfurt, Fischer Taschenbuch, 1 977 ) , 2 8 5 . 3 3 . Every field of scholarly production has i ts own 'rules' of propriety, which m ay remain implicit and only be known to initiates; sometimes, however, scholars endeavour to codify them ( for example, Boileau, Rapin, d' Aubignac or Subligny, who exhorted the authors of tragedies to eschew subjects likely to ofend the political or moral ideas of the audience, to exclude scenes of bloodshed which might shock, to adapt their characters to the rules of aristocratic etiquette and to avoid crude or vulgar terms ) . 34. See G . Scholem, 'Der Nihilismus als rel igioses Phanomen', Eranos, 1 974; and J. H abermas, 'Die verkleidete Thora' in Philosophisch-politsche Profile, 2nd ed. ( Frankfurt, Suhrkamp, 1 98 1 ) . 3 5 . One would need t o make explicit not only the general properties o f these borderline positions, such as the double games they allow and the double profits they secure, but also the double vulnerability, the doubling or objective and subjective uncertainty as to personal identity which they impose on their occupants. 36. Th us, Derrida denounces the artificial ity and strain of applying the table of categories, established with respect to j udgements of knowledge, to aesthetic j udge ment, which, as Kant constantly points out, is not a j udgemen t of knowledge. Derrida, La verite en peinture, pp. 79-83 . By contrast, Louis Guillermit endeavours to show, through a comparison of the three Critiques, that Kant rethought his whole theory of sensibility-putting forward a new transcendental definition of feeling which breaks the link between feeling and the faculty of desiring-to make room for a new, disinterested type of pleasure, which he discovers in aesthetic judgement, contemplative pleasure; this pleasure is not linked to desire for the object and, indiferen t as to i ts existence, is solely concerned with i ts representation. L. Guillermit, ' Esthetique et Critique' in H. Wagner, ed . , Sinnlichkeit und Vmtand in tier deutschen und jranzirischen Philosophie von Descartes bis Hegel ( Bonn, Bouvier Verlag Herbert G rundmann, 1 976 ) , pp. 1 22 - 1 50. 37. By treating the Critique as a beautiful object, Derrida no doubt con tradicts the deepest intention of Kant, who plays on the opposition between the frivolous and the serious--as is evidenced by the deliberately inaesthetic style-and seeks to place philosophy and the philosopher above art and the artist. But i n doing so, Derrida grants the Critique the status of an unconditioned objeer, freed from social determinants, which every pure, purely internal reading grants to the work; and which, by the same token, it grants to i tsel f. 38. Proust, ' En memoi re des eglises assass inees', p. 1 70; italics mine. In 'Jou rnees de lecture', Proust fu rther analyses the diferen t perversions of reading-the scholarly perversion, which iden tifies the search for truth with the discovery of a secret document, demanding 'material trouble', and the perversion of 'the lettered man', who ' reads for the sake of reading and of retaining what he has read' . Pastiches et melanges, pp. 2 34-240; 'Days of Reading', in J. L. Hevesi, ed., Esays on Language and Literature ( London, Allan Wingate, 1 947 ) , pp. 5 2 - 5 5 . 39. Pastiches et melanges, p. 244n; 'Days of Reading', p. 6 1 n . ## Appendix 1. Some Reflections on the Method 1 . Such efects of fashion are also found in legi timate culture. Thus the social value of some of the works ofered may have changed between 1 963 and 1 967, with the Four Seasons and Eine Kleine Nachtmusik being pulled towards ' middle-brow' culture by popularization. 2 . W i t h i n each class and class fraction, a very s l m t l a r n u mber of i n terviews was carried out in Paris and the Paris region and i<sup>�</sup> the Nord region. The Nord is characterized by a very diferent occupational structure from that of the Paris region and by a much lower average level of educational qual ification. The 1 968 census found many more industrial and commercial en t repreneurs ( large and smal l ) and fewer engineers, �enior executives, technicians, j u nior execu tives and ofice workers i n t h e Nord than i n t h e Paris region. Except for primary teachers ( relatively more n umerous in the Nord ) , the frac tions richest in c u l t u ral capi tal seem under-represen ted in this region. 3 . Ouvriers specialises: 'a m islead i ng term, since such workers are specialized i n nothing except the execution of one narrow, repeti tive task usually on the assembl yl i ne. For this they req u i re l i ttle t ra i n i ng; the Engl ish term "semi-sk i l l ed" would be a very loose eq u ivalent'; D. L. Hanley, A. P. Kerr and N. H. Wai tes, Contemporary France: Politic.r and Society since 1 945 ( London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1979 ) , p . 7 5 ( translator's n o te ) . 4 . See P . Bourdieu e t aI . , Un art moyen ( Paris, Ed . de Minuit, 1 965 ) , pp. 7 3 -84, and P. and M. C. Bourdieu, ' Le paysan et la photographie', Revue Fran(aise rk Sociologie, ( April-June 1 965 ) , 1 64- 1 74 . I n fact, this exclusion would n o doubt be much less j ustified now, in view of the far-reaching changes which have occurred, i n ter alia, in the relationship between the peasantry and the educational system, all of them tending to unify the symbolic goods market. 5. It should also be noted that i n the sample al most all the soci o-occupational categories have a h igher average educational level and h igher social origin than in the I N SEE s u rveys. I t is not possible to estab l i sh exac tly how far this is due to the h igh proportion of Parisians ( see note 2, above ) and how fa r to the more precise defin i tion of the categories. 6. See Bourdieu, Un art moyen. 7 . The same would of cou rse apply to the j udgements in the areas of i n terior decoration, cl oth i ng or cooking. I t i s true that the analysis ( wh ich was i n fact carried out) of some particularly represen tative i nteriors might have brough t out more clearly the concrete systematicity of these sets of objects and of the rel ationships ( very clearly visible i n the non-directive i n terviews ) which link them to other sets, such as clothing or tastes i n music. B u t establ ish i ng the statis tical reg u l ari ties presupposed developing the means of system atical ly grasping the most significant features of each universe, and also entailed sacrificing the power to evoke the whole wealth of each particular realtzation of the struc ture. 8. To avoid treating the efect of variations in the measuring condi tions as objective diferences, all the diferences in the nature of the indicators, the ph rasing of the q uestions, the coding of the responses, the conditions of the survey and the struct u re of the sample, were systematically taken i n to account. For example. i n one survey, hunting and fishing are grouped in a single question, i n another separated i n to twO questions; educational level is coded in five categories in one case, in seven categories in another. 9. The economics of publishing made it necessary to exclude many statistical tables ( or, at least, to reduce them to synoptic presen tation ) and many diagrams and documents ( in terviews, photographs ete. ) which made a real contribution to the analyses. For the same reason a bibl iography which, even when reduced to the useful and used texts, would have been i mmense, is not prin ted here. The l ist of complementary sou rces of statistical information ( appendix 2 ) did, however, seem essential, to provide the indispensable means of verification in all the many cases in which the data used in the analysis could be only partially reproduced. 10. Conforama: a chain of cheap furniture stores; Guy Lux: a popular en tertainer ( translator) . 1 1 . Twenty-four further q uestions on photography are not reproduced here ( see Bourdieu, Un art moyen ) . ## Appendix 2. Complementary Sources L I am particularly grateful to Mme. M . C. de la Godelinais and Mr. C. Thelot for having supplied the ( mostly unpublished ) tables which were needed for secondary analysis of the INSEE surveys whose findings are used here. My thanks also go to Mr. P. Debreu, Mr. P. Leroux and Mr. P. Ghigliazza for generously supplying data. Use was, of course, also made of earlier surveys by the Centre de sociologie europeenne ( sometimes wi th secondary analysis) , such as the survey of museumgoing ( see P. Bourdieu and A. Darbel, L 'amour de l'art [ Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1966J , the survey on students and culture ( see P. Bourdieu and J. c. Passeron, The Inheritors [ Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1979] ) or the survey of the students of the grandes ecoles. 2. These are given for each ' tax' household ( foyer ) . According to the I NSEE definition, a household ( menage ) consists of all the persons living in the same dwelling occupied as main residence ( ' usual address' ) , whatever the number of persons or their relationship to the holder of the tenure. For tax purposes, the joyer jiscal is defined more narrowly: it includes the head of the household, his spouse, if any, and the persons recognized as his dependants for tax purposes, i.e., all the persons taxed together. 3. The data given here are for households ( menages ) . For each socio-occupational category, consumption is also indicated per capita and per 'consumption unit'. According to the INSEE definition, the number of consumption units in a household is found by weighting as follows: first adult = 1 unit; each other adult 0.7 unit; each child ( under 14) 0 . 5 unit. 4. In reviewing the statistical sources, three bibliographical tools proved particularly useful: C. Guinchat, Bibliographie analytique du loisir: France, 1 966-1 9 73 ( Prague, Centre europeen pour les loisirs et l'education, 1 97 5 ) ; A. Willener and P. Beaud, Nouveles tendances de la consommation cultureile: vers une troisieme culture ( Paris and Cordes, CECMAS, 1 97 2 ) , which brings together quantitative data and survey findings on museums, photography, cinema, TV, music etc.; and the bibliographies of books and articles published each year from 1 969 to 1 97 3 on 'cultural development and action', compiled by the research department of the Ministry of Culture. ## Appendix 4. Asociations: A Parlour Game L This sociological test reveals a logic at work in the area of politics and images of the social world that is entirely similar to the logic found operating i n the mythico-ritual practices of pre-capitalist societies. It thereby demonstrates that the clear-cut distinction social science makes between 'primitive' or 'savage' thought and 'civilized' thought can only be due to ignorance. 2. In 197 5 these politicians occupied the following positions: Giscard d' Estaing, President; Chirac, Prime Minister, Gaullist leader; Marchais, leader of Communist Party; Mitterrand, leader of Socialist Party; Poniatowski, Minister of the I n terior; Servan-Schreiber, leader of the Radicals ( briefly a minister in 1 974; author of Le deji americain, published in 1967 ) . ( Translator's note. ) 3. In France, yellow is the colour of the strike-breaker, the 'scab'; in the 1 974 presidential campaign, Servan-Schreiber sided with Giscard against Mitterrand, and was rewarded with a ministry ( translator ) . 4 . Servan-Schreiber's Le deji americain ( translator) . 5. To measure the realism of this 'collective representation' one only has to look back at the photograph of the Servan-Schreiber interior, near the end of chapter 5 . 6 . L e gendre de Momieur Poirier i s a play o n this theme b y Emile Augier and Jules Sandeau, published in 1 8 54 ( translator) . 7. See P . Bourdieu, Outfine of a Theol) of Practice ( Cambridge, Cambridge G n iversitv Press, 1977 ) . 8 . I n addition to the tables published i n Sondages, i t was possible to analyse the distributions by sex, age-group and income group, bur the distributions by socio-occupational category were not available. 9. It can be seen that the responden ts, when the series that is proposed allows them to ( as it does here by ofering a gradua ted series of pertinent symbols ) , make sign ificant connections between all the elemen ts in the two series, instead of considering only two o r th ree of them-as they do in most of the other series, in which some of the elemen ts are only defined negatively, by el imin ation ( e.g., l i l ac and carnation i n the flower series, and Chi rae, o r to a lesser ex tent Poni atowsk i, i n most of the series) . This is an example of the efect inevi tably produced by oferi ng a finite series of products which excludes possibili ties consciously or unconsciously expected ( e.g., belote i n the game series or red in the colour series ) and ofers abstract o r u n real possibi l ities which may attract some choices. Another example of the same efect is the attribution of the ant to Giscard, fau te de mieux; in a diferent con tex t of possibi l i t ies, the ant-h ardworking, modest. thrifty. obstinate and, above all, small and numerous-would rather suggest the ascetic vi rtues of the petite bou rgeoisie as opposed to the conspicuous improvidence of the aristocracy and bourgeoisie. ( The fini te-ofer efect also explains why, of the two l i terary opposi tions--the ant and the grasshopper, the fox and the crow-only the fi rs t is used with the same logic as in the La Fon taine fable, while i n the second. also because of the symbolic charge of the crow, the two elements fu nction separately . ) 10. A whole aspect of popular revolt, seen in insul ts, oaths and especially in truly pop-<sub>ular</sub> <sub>festivity,</sub> <sub>which</sub> <sub>has</sub> <sub>now</sub> <sub>been</sub> <sub>ousted</sub> <sub>by</sub> <sub>home</sub> <sub>entertainments</sub> ( l <sub>am</sub> <sub>thinking</sub> of the analyses by Mikhail Bakhtin i n his Rabelais and His World [ Cambridge, Mass., M.LT Press, 1 968 ) , wo rks in t h i s way, t h rough the logic of the Satu rnalia, i n which the usual order is turned upside down symbolically and temporarily ( 'Non semper Saturnalia erunt', said Seneca ) .