# INTRODUCTION The Power of Design

With all architects, caring should be a moral imperative. Fay Jones

Design can only succeed if guided by an ethical view. John Vassos

A er in the answer to, How does it relate?"

There is a sense of wonder, a feeling of completion in design that is lacking in many other fields. Designers have the chance to make something new, or to remake something so that it is better. Design gives the deep satisfaction that comes only from carrying an idea all the way through to completion and actual performance. It can be compared to the emotions aroused by making a kite and then being able to fly it in the sky: a feeling of closure, pleasure and achievement. This enriches us both professionally and as human beings and provides us with a joyous affirmation of what we do.

Where does this element of joy come from? We have been called homo ludens, the playful being; certainly among the most profound human traits are curiosity and playfulness, and following from these a delight in learning from trial and error, in experimentation. This is linked to a deep need to bring order out of chaos, or – in the late 2oth century – to discover the underlying system of chaos itself. We seem to have a compulsion to bring meaning and pattern to a world that seems random and confused. We are the only time-binding'animal,¹ communicating skills, ideas and acquired knowledge across the generations, and so we anticipate many possible futures; the job of designers and architects therefore includes a certain degree of prophecy.

In design - this futures-oriented, trial-and-error process for making meaningful order - we work intellectually as well as from deep levels of intuition and feeling. In all human beings there are fundamental needs for comprehensible order, beauty, fitness, simplicity, anticipatory thinking and playful innovation. Designers attempt to satisfy these longings through their work. In the broadest sense, a designer is a human being attempting to walk the narrow bridge between order and chaos, freedom and nihilism, between past achievements and future possibilities.

The repertoire of a designer's skills and talents include:

1. The ability to research, organize and innovate.

2. The capacity to develop appropriate answers to new or newly emerging problems.

3. The skill to test these answers through experimentation, computer modelling, working prototypes or real-world test runs.

4. The training to communicate such developments through drawings, models, mock-ups and feasibility studies, video or film, as well as through verbal, computer-generated or written reports.

5. The talent to combine form-giving with rigorous technical considerations and with a sense of humane and social factors and aesthetic enchantment.

6. The wisdom to anticipate the environmental, ecological, economic, and political consequences of design intervention.

7. The ability to work with people from many different cultures and different disciplines.

How important is this mix of seven abilities, this synergistic blend of talents and skills? We can play the game of placing this ideal designer in different periods of history, or in different places in the world, with only a slight adjustment of his capacities to accord with place and time. Whether lashing a chipped stone to a stick for the hunt some three million years ago or working as a potter in China during the Sung Dynasty, whether developing the prow of a Viking ship or star charts to navigate the far Pacific, whether building a Baroque church in Austria or designing a diagnostic medical computer in Silicone Valley, our designer fits in superbly well.

If we move from history to geography and anthropology, we can see that innovation, function and delight are treasured in many different milieux, from a simple fishing village in Papua New Guinea to the technologically high-risk environment of a space-station in orbit, from an assembly line in Osaka to the hunting-gathering society of the !Kung bushmen of the Kalahari. Regardless of political systems or religious beliefs, the designer is accepted everywhere as an essential contributor to society.

Both time and place give designers the confidence that the skills and talents that we bring to our work will continue to be valuable in the futures to come. Yet this must make us extremely careful about what we design and why. The changing environment of our fragile planet is a result of the things that we do and the tools that we use. Now that the changes that we have brought about are so major and so threatening it is imperative that designers and architects play their part in helping to find solutions.

The agenda for this book can be put simply. It is vital that we all – professionals and end-users - recognize our ecological responsibilities. Our survival depends on an urgent attention to environmental issues, but even now there still seems to be a lack of motivation, a paralysis of will, to make the necessary radical changes. I want to show that there must be a spiritual underpinning to our ecological consciousness. I feel very strongly that the present world-wide concern for the environment cannot now be dismissed as a fashion, as it was during the early 197os, nor as pure panic over the sustainability of life on earth. I believe that it is rather a great spiritual rebirth or re-awakening, a desire to re-establish closer links between nature and humankind. Deeply embedded in our collective unconscious is the intuitive awareness of our relationship to the environment. This awareness has gone through wide pendulum swings throughout human history. At times our closeness to nature served as a template for all our actions, our art and our lives. At other periods, fancied differences between humans and other animals, between human life and nature were shrilly proclaimed by religious fundamentalist sects, totalitarian political groups and technocrats.

In his book The Voice of the Earth, Theodore Roszak writes: If psychosis is the attempt to live a lie, then the epidemic psychosis of our time is the lie of believing that we have no ethical obligation to our planetary home.' I remember a time when food, shelter and clothing were considered to be the absolute necessities of life. This no longer holds true. We have moved backwards and are now far from certain that we can expect fresh air, pure drinking water, food that is safe to eat and an environment that is unpolluted by damaging levels of noise. This raises the question whether designers, architects and engineers can be held personally responsible and legally liable for creating tools, objects, appliances, and buildings that bring about environmental deterioration.

In February 1994 I was speaker at a conference in Vancouver with James Wines, founder of SITE (Sculpture in the Environment). In his remarks he said, 'One has only to look at the bleak and hostile configuration of most cities to see how the ideals of architecture, need for purpose, meaning, and truth have deteriorated. What began as an encompassing socialist and capitalist vision has been turned into a symbol of oppression and a detachment from nature.'3

The same has been true for design. In most industrialized countries many people have come to expect a technological fix for every ecological dysfunction. Certainly my friend and colleague Buckminster Fuller felt that future inventions would repair all that was wrong on earth, and pinned a good part of his philosophy on this belief. Experience tells me that in design, architecture or planning, new technological fixes usually come accompanied by dozens of unforeseen sideeffects. Some of these side-effects can range from the merely disastrous to the catastrophic, and many of these proposed scenarios wilfully ignore human scale.

There is another view, mostly held by people who misinterpret James Lovelock's Gaia Hypothesis (now the Gaia Theory)⁴ – who assume that our planet will adjust to all our devastations by somehow absorbing and filtering pollutants in the air, re-regulating the ozone levels and purifying the toxins. Furthermore they believe that the gradual destruction or complete elimination of tropical rainforests will also be fixed by nature itself, and that the loss of many plant and animal species is of no concern. Lovelock's theory certainly postulates that Gaia, the Earth, has a capacity for self-maintenance and self-repair. It should be stressed, however, that this theory does not assume that there will be a place for our species on a planet that has changed itself as a result of human assaults on its biodiversity and balance.

Both of these groups are ecologically illiterate. Their mistaken notions are often the result of propaganda by industry or the state. During this century, two major changes have occurred for the first time in the long course of human history. First, we have nearly all – at least in the northern half of the globe – moved indoors. There are still jobs that take people out of doors, but even farmers ploughing their fields tend to sit in a climate-controlled cabin, and most of us spend much of our time in homes, cars, workplaces, cinemas or public buildings whenever we are not shopping in malls, supermarkets or arcades.

The second change, awesome to contemplate, is that we have now truly attained the power to change the natural order of the earth and throw it out of harmony. We manufacture trivial gadgets (electronic tape measures, electric fingernail-dryers, or huge water-guns made from shrilly coloured plastics for children), wasting irreplaceable resources, poisoning the atmosphere during manufacture, and polluting the ground once we have grown tired of them. We cut down forests and create deserts. We poison the lakes and rivers with industrial chemicals or pharmaceuticals, kill the fish, and then drink the water ourselves. We dump waste and toxins in the oceans and overfish them. Not only do we threaten other species with extinction, but also tribes of our own species, who rely on an ancient and intricate relationship with their environment.

We clad buildings with reflecting mirror panels, and then build two such structures so close to each other that the temperature between them can build up to more than 160°℉ (71ºC) during the summer. An incredible amount of energy is wasted in heating and cooling buildings.⁵

What is happening to the once-beautiful landscape is an enormous catastrophe for which the future will curse us. If there is a future. Most contemporary architecture has forgotten the age-old lessons of design which took nature, climate and the elements into consideration. Frank Lloyd Wright once said: 'It is important to work with nature but some architects will say to their client: "Madam, I can't work with nature, how would you like a nice contrast?" He suggested that much of the Modernist theory was based on a confrontation with nature, and advocated a deeper attention to ecological principles of natural building.

Post-Modernism followed Modernism, and was in its turn replaced by Deconstructivism. This movement started out as a literary fashion that deconstructs meaning and seemingly reconstructs historical reality; its misuse as a justification for collaborating with the Nazi occupation in France during World War II has surrounded it with controversy. It deforms the historic reality by claiming to relate to current conditions in society – fractured cities, families, political institutions. When applied to architecture and design, it continues to dehumanize the tools we use, the rooms we work in and the homes and cities in which we live. It turns us against our own past and against nature. Deconstructivism is an anti-world view according to the ecologist David Orr, who goes on to say: It deconstructs or eliminates the ingredients necessary for a world view, such as God, self, purpose, meaning, a real world, and truth as correspondence....This type of postmodern, deconstructive thought results in relativism even nihilism.'7

In many parts of the world, our institutions are dysfunctional. Once-bustling cities in North America have changed into wastelands of despair; the number of homeless families, and especially shelterless children, increases steadily. The urban pollution and poverty to be seen in Central and South America is extreme. Societies going through such chaotic transformations desperately need new and radical approaches in design.

Design and architecture are deeply implicated not because designers, architects or engineers are bad people. We work for clients, companies or governments. As Lewis Mumford said: Once-local manifestations of criminality and irrationality now threaten our whole planet, smugly disguised as sound business enterprise, technological progress, communist efficiency, or democratic statesmanship.'8We are guilty or implicated by not speaking out often enough to our clients whether they are governments, private enterprise or individuals. A designer has always been also a teacher, in a position to inform and influence the client. With the present environmental mess it is even more important that we help to guide the intervention of design with nature and mankind. We must enlarge our own areas of knowledge, and at the same time redirect our ways of working. It is to this task that this book addresses itself.

Wes Jackson, who founded the Land Institute in Salina, Kansas, says that our society is the first to have created ‘do-it-yourself extinction'. He proposes something he calls an ‘ignorant-based' view of the world to halt environmental deterioration, instead of our present, supposedly knowledge-based system. He argues strongly that things can be changed only by admitting that we can no longer continue under the assumptions that ‘we will figure out something', or that ‘we know what we're doing’. He makes a powerful case for starting from the premise that we know almost nothing about the future consequences of what we do now.9 Advertising for cigarettes used to claim that they had been endorsed by doctors as healthy and helpful for respiration - now some forty thousand smoking-related deaths occur each year in the United States alone. Governments, propagandists and eco-experts' for industry assure us that no clear link has been established between sulphur emissions from factory chimneys and acid rain',1º and that therefore nothing needs to be done just yet. Scientists believed that CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons) were non-toxic and would not pollute – only after destroying large areas of the ozone layer did we come to realize our profound error.

A world view based on recognizing how little we know might not only protect us from devastating mistakes in the future, but might also require letting go of the arrogance that seems such a strong element in the personality of designers and architects. We could even try to find some sorely needed humility. This may be the cardinal point where design practice meets the spiritual. Buddhism teaches humility and the vanity of material possessions, and, indeed, these are tenets of most philosophies and religions.

Perhaps there should be no special category called sustainable design'. It might be simpler to assume that all designers will try to reshape their values and their work, so that all design is based on humility, combines objective aspects of climate and the ecological use of materials with subjective intuitive processes, and relies on cultural and bio-regional factors for its forms.

‘Consumers'(or end-users or users as I shall refer to them throughout this book) are also implicated in this ecological crisis. In our greedy rush for more and more material goods in the West (and more recently in the countries of the former Soviet Union and eastern Europe), we have seriously neglected our links with nature and our responsibility to the environment; we are losing love and affection and respect for each other; we are forgetting the joy of the ephemeral and the freedom of owning little in the way of material possessions.

My strongest memory from the two years when I lived on the island of Bali in Indonesia, doing design work for UNESCO, is of the impermanence of things, which may there have been the result of the ever-present threat of volcanic eruption – there are something like eight hundred minor and twelve major earthquakes on Bali each year. A life that is based on change and the ephemeral is subtly spiced. On Bali this is also linked to the rich web of interpersonal relationships, and the fact that everyone participates actively in many different arts. There is wisdom and self-knowledge in their saying: 'We have no art, we just do the best we can.

Consider the last time that you enjoyed an ephemeral, a fleeting, experience. It may have been a live television show which was fun merely because the unexpected could and did happen, or a concert that was for once not recorded and could never be repeated. The beautiful landscape that you did not photograph probably lingers more strongly in your mind than those you tried to freeze in time. The unique piquancy of the unrepeatable may be the reason why the Balinese routinely spend as much time on constructing an elaborate templeoffering of fruit, blossoms and rice to last only for hours or days as they would on carving a stone statue that might endure for centuries. When everything is temporary, it is life that becomes lasting. This may be why my friend I Gusti Nyoman Lempad of Ubud, who was an acclaimed painter, sculptor, dancer (from the age of eight), composer, musician, teacher, poet, architect, story-teller and cook noted for the subtle flavouring of his dishes, died happy and fulfilled at the age of 118.1 It seems that by concentrating on goods that don't last nearly as long as we hope and don't age well, we have lost our sense of quality and the temporary. By trying to make art profitable and useful, we have also lost our sense of joy. By elevating the trivial productions of Post-Modernism and Deconstructivism to serious critical discussion, we have abandoned bliss.

This book attempts to develop these thoughts in a more systematic way. It examines the relationship between the disciplines of design and architecture on the one hand, and ecology and concern for the environment on the other. This is the central theme of the chapters Here Today, Gone Tomorrow?' and 'Designing for a Safer Future'.

It calls for ethical responsibility and spiritual values in design and architecture to help us find a sustainable and harmonious way of life; this is first explored in the chapter ‘Toward the Spiritual in Design'. Our understanding and appreciation of a design or building has been seriously handicapped by concentrating almost entirely on our sense of sight; ‘Sensing a Dwelling' shows how we might regain the joy of reading the fabric of a building through all our senses, and why some buildings make us feel good.Communities for Human Beings'continues this discussion of building to human scale in relation to town and community planning. The Lessons of Vernacular Architecture, the following chapter, is for us all, not just for architects; we can all benefit by looking at and learning from past building traditions.

The following chapters suggest how each of us, as end-users, can contribute to the radical changes in values which are necessary to create a sustainable lifestyle, and points to specific tactics and strategies that users, or‘consumers', might employ. Form Follows Fun’ explores the narrow division between style and fad, and suggests ways of restoring our enjoyment in fleeting delights. The questions and checklists in the chapter entitled Is Convenience the Enemy?' will help endusers to make decisions on what and whether to buy, and ‘Sharing not Buying' offers some practical alternatives to the continued acquisition of appliances, tools, gadgets and goods.

'Generations to Come' analyses how design education might help our children and the designers of the so-called Third World to learn from our mistakes. People once judged to be primitive' have much to teach us in our turn, and this is discussed in the chapter ‘The Best Designers in the World?

The concluding chapter, 'The New Aesthetic: Making the Future Work', summarizes the general points running through the whole book, and looks at the exciting possibilities if architecture and design were to become environmentally and socially more responsible, and if every one of us were to try to live once more in harmony with nature.

Tanah Lot Temple, Bali Schumacher College, Dartington, Devon Fundacion Valparaiso Mojacar, Spain 1991-95