# Bibliography Anscombe, Isabelle. Arts and Crafts Style, London: Phaidon, 1991. Anscombe, Isabelle and Charlotte Gere. Arts and Crafts in Britain and America, London, 1978. Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society. Arts and Crafts: Essays by Members of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society, with a preface by William Morris, London, 1899. Ashbee, Charles Robert. A Few Chapters in Workshop Reconstruction and Citizenship, and an Endeavour towards the Teaching of Ruskin and Morris, London, 1894. Carlyle, Thomas. Past and Present, 1843. Clutton-Brock, Arthur. William Morris, New York: Parkstone International, 2007. Collingwood, William Gershom. The Life and Work of John Ruskin, London, 1893. Crawford, Alan. C. R. Ashbee: Architect, Designer and Romantic Socialist, New Haven and London, 1985. Cumming, Elizabeth and Wendy Kaplan. The Arts and Crafts Movement, London: Thames & Hudson, 1991. Exhibition catalogue. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 1987. Haslam, Malcolm. Arts and Crafts Carpets, London, 1991. Kaplan, Wendy. “The Art that is Life”, The Arts & Crafts Movement in America, 1875–1920, La Sizeranne, Robert (de). The Pre-Raphaelites, New York: Parkstone International, 2008. Livingstone, Karen and Linda Parry. International Arts and Crafts, London: V&A Publications, 2005. Miller, Judith. Arts and Crafts, London: Dorling Kindersley Limited, 2005. Parry, Linda. Textiles of the Arts and Crafts Movement, London: Thames & Hudson, 1988. William Morris Textiles, London, 1983. Peck, Herbert. The Book of Rookwood Pottery, New York: Crown Publishers Inc., 1968. Ruskin, John. Modern Painters, 5 vol., London, 1851-1860. The Seven Lamps, London, 1909. The Stones of Venice, 3 vol., London, 1851-1853. Anonymous, armoury, 1863-1864. Queen’s College Hall, Cambridge.