## Index A Anonymous Armoury 194 Fireplace 192 The Tapestry room 131 Ashbee, Charles Robert (for the design), the Guild of Handicraft (for the manufacturing) Decanter 186 Ashbee, Charles Robert (made by the Guild of Handicraft) and Charles F. A. Voysey (interior painting design) Lovelace escritoire 188-189 B Baillie Scott, Mackay Hugh Manxman piano 191 Window for the Music Room of Dr R. K., Manheim 4 Barnsley, Sidney Sideboard 122 Behrens, Peter Dresser 125 Bugatti, Carlo Chair 4 Burges, William (for the design) Chest on a stand for Tower House 119 Burne-Jones, Edward Ladies and Animals sideboard 39 The Tomb of Tristan and Iseult the Fair from the Story of Tristan and Iseult 146 Burne-Jones, Edward (for the design) and Morris & Co. (for the production) Gawain and the Quest for the Holy Grail 149 Lancelot and the Quest for the Holy Grail 148 Musical Angels (detail) 152-153 Burne-Jones, Edward and Kate Faulkner (for the design) and John Broadwood (for the production) Grand piano 85 Burne-Jones, Edward and William Morris (for the design) and Morris & Co. (for the production) Pomona 21 C Crane, Walter Hammersmith Branch Socialist League (Membership Card for Henry Halliday Sparling) 183 Swans 178 Crane, Walter (for the design), Jeffrey & Co. (for the manufacturing) Cockatoo and Pomegranate 181 D De Morgan, William Four-tile panel 175 De Morgan, William (for the design) and Sands End Pottery (for the production) Panel 177 Dearle, John Henry (for the design) and Morris & Co. (for the production) Iris 19 Screen 94 F Fisher, Alexander The Peacock Sconce 4 G Greene, Charles Sumner and Henry Mather Greene The stairs in the David B. Gamble house (detail) 134 J Jack, George W. (for the design) and Morris & Co. (for the production) Cabinet 123 S. & H. Jewell & Co. (for the table and Queen Ann chairs) and Philip Webb (for the fireplace design) The Dining Room 15 K Kelmscott Manor 126 L Lebeau, Chris Screen 96 Lorimer, Robert (for the design) Rug chest 114 Lutyens, Sir Edwin Dining room 110 Mrs. Drewe’s bedroom 111 Walls and arches in the entrance hall 112 M Mackintosh, Charles Rennie Settle 104 Mathews, Lucia Screen 99 Minton’s (for the “Four Seasons”, the “ Wolf and the Crane”), W. B Simpson and Sons (for the central panel), William De Morgan (for the flower designs) and Wedgwood (for the blue and white tiles) Collection of tiles 170 Morris, William Adjustable-back chair, upholstered in original Bird woollen tapestry 89 The Annunciation 140-141 Autumn 139 Bed cover 49 The Billiard Room 68 Bird and Anemone 169 A Book of Verse 162 Bullerswood 58 Burnet 167 Cherwell 180 The “Chèvrefeuille” Room 75 Hammersmith carpet 42 Hammersmith carpet with a plain centre 60 Hammersmith rug 53 Holland Park 64-65 Jasmine Trellis 184-185 King Arthur and Sir Lancelot 151 Love Fullfilled, a poem from A Book of Verse (detail) 168 Minstrel 193 Odes of Horace 164 Orchard 55 Pair of high-backed chairs 106 Single Stem 4, 26 Small Barr 63 Spring 138 Tulip and Trellis 4, 172 Unfinished painting on the cupboard in the hall of the Red House 81 Violet and Columbine 16 “Wallflower” design 12 Wandle (name of the river next to Morris’ workshop) 17, 29 Wild Tulip 24 The Woodpecker 20 Morris, William (for the design) and Architectural Pottery Co. (for the production) Four Pink and Hawthorn tiles 173 Morris, William (for the design) and Morris & Co. (for the production) Strawberry-Thief 4, 10-11 Tulip and Willow 9 Morris, William (for the original design), Philip Webb (for the modifications) and Dante Gabriel Rossetti (for the painting of the original three doors) Settle and bookcase 4, 76 Morris, William, Charles Fairfax Murray, Louise Powell and Graily Herwitt The Story of Frithiof the Bold 165 Morris, William, May Morris (for the hangings) and Jane Morris (for the bed cover) William Morris’ bedroom 132 Morris, William, Philip Webb and John Henry Dearle (designers) and the Merton Abbey Workshop (for the production) The Forest 22-23 Morris, William and various designers The Green room 128 Morris & Co. Dining room 93 The Great Parlour 82-83 Morris & Co., Edward William Godwin, Bruce Talbert, Peter Waals, Ernest Gimson, Alfred and Louise Powell, Ernest Gimson, and the Barnsleys “Sussex” armchair, ebonized chair with cane seat, ebonized beech side chair, ladderback chair in beech, side chair of beech with holly and ebony stringing 100-101 Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co. Elderflowers 34 The Green Dining Room 36-37 Moon 33 Musical Angels (detail of the upper-half of the Angels Window) 142 Settee from the Sussex range 103 Probably created by Gavin Morton Donegal carpet with a Turkish inspired design 47 Morton, Gavin and G. K. Robertson Donegal carpet 56-57 O Olbrich, Joseph Maria Cabinet 118 Ould, Edward (architect) and Charles Eamer Kempe (stained glass design) Entrance hall alcove 87 Ould, Edward (architect) and Morris & Co. (furniture and textiles) Nursery 90 The Oak Room 88 P Pollard Seddon, John (for the design) and Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co. (for the production) King René’s Honeymoon cabinet 115 Powell, Louise Piano 84 R Rossetti, Dante Gabriel (for the design) and Morris & Co. (for the production) The Rossetti Armchair 102 Rossetti, Dante Gabriel or Edward Burne-Jones (for the design) and Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co. (for the production) Three Angels 144 S Shaw, Richard Norman Cabinet: bookcase and writing desk 120 Dining room 137 Main staircase 4, 135 Shaw, Richard Norman (architect) and his assistant, W. R. Lethby (for the design of the chimneypiece) Drawing room 30-31 Shaw, Richard Norman (architect) and Morris & Co. (for the stained-glass windows) Library 28 Shaw, Richard Norman (architect) and various designers The Yellow Bedroom 25 The Silver Studio (for the design) and woven for Liberty’s The Fintona, Donegal carpet 45 Stickley, Gustav Fixed-back oak armchair 109 Stickley, Gustav, Craftman Workshops (for the manufacturing) Screen 97 T Talbert, Bruce (for the design), Gillow & Co. (manufacturer) The Pet sideboard 117 Traquair, Phoebe Anna “Angel” Chalice 4 V Various designers The Paneled room 129 Tile pane 176 Voysey, Charles F. A. The Donnemara (signature Donegal Carpets design) 40-41, 52 The Glenmure, Donegal carpet 50 Voysey, Charles F. A. (for the design) and Donegal Carpets (for the production) The Rose, Donegal carpet 44 Voysey, Charles F. A. (for the design) and Ginzkey (for the production) Design for a carpet 47 Voysey, Charles F. A. (for the design) and Yates & Co. (for the production) The River Mat 59 W Webb, Philip Architectural drawing for the Red House (details of the roof over the well) 67 Architectural drawing for the Red House (north and south elevations and details) 66 Gothic dresser 78 Passage of the Red House opening to the servant’s room 77 The Red House 70-71 The Red House (Detail of windows on the west front) 73 View from the Red House 72 Webb, Philip (for the design) and John Garrett & Son (for the production) Altar table and superfrontal 154 Webb, Philip (for the design) and Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co. (for the production) Armchair 102 Settee 107 Side table 160-161 Sideboard 159 St. George’s Cabinet, cabinet with scenes from the life of St. George 156-157 Webb, Philip and Morris & Co. The Morning Room 14 The Victorian Drawing Room 6