# 3 “Sooty Sons of Vulcan”: Forging Shanghai’s Printing Machinery, 1895-1937

The manufacture of machinery was essential to the development of print capitalism in China. Events from the early 1930s illustrate the links that welded the cultural and industrial sectors inseparably together, both in actuality and in the minds of contemporary Chinese observers. In the early morning of 30 January 1932, in response to what they claimed were Chinese provocations related to Japan’s invasion of Manchuria the year before, Japanese bombers took off from ships anchored in the Yangzi River to hammer northern Shanghai districts.<sup>1</sup> Soon, six Japanese bombs struck the Commercial Press, one after the other.<sup>2</sup> According to the North China Daily News, “apart from the huge conflagration at the Shanghai North Station, the largest and most important of these [fires] took place in the Commercial Press, the leading publishing company in China ... The entire plant has practically gone up in flames.”<sup>3</sup> Two days later, on 1 February, fire broke out at the publisher’s Dongfang tushuguan (Oriental Library), the premier editorial collection of its kind in China and Shanghai’s largest library. Although the library was lost, a year later production at the Commercial Press recovered, thanks in large part to the failure of Japanese bombardiers to destroy the publisher’s machine shop.<sup>4</sup>

According to a 1933 in-house review of the Commercial Press’s activity, the plate-making and type-casting rooms, along with the letterpress and lithographic printing shops, had suffered major losses. Still, the report pointed out, “it is interesting to note ... that the Japanese bombardment last January, although most methodically carried out, failed to spot the Machine Shop. They damaged the company’s machines but overlooked something that could raise the dead to life.”<sup>5</sup> This passage is concisely eloquent testimony to the significance of machine shops even to cultural industries.

What was the nature of the relationship between machine shops and publishing? What did Shanghai’s machine-makers do to launch China’s adoption of Western-style letterpress printing and to extend the life of lithographic printing well into the twentieth century? And what was the impact of this process on Chinese social relationships? This chapter will address these questions. Their importance is suggested not only by the experience of the Commercial Press in the 1930s but also by numerous historical accounts of late imperial and Republican China’s literary and intellectual transformation that refer in one way or another to the expansion of modern publishing.

Leo Ou-fan Lee and Andrew J. Nathan, for example, have observed that “In the first few decades of the great awakening that began about 1895, political information and new ideas came to the people almost exclusively through the press.”<sup>6</sup> Discussing the publishing situation in 1919, Chow Tsetsung has written that, between the months of May and December 1919, 400 new periodicals appeared, giving voice to China’s anger over mistreatment by its Western allies at Versailles.<sup>7</sup> The appearance of so many new publications and so much previously unknown material so quickly was due, only partly, to political and cultural need. Just as important, the dissemination of periodicals, books, and information was also made possible technically by the mechanization of China’s publishing industry, a process in which Shanghai’s Chinese machine shops played a vital role alongside imported foreign printing presses.

Chinese did not begin to embrace letterpress printing until the period between the First Sino-Japanese War (1894-95) and the subsequent 100 Days of Reform (1898).<sup>8</sup> By then, the printing presses of Gutenberg’s and Stanhope’s days had been considerably improved upon. Letterpress printing machines brought previously unimaginable speed to the nascent industry and could print in higher volume than lithographic operators. Although no substitutes for unappealing old missionary fonts had yet appeared, both speed and volume now became major attractions for the production of newspapers and other time-sensitive materials that held out the promise of a large new audience of readers.

Soon Chinese typographers at the Commercial Press and elsewhere responded to the burgeoning new market with attractive fonts easily used on the speedy new letterpress machines. Once this phase of China’s Gutenberg revolution got under way, Shanghai’s modern printers and publishers widened the distance separating themselves from other possible contenders in Canton, Ningbo, Beijing, etc. (see Table 3.1). They also helped Shanghai to seize primacy of place in late Qing and early Republican China’s intellectual life. However, as the account of the Commercial Press’s destruction and recovery makes clear, that intellectual life depended on an industrial technology purchased and deployed by modern business organizations.<sup>9</sup>

Starting in 1895, widening circles of lithographic and then letterpress printers provided opportunities for those who could repair printing presses and machines. In turn, the Chinese printing machine industry grew out of the fertile ground provided by the repair business. Chinese machine technicians soon mastered not only the art of repair but also the techniques necessary to duplicate many, if not all, of the imported machines that they were repairing. From this beginning, Shanghai became the leading Chinese centre for manufacturing the kinds of printing machinery that much of the Western world took for granted at the turn of the twentieth century.

Table 3.1
<table><tr><td colspan="3">Chinese-made type-casters, printing presses, printing machines, and other machinery, 1900-1950s</td></tr><tr><td>Type of press</td><td>First recorded maker in China</td><td>maker in Shanghai</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">A. Relief (Ch. tuban) (typography and letterpress)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Type-casters, printing presses, and printing machines</td></tr><tr><td>Manual or foot-powered</td><td>Cao Xingchang Machine</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>printing press</td><td>Shop, Shanghai, c. 1900</td><td>same</td></tr><tr><td>Copper matrices</td><td>Fuxing Copper Matrix Shop, Shanghai, c. 1900</td><td>same</td></tr><tr><td>Chinese-language type- casting machine</td><td>Commercial Press, Shanghai, c. 1913</td><td>same</td></tr><tr><td>Chinese-language type- casting machine</td><td>Ruitai, Shanghai, c. 1916</td><td>same</td></tr><tr><td>Full-page newspaper press</td><td>Mingjing, Shanghai, c. 1920</td><td>same</td></tr><tr><td>Small newspaper press</td><td>Mingjing, Shanghai, c. 1920</td><td>same</td></tr><tr><td>Self-Inking Printing Press</td><td>Unnamed, pre-1924</td><td>same</td></tr><tr><td>Monotype/Sinotype</td><td>Gui Zhongshu, Taiwan, late 1950s</td><td>unknown</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Cylinder printing machines (lunzhuan yinshuaji)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>None</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>None</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>None</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Rotary machines (lunzhuan yinshuaji) Electric rotary press</td><td>Unnamed, 1929</td><td>same</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Rotary paper maker</td><td>Gongyichang, Yongsheng,</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Xinghua, all in Shanghai, 1926 same</td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">B. Planographic/lithographic (pingban, shiyin) presses and machines</td></tr><tr><td>Lithographic (hand?) press</td><td>Gongyichang, Shanghai, c. 1900</td><td>same</td></tr><tr><td>Lithographic (hand?) press</td><td>Xieda Machine Shop, Shanghai,</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>c. 1904</td><td>same</td></tr><tr><td>Five-colour lithographic press Mingjing, Shanghai, c. 1920</td><td></td><td>same</td></tr><tr><td>Offset lithographic machine</td><td>Hujiang and New China machine</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>shops, Shanghai, c. 1924</td><td>same</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">C. Photogravure (aoban yinshua) machines</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Banknote-printing</td></tr><tr><td>photogravure press</td><td>Mingjing, Shanghai, c. 1931</td><td>same</td></tr></table>

In 1879, the Reverend W.S. Holt claimed that the American Presbyterian Mission Press (APMP) had assisted publishers in China to secure presses and printing material from abroad. Just as this dependence on imported machinery had limited Canton’s American Board Press, the London Mission Press, and the APMP, so too the Chinese printing and publishing industry remained heavily dependent on foreign-made machinery until the early twentieth century. By then, Chinese foundry workers had mastered the electrotyping techniques that William Gamble (1830-86) had developed to cast the type fonts that enabled the APMP to make itself independent of its Western font suppliers. More important, Chinese foundry workers also learned to duplicate Western printing presses and other printingrelated technology. For this reason, China’s modern printing machine industry may be accurately said to date from 1895 to 1900, the period when Chinese machine makers surpassed missionary printer-publishers by starting to manufacture their own printing presses. They continued to manufacture presses domestically until 1937, even in the face of imported printing machinery valued at many hundreds of thousands of yuan.

By 1894, despite the substantial achievements of the lithographic printerpublishers, in terms of investment and numbers of Chinese workers employed, the printing and publishing industry was still a minor economic activity in Shanghai. Investments in the paper and letterpress printing industries totalled only about 10 percent of all investments in light industries if one excludes Shenbao.<sup>10</sup> Newspaper plants, including Shenbao, employed only about 650 workers. The five or six foreign-run publishing houses in China employed another 220 workers. In 1894, these 870 workers in the letterpress trades made up less than 1 percent of all workers employed in both foreign- and Chinese-owned heavy and light industry.<sup>11</sup>

However, the lead-type and letterpress industry grew rapidly in response to bursts of political and educational change after 1895, 1905, 1911, and 1919. Just like the xylographers and lithographers before them, letterpress printers and publishers responded to changes in the cultural world by expanding their technological infrastructure. New markets opened for rapidly produced, time-sensitive printed works. Printers and publishers bought machines to meet these demands for new kinds of textual and visual commodities.

In 1929, an article promoting the printing machine industry appeared in the Gongshang banyuekan (Industrial and Commercial Biweekly). The author described the achievements of Shanghai manufacturers in meeting the requirements of printers. Linking economic and cultural reconstruction with industrial development, he declared growth in the printing machine industry to be a national priority, concluding that “the rise of the nation depends on the development of handicrafts and industry, which depend on machinery.”<sup>12</sup> In 1932, another economics writer, Yan Zhong, estimated that between 1912 and 1932, Shanghai’s printing machine industry had grown by twenty times.<sup>13</sup> In the case of the publishing industry, just as in national revitalization, prosperity depended on the ability of Chinese machinemakers to supply printing presses and auxiliary machines.

## History of the Book and Printing: Reorienting the Problem

The “Chinese printing and publishing industry” is conventionally thought to include a spectrum of activity ranging from jobber printing of handbills, business forms, name cards, and small-scale bulletins, to the vast commercial printing plants of comprehensive printer-publishers such as the Commercial Press and Zhonghua Books, and on to the high-turnover printing departments of Shanghai’s daily, weekly, and monthly press.<sup>14</sup> However, even though Chinese print capitalism generally differed from Anglo-American print capitalism in the tendency of its leading firms to combine printing and publishing in a single enterprise, by the late nineteenth century, in Shanghai as elsewhere, the continuum involving the publishing company and the cultural world of reading and study did not actually begin in the print shop. Modern print shops did not manufacture their own presses, as they had in the age of wooden presses.

For this reason, to understand Shanghai’s printing and publishing industry, we must investigate the relationship between Shanghai’s cultural and industrial worlds. To do so, we turn to the Chinese-owned and -run foundries and machine shops that helped to make modern Chinese printing and publishing possible from a material or technological point of view. Reorienting our perspective is one of the objectives of this chapter and suggests the need for corrected vision in many scholarly histories of the book industry.

A survey of the literature concerned with “the history of the book” reveals that, since the pioneering work of Lucien Febvre and Henri-Jean Martin appeared in 1958, historians have been divided into at least two intellectual camps. Febvre and Martin themselves were aware of the importance of studying the history of invention and the interaction of humans and machines.<sup>15</sup> Since their day, however, antiquarian researchers have focused on machinery and the evolution of technology but have invariably divorced it from its social context.<sup>16</sup> The second, and larger group, made up of social historians of the book and the book trade, has largely ignored both the question of how the printing industry was supplied with equipment and issues related to the dark underside of cultural advancement.<sup>17</sup>

Because of the semicolonial status of Shanghai and China in the decades under review here, this study must adopt an interdisciplinary approach. Indeed, the political conditions of Shanghai under which foreign printing presses were sold there suggest that the successful imitation of Western technology was more politically charged and complex than the process that a later age mildly calls “technology transfer” might suggest. For this reason, contemporary pride, both private and official, in the mastery of foreign technology by Shanghai’s machine manufacturing industry is an element of Chinese political awareness in the 1930s that should not be overlooked by historians.

Moreover, the fact that Chinese publishers made the transition from xylography to lithography and then to letterpress in a generation and a half, rather than the four centuries needed to achieve printing modernity in the West, suggests that there were high social costs to be paid along with financial burdens and incentives to rapid development. We already know that the lithographers employed large numbers of print workers and calligraphers, including many hired away from the xylographers. Because of the limitations of our sources from that period, however, we can know relatively little about the workers themselves. This situation changes when we reach the era of the printing machine manufacturers.

Just as Lucien Febvre and Henri-Jean Martin as well as Robert Darnton have pointed out with regard to European printing industries, early use and ownership of machinery by printers created working conditions that significantly polarized socioeconomic relationships.<sup>18</sup> In fact, even a collateral industry such as printing machine manufacturing reveals signs of the brutal abuse of employees by shop owners that underlay early industrialization in Europe. The strife that resulted reminds us of the personal price paid by machine workers and apprentices to produce modern print capitalism.

Therefore, we need to acknowledge that both employers and employees in the Chinese machine-building industry supplied modern Chinese printers and publishers with printing presses and related machinery. How did the system work? After presenting statistical information that documents Shanghai’s and China’s continued and undeniably heavy dependence on imported machinery, this chapter will show that the printing industry was also supplied in part by Shanghai’s own commercially responsive Chinese machine manufacturers. They acquired mechanical skills in Shanghai and passed some of them on to their apprentices. In turn, they and their workers facilitated the mechanization of China’s publishing industry. Exploiting their niche between the high prices charged for foreign machinery and the attractiveness to Chinese printers and publishers of buying comparable locally produced machinery, Shanghai’s printing machine manufacturing firms created what became one of Republican China’s most viable industries. Both business owners and employees also contributed to the mechanization and modernization of another, the printing and publishing industry.

By isolating the printing machine manufacturing firms and their industry from the wider machine industry, it will become clear that the former succeeded in concentrating on production, rather than on mere repairs, much earlier than other machine industries. This development has been overlooked by recent Chinese and Western scholars but was related to the early emergence of a group of manufacturers who may be called, following the suggestion of one of their number, “foremen-capitalists.”<sup>19</sup> The early appearance of these largely anonymous entrepreneurs, who then relatively quickly passed on technical and industrial skills to their apprentices, positioned the Chinese-owned printing machine industry to take advantage of the expansion of Shanghai’s cultural and commercial sectors during the city’s period of rapid growth from 1910 to 1925. This success was achieved by selling both simple and sophisticated machinery to the growing Shanghai-based printing and publishing industry, to inland Chinese printing concerns, and, somewhat surprisingly, to printers in Japan and Southeast Asia. Along the way, Chinese officials of the 1930s, who regarded a self-sufficient machinebuilding industry as a sine qua non of a modern nation-state, took pride in the success of this industry.

In 1933, in terms of the overall value of the national Chinese machine industry’s manufacturing output, the printing and paper-making machine industry ranked seventh largest out of sixteen categories.<sup>20</sup> As outlined in the 1929 commercial report cited earlier, the five most successful printing and paper-making machine firms (out of a total of twenty-two manufacturing firms) produced a large variety of machines, ranging in cost from electric rotary presses selling for 7,800 silver dollars down to a 135-yuan hand-operated lithographic press. The former could have been used to produce mass literature of the sort discussed by Lee and Nathan, and the report says that the latter was used to print stationery such as name cards, envelopes, etc.<sup>21</sup> This lithographic hand press could also have been turned to printing political bulletins of the sort mentioned by Chow. Yet neither awakening nor enlightenment came without financial or social costs. Those with capital, or access to it, paid the former cost, and everyone who manufactured printing presses or used them to print and publish helped to defray the latter expense.

No other single Chinese locale could even approach Shanghai’s preponderance in this industry through the 1930s. As a result, no other place was as intimately involved with the financial and social changes brought about by it. According to a 1933 Nationalist government report celebrating the successes of China’s printing machine manufacturing business, among Chinese printing machine manufactories that were mechanized, and that employed more than thirty persons, 54 percent were located in Shanghai.<sup>22</sup> The five firms mentioned above produced all-Chinese-made machines that in many categories were considered to be equal in performance to imported ones. Four of the five, including Mingjing jiqi chang (Mingjing Machine Shop), which will be discussed extensively here, were started in 1914-15 and reached the peak of their commercial and technological growth during and after the mid-1920s. Between 1914 and 1932, the Shanghai printing machine industry reached its maturity and greatest profitability. In that period, the five large specialty firms also contributed to the growing confidence of Chinese intellectuals and writers that China’s modern media belonged to Chinese.<sup>23</sup>

The period from 1914 to 1932 may be brought into focus by examining the history of one of the five leading printing machine manufacturers, Mingjing Machine Shop. Its founder/owner, Zhang Jinlin, is one of the few machine shop owners to slip through the curtain of anonymity that cloaks most of these entrepreneurs. His activities reveal one of the most likely paths by which personal success occurred in this industry and by which Chinese printing machines came to be made and marketed and at whose cost. Zhang’s contributions will be elaborated after the following profile of Shanghai’s machine industry.

## Significance of the Machine Industry to the Printing and Publishing Industry

In the early 1930s, when the printing machine industry was praised by the Chinese government for its growth and volume of output, Shanghai was the recorded home of 456 Chinese-owned machine industry workshops.<sup>24</sup> Altogether, these machine workshops employed 8,082 workers, about 18 persons per shop. Both in aggregate and on average, these shops, although not insignificant, present a more modest image than that of the printing industry itself.<sup>25</sup> The machine industry’s total capital investment was less than a quarter of that of the entire printing industry.<sup>26</sup> Nonetheless, Shanghai did produce half of the total value of the national machine output.<sup>27</sup> The opportunities for this group of machine shops lay in the imbalance between the technological needs of the expanding modern Chinese printing industry and its ability or willingness to pay for foreign machinery.

Of the 456 shops, 32 (about 7 percent of the total) supplied machines to the printing and publishing industry.<sup>28</sup> What is most striking is that a high proportion (about two-thirds) of the machine works supplying the printing industry were manufacturers rather than mere repair shops. The high proportion of the latter, particularly in the spinning-and-weaving, silk-weaving, shipbuilding, and cigarette-rolling industries, repeatedly exercised 1930s Chinese government and commercial writers who longed to see a higher degree of national industrial self-sufficiency. By contrast, the printing machine industry was a source of pride, with twenty-two of thirty-two firms in 1933 engaged in manufacturing for the Chinese domestic, Japanese, and Southeast Asian markets. This ratio of manufacturing shops, relative to repair shops, positioned the printing machine industry as the second highest in rank of eleven machine industries in 1933 when manufacturing was compared to repair services.<sup>29</sup>

Despite its importance to industrial life through the printing shops that purchased and used its machinery, as well as its impact on political/educational reformers and revolutionary groups, the workaday activities of this new Chinese machinery industry have largely eluded historians.<sup>30</sup> Although most Chinese-owned machine shops were very small enterprises, particularly in the first stage of their development after 1895, they were nonetheless a crucial component in the process by which the Chinese publishing industry was mechanized.<sup>31</sup> They promoted, largely through the bargain-basement prices they charged for their machinery, the mechanization of an industry that provided some of the hardware for the late Qing revolutionary movement as well as the technological revolution that preceded and made possible the flurry of publications associated with the New Culture Movement (starting in 1915 with the journal Xin qingnian [New Youth]).

Sustained by the machine industry, the development of the letterpress printing machine industry, in particular, is related to the history of newspaper offices such as Xinwen bao, the Commercial Press, Zhonghua, and other general publishers, but its history is distinct from these cultural organs. To a much more profound degree, the Chinese printing machine industry was noisy, dirty, and brutish. By relying on the limited records available, however, we can see the process by which better-known Chinese printers and publishers were supplied with the machines upon which their success rested.

## Initial Appearance and Growth of Manufacturing Shops, 1895-1913

Throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, China was heavily dependent on the imports of the machine industry. This reliance persisted despite repeated efforts by private and government Self-Strengtheners to make the country more independent. Statistics appear only erratically until the beginning of World War I, but the limitations of China’s locally owned machine industry are clear. Between 1862 and 1905, seven foreign firms invested 3.9 million yuan in Shanghai’s nascent machinery industry; in the same period, ninety-one Chinese firms invested no more than 87,000 yuan. Even the Jiangnan Arsenal had been capitalized by the Qing government at only 543,000 yuan in 1867.<sup>32</sup>

From 1914, Chinese machine import statistics that distinguish between categories of machine (e.g., printing, agricultural, irrigational, etc.) start to appear. Between 1914 and 1931, imports of printing and paper-making machinery increased steadily from approximately 58,000-yuan worth in 1914 to a high of nearly 885,000-yuan worth in 1929 and settled out at about 631,000 yuan two years later.<sup>33</sup> If 1914 is considered a base year, however, the significance of the imports becomes clearer: by 1929, imports of printing and paper-making machinery reached nearly sixteen times the value of the 1914 level.<sup>34</sup>

As one might expect, Shanghai was central to this import trade. Printing and paper-making machinery never constituted more than 10 percent of Shanghai’s imports over the 1914-29 period and averaged only 3.8 percent per year,<sup>35</sup> but this proportion still represented an average of 76 percent of all printing machinery imported into China between 1923 and 1931, the only years for which such figures exist.<sup>36</sup> In four of those eight years, Shanghai’s proportion of the imports was in the eightieth and ninetieth percentiles. Yan Zhong’s report from the early 1930s praised Shanghai merchants’ ability to manufacture printing machinery,<sup>37</sup> but then it lamented Chinese publishers’ lack of access to the most sophisticated imported machinery: “Chinese merchants have the most of each type of imported printing machine, [but] the newest models of fine machinery go to the foreigners. For example, in Shanghai now, there are offset machines, used mostly by the British-American Tobacco (BAT) print shop; and Zhonghua, the Commercial Press, the Japanese-owned Shanghai Offset Company, and Shanghai Printing Company all take second place.”<sup>38</sup> Anecdotal accounts, too, reinforce one’s sense that the Chinese market was flooded with foreign printing machinery.

However, in spite of its small size, already by the time of the Treaty of Shimonoseki (1895), Chinese investment in both the machine industry and the printing machine industry, in particular, had begun to grow. Reminding us that possessing the motivation and the means to acquire the benefits of technological expertise were nearly as important as having the capital to pursue them, Marie-Claire Bergère points out that “the essential problem for Chinese modernisation in the early days was not so much one of innovation or even of the accumulation of capital, but rather how to acquire technological expertise.”<sup>39</sup> In 1899, a lengthy piece in the North China Herald, intended to justify Western imperialism to its readers, took an imaginary inland Chinese on a tour of a foreign machine shop and gloated over the superiority of Western enterprise, but it also suggested how that expertise might be acquired: “By-and-by ... [our visitor] notices that amongst the score or so of men at work, sooty sons of Vulcan as they are, there is not a single foreigner. Every one wears his pigtail, and yet the foreign machinery obeys his touch with promptitude and exactness ... This ... is but routine work which any intelligent man can do when he has learnt it. The brain work is done elsewhere, and for the moment mainly hails from the Clyde [River, metonymous with Glasgow and the industrial west of Scotland].”<sup>40</sup> In addition to crowing over Western innovative genius, the article makes clear that technological expertise was passed from the engineers of the Clyde estuary to Chinese foundries on the banks of the Huangpu River. Apparently unknown to the Herald reporter, the same experience-based industrial techniques that enabled foundry owners in Glasgow to execute engineers’ blueprints there were already being employed in Shanghai not only to operate Western machinery but also to duplicate it.

The scene described in the North China Herald article indirectly answers the question raised by Bergère: how did Chinese manufacturers acquire technological expertise?<sup>41</sup> We cannot know the precise steps that they took. What distinguished Shanghai’s printing machine manufacturers from other Shanghai machine shops of the sort described in this Herald article, however, was their triumph over the difficulties involved in going beyond repairing to replicating Western technology in the crucial decade following the Treaty of Shimonoseki.

Between 1895 and 1913, eighty-six new Chinese-owned machine shops were opened in Shanghai,<sup>42</sup> seventy-four more than in the years between the establishment of the Jiangnan Arsenal (1862) and the First Sino-Japanese War. By 1913, allowing for closures, there were ninety-one such firms. They produced machinery for six broad categories of industry, including printing. Between 1914 and 1924, the overall number of Chinese-owned firms producing machinery in Shanghai more than trebled to 284<sup>43</sup> and by 1932 registered 456 firms.

Tian Jiasheng (b. circa 1889), himself an important investor in Shanghai’s printing machinery industry and one of a number of veterans of Shanghai’s machine industry whose recollections were recorded in the late 1950s and early 1960s, confirms something that we know from Chapter 1 – namely, that Britain and America produced most of the large printing machines used in China before 1895.<sup>44</sup> The bulk of small-scale machines came from

Japan, he continues. Tian then adds that, around 1895, Li Changgen (b. circa 1845), who had worked as a foreman in a natural gas piping installation firm, started the Li Yongchang jiqi chang<sup>45</sup> (Li Yongchang Machine Shop) with a 300-yuan investment.<sup>46</sup> In the course of his piping installation work, Li had often been in touch with print shops using kerosene engines and, more important, with the newspaper printers. Over time, he had learned how to repair their printing machines.

From the setup of his small one-bay shop on Jiujiang Road in the heart of the International Concession, it appears that Li expected not only to repair but also to forge printing machines. One side of his shop was organized to take care of customers and to service kerosene-powered engines; the other half was for repairing printing machines, which in the 1890s would have included a vast range of equipment such as mechanized lithographic presses, flatbed or platen presses, type-casting machines, stereotyping machines, and so on. The same forge that Li used for repair work was soon turned to manufacturing copies of the printing machines that he fixed; not for the first time in the history of invention, the ability to repair was matched with the ambition and ability to copy.<sup>47</sup>

Just as important to the advance of Li’s craft, moreover, was the cultivation of a market for his machines. Not surprisingly, by 1900 or so, Li had established a link with the fledgling Commercial Press.<sup>48</sup> At this stage, its print shop was still located in its original three-room site in Jiangxi Road’s Dechang Lane (see Figure 4.4), a short walk north of Li’s workshop. The Commercial Press contracted Li to service the ten machines (hand and footpedal presses, lever presses, and a Roman-letter type-casting machine) in its print shop. By then, Li’s shop had grown to ten workers and was manufacturing simple printing machines for sale to Chinese printer-publishers including, but not limited to, the Commercial Press.

In the same year, 1900, a second machine shop, also with a capital of 300 yuan, opened in Zhabei district’s Haining Road. Like the Li Yongchang firm, in addition to taking in repairs, it manufactured copies of foreign machines, specializing in simple foot-powered letterpress printers. Along the same street, and at about the same time, the Fuxing tongmu dian (Fuxing Copper Matrix Shop) was opened. Essentially a foundry, it adapted Western printing technology to Chinese characters so that Fuxing could manufacture copper matrices<sup>49</sup> sold exclusively to the Commercial Press. Then a fourth entrepreneur began to manufacture lithographic printing presses. By 1904, a fifth, the Xieda Machine Shop, opened and supplied the Commercial Press with lithographic presses. In 1912, Shanghai’s sixth privately owned machine shop was started up at the present-day intersection of Fujian North Road and Suzhou North Road.<sup>50</sup>

In this way, an era of manufacturing entrepreneurs started its ascent via the Chinese-run printing industry between 1895 and 1913. Of the ownerproprietors whose backgrounds are known, most fit the pattern that one would expect. Having worked in related trades, in the course of their workdays they seem to have encountered conditions that made it possible for them not only to identify a market niche but also to fill it. These “sooty sons of Vulcan” were also cautious businessmen. As suggested by the fact that at least three of the six printing machine manufacturers quickly established ties with the increasingly important Commercial Press, whose market influence expanded considerably in 1903 when its capitalization grew to 200,000 yuan, they preferred to invest in a sure thing.

The precise number of machine shops aligned with the printing industry in this first era of growth (1895-1913) is still difficult to ascertain. In this period, at least these six Chinese-owned machinery shops specializing in printing machinery repair appeared in a narrow industrial apron of the International Concession bordered on the south and north by Jiujiang and Haining Roads, on the east and west by Henan and Fujian Roads, and bridging Suzhou Creek.<sup>51</sup> Their average capital investment was 300 yuan.<sup>52</sup> All of the firms were invested in and started independently. Two of the ownerproprietors had been print-shop foremen; one had come out of a type-casting shop; three were former machine shop foremen; and the most successful, Li Changgen, had worked in the natural gas pipe installation trade. In short, five of the six shops were started by onetime industrial foremen,<sup>53</sup> whose access to foreign machinery suggested to them how imitations could be made and sold for less than the foreign-manufactured originals. Particularly at this stage, as Bergère has written, “direct or indirect exposure to Western material civilisation was the determining factor in the setting-up of business concerns.”<sup>54</sup>

In this stage, even Li’s relatively successful company was a very modest operation. Despite his contact with the Commercial Press, for example, his shop was providing work for no more than ten persons<sup>55</sup> by 1900. After seven years and presumably still under contract to the Commercial Press, his shop had added twenty more, all thirty workers “manufacturing and repairing printing machines”<sup>56</sup> on Li’s four or five lathes and one planing machine (a large collection of machines at the time, according to Tian Jiasheng). Despite the relatively advanced technology in Li’s shop, however, Tian notes dryly that “some workshops barely had a few old ‘tiger clamps,’ and no mechanical equipment [at all] that would convince customers that repairs were their business.” 57

Slightly better-equipped but still nowhere near as well supplied as Li, Anhui native and owner-proprietor Chen Zhaoqing, founder in 1904 of the

Xieda Machine Shop, had had work experience in Shanghai’s Zhuyizhai printing shop on Haining Road, Zhabei. According to his son, he worked alone for the first few years after 1904, repairing all sorts of printing machines on his single piece of machinery, a foot-pedalled lathe measuring four feet in length.<sup>58</sup> By 1913, after nine years in business, he had only ten workers, had purchased only two additional pieces of secondhand machinery (at least one British-made), and was finally using a kerosene engine for power. Most important of all, Chen, like his Chinese competitors, was no idler when it came to manufacturing. According to what Chen’s son could recall about his father’s business forty-five years later, “In addition to specializing in printing-machine repair, he also started to duplicate lithographic printing machines, selling them in [Shanghai] and other ports, to the Commercial Press and others, but he couldn’t sell many.”<sup>59</sup> Still, Chen’s sales outside Shanghai aided in opening the hinterland to Chinese-manufactured printing presses, just as had the sales of the printing machines, copper matrices, and lithographic presses produced by his five competitors.

In sum, the years from 1895 to 1913 witnessed the establishment and growth of six printing machine manufacturers. These six formed the first real beachhead in the process by which Western printing technology was transferred and adapted for local Chinese use. In this industry, unlike others, early repair work rapidly promoted the manufacturing process. Perhaps the relative simplicity of the machinery involved accelerated the transition, but one must not overlook the ambition of these manufacturers to provide machinery for Chinese printers eager to participate in the rapidly expanding market for printed matter identified by Lee and Nathan and Chow.

From this survey, it is clear that, even at this early stage, one small business loomed over the other six. The Li Yongchang shop not only moved successfully from repairing machines to manufacturing them but also produced apprentices who in turn founded other manufacturing operations. Most significant of these apprentices was Zhang Jinlin, who went on to found the most singular of the workshops and factories supplying the printing and publishing industry with machinery. Zhang’s experience indicates that this “industrial training” or apprenticeship system proved central to both individual successes and the success of the industry. Once the first generation of foremen-capitalists succeeded in establishing the viability of the industry, their apprentices were well placed to surpass them.

## Zenith of the Foremen-Capitalists, 1914-32

Tian Jiasheng, who should be praised for his attention to the role of successive generations in advancing the industry in which he laboured, nevertheless incorrectly identifies the 1914-24 decade as the first in which most new shops were “started by foremen” (lingban).<sup>60</sup> As we have seen, the decades after the Sino-Japanese War had already exhibited the phenomenon of erstwhile foremen turning investors to become what might best be called foremen-capitalists. That this group emerged then suggests that a relatively deep, two-generations-old industrial sensibility had already formed by the time Tian began to take notice of his industry. For this reason, the period 1914-32 stands out not as the age of the foremen-capitalists but as that of their zenith.

Still, Tian is correct to focus on the mid-1920s as a key phase in the industry’s history. Indeed, Tian was not the only commentator to cite this period as one of consolidation in the printing machine manufacturing industry. For Yan Zhong, the economics writer who remarked on the growth of the printing machine business from the standpoint of 1932, the year 1924 marked a key turning point in the development of the industry. In that year, Yan says, because of the expansion of Chinese-owned cigarette manufacturing, Chinese machine manufacturers developed the offset machines needed to print advertising images. The offset machine market continued to expand into the late 1920s, say Cao Jinshui and Zheng Xilin, two former machine shop owners.<sup>61</sup> Throughout the late 1920s and into the 1930s, the printing machine industry remained profitable, and levels of technological innovation advanced, leading Yan Zhong to the conclusion that the industry’s capacity had increased fivefold over these years.<sup>62</sup>

In the third decade of the Chinese-owned printing machinery industry – that is, between 1914 and 1924 – at least thirteen more printing machine manufacturers fired up new forges and opened for business. One pre-1913 firm had gone bankrupt, and another converted to manufacturing lathes, yielding a total of eighteen printing machine manufacturers. Four of the five leading firms of the heyday 1920s and early 1930s were in fact founded in 1914 and 1915.

To return to the question that Tian seeks to address, were the proprietors of these grimy, clamorous workshops mostly erstwhile foremen? Of the thirteen new machine shops for which details are available, the founders’ backgrounds are fairly disparate; only three group together naturally, thanks to their shared experience in machine foundries, which presumably trained and encouraged them to think themselves capable of creating and supervising a workshop. Two others had been foremen in leading printing machine shops (one in Mingjing itself and the other in Gongyichang). Hence, in this 1914-24 period, only these five of the thirteen machine shop proprietors actually fit into Tian’s category of industrial foremen. Nonetheless, adding them to the five from the earlier (1895-1913) era, one finds that ten of the total of eighteen shops operating in this decade were indeed started up by what Tian might have agreed could be called foremen-capitalists. This term suggests a close, virtually genetic, link between generations of machine workers. These figures also make clear that these individuals had stepped outside the cycle of employment by others to become proprietors themselves.

By 1924, at the end of their third decade of business, Shanghai’s Chinese machinists had established a self-sustaining machine manufacturing industry. Of the eight firms not started by industrial foremen, four were started by veterans of printing- or machine-related work. Finally, two proprietors were former small-time labour contractors, and the last had owned a small shop. All thirteen firms were independently capitalized as in the pre-1913 era.<sup>63</sup>

During the early years of World War I, Tian himself laboured as a machine repairman at the Commercial Press, but by 1916 he was able to start up the Ruitai Machine Shop in Suzhou North Road’s De’an Lane (see Figure 1.15). Like his predecessors in the 1895-1913 era, Tian specialized in manufacturing. His shop produced type-casting machines that he sought to sell to his former supervisors at the Commercial Press.<sup>64</sup> Tian offers a persuasive, at least partially cultural, explanation for the relatively rapid growth of the industry in this era. His account also anticipates some of the observations of Lee and Nathan and Chow: “After the end of the First World War, and [with] the outbreak of the May Fourth Movement [1919], the cultural enterprises had a newly reformed atmosphere, and if you add onto this that in Shanghai businesses were started up one after the other, most of them using printed materials, all spurred the printing trades to a temporary expansion; because of this, the printing machine manufacturing trade was [also] invigorated for a while.”<sup>65</sup>

Shanghai’s population and commercial growth after the war produced an unabated demand for printed materials, but it took some time before Shanghai printers came to rely on equipment produced locally to satisfy the demand. A look at imports of printing machinery in this period shows that, despite reductions in 1915 and 1917, the three years of 1916, 1918, and 1919 all witnessed increased imports. By 1920, imports had completely rebounded, and they were nearly five times the 1914 rate; a year later, printing machine imports were thirteen times their 1914 levels.<sup>66</sup> The dependence on foreign machinery promoted by nineteenth-century missionary publishers had reached astronomical proportions.

According to Tian, progress was slow in the Chinese-owned manufacture of printing machinery and, until the mid-1920s, was limited to small- and medium-scale production. Three types of printing presses and machines (letterpress, colour proof presses, and type-casting machines) were produced. Tian makes no mention of collotype machines, then very popular in Shanghai for printing illustrations, or of mechanized typesetting machines of the sort that had been common in the West since 1886.<sup>67</sup> Before 1924, says Tian, “lead-type presses produced by the Chinese machine industry were nearly all limited to hand-turned presses, self-inking machines, ... foot-operated machines, and so on, down to extremely simple machines.”<sup>68</sup> Although the quantities of machines produced expanded, Tian regrets that neither the quality nor the complexity of the machines improved very quickly before the mid-1920s.

Tian’s criticisms overlook the important advances of Zhang Jinlin’s Mingjing Machine Shop. Unfortunately, Tian’s critical views have been mirrored in recent writing by Chinese historians even when they are unaware of their source. Even those who have written otherwise well-balanced general accounts of the machine industry in this era have largely overlooked the vigour of this industry and its early escape from what they call the “repair-and-supply” (xiupei) pattern. They report that, as late as 1924, of 284 machine industry firms, 85 (30 percent) were still repair-and-supply shops, and they argue that “this kind of ... business could not open up the commodity market independently.”<sup>69</sup>

Nonetheless, by no later than 1914, the specialized industry of printing machine manufacture had begun to do just that, signalling its departure from patterns characteristic of other machine-related industries in Shanghai. In the 1914-24 period, of the thirteen new shops, ten manufactured printing presses, admittedly still mostly simple, foot-powered letterpress machines. Two specialized in relatively simple type-casting machines. Zhang Jinlin’s Mingjing Machine Shop, in this as in many other respects, broke from the pack to produce a wide range of machines.

## Zhang Jinlin and His Mingjing Machine Shop

To get a perspective on the scale of Chinese-owned printing and publishing firms at this time, it is useful to note that Zhonghua Books, founded in 1912 and destined to become one of Shanghai’s two largest Chinese publishers by the late 1920s, did not establish its own specially designed printing shop until Shen Zhifang (1882-1939) succeeded in doing so in 1916.<sup>70</sup> Like the lithographic pioneer Tongwen Press located in a residential Chinese structure (pingfang) in the 1880s and 1890s, Zhonghua’s first two printing departments were in rowhouses (longtang) off Fuzhou Road and East Broadway (now Daming donglu, close to Tongwen’s old offices). The Commercial Press lent the firm its first offset printing press. Before 1916, Zhonghua’s typesetting was hired out to Wenming Books and other shops because its own facilities were inadequate. Into the 1920s, Zhonghua was still buying secondhand equipment. Li Xiangbo, who entered Zhonghua’s print shop as an apprentice in 1934, says that Zhonghua rarely even printed in colour before the 1920s.<sup>71</sup> This sort of hit-or-miss operation was changed with the founding of Zhang Jinlin’s Mingjing Machine Shop.

Zhang Jinlin’s Mingjing Machine Shop is the most thoroughly documented of all the approximately thirty-two Chinese-owned printing machine firms known to have existed in Shanghai by the 1930s. One reason Mingjing stands out sharply is that most Chinese-owned printing machine shops in this period were small, even including the machine shop of the Commercial Press.<sup>72</sup> Even Shanghai publishing houses that would assume colossal proportions in the 1920s and 1930s were much more modest operations in the 1910s than has been generally acknowledged. In contrast, by the early 1920s, Mingjing had over 100 employees and was producing approximately that number of printing presses annually. Other reasons for Mingjing’s prominence will emerge below.

Zhang came to Jiujiang Road, apprenticed to the Li Yongchang shop, when he was fifteen sui.<sup>73</sup> Upon completion of his apprenticeship, he went to work in the machine repair shop of his own master’s chief client, the Commercial Press. It is not known how long he worked at the press, but by the eve of World War I he had risen to the position of assistant foreman and was accumulating the stake that he would need to open his own shop. According to Hu Yunfu, owner-proprietor of a competing shop, “in 1915, [Zhang] ... pieced together ... a small amount of capital and set up the Mingjing Machine Shop at the intersection of Henan and Anqing Roads,”<sup>74</sup> one block north of the Haining Road establishments mentioned above and that much closer to his former employer, the Commercial Press.<sup>75</sup>

Contrary to what his colleague and future competitor Hu says, Zhang started with nearly twice the earlier generation’s average investment of 300 yuan. Indeed, his 500-yuan investment enabled him to open his business with ten workers.<sup>76</sup> After a year, Zhang moved his enterprise to Henan North Road’s Pengchang Lane. He was already using motorized machinery to copy an expanded range of hand-operated printing presses. By 1916 or 1917, after two years of business, forty persons laboured for him.<sup>77</sup>

The Commercial Press connection was no doubt vital to Zhang’s account registers. Even more important in enabling Zhang to break from his job at the Commercial Press was his exclusive contract with the Xinwen bao newspaper works (Xinwen bao baoguan, founded 1893), which, along with Shenbao, was one of Shanghai’s leading Chinese newspapers. Although it was reputedly founded by Viceroy Zhang Zhidong (1837-1909) and Sheng Xuanhuai (1849-1916), by the 1920s John C. Ferguson (1866-1945), the American missionary, held a controlling interest in Xinwen bao, located on the north side of Hankou Road between Henan and Shandong Roads.

While working as an assistant foreman at the Commercial Press, Zhang heard of a faulty foreign-built rotary press in one of the newspaper’s printing departments. The supervising foreign engineer had not checked it upon installation, and now it was malfunctioning. By working overtime, Zhang not only got the press functioning but also gained the confidence of the Xinwen bao management. Soon all of the newspaper’s machine repair work went his direction, and “Zhang took it all on,” says Hu. Thanks to this lucky break, Zhang was soon able to set up on his own. By the early 1920s, several Mingjing apprentices report, the baoguan account was worth 2,000 to 2,500 yuan<sup>78</sup> per year.

In 1920, Mingjing rented land on nearby Tiantongan Road, and Zhang erected a factory structure on it. When Wang Shan’gen began work there as a foreman in 1922, it seemed to be a very large plant, with over 3,000 square metres of space, divided into ten rooms.<sup>79</sup> The staff had grown to over 100 persons. The equipment was all top-notch; only a minority of the lathes were made by Mingjing itself, with most of them coming from abroad. Wang recalls that his boss Zhang Jinlin’s technical skills were “very high” and that, “except for a few high-level technicians, [the workers] were mostly skilled apprentices.”<sup>80</sup>

In addition to his maintenance contract with the baoguan, Zhang sold machinery to it. Other steady customers of his Mingjing company included the Shanghai shuju (a publishing company founded by the Japanese) and Zhonghua Books. Each year, says Wang, probably with some exaggeration, Mingjing was producing more than 100 new printing presses.<sup>81</sup> They ranged in price from the technically sophisticated, full-page, lead-type newspaper press (quanzhang qianyin baozhi ji) retailing for 2,600 yuan and a five-colour lithographic press for 2,400 yuan to a small newspaper press (750 yuan) and a paper-cutting machine (400 yuan).<sup>82</sup> Between 1916 and 1921, Zhang sold 157,500-yuan worth of printing presses, largely to Japan.<sup>83</sup> Over the next eight years, between 1922 and 1930, probably chiefly at the Tiantong’an Road factory supervised by Wang Shan’gen, Mingjing sales of printing presses climbed to 394,000 yuan,<sup>84</sup> for an average of nearly 50,000 yuan per year in sales. In these eight years alone, over 800 new printing presses would have been produced for sale in Shanghai, inland, and overseas.

With sales of this volume, it is not surprising that other entrepreneurs with mechanical backgrounds swarmed into the printing machine specialty. In 1918-20, even the Commercial Press’s affiliated machine shop, which until then had been content to purchase many machines from its network of suppliers, expanded its manufacture of printing machinery. When it did so, however, the Commercial Press went straight to the institutional source of much of Shanghai’s nineteenth-century and early-twentieth-century technical knowhow: the modernized military. According to Tian Jiasheng, “the one behind their designs was Rong Zimei, who came out of the Jiangnan Arsenal.”<sup>85</sup>

Still, Zhang held the lead, and by the mid- to late-1920s Mingjing was generally considered to be one of the top five printing machine manufacturers in Shanghai.<sup>86</sup> During 1928-30, the industry remained prosperous and then levelled out between 1931 and 1932. “At that time,” said Zhang Jinlin’s son Yingfang,<sup>87</sup> “because gold was dear and silver cheap, not only were imported machines expensive, but, to make matters worse, you could not get prompt deliveries,”<sup>88</sup> a situation that promoted sales of Mingjing’s presses. Zhang Yingfang recalls that Mingjing benefited directly from the imported machinery shortage by supplying big Chinese publishers with machinery that they otherwise would not have bought: “For instance, at that time, the [Chinese-owned] Zhonghua Books wanted to add a set of banknoteprinting photogravure machines. Originally [Zhonghua] had planned to buy them from Germany, but because the delivery date would have been too far off, and the price was too high, [Zhonghua] came to Mingjing [to have] them made.”<sup>89</sup>

In sum, Zhang Jinglin and his Mingjing Machine Shop represent a critically important stage in the advancement of the Chinese printing machine business. Not only did the firm advance from making simple and mediumscale machines of use to jobbers and small-scale printers but also, by the early 1930s, after fifteen years of operation, it was providing sophisticated photogravure machines used by Zhonghua to print currency for the Republican government. The significance of this achievement is emphasized by Bergère’s observation that even an entire lifetime rarely sufficed to allow one man to advance from working as an apprentice to becoming a capitalist of great substance.<sup>90</sup> With Zhang and his Mingjing firm, this technological and financial leap occurred in just over a decade. The next section suggests some reasons for Zhang’s success in addition to those of hard work, pluck, and good fortune.

## The View from the Floor Up: Former Apprentices Remember Zhang Jinlin and Mingjing

Given the scarcity of direct or first-person information from the owners of machine industry shops and factories, the testimony of former apprentices about them assumes considerable value. In the case of Mingjing Machine Shop, this value is increased by the prominence of Zhang Jinlin<sup>91</sup> in the industry at large. A comprehensive study of machine industry apprenticeships is beyond the scope of this chapter. The importance of the apprentice system in advancing the printing machine industry has already been mentioned, but its historical significance should not be permitted to obscure the wretchedness of the apprentices’ lives. In fact, their misery was an important aspect of the industry’s history.

Evidence from Zhang’s former apprentices can be used to supplement what is known about Zhang from the testimony of his colleagues and competitors. The former workers reveal in greater detail than is available elsewhere exactly how the apprenticeship system underwrote the printing machine industry financially and organizationally. Yet the fact that these interviews were conducted in the late 1950s and early 1960s requires that these sources, collected by Communist Party historians, be handled cautiously. Forty years and an at least nominally proletarian revolution separated the interviewed machine industry workers from the apprenticeships that they discussed. The interviewees’ vocabulary and bias often reflect the influence of the “speak bitterness” (shuoku) sessions promoted by the Chinese Communists after 1949. Nonetheless, many of the particulars of their accounts can be corroborated by comparing them with contemporary descriptions of apprenticeships in Shanghai and other Chinese cities, making them a useful historical source.

For example, machine industry shops were generally staffed by underpaid, or unpaid, apprentices working for their keep and minimal instruction, and it would be surprising if Zhang’s former apprentices reported anything different.<sup>92</sup> At the same time, the normal impoverished conditions, dirt, and grease of an industrial workshop were made worse at Mingjing by the fact that the bulk of the workforce ate and slept next to and beneath the machinery; these details are not found in accounts of other shops, so they provide important clues to conditions at Mingjing and about Zhang himself. For many, perhaps most, of Mingjing’s labourers, vocational rites of passage expected in any apprenticeship served largely as thinly ritualized humiliation emphasizing their subordination to Zhang.

Chen Zhaoquan (b. circa 1906), Yang Zhengyang, and Shen Zhizhang were apprentices in the Mingjing Machine Shop in 1920. At that time, the three recalled, there were over 140 workers in the shop (40 more than Wang recalled having been there in 1922), and about 80 percent of them (110) were apprentices.<sup>93</sup> This heavy reliance on apprentice labour reflected the prevailing conditions in the broader Chinese-owned machine industry. At Dalong Machine Shop, one of Shanghai’s best known, the proportion was the same in 1920,<sup>94</sup> with the added feature that half of the masters had served their apprenticeships in Dalong (the other half had come from outside firms). Other shops pressed even closer to full reliance on apprentice labour.<sup>95</sup>

According to Chen, Yang, and Shen, “the capitalist could ... get rich off the bodies of the apprentices ... because [apprentices] got no wages.”<sup>96</sup> Eating usually occurred at the lathe and consisted of two meals per day of rice porridge (zhou) and dried turnip. The three men say that they and their workmates “summed up three years of apprentice life as ‘three years of eating dried turnip meals.’”<sup>97</sup> Twice a month, on the second and sixteenth days, they ate some “tissue-thin” slices of meat or salted fish.<sup>98</sup>

In the early 1920s, even at a large, busy firm such as Mingjing, work times were uncertain but usually involved eighteen or nineteen hours per day.<sup>99</sup> Each machine shop set its own rules, but in small or specialized ones such as Mingjing young apprentices got up at 4 or 5 a.m. to do the housekeeping and accompany the master’s wife to the market. When she returned, the apprentices waited on the Zhangs and the masters while they ate.<sup>100</sup>

At Mingjing, new apprentices generally performed these domestic chores for six months to one year; usually, in Shanghai factories with more than twenty workers, such as Mingjing, these services were not expected. When the next apprentice appeared, the first was relieved and would start delivering finished products to customers, making purchases at the hardware store, etc. All heavy materials were carried to and from the foundry by apprentices, no matter how far the journey, say Chen and his coworkers. “Now [even though] we only recall the hardships of [our] former apprentice lives, our hearts still have some lingering fear ... People who have not gone through this kind of life simply have no way to imagine it,”<sup>101</sup> they recalled in the early 1960s.

Ideally, by the third year, apprentices started to work with machinery.<sup>102</sup> Although by then an apprentice had become the master’s mate, when the master stopped working the apprentice still had to clean the tools and tidy up. These odds and ends of work – shopping, hauling, cleaning – dominated the apprentices’ day; instruction, except at the large machine shops such as Dalong in the 1930s,<sup>103</sup> was conducted on an ad hoc basis.<sup>104</sup> Relaxation, conversely, was strictly controlled in the shop. Although the regulations at Mingjing said that apprentices could rest on the nights of the second and sixteenth of each month, their free time was not their own to organize. Even when released from work, they had to ask permission to leave the shop, suggesting that skilled and unskilled alike were captives of the master machine-maker, Zhang Jinlin.<sup>105</sup>

The shop worked late nearly every night, with masters and apprentices not getting to bed until 11 p.m. or midnight. At that hour, the master or a senior apprentice would pull out planks, dismantle the lathe belts, and put the boards across the machines, making beds for themselves. The other apprentices, “no matter whether the ground was mud, brick, or oil,” put a straw mat over it and slept below the machines. Oil from the machines dripped down onto the sleeping apprentices, with the result that “our clothes were always as oily as raingear.”<sup>106</sup> Because most apprentices had neither money to buy soap nor time to wash their garments, clothes were never changed from when they were first put on until they were in tatters.

Chen, Yang, and Shen say that between 1919 and 1921, when they first entered Mingjing, they were given twelve copper cash per month for doing “the work of oxen.” This stipend was to be used for haircuts, bathing, and so on. From this discussion of their personal hygiene of that day, one can get a good sense of their scale of values and discern a wry sense of humour stimulated by the process of recollection:

At that time, you only needed six coppers to get a haircut. [Because of] daily work, [your] whole body would be greasy. To wash your hands and face, you needed to buy one bar of soap, and that took four coppers. In this way, you only had two coppers left ... At that time, the cheapest bath house was twelve coppers ... You only needed to save for six months, and you had [just] enough to take one bath. So for the whole year we had no way to take a bath; sometimes if we had two coppers we would buy a bowl of wontons and figure this was [at least a way to] “end our meatless diet” (emphasis added).<sup>107</sup>

When Mingjing apprentices discuss precious moments of relaxation, their comments are invariably laced with some grimly humorous or ironic reference to the austerity of their everyday lives. In spite of these conditions, there was considerable competition for these apprenticeships. They were highly coveted because of the shortage of employment elsewhere and, presumably, because some workers sought to become masters or proprietors of their own shops, a phenomenon that had occurred many times between 1895 and the 1920s.

Chen Zhaoquan, for instance, came to Shanghai from Ningbo, his native place. His father was a landless peasant unable to support his several sons. At age fourteen sui, Chen was introduced to Mingjing by a relative/middleman who was a friend of Zhang Jinlin. Zhang, however, took a dislike to Chen because he was too short and small. At that time, apprentices were accepted on six-month approval, and Chen says that it was only thanks to his relative’s intervention that he passed muster with Zhang.<sup>108</sup>

Yang Zhengyang, Chen’s workmate, went to Mingjing as an apprentice in 1921. Yang concedes that a foreman’s intervention with Zhang was a basic aspect of the process of getting an apprenticeship but goes on to state that he felt most wronged by having to pay a twenty-yuan “security deposit” (yagui)

even before he began.<sup>109</sup> The rationale for this payment was that the money would pay for the apprentice’s copy of the factory rules. Yang says that many apprentices were new arrivals to Shanghai and became ensnared in this trap.

Just to gain him the opportunity to learn a trade at Mingjing, in Yang’s case, his father had had first “to barter with relatives and plead with friends” (huanqin tuoyou). Obtaining the travel expenses to Shanghai had further required him “to borrow from the east and gather from the west” (dongjie xicou). Since coming up with this kind of training had been so difficult, “how could I bear to lose it?” Yang asks rhetorically. Like innumerable others sent to Shanghai in search of employment, he now had no choice but to send home for the security deposit. After many days of rushing around and again imploring relatives and friends, Yang’s father barely pulled together the twenty yuan, which he sent to the Mingjing owner. Zhang, in turn, used the boy’s yagui as long-term capital. “When I was an apprentice,” says Yang, “the factory had more than 110 apprentices; if you work it out, that’s more than 2,000 yuan.”<sup>110</sup>

Even after having satisfied the deposit claims and after having been approved by Zhang, an apprentice and his family retained a quasi-familial patron/client debt to the shop. Chen Zhaoquan goes on to say that his middleman relative “ordered [Chen’s] father [to appear at the shop] provided with joss sticks and candles, to enter the factory, and to acknowledge the master [owner].” Accompanied by the middleman, Chen’s father had “first to kowtow and do obeisance to the owner, then do obeisance to the owner’s mother, then to the God of Wealth, and to the Kitchen God.” Lastly, under the owner’s guidance, Chen’s father had to “salute each old master,” finally completing the “Master-Acknowledgment Ceremony” (shifu xingli).<sup>111</sup>

The traditional apprentices’ training lasted from three to three-and-a-half years.<sup>112</sup> Around 1927, the Tongtie gongsuo (Copper and Iron Guild), to which machine shops belonged, would stipulate a three-year training period. Nevertheless, apprentices were so vital to a shop’s operation that masters found all sorts of excuses to prolong the term. According to the former Mingjing apprentices Chen, Yang, and Shen, in the early 1920s, in spite of establishing contracts (guanyue) specifying three-year training periods, Zhang Jinlin “used holidays, injuries suffered while on the job, and sick days as excuses [to force us] to make up work [time].” 113

In addition, most factories obliged apprentices to hold to the “holiday expiration” schedule, meaning that apprentices could “graduate” only during the Spring, Dragon-Boat, or Mid-Autumn festivals. If one’s term expired just a few days after the end of a holiday, one would have to work for a few more months, and only when the next holiday finally came around could one complete the term.<sup>114</sup> As a result, many machine industry apprentices took four, five, or even six years to complete their terms; at Mingjing, upward of four-and-a-half years was not uncommon in the early 1920s.

Just as the apprentice’s entry into Zhang Jinlin’s shop was marked by a ritual of subordination, so too was his final departure from it. Chen, Yang, and Shen all agree that at Mingjing, if one did not perform the “Thank-Master Toast” (xie shi jiu), one was not considered to have bought one’s “diploma” or as having completed one’s term. Even at this point, the three men recall bitterly, “the owner could resort to new tricks,” such as extending individuals’ terms, even up to six months, to get a large number of apprentices pooling their resources for the final send-off. When the big day arrived, Zhang was entitled to invite his friends and relatives to participate, but the apprentices could not invite even a parent. No protests were raised because the only persons entitled to complain were the apprentices’ guarantors; presumably, their interest was in seeing apprenticeships completed.<sup>115</sup>

At Mingjing, apprentices regarded themselves, with good reason, as beasts of burden subjected to a life of austerity, filth, and violence. Corporal punishment was frequent. “A punch or slap on the face was the very least ... It was so natural that it was not ... taken as [anything] special,”<sup>116</sup> said eight former apprentices of Mingjing and other shops. Hammer handles, wooden sticks, ropes, whatever was at hand could become weapons if an apprentice crossed a master or simply had the bad luck to run into him when he was out of sorts. Chen Zhaoquan recalls the Mingjing apprentice Xu Xingkang, sent to the Zhonghua falang chang (Zhonghua Enamel Works) one day to repair a machine. In the course of his work, the machine somehow crushed his foot. When Zhang Jinlin saw how seriously Xu had been wounded, he told him to leave the factory for good. Because of the medical neglect brought on by his unemployment, Xu ended up crippled for life.<sup>117</sup> Former apprentices from other shops recall workmates having been beaten to death.

As suggested by the repair mission that led to Xu’s accident, however, and in spite of haphazard training and the physical neglect or abuse of the 110 or so apprentices, in the early 1920s apprentices did glean enough skill to turn themselves into valuable craftsmen whose labour Zhang Jinlin could then farm out into the printing and publishing industry. Wang Shan’gen, quoted earlier, recalled that the workers at Mingjing “were mostly skilled senior apprentices.” The Chen, Yang, and Shen trio also recall participating as part of a maintenance team of ten persons (eight apprentices, one old master, and one just-graduated apprentice) sent one day to Xinwen bao. The newspaper plant, when paying Mingjing for its expertise, did not distinguish technicians from apprentices and handed over thirty yuan per man per month. Each apprentice continued to receive only his twelve-coppers maintenance, with at most a two-mao bonus tacked on. With board added in, Chen and his coworkers calculate that Zhang cleared over 2,000 yuan per year on their team’s labour. 118

From the testimony of these apprentices, it is clear that by 1919-21, when Zhang’s firm was selling an annual average of 31,500-yuan worth of printing machinery, Zhang had also gained at least 2,800 yuan of his long-term capital from apprentices’ security deposits. He made another 2,000 yuan per year from his account at the baoguan. Although we have no way of knowing Zhang’s profit margin on his sales, it is clear that 15 percent of his gross income in this early period originated solely from his captaincy of a battalion of widely employable apprentices.

In her review of Chinese entrepreneurs in this period, Bergère states that “the technical success of these small workshops capable of reproducing foreign machinery ... was not rewarded by an equivalent economic and social success.”<sup>119</sup> It is precisely this state of affairs that makes the anonymity of these entrepreneuring foremen so difficult to penetrate. Still, from the testimony of his former competitors, colleagues, and apprentices, many of whom probably had good reason to dislike him, Zhang Jinlin’s character emerges.

Zhang appears to have been a highly trained and energetic individual. In the course of a twenty-two-year career, he stationed himself at the centre of a web of professional obligations that ranged from supply firms, to his clients at the Commercial Press, and on to the Xinwen bao plant. Socially and domestically, he directed a small army of knowledgeable but impoverished apprentices and, at least as important, their families. A man whose own status had risen thanks to technological and economic authority, physical brutality, and ritualized subordination of his apprentices and their families, Zhang was the primary beneficiary of familial patronage money, repair contracts, and sales of specialized printing machinery. But beyond these observations, even he remains as anonymous as his competitors.

## The Impact of Other Chinese-Owned Printing Machine Manufacturers

At other firms, the 1920s were also a time of growth and increased manufacture of different kinds of machines. Up to now, attention has focused on the manufacture of printing presses, but many firms were also busy developing other types of machines. Gongyichang, Yongsheng, and Xinghua, for example, were actively attempting to produce rotary paper makers, which first appeared in 1926 as a result of collaborative efforts at their Baoshan Road factories.<sup>120</sup> The lack of Western-style paper had been an impediment retarding the Western-style letterpress industry since the era of the missionary publishers. The inability of Chinese-owned enterprises to produce paper in adequate quantities by 1900 obliged the Chinese letterpress industry to use expensive imported paper. Interestingly, restrictions on the availability of foreign paper sustained the lithography industry, which relied on Chinese-produced bamboo paper, and kept it viable well into the twentieth century.

Efforts by Gongyi and others to achieve technological independence through the manufacture of Western-style paper, however, were eventually successful. By 1936, a government report observed in laudatory tones, “In the south [of China], all paper factories now use Chinese-manufactured [paper-making] machines from Baoshan [near Shanghai] and Shanghai [-proper]; in other places, most [factories] use foreign-produced ones. Baoshan and Shanghai machines are all designed and manufactured by Chinese, and the results are excellent.”<sup>121</sup> In spite of breakthroughs of this sort, of course, not all efforts were rewarded with comparable market success. Offset printing presses, for instance, were first introduced by the Hujiang and Xin Zhongguo (New China) machine shops. Hujiang responded to the growth in cigarette advertising in 1926 by attempting to copy Germanmade machines imported for sale at 10,000 yuan each. Although Hujiang did succeed in producing an imitation, its quality was so low that all the examples were sold for scrap, and in 1928 Hujiang had to declare bankruptcy.

New China Machine Shop, alternatively, had started by imitating American cigarette-rolling machines. At the time, Japanese offset printing presses were being sold for 8,000 yuan, and the Chinese shop endeavoured to copy them and the German ones, with the intention, common to the Chineseowned machine shops, of underselling the foreign machines. Zheng Xilin, then working for a Japanese firm installing offset presses at 100 yuan per job, says that he helped the firm to test its new machine, but, despite whittling the price down, the printing machine could not compete in Shanghai with the authentic foreign ones, presumably because of technical deficiencies. Finally, New China’s investment was saved by the Shanxi warlord Yan Xishan (1883-1960), who sent his purchasing agent to Shanghai to buy the machines. Zheng states that, to get the two test models off their hands, “we started with the low price of 3,500 yuan for each.”<sup>122</sup> In this way, even design failure promoted the modest expansion of mechanized printing presses to the hinterland.

The manufacture of printing presses and the sale of them outside Shanghai was supported by Chinese manufacture of other kinds of printing apparatus. Tian Jiasheng’s Ruitai Machine Shop specialized in making type-casting machines, which in the post-World War I era were all Japanese imports. Targeting the Commercial Press, his former employer, which, it will be recalled, opened its own machine shop to manufacture printing presses in the period 1918-20, Tian eventually succeeded in gaining an account there. He soon attracted other clients, and “after I got ... going, Japanese imports were gradually reduced,” he says proudly.<sup>123</sup>

Shanghai printing press and machine manufacturers had moved technologically far beyond the stage characterized by Li Changgen’s shop at which the industry had started. In the middle of the industry’s fourth decade – that is, by the 1930s – successes such as the jointly invested rotary paper maker, Tian’s type-casting machines, Mingjing’s newspaper presses, lithographic presses, and paper-cutting machines had all been achieved. The manufacturers remained hampered largely by production capacity, which itself may have been influenced by a lack of access to capital.

Regardless of these constraints, Chinese printing press and machine manufacturing was a creative and profitable industry, capable of countering Japanese manufactures, if not yet European and American ones, even at the high end of the technology required by the printing and publishing industry. More successfully than any other Chinese machine industries, except the knitting machine industry, Chinese manufacturers such as Mingjing had moved to satisfy the demands of the Chinese market for locally produced machinery. Out of the thirty-two machine shops specializing in printing machine manufacture, twenty-two were primarily manufacturers, with the remaining ten focusing on repair.<sup>124</sup> Praised by industry and government, nonetheless, the printing machine industry was founded not on the sort of circumspect intelligence characterized by Tian Jiasheng, but on the anonymous energy of proprietors such as Zhang Jinlin.

## Beginning of the End

As noted earlier, in 1932, one observer commented that Shanghai’s printing machine industry had grown twentyfold in as many years. Of the 400- plus machine shops that dotted Shanghai’s foreign concessions from 1895 to the early 1930s, this chapter has focused on the portion that supplied the domestic Chinese and, to a lesser extent, Japanese and Southeast Asian printing and publishing industries.

Of the thirty-two firms referred to here, six (Li Yongchang, Fuxing Copper Matrix Shop, Xieda, Tian’s Ruitai, Zhang’s Mingjing, and the semidependent Commercial Press-owned Huada) can be shown to have been part of the network of Chinese firms supplying the big Chinese newspaper plants and publishing houses. Initially, they offered repairs but quickly thereafter began building copies of foreign machinery. The actual number of these machine producers was certainly much higher. Like a series of industrial nodes, scattered throughout the International and Japanese Concessions, these shops provided the native industrial base for the expansion of Shanghai’s printing industry.

In addition, Tian Jiasheng, in his own view, dislodged the Japanese, who had dominated China’s type-casting machine market. In an interesting twist on the theme of technological competition, Zhang Jinlin’s Mingjing Machine Shop was patronized not only by Chinese printers and publishers but also by the Japanese Shanghai publisher Shanghai shuju and by the Japanese home market. When the Shanghai market proved to be unreceptive to locally manufactured commodities, such as Chen Zhaoqing’s lithographic presses, Tian’s type-casting machines, or New China’s offset presses, Shanghai-made machinery was sold in the Chinese hinterland and abroad and contributed to the mechanization of both the national printing and the national papermaking industries.

Thus, no later than 1900 and much earlier than has been previously recognized, the Chinese-owned printing machine industry started to rise above the prevalent pattern of heavy reliance on repair work characteristic of most machine-related industries in Shanghai. Between 1914 and 1924, the industry produced small- and medium-scale printing machinery such as simple presses and type-casting machines. By the mid-1920s, it had moved into production of more sophisticated machinery such as offset presses. Even its failure to compete well against foreign offset presses in the Shanghai market facilitated the mechanization of the nonlittoral Chinese printing industry long before the forced transfer after 1937 of industry inland brought on by the war with Japan. The singularity of Shanghai’s printing machine business in breaking from the pattern more typical of the larger Chinese machine industry – that is, of reliance on repair-and-supply work – was accomplished in part by articulate entrepreneurs such as Tian Jiasheng, but more often by the the patronage, control, and energy of men such as Zhang Jinlin who today remain little more than name entries on lists of pre-1949 factories.

In the Japanese attack on 30 January 1932, mentioned at the outset of this chapter, bombs also rained down onto the machine-making firms that studded the Zhabei, Hongkou, Nanshi, and Yangshupu districts and that were so dependent on the Commercial Press and the rest of Shanghai’s publishers for purchase contracts for printing presses and machines. During the initial bombing and subsequent house-to-house fighting, most machine shops in Zhabei were destroyed. Mingjing itself was nearly obliterated. In Hongkou alone, more than 200 machine shops suffered destruction. Naturally, in light of their lack of access to corporate assets and their dependence on larger firms for business, these small workshops recovered much more haltingly than did the machine shop of the Commercial Press.

According to Bank of China reckoning, by 1934 there were only 204 machine shops left in Shanghai, the same approximate number as in the late 1910s.<sup>125</sup> The machine industry grew smaller year by year and did not begin to recover until the end of 1936. Dalong, for example, increased both its investments and its sales by then. Mingjing, like many other surviving machine shops, began retooling for the arms trade and government needs. Its plant flickered back to life with the shift to military production and machine tools intended for military products. When fighting related to the Marco Polo Incident (7 July 1937) spread from Beijing to Shanghai on 13 August, however, the machinery industry collapsed again. Fighting destroyed 360 firms, and 66 firms moved inland.<sup>126</sup> Dalong was soon occupied by Japanese troops and was reorganized to support the Japanese war effort. Mingjing drops out of the record until 1949, by which time Shanghai and Mingjing were no longer the centre of the Chinese-owned printing machine industry. In that year, only 9 of 308 printing presses produced in China bore a Shanghai trademark.<sup>127</sup>

## Conclusion

This chapter began with the question of how letterpress and lithographic printing commenced, technologically speaking, in Shanghai and, by implication, in the rest of China at the end of the nineteenth century. The gradual spread of Western-style lithographic and letterpress printing up the China coast after 1814 by means of missionary publishers such as the Jesuits, American Board Press, London Mission Press, and the APMP presented numerous technical challenges. Missionaries themselves came up with innovative solutions to these problems on the spot or brought in technical personnel, such as William Gamble, to assist them. One obstacle that the missionaries did not manage to overcome by the end of the nineteenth century was their dependence on imported printing presses and printing supplies. They passed this dependence on foreign-made machinery and supplies on to the small number of Chinese printers and publishers trained in their publishing firms. Shanghai’s modern printing industry overcame the limitations of the missionary supply system and gradually mechanized itself on the bases of imported machinery and, historically more significant, Chinese-made printing machinery.

As indicated by Table 3.1, by 1900, five years after Li Changgen opened his machine shop, Shanghai had distinguished itself from other potential competitors in printing press and printing machine manufacture. Whether we are discussing early manufacture of manual relief presses or lithographic hand presses, China’s important breakthroughs were made by Shanghai’s machine shop proprietors and their workers. The same can be said of the manufacture of matrices and Chinese-language type-casters. In the Chinese manufacture of rotary presses, which did not appear until the late 1920s, and in the creation of advanced photogravure presses, Shanghai’s tradesmen played the same prominent role. Somewhat more significant, of the nine technologies created or imitated on the Chinese mainland after 1915, when Zhang Jinlin founded Mingjing, his firm could claim credit for the first viable models of four of them. And within six years of the establishment of the firm, Zhang and his apprentices were manufacturing an average of 100 presses and machines per year. By contrast, Tian Jiasheng’s Ruitai could claim breakthrough success only in type-casters, an area that nonetheless advanced China’s Gutenberg revolution by putting lead type into a widening variety of Chinese hands.

By shifting attention away from imported technology, this chapter has brought into view the process by which the initial seven Shanghai printing machine shops, within less than a decade after 1895, laid the foundation for self-sustaining manufacturing firms. Starting with the Li Yongchang shop, which, like its competitors, was initially little more than a repair-and-supply shop, these firms were led by persons who may be called foremen-capitalists. Although of relatively minor economic importance, these few scattered firms are of historical importance and interest because of their role in creating conditions suitable for the economically more significant manufacturing firms, such as Mingjing. Contrary to the prevailing view, we have seen that, in the first crucial decade of the printing machine industry and more likely between 1895 and 1900, erstwhile industrial foremen had already remade themselves as manufacturers. At the same time, they created their own successors through an effective, if exploitative, apprenticeship system. Even before World War I, the Chinese printing machine industry was concentrating on manufacture, rather than repair, thanks to their efforts. By reorienting the standard paradigm prevailing in the history of the book to include the history of technology and industrial manufacturing, this chapter has shown that Shanghai’s Chinese-owned modern printing and publishing industry was grounded in part on its Chinese-owned foundries and machine shops. For this reason, histories of the modern book industry, which itself is key to the development of Chinese print capitalism, are incomplete unless they include attention to the history of industrial manufacturing.

Indeed, the most successful of these foremen-capitalists, Mingjing’s Zhang Jinlin, started out as an apprentice in the most flourishing of the late Qing Shanghai workshops. At least as helpful to his fifteen-year climb as his own diligence and training was the range of business connections that he picked up as he manoeuvered through Shanghai’s industrial sites, starting from the Li Yongchang shop on Jiujiang Road, moving north to the Commercial Press, heading south to the Xinwen bao newspaper works, and finally coming to rest in his own vast manufacturing plant. Just as important, the more than

1,100 presses that Zhang’s firm can be shown to have produced between 1916 and 1930, the years for which such twenty-one Chinese-owned competitors were important for putting modern Western-style printing within reach of Chinese print capitalists both in Shanghai and inland. By the 1930s, the productivity of these manufacturers presented government commentators with a model of industrial success.

The printing machine manufacturing business witnessed the early emergence of foremen-capitalists who, despite the limitations of the industrial training system, did produce their own successors. The fact that certain prominent firms, such as Li Yongchang and Mingjing, cultivated the sale of their machines to one of Shanghai’s largest industrial markets, the Shanghai printing industry, implies that less well-known firms had much the same intention but searched for less competitive markets inland and overseas.

For all of them, technological expertise, commercial acumen, and good fortune combined between the early 1900s and the 1930s to enable a total of twenty-two firms to move rapidly into the manufacture first of simpleand medium-scale printing machines and then of highly sophisticated ones. The early success of the printing machine firms in moving from repair services to manufacturing was related not only to the ability of these manufacturers to produce machinery at a marketable price but also to the increasing demand for printed commodities of all kinds between 1895 and the mid-1930s. In the end, however, war, not technological or commercial competition, brought a lasting halt to the proliferation of Shanghai’s Chinese printing machine manufacturers. The 1932 Japanese bombing of Shanghai had a profound effect on the printing machine industry, dealing it a setback from which it very slowly recovered in the mid-1930s, only to be decimated in August 1937 when the Japanese military again attacked Shanghai. Indeed, the second Japanese assault dealt the city’s printing machine manufacturers a blow from which they never recovered in the Republican period, highlighting the importance of machinery to Chinese print capitalism.

From Mingjing’s modern plant down to the smallest and rudest of workshops, these grimy, noisy, violent shops, much more fundamentally than the missionary publishers or any of the large Chinese publishers at the highstatus end of this cultural industry, were responsible for the extensive mechanization, as well as the spread, of both letterpress and lithographic technology throughout Shanghai’s and China’s printing industry in the early twentieth century. Without the appearance and multiplication of these Chinese “sooty sons of Vulcan,” labouring over their forges and sleeping under their lathes, Shanghai printers and publishers would have remained permanently dependent on the same imported supplies as the missionaries who had trained nineteenth-century Chinese printers in Canton, Hong Kong, and Ningbo.

Fewer Chinese printers would have been able to afford to buy modern printing machinery, and Western-style printing would have required much more time to become the Chinese norm.

While acknowledging the importance of proprietors such as Zhang Jinlin, a balanced account of this industry, which contributed in a material, if indirect, way both to the post-1895 “general awakening” and to subsequent expansions of the modern, mechanized, market-driven Chinese press in the early twentieth century, requires that we recognize the social cost of enlightenment exacted from Zhang’s and others’ employees. Through physical and patriarchal domination, machine shop owners such as Zhang controlled access to the narrow passageway that provided a relatively small proportion of machine-building apprentices with the skills they needed to succeed on their own. The exacerbation of these social relations in a radically new industrial environment harkens back to issues raised in Chapter 2’s discussion of the lithographic industry, particularly the observation that the minds and values of those who owned modern machinery often failed to keep pace with technological innovation. In fact, industrial technology seems to have coarsened life for many even as it granted hope to a handful.

Although there is little evidence of the emergence of mature and selfconscious class relationships in the lithographic industry of the late nineteenth century, by the early twentieth century it is clear from the machine industry that the same growing polarization discussed by Febvre and Martin and Darnton with respect to France was under way in Shanghai. This process was exacerbated by the existence of technology and access to it even if the situation did not yet manifest itself in specific acts of rebellion. Thus, a question arises as to how Mingjing and other apprentices addressed their misery at the powerless end of Shanghai’s industrial workplace relations. The success of many of their masters in opening their own shops hints strongly at some apprentices’ faith in their ability as individuals to get ahead. Others, perhaps under the influence of printed materials that began circulating in the 1920s, gradually turned to collectivist solutions in opposition to the master/apprentice system studied here.