# Patterns and Limits of Reflection-in-Action Across the Professions

Having considered a sample of professional fields and having studied episodes of reflection-in-action in each of them, we are now in a position to return to two of the questions with which we began this study:

What are the patterns of similarity and difference in reflection-in-action across professional fields?

2. What have we learned about the limits to reflection-in-action?

## Constancy and Variation

I have tried in Part Il to show how practitioners in very different sorts of professions reveal an underlying similarity in the art of their practice, and especially in the artful inquiry by which they sometimes deal with situations of uncertainty, instability, and uniqueness. This is the pattern of reflection-inaction which I have called "reflective conversation with the situation." In chapter 5, I showed how architectural designing and psychotherapy can both be seen as variations on this underlying process, and in the subsequent chapters on the sciencebased professions, planning, and management, I have described what I take to be versions of the same process.

In all of these examples, inquiry begins with an effort to solve a problem as initially set. In some cases, the initial problem is framed as a problem of making something (a semiconductor amplifier, a higher-absorbency paper product); in some cases, it is framed as a problem of understanding something (why a traditional industrial process works, the sources of malnourishment). However the problem is initially set, in the later stages of inquiry both making and understanding interests come into play.

The inquirer remains open to the discovery of phenomena, incongruent with the initial problem setting, on the basis of which he reframes the problem. Thus, the discovery of a new metal-coloring process, which also works, leads to a new question, "How to account for the effectiveness of both the traditional and the new processes?" As the Bell Laboratory scientists tested Bardeen's theory of surface-state “electron traps,' they observed an unexpected amplifying effect which they saw as requiring a new explanation. Having constructed his initial nutrient flow model, and having discovered the problems of implementing it, Wilson was led to ask how community members themselves could be helped to treat reduction of malnourishment as an experimental task. Product development researchers, seeking higher-absorbency paper products, discovered phenomena which led them to recast the development target from high “absorption capacity"to "high rate of absorption.'

Thus, in all of these examples, inquiry, however it may initially have been conceived, turns into a frame experiment. What allows this to happen is that the inquirer is willing to step into the problematic situation, to impose a frame on it, to follow the implications of the discipline thus established and yet to remain open to the situation's back-talk. Reflecting on the surprising consequences of his efforts to shape the situation in conformity with his initially chosen frame, the inquirer frames new questions and new ends in view.

In this shared pattern of inquiry there are two critically important processes, which I have also noted in my comparison of Quist's designing and the Supervisor's psychotherapeutic interpreting. Faced with some phenomenon that he finds unique, the inquirer nevertheless draws on some element of his familiar repertoire which he treats as exemplar or as generative metaphor for the new phenomenon. So Wilson thought of the malnourishment process in terms of nutrient flow, and the product researchers saw the synthetic-bristle paintbrush as a pump. Further, as the inquirer reflects on the similarities he has perceived, he formulates new hypotheses. But he tests these hypotheses by experimental actions which also function as moves for shaping the situation and as probes for exploring it. In the later examples, as in Quist's designing, the reflective conversation includes and depends upon this threefold transactional experimenting.

I have so far stressed similarities of pattern in the various arts of reflective professional practice, but there are also important differences. These go beyond the familiar distinctions between "hard"and "soft"professions, "helping professions' and "mechanical arts,""learned professions"and "professionalizing occupations."I have in mind differences in the constants that various practitioners bring to their reflection-inaction:

. the media, languages, and repertoires that practitioners use to describe reality and conduct experiments

the appreciative systems they bring to problem setting, to the evaluation of inquiry, and to reflective conversation

the overarching theories by which they make sense of phenomena

the role frames within which they set their tasks and through which they bound their institutional settings.

In calling these things constants, I do not mean to suggest that they are absolutely unchanging. They do change, sometimes in response to reflection, but at a slower rate than theories of particular phenomena or frames for particular problematic situations. Hence they give the practitioner the relatively solid references from which, in reflection-in-action, he can allow his theories and frames to come apart. Indeed, depending on the robustness of these constants, practitioners are more or less able to recognize and engage that which is shifting and turbulent in their practice. And depending on differences in these constants, taken individually and as whole patterns, we can account for significant differences in reflection-in-action within and across the professions.

Although it would be beyond the scope of this book to pursue this line of inquiry very far, I would like in a few paragraphs to suggest how it might be pursued

What does it matter that the medium of reflection-in-action is the architect's sketchpad, the relation between patient and therapist, the drawings and experimental models of an engineering laboratory, the dialogue of planner and developer, or the interactive relations among managers in a corporation? Media cannot really be separated in their influence from language and repertoire. Together they make up the "stuff" of inquiry, in terms of which practitioners move, experiment, and explore. Skills in the manipulation of media, languages, and repertoires are essential to a practitioner's reflective conversation with his situation, just as skill in the manipulation of spoken language in essential to ordinary conversation.

Quist's designing depends on his feel for the sketchpad and the scale model, and for the drawing/talking language in which he works. Similarly, the engineers' experimental designing depends on their feel for the behavior of metals under varying conditions of temperature, exposure to air, or immersion in water. For Wilson, the Supervisor, the town planner, the managers, media are kinds of social fields. Because they have developed a feel for the media and languages of their practices, the individuals we have studied can construct virtual worlds in which to carry out imaginative rehearsals of action. Because of the importance of this feel for media and language, an experienced practitioner cannot convey the art of his practice to a novice merely by describing his procedures, rules, and theories, nor can he enable a novice to think like a seasoned practitioner merely by describing or even demonstrating his ways of thinking. Because of the differences in feel for media, language, and repertoire, the art of one practice tends to be opaque to the practitioners of another, obscuring such underlying similarities as I have outlined above.

We know very little about the ways in which individuals develop the feel for media, language, and repertoire which shapes their reflection-in-action. This is an intriguing and promising topic for future research.

Constancy of appreciative system is an essential condition for reflection-in-action. It is what makes possible the initial framing of the problematic situation, and it is also what permits the inquirer to reappreciate the situation in the light of its back-talk. Thus Quist's valuing of coherent design, nooks and soft back areas, artifices, and the softening of hard-edged forms makes it possible for him both to give his initial framing of the problem of the design of the school and to reframe that problem in the light of his discovery of the meaning of the gallery. And Wilson's valuing of experimental modelling, trying things out, finding things out for oneself, seeing connections between apparently disparate phenomena, showing up the defects of an orthodox view, underlies both his initial framing of the malnourishment problem in terms of the nutrient flow model and his later reframing of it in terms of communitybased Cogwheel Experiments. If, in the midst of such inquiries as these, there were a sudden shift of appreciative system, inquiry would no longer have the character of a reflective conversation. It would become a series of disconnected episodes.

It is also because of the constancy of his appreciative system that an inquirer engaged in on-the-spot experiment can tell when he is finished. He bounds his experimenting by his appreciation of the changes he has wrought.

Overlap in appreciative system has much to do with the shape of professional communities of inquiry, and differences of appreciative system have much to do with differences in reflection-in-action both across professions and within them. Partly because of such differences, architects from different schools will approach the same site and program in very different ways and produce dissimilar products, even though their design processes may conform in broad outline to my description of Quist's designing. Similarly, different planners, managers, or systems engineers may enter what would seem to an outsider to be the same situation and carry out very different inquiries, leading to different kinds of results, even though they are all engaged in reflective conversation with the situation. This variability, partly rooted in difference of appreciative system, leads to a special version of the problem of objectivity. Within a process of inquiry, evaluations of methods and products may be objective in the sense that they are independent of mere opinion. Across processes of inquiry, differences in evaluation may not be objectively resolvable. Resolution of such differences depends on the little-understood ability of inquirers to enter into one another's appreciative systems and to make reciprocal translations from one to the other.1

Quist has access to special theories of building structures, soil conditions, and the circulation of people through spaces. The engineers working on the gun-coloring problem have access to theories of the surface properties of metals. Both Quist and the engineers can apply their special theories to particular instances so as to derive a rule for the prediction or control of the phenomena at hand. Quist can use his structural theories, for example, to figure out the minimum dimensions of a beam that must carry a given load. But neither Quist nor the engineers appear to have access to what I have called overarching theories. An overarching theory does not give a rule that can be applied to predict or control a particular event, but it supplies language from which to construct particular descriptions and themes from which to develop particular interpretations. Psychoanalytic theory functions in this way for the Supervisor, and process-flow modelling does so for Wilson. In both cases, the practitioner does not consider that he has formed a satisfactory account of phenomena in any practice situation until he has framed it in terms of his overarching theory.

If a practitioner has such a theory, he uses it to guide his reflection-in-action. The nature of the reflective conversation varies, from profession to profession and from practitioner to practitioner, depending on the presence or absence, and on the content, of overarching theory.

In the several cases we have examined, we have observed how practitioners frame their roles. In one case, the town planner's, we have traced the consequences of role-frame for the system of knowing-in-practice. Because role-frame remains relatively constant from situation to situation, it bounds the scope of practice and provides a reference which allows a practitioner to build a cumulative repertoire of exemplars, facts, and descriptions.

Differences in role frame help to determine what knowledge is seen as useful in practice and what kinds of reflection are undertaken in action. Consider, to take a particularly important example, how practitioners treat their institutional contexts. All professional roles are embedded in an institutional context, but not all practitioners take it seriously. A mechanical engineer may see himself as a technical problem solver, treating his relations with his clients as an unavoidable but essentially nonprofessional activity. Or, like Wilson, he may frame his tasks in such a way that a larger social context moves to the foreground and technical problem solving becomes a piece of the larger social puzzle. If institutional context occupies a central place in a practitioner's role frame, then he pays attention to phenomena for which there is no satisfactory off-the-shelf theory. He must construct a theory of his own. And if he treats his theory of the context as an object of reflection (as the town planner does only to a slight extent), then he will perceive that others in the situation meet his frames and theories with

## Patterns and Limits of Reflection-in-Action

frames and theories of their own. He will see them not only as objects to be planned for but as planners in their own right, and his interaction with them will take the form of a reflective conversation.

In these ways, among others, differences in the constants brought to inquiry affect the scope and direction of reflectionin-action. But the constants—media, language, repertoire, appreciative system, overarching theory, and role frame—are also subject to change. They tend to change over periods of time longer than a single episode of practice, although particular events may trigger their change. And they are sometimes changed through the practitioner's reflection on the events of his practice. The study of these sorts of reflection, crucial both to professional development and to the epistemology of practice, would require a more sustained longitudinal analysis than any I have attempted in the chapters of this book.

## The Limits of Reflection-in-Action

What is it that constrains our ability to reflect-in-action? To what extent are such constraints inherent in the human situation or in the epistemology of practice, and to what extent can we learn to transcend them?

Our examples suggest that practitioners do frequently think about what they are doing while doing it. In professional practice, reflection-in-action is not a rare event. On the other hand, we have also seen how systems of knowing-in-practice may limit the scope and depth of reflection.

The first finding disconfirms the rather widespread belief that thinking must interfere with doing. The second draws attention to the self-limiting character of knowing-in-practice, both in individuals and organizations, and suggests the directions in which such limits might be extended.

According to conventional wisdom, thinking interferes with doing in two ways. First, artistry being indescribable, reflection on action is doomed to failure; and second, reflection-inaction paralyzes action. Both arguments are largely, though not entirely, mistaken. They owe their plausibility to the persistence of misleading views about the relation of thought to action.

As to the first argument, I have already noted that "artistry" has two meanings. It may designate intuitive knowing, like the intuitive judgments of a skilled craftsman or the intuitive theories-in-action of an expert block balancer. It may also designate reflection-in-action on intuitive knowing, as in Quist's designing or the Supervisor's interpreting. In both of these senses, artistry is describable. When practitioners reflect-in-action, they describe their own intuitive understandings. And it is possible to describe reflection-in-action itself, as I have done in the previous chapters.

It is true, nevertheless, that there is always a gap between such descriptions and the reality to which they refer. When a practitioner displays artistry, his intuitive knowing is always richer in information than any description of it. Further, the internal strategy of representation, embodied in the practitioner's feel for artistic performance, is frequently incongruent with the strategies used to construct external descriptions of it. Because of this incongruity, for example, people who do things well often give what appear to be good descriptions of their procedures which others cannot follow. Everyone who has tried to learn from a book how to ski or write a story knows how difficult it can be to act from such a description.

But the gap between artistry and its description need not obstruct reflection-in-action. In such examples as Quist's reflection on Petra's framing of the problem of the site or the block balancer's reflection on his geometric center theory of balancing, the description of intuitive knowing feeds reflection, enabling the inquirer to criticize, test, and restructure his understandings. Incompleteness of description is no impediment to reflection. On the contrary, anything like a complete description of intuitive knowing would produce an excess of information. Nor is it a fatal impediment that reflection-inaction converts one's intuitive feel for performance to knowledge-in-practice which involves a different strategy of representation. Reflection-in-action does not depend on a description of intuitive knowing that is complete or faithful to internal representation. Although some descriptions are more appropriate to reflection-in-action than others, descriptions that are not very good may be good enough to enable an inquirer to criticize and restructure his intuitive understandings so as to produce new actions that improve the situation or trigger a reframing of the problem.

Even if reflection-in-action is feasible, however, it may seem dangerous. The baseball pitcher who claims never to think about his pitching in the midst of a game, and the famous story of the centipede paralyzed by the attempt to explain how he moves, suggest that reflection interferes with action. It may seem to do so for four different reasons:

1. There is no time to reflect when we are on the firing line; if we stop to think, we may be dead.

2. When we think about what we are doing, we surface complexity, which interferes with the smooth flow of action. The complexity that we can manage unconsciously paralyzes us when we bring it to consciousness.

3. If we begin to reflect-in-action, we may trigger an infinite regress of reflection on action, then on our reflection on action, and so on ad infinitum.

4. The stance appropriate to reflection is incompatible with the stance appropriate to action. As Hannah Arendt has said,

Every reflection that does not serve knowledge and is not guided by practical needs and aims is . . . "out of order". . . it interrupts any doing, any ordinary activities, no matter what they happen to be. All thinking demands a stop-and-think . . . it is, indeed, as though thinking paralyzed me in much the same way as an excess of consciousness may paralyze the automatism of my bodily function.2

So understood, reflection-in-action is a contradiction in terms.

These arguments admit the possibility of reflecting on action (even the pitcher who never "thinks"during the game is happy to review films of the game in the privacy and safety of the locker-room), but they point to the dangers of reflection in action. They contain grains of truth, but they depend on a mistaken view of the relationship between thought and action. Fused together in the conventional wisdom, they have become a myth that reinforces the ever-present tendency to mystify the art of practice.

There are indeed times when it is dangerous to stop and think. On the firing line, in the midst of traffic, even on the playing field, there is a need for immediate, on-line response, and the failure to deliver it can have serious consequences. But not all practice situations are of this sort. The action-present (the period of time in which we remain in the “same situation") varies greatly from case to case, and in many cases there is time to think what we are doing. Consider, for example, a physician's management of a patient's disease, a lawyer's preparation of a brief, a teacher's handling of a difhcult student. In processes such as these, which may extend over weeks, months, or years, fast-moving episodes are punctuated by intervals which provide opportunity for reflection.

## Patterns and Limits of Reflection-in-Action

Even when the action-present is brief, performers can sometimes train themselves to think about their actions. In the splitsecond exchanges of a game of tennis, a skilled player learns to give himself a moment to plan the next shot. His game is the better for this momentary hesitation, so long as he gauges the time available for reflection correctly and integrates his reflection into the smooth flow of action. And we have observed how practitioners like architects, musicians, and therapists construct virtual worlds in which the pace of action can be slowed down and iterations and variations of actions can be tried. Indeed, our conception of the art of practice ought to give a central place to the ways in which practitioners learn to create opportunities for reflection-in-action.

The argument from the inherent complexity of intuitive knowing raises again the question of what constitutes a good description of action. Speaking of the centipede's paralysis, Seymour Papert once observed that the difficulty is not in the inherent complexity of the material brought to consciousness but in our ways of representing complexity. Certain descriptions are more useful for action than are others. The centipede might have given a nonparalyzing answer to the question, "How do you do it?" by saying simply, "I move forward in a wavy motion."A good coach learns to capture the complexity of action in metaphor ("Lean into the slope!") that helps to convey the feel for the performance.

On the other hand, some very useful prescriptions for action do temporarily interfere with performance. Someone learning to play tennis or golf or a musical instrument may be asked to change his grip (or his embouchure) with the expectation that he will lose spontaneity for a time before recapturing it at a higher level of quality. Here we are not surprised to find that reflection does temporarily inhibit action. Whether or not we are prepared to pay this price depends on our ability to find a context in which we can practice at low risk, or on our judgment of the value of incurring a temporary loss of spontaneity. In any case, we are most likely to initiate reflection-in-action when we are stuck or seriously dissatisfied with our performance. Our question then is not so much whether to reflect as what kind of reflection is most likely to help us get unstuck.

The fear that reflection-in-action will trigger an infinite regress of reflection derives from an unexamined dichotomy of thought and action. If we separate thinking from doing, seeing thought only as a preparation for action and action only as an iimnplementation of thought, then it is easy to believe that when we step into the separate domain of thought we will become lost in an infinite regress of thinking about thinking. But in actual reflection-in-action, as we have seen, doing and thinking are complementary. Doing extends thinking in the tests, moves, and probes of experimental action, and reflection feeds on doing and its results. Each feeds the other, and each sets boundaries for the other. It is the surprising result of action that triggers reflection, and it is the production of a satisfactory move that brings reflection temporarily to a close. It is true, certainly, that an inquirer's continuing conversation with his situation may lead, open-endedly, to renewal of reflection. When a practitioner keeps inquiry moving, however, he does not abstain from action in order to sink into endless thought. Continuity of inquiry entails a continual interweaving of thinking and doing.

Finally, Hannah Arendt's observation that reflection is "out of order" in action may seem valid or invalid depending on the kind of reflection one has in mind. It is not hard to imagine reflection "not guided by practical needs and aims" which might distract an actor or cause him to cease acting altogether. This may appear a good or bad thing, depending on one's view of the action in question. Some advisors to President Johnson

## Patterns and Limits of Reflection-in-Action

during the Vietnam War years have recorded the feeling that in the councils of war their skeptical reflections always seemed impractical and out of order.3 In such a case, the interruption of action by reflection might seem heroic. In other, less dramatic instances, reflection incongruent with a present course of action may be maintained through double vision. Double vision does not require us to stop and think, but the capacity to keep alive, in the midst of action, a multiplicity of views of the situation. It does not interfere with action but contributes to the inquirer's readiness for the mode of action I have called reflective conversation with the situation.

There is nothing in reflection, then, which leads necessarily to paralysis of action. The fear of paralysis may spring from worst-case analysis which ignores the opportunities for reflection within the action-present, from neglect of our ability to construct virtual worlds in which the pace of action can be slowed down, from ignorance of double vision, from inability to imagine descriptions useful for action, or from an inappropriate dichotomy of thinking and doing.

In actual practice, practitioners do, without paralysis, reflectin-action. The fear of a paralysis induced by reflection, like the belief in the indescribability of artistry, comes not from the experience of practice but from a lingering model of practical rationality which is much in need of reflection.

Quite different from the mythical limits to reflection, celebrated in the conventional wisdom, are the self-reinforcing systems of knowing-in-practice that we have encountered in some of our case studies of professional practice.

The town planner in our example reflects on his strategies of problem solving but not on his problem settings or on the role frame and theory of action from which they derive. The consumer product managers reflect on their organizational crises but not on the organizational learning system that fosters crises. Their reflections operate within their systems of understanding. The town planner, who takes his balancing act as a given, reflects only on the techniques best suited to its performance. The product development managers, who treat their learning system as unchangeable, think only about the best ways of patching it. Similarly, in the dialogues of Quist and Petra and the Supervisor and the Resident, there is a great deal of artistry (which involves reflection-in-action) but very little second-order reflection either on artistry or on the interaction between teacher and student.

It seems to me that the processes which maintain the constancy of individual and organizational systems of knowing-inpractice are also the ones that keep the art of practice mysterious. When a practitioner does not reflect on his own inquiry, he keeps his intuitive understandings tacit and is inattentive to the limits of his scope of reflective attention. The remedy to the mystification of practice and to the constriction of reflection-in-action is the same: a redirection of attention to the system of knowing-in-practice and to reflection-in-action itself. Quist and the Supervisor should be thinking about the art that they demonstrate for their students, and about the interactions in which they demonstrate it. The town planner should be thinking about his limited reflection-in-action, and about the balancing act within which he frames his practice. The managers of the consumer products firm should be reflecting on their patching exercises and on the organizational learning system that requires patching.

But this is circular. What keeps the planner, for example, from reflecting on his balancing act is his self-reinforcing system of knowing-in-practice. The system makes itself immune to reflection, thereby protecting the planner from the uncertainty (and perhaps also from the paralysis) he would experience if he were to allow his system to come apart. A practitioner might break into a circle of self-limiting reflection by attending to his role frame, his interpersonal theory-in-use, or the organizational learning system in which he functions. W'hatever his starting point, however, he is unlikely to get very far unless he wants to extend and deepen his reflection-inaction, and unless others help him see what he has worked to avoid seeing.

The pursuit of these questions, critical to a theory of education for reflection-in-action, would take us well beyond the scope of this book.

## Part III CONCLUSION