# Mapping The Fut ure

As one millennium ended and anot her began, digital t echnology fundamentally t ransformed graphic design. Old avant-garde issues of aut horship, universalit y, and social responsibilit y were reborn wit hin societ y’s newly decent ralized net worked st ruct ure. Designers became graphic authors, initiators of content, much to the chagrin of die-hard modernists and service-oriented professionals. Industry-standard software and restrictive web protocols formed a new universal graphic language, while the subjective shift expressed in New Wave and postmodern design instilled a revived sense of agency among designers. Kalle Lasn launched Adbusters, tearing a hole in the detached professional facade of the ad industry. Designers rebelled against the sleekness of technology, looking to a renewed sense of craft, as ornament reentered the design scene. Visionary global design leaders like Kenya Hara brought global consciousness and environmental ethos to big business. Cyberspace no longer represented the terrain of specialized interactive designers; instead virtual and physical reality began to merge, forming a new collective working environment for all.

Jan van Toorn Spread from the visual essay “Panorama of Habits” in Design’s Delight, 2006.

St even Heller is t he world’s most prolific design writ er, producing, so far, over ONE hundred books and count less art icles. And, for the majority of his career, he has done so while maintaining a day job as an influential art director at the New York Times (first of the Op-Ed page and later of the Book Review). Notoriously, he begins his workday at 4:00 a.m. Since the late 1970s, Heller has filled such early morning hours documenting and critiquing the history and culture of graphic design, capturing narratives otherwise lost. As an educator he cofounded and cochairs the School of Visual Art’s Designer as Author mfa program, and in 2008 he founded sva’s Design Criticism mfa. Heller speaks with a recognizable, strongly principled, sometimes controversial voice. Currently he is exploring the shifting terrain of blogs as both an editor and writer for online journals. In the entry below from Design Observer, Heller takes a sharp look at the advertising industry as he delves into the complex relationship between underground and mainstream design.

## The Underground Mainst ream

St even Heller | 2008

Commercial culture depends on the theft of intellectual property for its livelihood. Mass marketers steal ideas from visionaries, alter them slightly if at all, then reissue them to the public as new products. In the process what was once insurgent becomes commodity, and what was once the shock of the new becomes the schlock of the novel. Invariably, early expressions of sub- or alternative cultures are the most fertile sampling grounds, as their publications or zines are the first to be pilfered. Invariably pioneers of radical form become wellsprings for appropriation. Rebellion of any kind breeds followers, and many followers become a demographic.

The phenomenon is not new, however. From the beginning of the twentieth century avant-gardes have ceded original ideas to the mass marketplace. In Europe the Weiner Werkstätte, Deutscher Werkbund, Bauhaus, and scores of other reformist schools and movements that sought to better the marketplace with convention-altering arts and crafts fell victim to their own successes. Their collective goal was to raise the level of both manufacture and design while changing timeworn habits and antiquated expectations, yet their ideas became established. The avant-garde is usurped when its eccentricity is deemed acceptable.