Christmas Exhibition in the Austrian Museum (1897) (Bourgeois Household Effects – the Lefler room) It cannot be denied: the collection of copies of old furniture now on show in the Austrian Museum has caused a sensation. It is the talk of the town. One feels transported back to the best days of Austrian arts and crafts. Back in the day when Vienna was still a frontrunner in applied art, when the unforgotten Eitelberger<sup>2</sup> led the cohorts of the Stubenring, the public’s interest in decorative art can hardly have been greater. Again we read reports in the daily newspapers about new paths and trends; people debate, people argue. More than that, in fact: they revisit the Christmas exhibition. What has actually happened? A new director has been appointed at the Austrian Museum, and this new director has opened up a new area for us. He has granted access to the modern style, some say. He has introduced Anglicism, say others. He stresses the practical aspect of everyday objects, say yet others. Who is right? All of them, in fact. But they haven’t found the right term. He has, I would say, discovered bourgeois household effects. I know this explanation will provoke a general puzzlement. Have we not collected the best objects of all times, whichever social class they might have belonged to, conserved them in the museum and studied them? Have we not copied the best bourgeois pieces of gothic, the Renaissance, the Baroque, the Rococo and Empire? Have we not always furnished our homes in the bourgeois style? No, we haven’t. Our wives and daughters sleep in a bed in which even Marie Antoinette, the unfortunate daughter of the Emperor, would have dreamed in the Trianon of glory, happiness and splendour. Mr Master-Butcher looks with pride at an old German sofa, whose patterns are borrowed from the wall panelling of the state room in the Town Hall in Bremen and combine part of it – all of it would be far too expensive – with an upholstered chest. And in the drawing room of an affluent stockbroker the guests stretch out in armchairs exactly like the one from which Napoleon once imposed his law on the world. Even the imperial ‘N’ is obligatory. And yet the Corsican only used this throne once. Otherwise he and his guests would have settled for less ambitious furniture. But why do we know so little about middle-class household effects? Because a disproportionately small amount has come down to us. Because the middle class used their furniture up, they used it every day, and in the end they heated the house with it. They couldn’t afford magnificent, showy rooms. And if one piece of furniture or other survived, it was almost impossible to find a museum to give shelter to the old household pet. It was distinguished neither by elaborate work nor by noble materials. And if it had won for itself a modest little place in a collection here or there, it was probably ignored. Quite the contrary with princely furniture. It was never used, or rarely, and showed its elegant, do-nothing character by displaying motifs of high architecture, and by being richly decorated. But if it was unsuitable for practical use, it was not pointless in its own circle. Its purpose was to represent and bear witness to its owner’s wealth, splendour, love of art and sheer good taste. Princely furniture was consequently, and rightly, preserved, and forms the pride and joy of every museum. Our century has made bad use of these exhibits by taking them as a practical model. The barriers that royalty had erected against the nobility, the nobility against the lower aristocracy and the lower aristocracy against the middle class, had fallen, and anyone could furnish his house and dress according to his taste. So we can actually hardly be surprised if every manservant wants furniture that could easily have graced a royal court and every cellarman wants to dress like the Prince of Wales. But it would be wrong to see this situation as progress. Because princely furniture, the product of vast superfluity, costs huge sums of money. But as the general public do not have access to such wealth, they copy the forms at the expense of material and execution, and half-measure, hollowness and that terrible monster that threatens to suck all the marrow from our bones, imitation, make their entrance. And the life we lead also contradicts the objects with which we surround ourselves. We forget that as well as the throne room we need a living room. We allow ourselves to be abused by our stylistic furniture. We bump our knees black and blue on them, and imprint whole ornaments on our backs and bottoms by the very act of sitting down. Over the last few years we have given ourselves two decades’ worth of Renaissance, Baroque and Rococo blisters, one after the other, from the variously ornamented handles of our drinking vessels. But we didn’t complain, because those who resisted such things would have been pilloried as ignoramuses, as people without a higher understanding of art. But what I am suggesting here applies only to the Continent. Across the Channel there lives a nation of free citizens who have weaned themselves off the old divisions for so long that parvenu transformations have no place there. These people have abandoned princely magnificence and princely grandeur in their homes. They gave up on dress codes a long time ago, and consequently take no special satisfaction in aping the great men. Their own comfort is more important to them than anything. And under the influence of their middle class even the aristocracy in that country is slowly going through a transformation. They have become simple and plain. A country that has such a confident, free middle class must soon inevitably the middle-class domestic style to its fullest flower. Here, the best craftsmen can work for them, they are able to concentrate on these tasks, while in other countries princely furniture would be entrusted to a master of the first rank, and middle-class household effects would be made by the second-rate. We need only consider the two most significant designers in England and France from the same period. Let us take, for example, Thomas Chippendale and Meissonier, the designer of Louis XV. Meissonier’s work consists entirely of designs for the king’s state rooms and halls, while Chippendale is best summed up by the unassuming title of a collection of his copperplates: The Gentleman and Cabinet-maker’s Director, being a Collection of Designs of Household Furniture. One will therefore understand that in any collection of bourgeois furniture the lion’s share will be the English. After all, they have even given a home to a certain amount of German bourgeois furniture that has been forgotten here in the meantime, and which is now on its way back to us via England. There are interesting examples of this; let us mention one of them here. The brightred painted chair with yellow wicker that strikes us today as so terribly English (we mockingly call them Sprösselstühle or chicken-perches) appears in many eighteenth-century German paintings of interiors, especially in the work of Chodowiecki. One other circumstance helps to explain the large number of English designs. England was the first country to go into battle against imitation. Now we too are slowly beginning to wage war against it. Fake gemstones and fake furs are already no longer, thank heavens, considered elegant, even here. We must thank our Christmas Exhibition for inspiring us to apply the new theory to domestic furniture as well. Anyone who lacks the money for a pressed-leather chair can simply buy a wicker one. Some people will be horrified. A straw-bottomed chair, how vulgar! Go to it, my dear Viennese, a straw-bottomed chair is no more vulgar than going out without diamonds, or wearing a simple cloth collar with one’s winter coat. But imitation diamonds, fur collars and leather chairs – they are truly vulgar. And so it is slowly dawning on us that if there is not enough money for opulent and decorative objects, the main focus must be on the solid and the practical. Painted inlays, wood-carvings made of sawdust and glue, ‘botch-it-yourself’ windows and other patents from the armoury of imitation, the doors and windows painted like hard wood, are slowly disappearing from the bourgeois house. Middle-class pride has awoken, the attitude of the parvenu is slowly falling out of fashion. But the key to the exhibition is an interior created collaboratively by some Viennese: the painter Heinrich Lefler, the sculptor Hans Rathausky and the architects Franz Schönthaler Junior and Josef Urban. In everyday conversation it is referred to as the Lefler room. That shorthand was absolutely necessary, because for the last few weeks it has been on everyone’s lips. Praised to the skies by the young, deeply reviled by the old, this room is seen as the first thrust of the modern in decorative and applied art on Viennese soil. This room does look modern. But if one examines it more closely, it is only our good old German Renaissance costume-ball room recast in a modern light. Nothing is missing: the wood panelling with the stencilled-on wooden inlays, the old German decorative sofa (God rest its soul), from which the nailed-on brass lions’ heads, the ones that held the Persian throw in place, were always being pulled off, and with the shelf above on which wine glasses and decorative beer mugs wobbled around so nicely when one made the slightest movement – all of these were carried over along with the rest, and masked themselves so beautifully that you do not recognize them at first. While, for example, with the old ‘decorative sofa’ a beer mug could fall on your head at any moment, it is now an English vase, but it is bound to do so. A great advance in that half-measures are now avoided, and one that can only step up porcelain consumption. So we can see already what this room is getting at. It is bringing us modern forms in the old spirit. So we have no right to speak of a modern room. They would have been doing modern art a big favour if they had used old forms in a new spirit. Let us turn our attention to the individual works. Lefler has provided delightful wallpaper, by far the best in the room. Our Austrian wallpaper industry has nothing of the kind to set beside it. Just imagine: modern wallpaper that has nothing English about it, and whose Viennese origins are visible at first glance. The appliqué cushions and the carpets are also first-rate. The mohair rug Dragon Battle also displays a proficient command of technique. But Lefler’s technique faltered when it came to the design of the stained-glass windows. He provided two: one is called Cinderella, the other Sleeping Beauty. Both reveal an oscillation between two techniques, stained-glass and American work on glass melts. Cinderella has a harmonious appearance, since here stained glass was used only when it was absolutely necessary, for example on the faces. But Sleeping Beauty is unforgivable. The painted rose hedge is a slap in the face for honest glasswork. With what joy would a glass technician have seized the opportunity to show his art in the roses. Every rose petal a different glass melt! These roses cry out for American technology, all the more so in that it is used in passing at a few important points. And that is why this window looks so unharmonious. The attempt to leave the middle window free to allow an unobstructed view outside seems to me to be worthy of imitation. All in all Lefler’s works show a fresh willingness to take the bull by the horns, and a resolute talent for subjecting himself to new techniques. The same cannot be said of the other works. The imitated inlays in the wall panelling and the banal papering of the ceiling suggest a lack of elegance. A splendid trousseau is spoiled with artificially patinated bronze reliefs which, if they were real, would not say much about their owner’s cleanliness. We should bear in mind that the green patina on the bronze objects has formed through their lying for thousands of years in damp earth, but that it would be completely absent if the objects were still in use. We could, however, still expect our moderns to reject this archaizing hoax. I have already mentioned the shelf that crowned the lightly carved sofa. And then there is clock from which one cannot tell the time. That used to be so because the face was ‘stylish’; now it is because it is square. It would therefore be unfair to make modern interior decoration responsible for this room. The modern spirit demands above all that an everyday object be practical. For this spirit beauty is the supreme perfection. And since the unpractical is never perfect, it is also impossible for it to be beautiful. Secondly, it requires unconditional truth. I said above that imitation, pseudo-elegance, is, thank God, at last becoming unmodern. And thirdly it demands individuality. That is to say that in general the king should furnish his rooms like a king, the middle classes like the middle classes and peasants like peasants, and that most particularly every king, every middle-class person and every peasant should express his own characteristics in the furnishing of his room. It is the task of modern artists to raise the taste of the masses by fulfilling the needs of the most intellectually elegant in each of its distinctive classes. Have our four artists done that? Does their boudoir correspond to the elegance of the aristocratic lady? No. And not the elegance of the manufacturer’s wife either, and certainly not the elegance of the middle-class woman. Instead it seems that in this cheap elegance the old taste of the parvenu has bestirred itself once more. Hopefully for the last time.