Gentlemen’s Hats (1898) How is fashion made? Who makes fashion? These are certainly very difficult problems. The Vienna Fashion Hat Association had the opportunity to provide a playful answer to this question, at least in the field of headgear. Twice a year, in fact, they sit around the green table and dictate to the entire globe the form of hat that is to be worn the following season. The whole globe, let us not forget. They are not making Viennese folk costumes that our stablemen, coachmen, spivs, fops and other Viennese local types might wear. Oh no, the members of the Fashion Hat Association would not stretch their minds for these people. The fashion in hats is meant only for the gentleman, and since as we know the clothing of such an individual has nothing in common with the various national costumes, except when practising country sports, since gentlemen all over the world wear the same thing, the Vienna Fashion Hat Association sets the tone for all headgear in western culture. Who would have thought the solution of this question would be so simple! It is with respect that I now consider the honourable master hat-maker, who has raised his voice in favour of the repeated elevation of the silk hat and in this way, with a one-vote majority, enforced this regulation. He alone has forced flâneurs from Paris to Yokohama to don an even taller silk hat next year, if they wish to be considered a part of good society. But what do the flâneurs from Paris to Yokohama know? What do they know of the fine master in the eleventh district? They may perhaps maunder on about the tyranny of fashion, or at best about fashion, that capricious goddess! If they had any idea! The fine master in the eleventh district is the tyrant, the god! We cannot imagine what the consequences might be if this man were prevented from appearing in the choice of fashionable headgear. Whether by a cold, whether because his strict other half refused to give him the evening off, whether he had completely forgotten. Then the whole world would have to wear a lower top hat. But it remains to be hoped that, given such colossal responsibility towards the world, nothing will keep the members of the Fashion Hat Association from casting their vote twice a year. I think I hear my readers asking the question: so do the hat-makers of Paris, London, New York and Bombay allow the fashion in hats to be determined by the masters of Vienna? In a sheepish voice I must reply: sadly not. These bad people, with perfidious Albion, of course, at their head, are not concerned in the slightest about the results of these votes. So in that case are these votes entirely pointless? Actually – yes. They are a harmless piece of play-acting, just as innocuous as if the hatters of Bucharest or Chicago were doing the same thing. The shape of the hat of an elegant man who wants to be considered elegant anywhere around the world is not affected by it one whit. But wait: this play-acting is not so innocuous at all. There are in fact more elegant people than our hatters commonly assume. And since they are unwilling to wear hats whose elegance stops at the black and yellow border posts, but our hatters make them at the bidding of the Fashion Hat Association, they are forced to acquire English hats. And we see how the use of English hats in Austria, even though they are 100 per cent more expensive and the same quality, increases to the same degree from year to year the further removed the models of the Fashion Hat Association are from the members of fine society. This becomes even sadder when we bear in mind that, with our excellent felt and our low prices, we could easily compete with the whole world. The promulgation of the Viennese hat abroad has always been defeated by incorrect form and execution. Among their customers in the most elegant circles of society, our leading firms have had their worst experiences with the styles of the Fashion Hat Association, and have soon abandoned their allegiance to the association. At Pless or Habig one will seek these styles in vain. And the emancipation has soon made itself apparent in terms of exports too. Habig hats can now be found all over the world, from New York to Rio de Janeiro. But I fail to see why the court hat-maker, who is quite able to obtain the right models thanks to his connections abroad and his fashionable clientele, should stock different hats from the provincial hat-maker. Rather than presenting as modern a hat that has sprung from the imagination of one of its members, the Fashion Hat Association would need only to promote the shape that is considered modern all over the world and in the most elegant circles. That would lead to a rise in exports and a decline in imports. In the end it would be no bad thing if everyone, even in the smallest provincial town, wore just as elegant a hat as the Viennese aristocrat does. The time of dress codes is over, after all. But some decisions made by this Association have caused actual damage to our hat industry. And the consequences of that? The crown of the top hat is now slightly lower than last season. But for the top hat of the coming winter, the Association decided that it should be higher again. The English hatters are already preparing an extraordinary mass export of silk hats to the Austrian market, since the modern top hat will not be available from every Viennese hat-maker next winter. There are other respects in which the Association’s activity might prove to be a blessing. Our Austrian national hat, the Loden hat, is just beginning to make its way around the globe. It has already reached England. The Prince of Wales encountered it and came to appreciate it on his hunting expeditions in Austria and brought it back home with him, where it has now conquered English society, both gentlemen and ladies. Truly a delicate moment, particularly for the Loden hat industry. We might in fact wonder who will make the Loden hats for English society. The Austrians, surely, while they still produce the forms that English society wants. This, however, requires boundless sensitivity, a precise knowledge of society, a sense of taste and a good nose for future developments. Styles cannot be forced upon such circles by a simple majority vote around the green table. The large manufacturer is very well aware of this, but I think that the small hatters should become involved when the time is right for their product. The Fashion Hat Association, if it feels capable of dealing with this difficult question, should take matters in hand on their behalf. But perhaps even the large manufacturers are not aware of this either. Then the English will be the happy heirs to the great treasure that the small hat-maker in the Alps has carefully guarded for a thousand years. In fact the English conduct business quite differently from the Austrians. Different hats are made for different markets. Let us not be deceived: the English hat that we see on the Viennese market is a compromise between the modern hat and the Fashion Hat Association’s hat. Even for savage peoples they manufacture objects that most appeal to them. The English treat us as they do savages. And they are quite right to do so. In this way they sell us a great many hats, while with the hat worn in the best society, which is to say the modern hat, they would do very little business. They do not sell the Viennese the hat that is modern, but the one that the Viennese consider to be modern. And there is a big difference between the two. The correct ones are sold only in London. When I ran out of London hats, I went in search of the correct shape here. Then I found that the English hats sold here did not correspond to the ones in London. I commissioned a hat-maker to order me a hat from London in a style also worn by the members of the Royal Family. I made the guarantee of the London house a condition. The cost was irrelevant. It got me nowhere. After months of excuses, after a considerable sum had been telegraphed, the British company broke off negotiations once and for all. But it would be easy for the Fashion Hat Association to make these styles. Speed was not an issue either. We should be very content to obtain a hat today that the English were wearing three years ago. That would be such a hyper-modern hat for us that no one in Vienna would notice. And that is what one can demand of a modern hat. Fashion moves slowly, more slowly than is usually assumed. Objects that are truly modern remain so for a long time. But if one hears of an item of clothing becoming unmodern in the next season, if in other words it was considered unpleasing, then one may claim that it was never modern, but incorrectly presented itself as such. Looking at our hat-makers’ exhibition in the Rotunda, it is heartbreaking to consider that such a prestigious industry is no longer involved in the export trade. There is nothing tasteless here apart from the portrait of our Emperor in the hat-lining, and even the smallest hat-makers are capable of manufacturing hats of a quality just as excellent as those of the leading houses. How high the standards are – and sadly the same cannot be said of other areas of the clothing industry. Each one seeks to make an impression through his essential competence, and the familiar exhibition tricks of attracting the viewer’s attention through adventurous forms are entirely reviled. As a result this whole part of the exhibition is attuned to a fine and elegant tone. In a single vitrine the Hat Makers’ Association brings together twelve exhibitors – small and large hat-makers, all of excellent quality. Our firms – Habig, Berger, Ita and Skrivan – are distinguished by the richness of their exhibits. Sadly I cannot judge the correctness of the styles, having been in Vienna for two years. But where elegant accoutrements are concerned, I should award the prize to Ita. But we might wish that our Fashion Hat Association might attempt to join forces with the other civilized nations. The creation of an Austrian national fashion is a phantom whose rigid grip would do inestimable damage to our industry. China is beginning to pull down its walls and is doing well out of it. We should not tolerate the erection of a Chinese wall in the name of fake local patriotism.