The New Style and the Bronze Industry (1898) I am certainly sorry that I can’t always give praise. Now and again I am obliged to deliver a word of blame. From the many letters that I receive, I see that this is resented in some quarters. The world of Viennese craft is plainly not used to serious criticism. Very much to its detriment. The many admiring articles with which exhibitions are so often greeted have, like the heat in a greenhouse, had a slackening effect on the craft, and there is a danger that the slightest draught might give the spoilt pet a cold. Were I equally convinced of this, I would not contribute to the gust of wind. But as it is, I think that the child of such healthy parents can easily cope with a bit of a draught. It will toughen him up. Many of my thoughts will also cause consternation. I am looking at the exhibition not from a Viennese but from a foreign standpoint. Deliberately. Because I am writing expressly with regard to the Paris exhibition. I want to draw the Viennese craftsmen’s attention to those products that they take so much for granted that they don’t consider them worth exhibiting, but which are considered unsurpassed in the rest of the world. But at the same time the Viennese should be warned against showing in Paris products that can be made better abroad. Yes, do craftsmen themselves not know what they do best? Oh no. Just as little as poets, painters or artists of any kind know or can know. They will always place most value on the child of their Muse that has tormented them the most. But that which best corresponds to their nature, to their predisposition, what they have produced most effortlessly, what bears the mark of their individual, and hence the best, their very own, can never strike them as especially outstanding. Only the agreement of the public can teach them the correct judgement of their achievements. But the Viennese has heard the judgement of London, Paris and New York so seldom. And now the right moment seems to me to have come, after which, at the end of the century, we must subject ourselves to this judgement. In Paris we should show people what we can do, not what we can’t but would like to be able to. Exhibiting these things would be of little use to us. I would sooner see fewer ingenious objects than those that could be seen better, if only by a shade, in another category. In Paris they are probably about to resolve, for the next few years, the most burning question that currently dominates our arts and crafts: the old styles or the modern style? Other civilized countries adopted a position on the matter long ago and will therefore also impress in Paris with their firm and resolute presence. Even the German Reich, whose entrance in Chicago was accompanied by the sound of trumpets, having noticed that this grandezza was inappropriate, modestly withdrew to learn something from the Americans; even the German Reich, then, which had lagged behind for so long, enthusiastically joined the other civilized nations. However, we have remained behind, we have remained so far behind that our craftsmen are defiantly spurning the saving hand that Privy Councillor von Scala offers them, and have even launched a newspaper of their own to combat the new trend. In Germany over the past few months four newspapers have been founded to propagate this new tendency, and if anyone wanted to bring out a paper to counter it he would be welcomed with boundless joy. We are certainly no more stupid than anyone else out there. On the contrary! We even have something that most of them lack – our triumphant good Viennese taste, which many might envy us. The only people to blame are our unreasonable schools, which have inhibited the natural development of our arts and crafts. But the solution of this burning question is this: anything created by earlier centuries can today, insofar as it is still usable, be copied. The forms of new phenomena in our culture (railway carriages, telephones, typewriters, etc.) must be developed without deliberate echoes of a style that has already been surpassed. Changes to an old object, in order to adapt it to modern needs, are not allowed. Here the important thing is either to copy or to create something completely new. But by saying that I do not mean that the new is the opposite of what has gone before. To my knowledge this demand has never been expressed in such precise terms, although in specialist circles abroad and, recently in the Austrian Museum, similar things can be heard. But people have been working according to this rule for years. This demand is in fact quite obvious. The copy of an old painting is also a work of art. Who does not remember the magnificent copies of Italian old masters by Lenbach<sup>6</sup> in the Schack Galerie in Munich? But deliberate attempts to capture new thoughts in the style of an old master are unworthy of true art. They are always doomed to failure. Certainly a modern artist can, through a penchant and reverence for a particular master, make this manner so much his own that his intellectual products strongly bear the stamp of his master. I need only recall Lenbach’s oldmaster tone, or the fifteenth-century figures of the English. But never can a true artist paint now à la Botticelli, the next time à la Titian and another time à la Raphael Mengs. What would we think of a writer today who wrote a work in the style of Aeschylus, a poem in the style of Gerhart Hauptmann tomorrow and the day after that a farce in the style of Hans Sachs and still demonstrated the sad courage of revealing his impotence by confessing to his models. Imagine a state school for poetry in which artistic young people were forcibly emasculated by such a doctrine, in which literary helotism was elevated to a principle. The whole world would regret the victim of such a method. And yet that school exists, although not for literature, but for arts and crafts. But neither can we change anything about an object that we want to copy. As we feel no reverence for our own times, we lack it also for times past. We always have objections to raise about the old products. We always yield to the happy illusion that we can do something better. So we have also hounded the German Renaissance to death with ‘beautiful’ conditions. So changes must be made: it’s called ‘beautification’. But even years later we can see that these supposed beautifications were not improvements, that the old model or an exact copy of it gleams with old naivety, while its imitation, with its many ‘beautifications’, has become unimpeachable. Has that, though, become a salutary lesson to the practitioner of the applied arts? Far from it! He thinks only about how these beautifications have not been radical enough. Because he doesn’t like the old thing at all. Now he knows more improvements again. And after years the game started up again from the beginning, and so on into our own present day, if the new director of our Austrian Museum had not put an end to this labour of Sisyphus – we might call it ant-work – which is more comical than it is tragic. From now on, works which seek to attain a style other than the one presently seen on the Stubenring must be exact copies. But from these perspectives – they may be correct or not, but they are the Austrian ones – how do things stand with our bronze industry? Very differently. Those things which escape the authority of the schools are, of course, once more the best. But perhaps that is precisely why they are not being shown. I mean those charming bronze bibelots which, in their natural colours, are a Viennese speciality, and which are the delight of every Graben flâneur. Under the Japanese influence, something genuinely Viennese has come into being here, something which can fill us with justified pride. I have asked about them, but always been told that there is no room for these ‘ordinary’ things. With great satisfaction, however, people have pointed to the artworks that they have had made especially for the exhibition by the most celebrated architects and professors. All styles are abused by these gentlemen. I did find one exception, but I only praise it with some misgivings. It is the religious objects in the Romanesque and Gothic styles, eras with which I am not as familiar as I am with the Renaissance. That may be the source of my pleasure in them. But it seems to me that the architect Richard Jordan has kept as precisely as possible to the old models, which we can admire in the most exquisite execution at the firm Franz Ludwig Adler & Son. These considerations do not, of course, touch upon the purely figurative works. We see some of these by A. M. Beschorner on a monumental scale and in an execution calculated to produce precisely this effect, and the splendid bronze casts by J. Kalmar, whose exquisite technique always ensures an effect of intimacy. If only a better selection could have been made from the statues. In everyday objects, the School of Applied Arts sets the tone. How much effort one must go to, after all, to find a decent coal-scuttle or fire grate! And how hard it is to find good hinges for doors or windows! Over the last two decades we’ve given ourselves a sequence of Renaissance, Baroque and Rococo calluses from door handles, I wrote somewhere. But in Vienna there is one decent door handle not far from where I live, to which I always make a pilgrimage whenever I am near it. It is in the new house on the Kohlmarkt (Zwickl Studio) and was made by Professor König’s artistic hand. But do not go there, dear readers. Otherwise you would suspect me of pulling your leg. It is as inconspicuous as that. It is worth mentioning the patented stick and cane holder by the firm of Balduin Heller and Sons, which, thank God, has no ornamentation. Consequently I cannot recommend it enough. At a time when every door handle, every window frame, every inkpot, every coal shovel, every corkscrew cries Hurrah, such modesty deserves double the support. The brass beds that we took over from England only a few years ago, and which we liked so much because of their distinguished simplicity, have already acclimatized themselves extremely well, and their Hurrahs now compete with those of the door handles, picture frames, coal shovels, etc. (Let us devote a moment’s thought to the well-behaved ones among them, which do not come so much to the fore. We find two simple beds and a good washstand by Rudolph Kitschelt, a washstand and bedside table by Franz Thiel, an exemplary washstand at Joseph and Leopold Quittner, an exquisite child’s bed by Sigmund Wisler and very good products by various bed-manufacturers. Of course no one has equalled the bed in the bedroom of court paperhanger F. X. Schenzel and Son, designed by Otto Wagner. That would have been too much to ask. Most striking, in particular, where their discreet moulding is concerned, are all the English beds. They could compete with any in the world. Come out, you capitalists! Set up a factory devoted to making these beds in hundreds and thousands of copies. Anton Büchler’s bronze letters deserved to be stressed here too. But where the many lamps are concerned, because of the many new viewpoints, they call for a whole essay of their own.)