The Potemkin City (1898) Who doesn’t know them, the Potemkin villages that Catherine’s clever favourite built in the Ukraine? Villages made of canvas and cardboard, villages whose task it was to turn a desert into a blossoming landscape for the eyes of Her Imperial Majesty. But the clever minister is supposed to have built a whole city? That could only happen in Russia! The Potemkin City I want to talk about here is our own dear Vienna. A serious accusation that will also probably be hard for me to prove. Because I need an audience with a fine-tuned sense of justice that is sadly still very scarce in our city. Anyone who makes out he is something higher than he is is a fraud and thus an object of general contempt, even if no one is harmed by it. But what if someone tries to achieve that effect with fake stonework and other imitations? There are countries where the same fate would await him. But that hasn’t yet happened in Vienna. Only very few people have the feeling that an immoral act, a swindle is happening here. And it is not just a matter of fake watch-chains, not only the furniture in the apartment, assembled from mere imitations, but also the apartment itself, and the building that houses it. When I stroll along the Ring, I always feel as if a modern Potemkin were setting out to make someone believe he had been transported to a city peopled entirely by aristocrats. Whatever Renaissance Italy produced in the way of lordly palaces was plundered to conjure up for the plebs a New Vienna that could only be inhabited by people in a position to occupy a whole palace all by themselves, from skirting-board to cornicing. On the ground floor the stables, on the low, secondary mezzanine the servants, in the high, architecturally designed piano nobile the halls and above them the living rooms and bedrooms. Viennese householders liked owning a palace like this, and the tenants also liked living in a palace like this. The simple man, even if he had only rented the bedroom and study on the top floor, was overwhelmed by a feeling of feudal splendour and lordly greatness when he looked at the building he lived in from outside. Does the owner of a fake gemstone not also ogle the glittering glass? Oh, the deceiver deceived! Some will object that I am attributing false intentions to the Viennese. The architects are to blame, the architects should not have built like that. I must stick up for the architects. Because every city has the architects it deserves. The one closest to the desires of the populace will have the most building to do. And the most proficient will perhaps pass away without ever having received a commission. But the rest are setting a trend. Then people go on building just as they’re used to doing. And they have to. Ideally, the building speculator would have the façade stuccoed smooth from top to bottom. It’s the least expensive way of doing things. And if he did so he would also be acting in the truest, the most correct, the most artistic way. But people wouldn’t want to move into the house. Because of rentability, the architect is forced to nail on this façade, and only this one. That’s right, nail it on! Because these Renaissance and Baroque palaces do not really consist of the material they seem to be made of. Sometimes they pretend to be built of stone, like the Roman and Tuscan palaces, sometimes of stucco, like the Vienna Baroque buildings. They are neither: their ornamental details, their corbels, fruit festoons, cartouches and dentils are nailed on to cast cement. Certainly this technique, first applied in this century, is entirely legitimate. But it should not be applied to forms closely linked with the qualities of a particular material just because no technical difficulties stand in the way of its application. The artist’s task would now have been to find a new formal language for the new material. Anything else is imitation. This has not even concerned the Viennese throughout the last few periods of architectural history. He has even been glad to be able to copy the material that served as a model with such paltry means. As a genuine parvenu he thought everyone else had failed to notice the deception. The parvenu always believes that. He confidently believes that the false shirt-front, the fake fur, all the imitated things he surrounds himself with completely fulfil their purpose. All those who stand above him, those who have already gone beyond this parvenu stage, meaning those who know, smile at his pointless efforts. And over time even the parvenu’s eyes are opened. At his friends’ homes he sees one thing after another he had previously thought was authentic. Then, with resignation, he gives up. Poverty is not a disgrace. Not everyone can be born into a feudal manor house. But to pretend such a thing to one’s fellow men is ridiculous, immoral. So let us not be ashamed of the fact that we live in a house with many others who are socially our equals. Let us not be ashamed of the fact that there are materials which would be too costly for us as building materials. Let us not be ashamed of the fact that we are people from the nineteenth century, and not those who live in a house which, in its architectural style, belongs to an earlier time. You would then see how quickly we would receive our era’s very own architectural style. We have it anyway, someone will object. But I mean an architectural style that we can hand down to posterity with a clear conscience, one which would be referred to proudly in the distant future. But this architectural style has not been found in Vienna in our century. Whether one tries to use canvas, cardboard and paint to depict wooden huts in which happy peasants live or brick and cement casts to construct stone palaces in which feudal lords might have their place of residence, the principle remains the same. Above the Viennese architecture of this century there floats the spirit of Potemkin.