To Our Young Architects (1898) Is architecture still an art? It would almost seem that people are trying to deny it. The architect is granted full artistic status neither in the art world nor among the public. The most insignificant painter, the most minor sculptor, the weakest actor and the most unperformed composer lay unlimited claim to the status of artist, and the world is also happy to give it. But the architect must have achieved something outstanding before being accepted into the ranks of artists. Two factors have served to undermine the prestige of architects. The first is the state, the second is architects themselves. The state has introduced examinations at its technical colleges, and the examinees now consider themselves justified, because they have successfully sat an examination, in using the professional title ‘architect’. This farce has even gone so far that some have wanted to approach the government with a request to give legal protection to the term ‘architect’ as a title for technicians who have graduated in the structural engineering department. That the whole of cultured Vienna did not break into loud and liberating laughter at the time probably shows us clearly enough how deeply the opinion has penetrated the nation through these examinations, as if architecture were a subject that one could learn, and one’s mastery of it could be proved by a diploma. We need only imagine this whole development being transferred to music. Composing, so deeply close to the architect’s work, should in the mind of the Conservatoire student only be granted to someone who has sat an examination at the Conservatoire. How ridiculous that would sound to us, because we still see music as an absolute art. For the true artist, the reasons adduced by those diploma-addicted technicians are completely untenable. ‘Any bricklayer’s assistant can call himself an architect from now on.’ And if it brings you joy, then why not? Is the fame of Beethoven and Wagner dimmed because the writer of a comic couplet calls himself a composer? Has it done any harm to Lenbach and Menzel that any dauber can call himself a painter? Certainly not. But how ridiculous the two of them would have made themselves if they had demanded state protection for the term ‘painter’ because of that fact! The pen bridles at such presumption. More even than the examination board, however, the architects have damaged themselves. They have degraded themselves, and the world has reacted. Most of our young people are, in spite of the title that they claim for themselves, in spite of their artistic talent, just architectural draughtsmen. For a month’s income which matches that of a badly paid and not particularly gifted cashier, they hire themselves out to construction companies, master builders and architects whose funds allow them to keep their own studio. Their working hours are also those of a commercial worker. Whether his artistic conviction agrees with that of his paymaster is a matter of indifference to this ‘architect’. In most instances he has none in any case. Today he does Gothic work, while in the next office his only salvation is the inspiration of the Italian Renaissance. And he says yes to everything. In the circle of his like-minded colleagues he probably makes fun of his boss – you see how business-minded the language used by architects is – and thinks he’s doing something extraordinary when he launches off about the old codger. And the next day, at eight o’clock on the dot, he is already fresh at work again. If our rising artistic generation also wanted to give powerful expression to its conviction, in defiance of all financial challenges, the beneficial consequences would soon appear in the reputation of our art. Look at your brothers in painting, sculpture and music! They can starve and suffer for their art, if need be. And that is something that he must do who wants to bear the finest honorary title of all: artist!