Ladies’ Fashion (1898) Ladies’ fashion! You dreadful chapter of cultural history! You tell the story of humanity’s secret pleasures. If we flick through your pages, the soul quakes before the terrible aberrations and outrageous vices. We hear the whimpering of abused children, the screech of mistreated women, the terrible screams of tortured people, the wailing of those who died on the pyre. Whips crack, and the air assumes the burning stench of roasted human flesh. La bête humaine … But no, man is not a beast. The beast lives, it lives simply as nature has decreed. But man abuses his nature, and nature abuses the Eros in him. We are beasts that are locked in stables, beasts, deprived of their natural food, beasts that must make love on demand. We are domestic animals. If man had stayed a beast, love would have entered his heart once a year. But the sensuality that is so arduously restrained always makes us capable of love at any time. We have been cheated of springtime. And this sensuality is not simple, but complicated; not natural, but unnatural. This unnatural sensuality erupts in different ways every century, indeed in every decade. It hangs in the air and becomes infectious. Soon it spreads like a pestilence that cannot be hidden, soon it creeps through the land like a secret plague; the people afflicted by it know to hide it from one another. Soon flagellants are drifting through the world, and the burning pyres become a fairground, soon pleasure withdraws back into the most secret wrinkles of the soul. But be that as it may: the Marquis de Sade, the culmination point of sensuality in his day, whose mind dreamed up the most extravagant tortures of which our imagination is capable, and the sweet, pale maiden whose heart breathes more freely once she has crushed the flea, are of a single tribe. The noble part of the female knows only one longing: to assert herself beside the big, strong man. This longing can at present be fulfilled only if she wins the man’s love. Love makes her subservient to the man. But this love is not natural. If it were, the woman would approach him naked. But the naked woman is unattractive to the man. She can arouse the man’s love but not keep it. You will have been told that modesty imposed the fig-leaf on the woman. What an error! Modesty, that emotion so strenuously constructed by refined culture, was alien to primitive man. The woman clothed herself, she became a mystery to the man, to plunge longing for its solution into his heart. The awakening of love is the only weapon that the woman presently possesses in the battle of the sexes. But love is a daughter of desire. The desire to arouse the man’s passion is the woman’s hope. The man can control the woman through his position which he has achieved in human society. He is inspired by the urge for elegance, which he too expresses in his clothing. Every barber would like to look like a count, while the count will never strive to be mistaken for a barber. And in marriage the wife acquires her social standing through her husband, whether she was previously a prostitute or a princess. Her status is lost completely. So the woman is forced to appeal to the man’s sensuality through her clothing, unconsciously appeal to the man’s morbid sensuality, for which only the culture of his time can be held responsible. So while the change in men’s clothing is effected in such a way that the great masses rush in their urge for elegance and in this way devalue the original elegant form, the truly elegant – or rather those who are held to be so by the crowd – must seek a new form to distinguish themselves, the change in women’s clothing is dictated solely by the change in sensuality. And sensuality is in constant flux. Certain aberrations usually accumulate in one time before making room for others. Sentences based on §§ 125–133 of our legal code are the most reliable fashion journal. I don’t want to reach a long way back. In the late 1870s and the early 1880s literature was bursting with this trend, which tried to achieve an effect with their direct realism, with descriptions of opulent female beauty and flagellation scenes. I need only mention Sacher Masoch, Catulle Mendès and Armand Silvestre.<sup>7</sup> Soon after this full opulence, mature femininity was keenly expressed through clothing. Those who lacked it had to fake it: le cul de Paris.<sup>8</sup> Now the reaction set in. The call for youth rang out. The woman-child became fashionable. People craved immaturity. The girl’s psyche was dissected and exploited in literature. Peter Altenberg.<sup>9</sup> The Barrisons<sup>10</sup> danced on stage and in man’s soul. Then the feminine disappeared from women’s clothing, to do battle against the child. She lied away her hips; strong forms, previously her pride, became uncomfortable to her. Her head acquired the expression of the child through her hairstyle and her wide sleeves. But those days are now gone as well. The objection will be raised that precisely now the jury trials of these crimes are increasing in the most terrible way. Certainly. That is the best proof that they are disappearing from the higher circles and embarking on their downward peregrination. Because the great mass do not have at their disposal the means to escape that oppressive atmosphere. A large and constant draught passed through this century. Becoming had a stronger effect than that which had become. It was not until this century that spring became the most favoured season. The flower paintings of earlier times never painted buds. The professional beauties at the court of the French kings only achieved their fullest flowering at the age of forty. But today, even for those who consider themselves to be in perfect health – consider themselves, I say – this point in the development of women has been raised upwards by twenty years. Hence women always choose styles that bear the features of youth. One piece of evidence: place the photographs from the last twenty years of a woman’s life side by side. And she will exclaim: ‘How old I looked twenty years ago!’ And you too will have to admit: she looks youngest in the last picture. As I have already observed, there are also parallel trends. The most important of these, whose end is still impossible to predict, and the strongest because it emerges from England, is the tendency invented by refined Hellas – Platonic love. The woman is only a good comrade to the man. This trend was also accommodated and led to the creation of the tailor-made costume, the dress made by a master tailor. But in that stratum of society in which the wife’s elegant lineage was also a matter of interest, in the aristocracy, where chamberlain status meant that the wife’s lineage was still apparent generations later, we may observe an emancipation from the dominant ladies’ fashion, in that aristocracy there is recognized according to the male line. Then people cannot be amazed enough by the simplicity that prevails in the aristocracy. This tells us that the man with the highest social position holds the leading role in gentlemen’s clothing, but the leading role in ladies’ fashion is held by the woman who must develop the greatest finesse when it comes to arousing sensual feelings, the prostitute. Women’s clothing differs outwardly from men’s in its preference for ornamental and colourful effects, and the long skirt that completely covers the woman’s legs. These two elements alone show us on their own that women have remained far behind in their development over the last few centuries. No cultural era has known such a difference in the clothing of the free man and the free woman as our own. Because in earlier times men also wore clothes whose hems reached the ground, colourful and richly decorated. The magnificent development that our culture has undergone this century has happily overcome ornament. Here I must repeat myself: the lower the culture, the more apparent the ornament. Ornament is something that must be overcome. The Papuan and the criminal ornament their skin. The Indian covers his oar and his boat all over with ornaments. But the bicycle and the steam train are free of ornament. As culture advances, it excludes object after object from being decorated with ornaments. Men who wish to stress their relationship with previous eras today dress in gold, velvet and silk: magnates and the clergy. Men from whom we wish to withhold one modern achievement, self-determination, we dress in gold, velvet and silk: lackeys and ministers. And on special occasions the monarch dresses himself in ermine and purple, whether it corresponds to his taste or not, as first servant of the state. For the soldier, too, the sense of bondage is heightened by colourful uniforms dripping with gold. But the long cloak reaching to the knuckles is the common insignia of those who do not do physical work. When physical and gainful activity was still irreconcilable with free, noble descent, the lord wore the long dress, the servant the trousers. It is still so in China: mandarin and coolie. By the same token, the clergyman emphasizes the non-gainful nature of his activity with the cassock. The man in the top layers of society has probably acquired the right to free labour, but on solemn occasions he still wears a piece of clothing that reaches to his knees, the frock coat.<sup>fn1</sup> Women from these circles were not permitted gainful employment by their society. In the classes in which they achieved the right to gainful employment, they too wear trousers. We might think of the female coal-miners in the Belgian pits, the dairywomen in the Alps, the crayfish fisherwomen of the North Sea. Men also had to fight for the right to wear trousers. Riding, an activity directed solely towards the purpose of physical education and not material gain, was the first stage. Men owe their anklelength clothing to the flourishing, horse-riding knightly caste of the thirteenth century. The sixteenth century, when riding fell out of fashion, could not strip them of this accomplishment. It is only over the past fifty years that women achieved the right to physical education. A similar process: like knights in the thirteenth century, twentieth-century women cyclists were granted the right to clothes that left the feet free, and to trousers. And thus is the first step taken towards the social sanction of women’s work. Women’s nobility knows only one longing: to assert herself beside the big strong man. At present this longing can be fulfilled only if she wins the man’s love. But we are approaching a new and greater time. Women’s equality with men is prompted no longer through an appeal to sensuality, but rather through the economic and intellectual independence of women as achieved by work. Women’s value or lack of it will not rise and fall with changes in sensuality. Then velvet and silk, flowers and ribbons, feathers and paints will lose their effect. They will disappear.