The Old and New Direction in Architecture (1898) A parallel with particular reference to the artistic situation in Vienna It does seem to me that architecture is the last among the visual arts to adapt to the prevailing trends of the day. The painting, the etching, the sculpture owe their creation to a happy thought, and the artwork can be passed on to the world after weeks or months. Not so the building. Even the preliminary works call for an intellectual and artistic activity of years, and their execution can last a lifetime. But it now becomes all the easier for us, on the basis of the transformations that the other arts have already been through, to guess the new directions that architecture will take. Architecture, an art of space and form (unlike the view that seeks to include architecture among the graphic arts), will be particularly influenced by sculpture. We see how over the course of the century a social trend has made itself apparent, and one which has already taken hold in sculpture at present: craft is coming into its own once more. Until recently we were living in a curious time, which saw the brain-worker as everything and the hand-worker as nothing. In social terms, the man in the blue apron, however proficient he might have been, was far below the ill-paid little clerk in the office. The arts too were gripped by this madness: wherever it was applicable, actual craft was left to the slavishly labouring craftsman. The same probably did not apply to painting. The sculptor, however, only modelled the miniaturized sketch. The sculpting work, the technical mastery of the material, was alien to him. But the architect did not even move from his office, and produced his plans perhaps without having seen the setting for his artistic activity. He left everything up to the craftsman. The most ambitious architects, after proposed changes had been ruled out, probably went to the building site and cursed and raged at the stupid craftsman who had not of course followed their design intentions to the letter. They forgot, in fact, that the craftsman is a human being and not a machine. The English efficiently swept away the notion of the inferiority of craft. If you want to make a pot, don’t design some notional geometrical figure, but sit down at the potter’s wheel yourself. If you want to make a chair, don’t spend ages doing sketches all over the place, but pick up your chisel. They took the artist into the workshop and threw out the challenge, ‘Hic Rhodus, hic salta’.<sup>11</sup> Now the reaction occurred. Where it had once been vulgar to work in the workshop, now it became the height of elegance. Sculptor N. N. will carve his bust of Danaë in multicoloured marble with his own hand. The artist who was not afraid to wield hammer and chisel, to learn the stonemason’s craft, was the focus of interest. He no longer stood, as he once had done, below his colleagues who only drew and modelled, but above them. The number of sculptors who did not want to leave their work to a mindless copying machine or a stone sculptor with different ideas grew and grew. Architecture too will have to do justice to this requirement of the age. The architect will work more on the building-site, he will pay attention to his decorative ornamentation only once the space has been created and its lighting established. The completely superfluous and timeconsuming drawing of ornamental natural details will be abandoned. In the studio itself, perhaps even on the spot, the master will be able to model the decoration from a sketch and undertake the corrections with his own hand, after precise study of the lighting and the removal of the viewer. Of course, that will make big demands on his time. This means that he will build less. The large construction offices, veritable factories of house-building, will disappear. But what will the buildings executed in this way look like? We may assume that they will present themselves in a much more conservative manner than our hotheads imagine. Because the art of construction is connected with emotions and habits influenced by the continuous use of already existing buildings that have lasted for millennia. What does the architect actually want? With the help of the materials he wants to arouse emotions in people that do not yet in fact inhabit these materials. He builds a church. People are to be put in the mood for worship. He builds a bar. People are supposed to feel congenial there. How does one do that? One checks to see what buildings in the past have been capable of producing those feelings. Those are the ones with which one must connect. For throughout his life man has prayed in certain spaces, drunk in certain spaces. The feeling is learned, not innate. Consequently the architect, if he is at all serious about his art, must take these learned emotions into consideration. We might think that what delighted us 500 years ago can no longer do so today. Certainly. A tragedy that would have moved us to tears back then will only mildly interest us today. A joke from back then will no longer tickle our funny bones. The tragedy is no longer performed, the joke is forgotten. But the building remains in the midst of changing posterity, and hence it becomes explicable that architecture, in spite of all other changes in the zeitgeist, will remain the most conservative art. For there is one emotion that we cannot erase from our memory: the acknowledgement of the superiority of classical antiquity. Now that this is obvious to us, all Gothic, Moorish, Chinese, etc. styles are completely finished. They may influence the Renaissance, and have always done so, but a great spirit, I should like to call him the uber-architect, will always be able to free architecture from alien ingredients and give us back the pure, classical style of building. And again and again the people hail that man, because we are classicists in thought and feeling. After the great master-builders of the Italian Renaissance countless little masters turned up in Germany, full of good ideas, full of overflowing imagination; who knows their names? Schlüter arrived in the north, Fischer von Erlach in the south, Le Pautre in France. Men of classical-Roman sensibility, and again we can record a peak. And again it goes downhill, again the unbounded delight in form took hold and produced architects whose names will only be wrested from oblivion by research. Here appears Schinkel, the great tamer of the imagination and, again after a downward motion, Semper; so we see that the palm is always awarded to the artist who has made the fewest concessions to his time, and who has most recklessly represented the classical position. For the architect creates not only for his own time; posterity too has the right to be able to enjoy his work. One needs only a fixed and immutable measure, both contemporary and for the future, until perhaps a great event evokes a complete revaluation, classical antiquity. So we may assert: the great architect of the future will be a classicist. One who follows on not from the work of his predecessors, but directly from classical antiquity. He will have a much richer formal language at his disposal than the great master-builders of the Renaissance, the Baroque or the Schinkel-Semper schools. For old discoveries have been supplemented by the results of more recent archaeology; there is also the fact that the Egyptians, Etruscans, Mesopotamians, etc. are gradually arousing our interest as well. There are hints of this even in the new ornamentalism of the Wagner school. So now we know: the future architect will have to make his own contribution and be classically trained. Indeed, we may make the following demand: among all professions, that of the architect is the one that most strictly requires a classical training. But in order to do justice to the material needs of his time, he must also be a modern person. He must not only be very well acquainted with the cultural needs of his time, he must himself be at the top of that culture. For he has it in his power to give certain cultural forms and practices a different character. Thus he would never lead the culture downwards, but upwards. But the future architect must also be a gentleman. The times are over when all those who did not steal were honest. Today Aristides would not be celebrated for his poverty. That is obvious to us. We are becoming more and more sensitive to justice and injustice. As a final consequence of this we now make the following conclusion: the architect must also not lie in relation to the material. This demand is probably fulfilled in the fact that the architect himself must bring everything in the material to execution. For the craftsman does not know this lie. It was only introduced to architecture by the architect-draughtsman.<sup>fn1</sup> But as the architect cannot master all materials equally (in fact everyone can master only one), a specialism will form, of the kind adhered to in earlier times: the architect in stone (stonemason)<sup>fn2</sup> and the architect in brick (bricklayer), the architect in stucco (plasterer) and the architect in wood (cabinet-maker). You want a stone church, then fine, you go to the stonemason. You want a bare brick barracks. The bricklayer makes it. You want a stucco residential house. You give the contract to the plasterer. You want a wooden ceiling in the dining room. The cabinet-maker will do it. Yes, but – someone will object – where is the similar artistic training? I insist that it is unnecessary. No one will deny that magnificent buildings were made in former times in this way. A building all of whose details, down to the key-plates, were the product of a single mind, loses all its freshness and becomes boring. Always the same ornament, always the same profile, now a little bigger, now smaller, on the façade, on the front door, in the hall, in the mosaic floor, in the roof lantern, in the wallpaper. What a glorious room is the golden hall in the Augsburg Town Hall. And yet it owes its existence to two artists: the master builder Elias Holl for the spatial effect and the master carpenter Wolfgang Ebner for the wonderful ceiling. But the similar artistic training is already rendered illusory by the division of labour. As so often, two or even three architects come together to form a firm, and the actual execution is left to an army of draughtsmen. How easily that is modified by an artist, the boss, making the sketch, while the details are left to draughtsmen who have also learned their craft. The boss himself will probably correct but will happily concur with his colleague’s specialist judgement. But the artist himself will have to master one of the four crafts listed above. I have captured what our intelligence can grasp, without drawing utopian conclusions. These impulses apply to the present and the immediate future. I did not think it necessary to examine whether social upheavals will produce new forms and thoughts. Because at present the capitalist view of the world still prevails. And my reflections apply only to that.