Furniture (1898) The interiors on display in our Jubilee Exhibition can be divided into three categories. The first tries to copy old furniture as faithfully as possible, the second wants to be modern, and the third is trying to adapt old furniture to new needs. Today I want to look at the first category. I have already dwelt at length on the second in the essays about the Otto Wagner room, and the other rooms are to be discussed next time. But I must pass over the third category in silence. I think it is possible, if not to honour a dead master, then at least to show him so much respect that one leaves his works untouched. It would be a degradation of the spirit of Raphael if we were to produce a copy of the Sistine Madonna in that way, repainting the green curtain in rubyred, giving the two angels different heads and replacing St Sixtus and St Barbara with St Aloysius and St Ursula. Don’t overstate your case, I hear the cabinet-maker saying. Certainly, I would never do that. Raphael was a painter. But if we were talking about a piece of cabinetmaking … The great cabinet-makers of the Renaissance and the Baroque, however, are said to have been revered by their pupils as much as our painters revere the Old Masters. Professional honour required it. One can do new things in painting and carpentry, one can copy old things, copy them strictly, as strictly as is possible in our time, until we abandon our own identity, but those who deliberately lay hands on the old masters receive a hearty ‘Hands off!’ Some might object that there is little sense in copying what the masters could not have done otherwise. The glass is poor and only comes in small pieces. The great master, if he had had our highly developed glass industry at his disposal, would certainly have made use of it. Of course he would. But then he would also have chosen another subject for a painting on glass: he would have produced a different design. These supposed improvements always end badly. These figures and this arrangement suit only this material, and if a modern glass were used, modern figures would also have to be drawn. If you dislike something about the old master, then leave him entirely alone. But it would be megalomania to try to improve him. I will be frowned upon in some circles for standing up for copying. Other centuries didn’t copy. That is particular to our own time. Copying, the imitation of old stylistic forms, however, is a consequence of our social conditions, which have nothing in common with those of previous centuries. The French Revolution freed the middle classes. Nothing could stop them from acquiring money and using it as they saw fit. They could use it just as the aristocrat did, or even the king. They could ride in gold coaches, wear silk stockings and buy palaces. Why shouldn’t they? That was even their duty. There are people who still gravitate towards the ancien régime. However, they say, I now have the right to dress like the Prince of Wales. But I am not a king’s son. I am just an ordinary member of the bourgeoisie. No, my dear bourgeois, you not only have the right, you also have a duty to dress like the Prince of Wales. Remember that you have ancestors. Your great-grandfather and your father fought for it, perhaps they even spilled their blood. A king and an empress’s daughter had to lose their heads for this idea on the scaffold. Now it is up to you to make the correct use of what they won. Our middle classes soon worked out how the prince dressed. Because clothes wear out quickly, and when these can no longer be worn, one orders new ones. Now it was an easy matter to go to the same tailor and say to him: répète. But living was another matter. The aristocracy and the royal family had an abundance of old furniture that kept them going for a long time, for centuries, even. Why should one throw money out of the window just for the sake of innovation? On the contrary: they were glad of the old possessions that distinguished them from the now wealthy bourgeoisie. Because in the days when they still held power, the middle class could not afford to buy such things. They did not have access to unoccupied ceremonial halls to act as store rooms. The middle classes used their furniture up. If they wanted to surround themselves with the same things, they were forced to make copies of them. That isn’t a mistake. It may look like the actions of a parvenu, but it is the elegance of the parvenu. The desire to surround oneself with copies or depictions of old cultural products that one likes, but whose originals are out of one’s reach, is certainly very human. A photograph of an old building, a cast of a sculpture, a copy of a Titian can bring back the happy sensations that one felt when looking at the originals. Three firms have worked towards this end. Sadly only three, because the creations of the others, apart from the few who worked in a modern way, belong to the third category. These three, who will be discussed subsequently, are: Sándor Járay, Bernhard Ludwig and J. W. Müller. We may recall the struggle that Sandor Jaray had last year with the director of our Museum of Applied Art, Privy Councillor von Scala. But when we look at Jaray’s exhibition, we wonder with amazement: what was the fuss about? With his fundamental principles Privy Councillor von Scala incited opposition on the part of the current powers-that-be in the School of Applied Art and the Applied Art Associations. The first principle, which I implemented initially, and which is now followed in all civilized countries, is: copy, but copy strictly. The second is: the English set the tone for modern furniture-making. Both principles are vehemently opposed in the aforementioned camps. They think they can always create new things in the spirit of a different age. They do not feel that the idea of a gothic gas chandelier is just as nonsensical as that of a gothic locomotive. But the second principle, obviously because the word ‘English’ appears in it, is like a red rag. Let us see how Sandor Jaray opposes Herr von Scala by what he does. He exhibits a drawing room in the style of Louis XV, an Italian Baroque dining room, a drawing room in the – according to Ilg – ‘style of Maria Theresia’, an Empire drawing room, all faithful copies, and now comes the modern, the – horribile dictu – room of an English lord. But we can see that Sandor Jaray preaches the Applied Art Association, but practises Privy Councillor von Scala. While I once had to speak out in harsh terms against the theorist Jaray, I lack sufficient words of praise for his work as a practitioner. One can say with confidence: never has a Viennese applied artist offered anything more accomplished in all his pieces, both in terms of quality and quantity. But certainly the quantity is remarkable, because it takes an eminent workforce and performance, while continuing with normal production, to produce such a number of objects worth looking at for the same occasion. What the Viennese art industry has to offer in terms of significant decorative talents were brought in to furnish the dining room. We see sopraportas by Matsch, a fireplace by Schimkowitz, reliefs by Zelezny and lunettes by Makart. Wherever the eye falls, there is no flaw to be seen. Everything is a strict copy, strict in the spirit of the age. And that is a skill, a very significant skill. Because it is much easier to paint a new Madonna in Raphael’s manner than to do justice to the Sistine Madonna. As well as three modern rooms, Bernhard Ludwig has exhibited a drawing room, a copy of a room in the Bishop’s Palace in Würzburg. Walls, ceiling and furniture are produced in Vernis Martin’s green, a charming effect, but one that is only within the means of people who can also construct a red drawing room, in order to have somewhere to go quickly, if necessary – and it will be necessary – for a few minutes as an antidote. J. W. Müller is showing a lord’s room in the German Renaissance style. How quaint, how tasteful! It is unparalleled in terms of its lovingly efficient joinery. What respect for the skill of the old master is revealed in every line, every fitting! Nothing was changed, even the old German ‘unbeautiful’ proportions, probably the severest test for the sensibility of modern man, were retained. Quite rightly. Because here it is a matter of either-or. How beautiful! How glorious! The modern, efficient Viennese master helping his old colleague from the sixteenth century to victory. What does Hans Sachs say through Richard Wagner? Honour your German masters, then you will conjure up good spirits. Now we know: Sándor Járay, Bernhard Ludwig and J. W. Müller are good spirit-conjurors.