Chairs (1898) The Otto Wagner room – the modern bedroom and bathroom in the Applied Art section of the Craft Association – is beautiful, not because but despite the fact it was produced by an architect. This architect has in fact become his own decorator. For anyone else this room would be incorrect because idiosyncratic, and hence imperfect, and thus we would be unable to speak of beauty. That is indeed a contradiction. By beauty we mean supreme perfection. It is thus completely out of the question that something impractical can be beautiful. The first fundamental condition for an object that wants to lay claim to the label ‘beautiful’ is that it does not offend against functionality. But the practical object on its own is not yet beautiful. More is required. The people of the Cinquecento probably put it most precisely. They said: an object that is so perfect that one could not add anything to it or take anything away without adversely affecting it is beautiful. That would be the most perfect, the most complete harmony. The beautiful man? He is the most perfect man, the man who, through his physique and his intellectual properties, can offer the best guarantee of healthy descendants and for the upkeep and feeding of his family. The beautiful woman? She is the perfect woman. She applies herself to arousing the man’s love, breastfeeding the children herself and giving them a good upbringing. She also has the most beautiful eyes, practical, keen eyes, rather than short-sighted and stupid ones, she has the most beautiful forehead, the most beautiful hair, the most beautiful nose. A nose through which one can breathe well. She has the most beautiful mouth, the most beautiful teeth, teeth that are best for grinding food. Nothing in nature is superfluous; the degree of usefulness, together with harmony with the other parts, is what we call pure beauty. So we see that the beauty of a useful object can only be explained in terms of its purpose. For the object there is absolute beauty. ‘Look, what a lovely desk!’ ‘Desk? It’s ugly!’ ‘But it isn’t a desk, it’s a billiard table.’ ‘So, a billiard table, certainly, it’s a beautiful billiard table.’ ‘Oh, look, what magnificent sugar tongs!’ ‘Whaaat, magnificent, I think those sugar tongs are dreadful! ‘But that’s a coal shovel!’ ‘Right, then, yes, it’s a magnificent coal shovel!’ ‘What a wonderful bedroom, Herr – put the name of the stupidest person you know – owns.’ ‘What, Herr X.Y.Z.? You think that’s wonderful?’ ‘I was wrong, it belongs to Senior Architectural Councillor Professor Otto Wagner, C.M. (Club Member), the greatest architect of his time.’ ‘Then it is indeed wonderful.’ The most beautiful, quaintest osteria would be ugly to anyone but Italian peasants. And the people would be right. And the same is true of every individual utility object. Are, for example, the chairs in the Wagner room beautiful? Not for me, because I find them hard to sit on. Everyone else will probably feel the same. But it is quite possible that Otto Wagner sits very comfortably on these chairs. For his bedroom, a room in which one does not welcome guests, they are thus, as long as my assumption is correct, beautiful. They are formed like Greek chairs. But over the millennia the technique of sitting, the technique of resting has undergone a significant change. It never stood still. It is different in all peoples and in all ages. Postures which would be for us extremely strenuous, other people – we need only think of people from the East – might see as restful. At present we not only demand of a chair that we can rest on it, but also that we can rest on it quickly. Time is money. So resting must be specialized. After intellectual work one will have to rest in a different posture from that after movement in the open. After gymnastic exercises differently from after rowing. Indeed, still more. The degree of fatigue requires a different technique of resting. This, to hasten resting, will happen through several physical positions and postures. Have you never had the need, particularly when extremely tired, to hang one foot over the arm of the chair? Essentially a very uncomfortable posture, but sometimes a real blessing. In America one can always achieve that blessing, because there no one considers comfortable sitting, or quick resting, to be inelegant. There you can put your feet up on a table that isn’t being used for eating. But here we find something insulting in the comfort of our neighbour. There are still people whom one can irritate by putting one’s feet on the opposite seat in a railway carriage, or even by lying down. The English and Americans, who are free of such petty ways of thinking, are also genuine virtuosi in the art of resting. In the course of this century they have invented more types of armchair than in the whole world, all peoples included, since they have existed. According to the principle that every kind of fatigue calls for a different armchair, the English room never shows an entirely identical type of armchair. All kinds of seating opportunities are represented in the same room. Anyone can choose the seat that suits him best. One exception is constituted by those rooms which are only used temporarily for the same purpose by all occupants. Thus, for example, the dance hall and the dining room. But the drawing room, our salon, will according to its definition have light and hence easily transportable chairs. These are not there for resting on, however, but to offer seating for light and stimulating conversation. It is easier to chat on small, capricious chairs than in a grandfather chair. So such chairs – they could be seen last year at von Scala’s Christmas exhibition in the Austrian Museum – are also made by the English. The Viennese, who either didn’t know what they were for or perhaps have in mind a patent chair for all seating eventualities, thus called them impractical. In general, we should be very cautious in our use of the word ‘impractical’. I have previously indicated that under certain circumstances an uncomfortable posture can be comfortable. The Greeks, who required of a chair that it should allow great play for the bending of the spine – we need only think of the crouching figures of Alma-Tadema – would also find our seatbacks uncomfortable, as we want to have our shoulder-blades supported. And what would they say to the American rocking chair, with which we don’t even know where to start? We proceed, in fact, from the principle that one has to swing in a rocking chair. I think that this false idea has arisen out of a misnomer. In America, in fact, the chair is called a ‘rocker’. But the word ‘rocking’ also refers to a seesawing, back-and-forth motion. The rocker is in principle nothing but a chair with two legs in which the seated person’s feet must form the front legs. So it has arisen out of the comfortable seat that one creates when one moves one’s centre of gravity backwards, so that the front legs are raised. The back runners of the chair keep it from tipping over. The American rocker does not have front runners, like our swing chair, since it would not occur to anyone over there to sway. For this reason, in some American rooms we see only rockers, while here they are very unpopular. So all chairs should be practical. Hence if only practical chairs were built for people, they would be given the opportunity to furnish their homes completely without the help of a decorator. Perfect furniture creates perfect rooms. So let our paper-hangers, architects, painters, sculptors, decorators, etc., where living rooms as opposed to state rooms are concerned, limit themselves to the use of perfect, practical furniture. At present in this respect we rely on English imports, and can therefore unfortunately give our cabinet-makers no better advice than to copy these types. Certainly our cabinet-makers would have made similar chairs without any influence, if their contact with life had not been severed. Because differences between the craft furniture of a single cultural outlook and a single time are so small that they would strike only a great connoisseur. It seems very peculiar that, at the turn of our century, voices were heard demanding an emancipation from the English influence in favour of an Austrian national style. Applied to bicycle construction, this would sound more or less like this: abandon the reprehensible copying of English products and take the genuine Austrian wooden bicycle by the Upper Styrian farm hand Peter Zapfel – was that his name? – as your model. This bicycle is definitely better suited to the Alpine landscape than the ugly English bicycles. And for this trend that seems to be the main thing. From century to century furniture has increasingly assumed features of kinship in outward form. Even as early as the beginning of this century, it was difficult to tell the difference between a Viennese and a London chair. That was at a time when one had to spend weeks in the mail coach to get from Vienna to London. And now there are queer fish who, in the age of express trains and telegrams, want to build a Great Wall of China around us. But that is impossible. Identical food will lead to identical cutlery, identical work and identical rest in an identical chair. But it would be to sin against our civilization if we challenged ourselves to abandon our eating habits and, like a peasant, to eat with our whole family from a single bowl just because otherwise the way we eat comes from England. The same applies to sitting. Our habits are much closer to those of the English than to those of the Upper Austrian peasant. So our cabinet-makers would have achieved the same results if they had been given free rein, and the architects hadn’t got involved. If the same pace had been maintained in the assimilation of forms as had been adopted from the Renaissance to the time of the Congress of Vienna, there would also be no difference in cabinet-making between countries, just as such differences ceased long ago to exist in the blossoming architect-free crafts: in car construction, jewellery, in leather fashion accessories. For there is no difference between the vision of a London cabinet-maker and one from Vienna, while between a London cabinet-maker and a Viennese architect there lies a whole world.