Glass and China (1898) ‘Show me the pots that a civilization has produced, and you can generally tell what it was like, and at what stage of civilization it was,’ Semper says in the preface to his book on ceramics. This revelatory power is not only inherent in pots, one might add. Any utilitarian object can tell us of the customs, the character of a people. But ceramic products possess this quality to a particular degree. Semper immediately gives us an example. He uses the illustration of one vessel that women used to bring water home in Egypt and one in Greece. The former is the Nile bucket, the situla, which bears a casual resemblance to those copper vessels with which Venetians scoop their water. It resembles a giant pumpkin, cut off at the top, has no foot and a handle like a fire pail. This water-bucket can reveal to us the whole of the country’s creativity, its topography and hydrography. We know straight away: the people that use this vessel must live on the plain, on the shores of a sluggish river. But how different it is from the Greek vessel! Semper says of this one: ‘… the hydria, whose purpose lies not in scooping water but in catching it as it flows from the spring. Hence the funnel shape of the neck and the kettle shape of the body, whose centre of gravity is as close to the mouth as possible; because Greek and Etruscan women carried their hydrias on their heads – upright, if full, horizontal, if empty. Anyone who attempts to balance a stick on his fingertip will find the trick easier if he puts the heavier end of the stick at the top: this experiment explains the basic form of the Hellenic hydria (the body in fact resembles a heart-shaped turnip), which is completed by two horizontal handles at the level of the centre of gravity, for lifting of the vessel when full, and a third, vertical, handle for carrying it and hanging it up when empty, perhaps also as a grip for a third person who stands by the water-carrier, to lift the full vessel on to her head. So much for Semper. He has doubtless stung the hearts of idealistically minded people. What, those wonderful Greek vases with their perfect forms, forms that were made only to tell of the Hellenic people’s urge to beauty, owe their shape to simple utility alone? The foot, the body, the handle, the size of the mouth were dictated entirely by use? And these vases are practical after all! When we always thought they were beautiful! How could such a thing even happen to us! Because we have always been taught that the practical excludes the beautiful. In my last article I dared to claim the opposite, and as I received so many letters proving to me that I was wrong, I must take up my hiding place behind the ancient Greeks. I do not want to deny that our applied artists stand on a level that completely excludes comparison with another people or another age. But I would like to suggest that the ancient Greeks also knew something about beauty. And they only worked practically, without even thinking for a moment about beauty, without trying to pursue an aesthetic need. And if an object was so practical that it could not be made more practical, they called it beautiful. And so did the peoples who came after them; and we too say: these vases are beautiful. Are there still people who work as the Greeks did? Oh, yes. There are the English as a people, engineers as a class. The English, the engineers, are our Greeks. From them we have our civilization, from them it spreads over the whole globe. They are the people of the nineteenth century in all its perfection … Those Greek vases are beautiful, as beautiful as a bicycle. In this respect our ceramics can by and large not be measured against the products of mechanical engineering. Of course not from the Viennese perspective, but from the Greek. The superfluous – here it becomes a sensation. At the start of the century our ceramics were very much in the wake of the classical. Here too the architect intervened ‘to save it’. I once saw an operetta, which was of course set in Spain. On the occasion of a joyful celebration – I think it was the birthday of the master of the house – a choir of estudiantes was brought in to offer the composer the opportunity of a Spanish song, and the costume designer activity for so and so many ladies’ roles. They sing – whether for a wedding, a birth, a christening, an anniversary or a name day, they don’t mind – because We have only one song That fits all needs. We are here on the spot, etc., etc. The magic song is: For he’s a jolly good fellow, and so say all of us. I am only quoting from memory, it must be twenty years ago now. These estudiantes were our architects. They too knew only a single song. It had two verses: profile and ornament. And with the same profile and the same ornament everything was worked and reworked. Façades and briefcases, inkpots and pianos, key-rings and displays. Also glass and china goods. First a line was drawn, that was the central axis. Then, on the right or the left depending on whether the artist was right- or left-handed, he profiled away, profiled so much that it was a joy to behold. The profiles just flowed from the pencil. Bandelet, cove, bandelet, ogee, bandelet, cove, bandelet, and in between the occasional cornice. Then this profile was traced over, and the ceiling rose was complete. Now came verse two: ornament. That too was solved with the help of the geometry with which, as the song has it, the content of the cucumber could not be explained: ‘With the help of geometry you will never measure the content of the cucumber’ – but the ceiling rose could be elaborated. In short it was glorious. Then the wicked English came along and dimmed the joy of the gentlemen from the drawing board. They said: don’t draw, do. Go into life, so you know what’s needed. And when you have completely grasped life, then go and stand by the foundry or the potter’s wheel. In that case 99 per cent of artists would give up pottery. We haven’t got quite that far. But the English spirit has also entered our craftsmen and is rebelling against the predominance of architects. With secret joy I recently heard a colleague complaining to me that a potter had openly declared that he couldn’t work from his design. He refused even to try. There was no point even asking. The man is right, I told the architect. He probably thought I was an idiot. It is high time for our trade to think about itself and try to reject any unwanted guidance. Anyone who wants to join in is welcome: anyone who wants to stand by the whirring potter’s wheel in his smock, or by the glowing foundry with a naked torso, shall be praised. But let those dilettantes who wanted, from the vantage point of their comfortable studios, to prescribe to the artist, art means skill, to the creator, to tell them what to create, let them restrict themselves to their own field, that of graphic art. The emancipation of the craftsman came from England, and hence new objects all show English forms. Also from England came the new cut glass that we call Steindlschliff or Walzenschliff. Lines of prismatic cross-hatching form a geometrical design across the whole of the glass. The rectilinear design is given the first name, the curvilinear the second. Here we have reached a level with this technique where we can already compete with America (a country where it has reached its prime), which should come as no surprise, given the dexterity of our glass-cutters. But many things are finer, more elegant, more distinguished in terms of form. American cut glass always displays an exuberance of form that does not strike me as contemporary. Almost all exhibitors have good samples. Count Harrach’s glass factory in Neuwelt is showing, probably for the first time, Tiffany glasses produced on Austrian soil. The son of the American goldsmith Tiffany, Louis C. Tiffany, has, with the help of Venetian glass-workers and using the latest achievements of the ‘glass flux technique, discovered a new principle for the decoration of glass. These pieces are made not by grinding or painting, but by a clever process of immersion in different-coloured molten glass while it is being blown – unlike the Venetian method, in which different pieces are melded together during the blowing process. This forms vessels which represent the very best that modern art can offer us. The objects from the New World are very tame particularly in terms of their colouration. But none the less a start has been made, and with any luck it will also bring artists into the glass factory. We cannot speak with such confidence about the china industry. Porcelain painting clings to the time-honoured tradition of the previous century. In stoneware and majolica there are forms, forms! There one finds among other things an ashtray made of the concave shield of our imperial house. Is there no College of Heralds that could get involved? In glassware there is certainly a great deal of inferior work. We pass over that in silence. But in the ceramics section we read the confident inscription: ‘All designs and forms are legally protected in all countries.’ Good God! Should we not be legally protecting all countries from these designs and forms? Such thoughts must surely occur to us in the face of so much tastelessness. We seek in vain for works like those produced by the Royal Copenhagen Factory, recently Meissen, Rookwood in Cincinnati, the Germans Läuger, Schmutz-Baudiss and Heider. A glorious material – new, very new – is in evidence, an Austrian invention – eosin. But the hand of the artist that will give it a fitting decoration has so far been still. Things like Raguenet ornaments – in the oriental art section – or imitations of marbled enamel crockery don’t fit the bill. Stay fine and delicate: the Raguenet ornament seems more appropriate to eosin. In the big exposition by the Ernst Wahliss company the patterned plates, along with the large dinner services they have delivered in the past, are a delight for any art-lover. Here the company has reached a height unparalleled in the world. All the royal houses and aristocrats by wealth or title in all parts of the world have their porcelain services manufactured here. Here the plates of the Indian rajah and the American Croesus sit side by side. Like a symbol of the beginning of the dominance of a global culture, like a symbol of uniform English food and levelling Viennese taste.