Matters of Viennese Architecture (1910) There is something unique about a city’s architectural character. Every city has its own. What would be beautiful and charming in one city might be ugly and repellent in another. The bare brickwork buildings of Danzig would lose all their beauty at a stroke if transferred to Viennese soil. This has nothing to do with the power of habit. Because there are quite specific reasons why Danzig is a city of bare brickwork and Vienna one of lime plaster. I do not want to discuss the reasons here, since the proof would fill a whole book. Not only material, but architectural forms are bound to place, to soil and air. Danzig has high, steep roofs. The architectural solution of these roofs required all the inventive energy of the architects of Danzig. Vienna is different. Vienna has roofs as well. But our architects have ignored the roof. If you are still in the street on Midsummer’s Night, and the roofs stretch out before you, you imagine you are walking through a new city. We no longer need to take heed of passers-by, carriages and automobiles, and we are astonished by a wealth of details that the day has withheld from us. And then we see the roofs of Vienna, we see them for the first time, and wonder how we could have overlooked them by day. But Viennese architects left the roof entirely to the carpenter. The work was complete with the entablature. Palaces were given a parapet wall with vases and figures on it. The solid citizen forswore this. Five minutes from Vienna, after crossing the glacis of today’s Ring, there was ‘the roof’. The same architects who did not design roofs in Vienna were full of spirit and invention when it came to the roofs and domes of a house or palace in the suburbs. I mention this only to prove that the old Viennese architects took the architectural character of a place into their calculations and avoided anything that might disturb it. I accuse our contemporary architects of deliberately failing to take the character of buildings into account. But the architecture on the Ringstrasse has adapted itself to the city. However, if the Ringstrasse were built today, we would have not a Ringstrasse but an architectural catastrophe. If I look from the Opera towards Schwarzenbergplatz, I am filled with the feeling: Ringstrasse! The feeling: Vienna! But on the Stubenring I have the feeling: five-storey Mährisch-Ostrau. Are the buildings on the Stubenring bad? Or those on the Kärntnerring good? Neither is the case. There are good and bad buildings in both places, buildings by artists and frauds. But artists and frauds on the Kärntnerring have taken the character of the buildings in Vienna into account, while on the Stubenring neither gave it a thought. Typically Viennese is the straight wall end, without roofs, domes, oriels or other structures. The building law specifies a height of 25 metres to the upper edge of the parapet. But the roof should be exploited and contain studios and other rentable rooms. Because the property costs a lot of money and taxes are high. And for financial reasons the old character of the Viennese buildings was lost. I think I know one way in which we can get it back. Certainly not with new laws, which would take rights away from the owner of the house and the land. Certainly not according to the popular principle: equal injustice for all. But: anyone who undertakes to construct nothing, absolutely nothing, above his parapet shall be authorized to build six storeys. For sooner an honestly tall building than one with roof monstrosities built in the so-called enfeoffment style. Then we would once again have beautiful monumental lines and grand proportions, we, who have basked for centuries in the Italian air that comes over the Alps, in Italian grandeur and monumentality, things that are in our blood, and for which people in Danzig can rightly envy us. And then we have lime plaster. We look down our noses at it, and in a materialistic age have begun to be ashamed of it. Good old Viennese plaster is mistreated and prostituted, it is no longer allowed to remain who and what it is, and it is used to imitate stone. Because stone is expensive, and it is cheap. But there are no expensive and cheap materials in the world. Here the air is cheap and on the moon it is expensive. To God and the artist all materials are equal and valuable. I am in favour of people considering the world with divine and artistic eyes. Lime plaster is a skin. Stone is constructive. In spite of their similar chemical composition, the greatest difference between them lies in their artistic use. Lime plaster has more in common with leather, wallpaper, wall fabrics and lacquer paints than with its cousin, limestone. If lime plaster presents itself honestly as a coating for brickwork, it should not be any more ashamed of its simple origins than a Tyrolean with lederhosen and bare knees in the Kaiserburg. But put tails and a white cummerbund on both, the man will feel insecure there, and the lime plaster will suddenly become aware that it is a fraudster. The Kaiserburg! Its proximity alone is a touchstone for authenticity and inauthenticity. I always give a piece of good advice to people with uncertain taste. If you want to know whether an object is good or bad, ask yourself: would this object suit the Burg or not? That is the test of fire. Apparently tasteful objects such as the products of the Copenhagen porcelain industry, Galees glasses and the work of the Wiener Werkstätte cannot pass this test, while the greatest monstrosities of taste, such as waiting Dobermanns painted on metal, which are used for fire tongs and pokers, may survive. But the metal Pintscher is right, and the Copenhagen cat<sup>21</sup> is wrong. And near the Kaiserburg there was the task of erecting a new building, modern business premises. It was a matter of creating a transition from the imperial residence via the palace of a feudal lord to the most elegant shopping street, the Kohlmarkt. The construction site, which was established at the time by Professor Mayreder and the current director of the municipal planning office, Oberbaurat Goldemund, has been enlarged. Certainly not to the benefit of the square. They have attempted to compensate for this error with a large colonnade of Cipollino monoliths, which sets the façade three and a half metres back on the ground floor and the mezzanine. It was supposed to be a kind of bourgeois house: the architectural design stops at the parapet, and the copper roof, which will soon have turned black, will never be noticed by Midsummer Night’s Dreamers. And the four floors are to be covered with lime plaster. What is necessary for decoration should be honestly applied by hand, a rule with which our old Baroque masters complied in those happy times when there were no building laws because everyone carried the law in their heart. But on the ground floor and the mezzanine, where the places of business open up, modern business life demands a modern solution. And rightly. For modern businesses, the old masters could leave us no models. And not for electric lights, either. But were they to rise from their graves, they would find the solution soon enough. Not in the spirit of the so-called modern age. And not in the spirit of the archaizing paper-hangers who stick porcelain candles with light-bulbs on old candle-holders. But new, and very differently from the thinking of these two opposing camps. An attempt was made to harmonize the building with the imperial palace, the square, the city. If this attempt succeeds, Baurat Greil will win gratitude for finding a truly elegant interpretation and alternative to a rigid law.