Learn a New Way of Dwelling! (1921) The new movement that has afflicted all the inhabitants of this city like a fever, the estate movement, demands new people. People who, as Leberecht Migge, the great landscape architect, so rightly says, have modern nerves. It is easy for us to describe a human being with modern nerves. We do not need to strain our imagination. They are already living in a state of exhaustion, not in Austria, but a little further west. Our descendants are the ones who will receive the nerves that Americans have today. The city-dweller and the farmer are not so sharply divided in America as they are hereabouts. Every farmer is half a city-dweller, every city-dweller half a farmer. The American urbanite has not distanced himself as much from nature as his European colleague, or rather his continental colleague. Because the Englishman is also a proper farmer. Both – English and Americans – feel living with other people under one roof to be a disagreeable condition. Everyone, rich or poor, strives for his own home, even if it is only a cottage, a dilapidated shack with a drooping thatch. And in the city they do a spot of play-acting and build revenue houses<sup>24</sup> whose individual apartments are arranged on two floors, connected by special wooden stairs. Cottages placed on top of one another. And this brings me to the first item on my agenda. A person in his own home lives on two floors. He divides his life sharply into two parts. The daytime and the night-time parts. Dwelling and sleeping. One should not imagine that life on two floors is comfortable. On our terms it certainly isn’t. They are two small and unhomely for that. The only item of furniture is the whitepainted iron or brass bed. One would seek in vain for so much as a bedside table. And there are no wardrobes either. The ‘closet’, the wall cupboard, literally the ‘closure’, takes the place of the cupboards. The purpose of these bedrooms is really only to sleep. They are easy to tidy. But they have one advantage over our bedrooms, which is that they have only one entrance and can never be used as walk-through rooms. In the morning all the family members come downstairs at the same time. Even the baby is brought downstairs and spends the day with its mother in the living areas. In every family there is a table around which the whole family can gather at meal times. Like farmers, then. Because in Vienna only 20 per cent of this city does that. What do the other 80 per cent do? Well, one sits by the stove, one holds a pot in their hand, three at the table, the others occupy the window sills. And now every family that gets its own home is to receive a table which is, like the farmer’s table, in the corner of the sitting room. As in a peasant house. That will make for a fine revolution! One hears voices for and against. ‘Well, well, we’re not doing that. I’ve seen that among the farmers in Upper Austria. They sit at a table and all eat from the same bowl. And, well, we’re not used to that kind of thing. We sit individually.’ And a concerned father said: ‘What, around one table? My children will be getting used to going to pubs! And when I tell that story, people laugh. But I weep inwardly. We won’t argue over the table. It soon becomes clear that communal breakfasting saves money. The Viennese breakfast – a gulp of coffee standing by the stove and the piece of bread consumed half on the stairs, the other half in the street – demands a goulash at ten o’clock, a way of cheating the stomach, and since the goulash is nicely peppered with paprika, a little mug of beer. This meal, for which the English and the Americans do not even have a name, is known to us as Gabelfrühstück – ‘fork breakfast’ – plainly because only the knife comes into play. Admittedly one is not supposed to eat with one’s knife – ‘but what are we going to eat the sauce with afterwards?’ May the father of the house be granted this second breakfast for as long as he must settle for his gulp of black coffee at home. But his wife will soon work out that for the same money the whole family can have a wonderful American breakfast feast, so filling that one can eat nothing till midday. In the American family breakfast is the finest meal. Everyone is refreshed by sleep; the room is comfortable, freshly aired and warm. The whole table is laid with food. First of all everyone eats an apple. And then the mother serves the oatmeal, that wonderful food to which America owes its energetic people, its greatness and its welfare. The Viennese, however, will pull long faces when I reveal to them that oat means the grain and meal means food. But in Lainz<sup>25</sup> we will offer trippers porridge prepared in the American style and hope to convert the whole of Vienna to porridge-eating. What use to us are the beautiful oat-fed horses that we are so proud of? Humans too should have ‘well-contoured’ heads, expressive faces. Whether rich or poor, farmer or billionaire, porridge appears on every breakfast table. Everything else, cheap fish or expensive veal cutlet, depends on circumstances. Of course there is tea and bread, which is curiously also served at midday and in the evening. Lunch is a very simple matter. The father is not at home, the mother has been busy tidying the house all morning. Because the housewife does not have a servant. And the lack of a helpful genie of the house means that food is prepared in the sitting room. Because the woman of the house is entitled to spend her time not in the kitchen but in the sitting room. But that arrangement means that cooking is divided into two. The work is divided into two distinctly separate parts. One part is the work over the fire, the work at the stove. The other part is the preparation and the washing-up. The first part is carried out in the living room, where the stove is located. For this, however, it is necessary for the stove to be hidden as much as possible from the eye of the resident. All the things they have come up with in America to solve this problem! Only recently I saw a photograph, or rather two photographs, in a magazine. One picture showed a stove lodged in a niche in the wall, the second a desk. It was the same niche in the wall: a push of a button and, as if in a tabernacle, the mechanism, driven by electricity, rotates according to requirement. But such an arrangement requires more than technology can produce. It requires people who aren’t afraid of cooking. We, who all have a slight dread of cooking, a feeling that farmers, the English and the Americans do not possess, are amazed that these exotic creatures are offered dining rooms in which food is cooked in front of the dining guests. During the war this room was called the roast room, now it is once again called the grill room. But the simple settler will call it a living kitchen or a cooking room and will feel as aristocratic as an English lord. Or as vulgar as an Austrian farmer. Anyone who wishes to settle must relearn. We must forget urban revenue houses. If we want to go to the country, we must go to school at the farmer’s house and see how he does it. We must learn a new way of dwelling.