Arnold Schönberg and His Contemporaries (1924) The Gurrelieder – the most recent compositions! What do you make of them? And if Schönberg really wishes to defend the last few years of his work – and of this there can be no doubt – what is his position on the Gurrelieder? Is he not bound to repudiate them? And yet in fact we learn the opposite: we have seen that he himself has rehearsed and conducted them. Explain that contradiction to us! My honoured audience, you are mistaken. No one repudiates what he has made. Neither the craftsman nor the artist. Neither the cobbler nor the musician. The differences in form that the public perceives are hidden from the person who makes them. The shoes that the master shoemaker made ten years ago were good shoes. Why should he be ashamed of them? Why should he repudiate them? ‘Look at the rubbish I made ten years ago’ – only an architect could have uttered those words. But, as everyone knows, I don’t count architects as human beings. The craftsman creates form unconsciously. The form is accepted by tradition and the changes that occur during the craftsman’s life are not dependent on his will. His clients, who change – they grow older – give him the stimulus, and so they effect a change of which neither the consumer nor the producer is aware. In his twilight years the master shoemaker makes different shoes from the ones he made in his youth. Just as his handwriting has become different over forty years. As all handwriting changes to the same degree, all writers are involved in this change to the same degree, so that one can easily guess the century from the shape of the letters. The artist is different. He has no client. The person who gives him his commission is himself. His first work will always be the product of his milieu and his will. But for anyone with ears to hear and eyes to see, this first work contains the whole of the artist’s life’s work. Crocodiles see a human embryo and say: ‘It’s a crocodile’. Humans see the same embryo and say: ‘It’s a human being. Crocodiles say the Gurrelieder is Richard Wagner. But humans feel something unimaginably new after the first three bars and say: ‘That’s Arnold Schönberg! It has always been so. Every artist’s life has been subjected to this misunderstanding. His distinctive qualities remain unknown to his contemporaries. He probably feels that the mystery is something alien, and at first he relies on analogies. But when he becomes fully aware of the new, the artist’s ego, he attempts to salvage his own inferiority with laughter and rage. We know Rembrandt’s work from his earliest boyhood. He was a famous painter. Then he made The Night Watch. People ranted and raged: ‘Why is he working differently?’ ‘This isn’t the famous Rembrandt, this is a ghastly mess!’ And the master was surprised and didn’t know what the public meant. He didn’t see what the public saw. He hasn’t changed at all, he has done nothing new. Three hundred years on, the public agrees with the master. He really wasn’t a new Rembrandt, but a better, bigger, more powerful one. And the public looking through Rembrandt’s work cannot see the rupture that was so keenly identified by the master’s contemporaries. Even the boyhood drawings contain the whole of Rembrandt, and we wonder with astonishment how it was possible that the revolutionary aspect of these paintings was accepted with so little resistance. But people saw only the crocodile. Should I suggest other examples? Beethoven’s journey? Have we forgotten that the Ninth Symphony was excused by referring to the master’s deafness? That his work might have been lost to us for ever had the French not stepped in on behalf of the now deranged German master? Centuries may have to pass before people wonder what it was that made Arnold Schönberg’s contemporaries get themselves into such a state.