On Thrift (1924) A cause becomes unmodern at the moment when our feelings revolt, and as soon as we feel ourselves becoming ridiculous, we want to return to the cause. The top hat has various shapes. Let us put a hundred top hats side by side. I want to go to a funeral. I try on various styles, I see that they are mostly impossible, ridiculous, and that only one hat is suitable. The one, let us say, from 1924. This top hat is the only possible cause for me and my time. People only find things modern if they are possible in the first place. The top hat of 1924 is entirely possible, and if I could have worn it twenty years ago and could wear it even today, everything would be excellent. And because I can wear it at all, this top hat is fully justified in terms of production, or more generally speaking, in commercial terms. But these are all in fact matters of fashion, which soon pass. But if it happens that a desk loses its aesthetic value for me after ten years, that I find it impossible, that I remove it and must buy myself a new one, it is an enormous economic loss. I reject all addiction to innovation. Only a conservative person is thrifty, and every innovator is a spendthrift. But a person who has many clothes is keen to ensure that they do not fall out of fashion. A person with only one suit is not bound to caution. On the contrary. In a very short time he has destroyed his suit with constant use and thus forces the tailor to invent constantly new forms. The objection that these constant changes in fashion are a very useful thing in that they create a great deal of work for the producers is a mistaken view. One must have many clothes so that one can change them according to actual need. In the rain I take my rubber raincoat, in the spring I put on an overcoat, in winter a woollen suit and thus I spare my whole wardrobe. Fashion is something that changes quickly only because we cannot manage with our things over time. As soon as we have objects that survive for a long time and stay beautiful, fashion immediately stops. We have to measure beauty according to time. I cannot judge railway lines according to how many trains can travel over them, but only according to their durability. They will always be good if they offer good and reliable service. Material lives. And material, fabric, product, clothing necessarily require a certain period of molecular repose. So I praise large wardrobes, that is the correct method, because amongst other things such a wardrobe reassures me with every minute of my independence. Changing style where actual improvement is possible – it is the greatest nonsense. I can invent something new where I have a new task, in architecture, for example: a building for turbines, hangars for airships. But chair, table, wardrobe? I will never admit that we should change forms that have been tested and settled into over centuries because of some imaginative need. The difference between the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries is effectively an abyss. In those days 95 per cent of all people worked so that 5 per cent could wear wigs and expensive clothing and present themselves as cavaliers. That was a great social immorality. Today the worker and the English king, from the stylistic point of view, wear fundamentally the same clothes. Our presidents and monarchs in the twentieth century do not have the slightest need for mummery with crowns and ermine cloaks. This has a deeper meaning than it might seem to have. The intelligent modern person must have a mask for other people. That mask is the particular form of clothes common to everyone. Only mentally limited people have individual clothes. They have the need to proclaim to all and sundry what they are and what they are actually like. And it is the same with furniture. One has formally random objects made so that one notices immediately which lord and master owns them, and that as a human being he is quite different from all other people. It is true that there are cheap and expensive clothes. That depends upon the quality of the fabric and the excellence of the work. But here too there are boundaries. In sport we have champions who can run 100 yards in the shortest time imaginable. There is a person who jumps highest of all people. And similarly somewhere there is an excellent tailor who can make the most technically perfect clothes from the best material. He may be in New York, in London, in Paris, I don’t know where. Luxury is a very necessary thing. Someone must pay for quality work. And this luxury industry, which serves only a few, means what I have said about the best runner and the most excellent jumper, that is, that at least a small handful of skilled people must struggle to attain this perfection of production. With talent and endurance. That must be an example of the best human abilities. Otherwise things go downhill with everything and in every field. The tailor to the English king has an effect through his encouraging example, through his perfect work on the whole of English clothes production. Without these excellent people we cannot go beyond the average. Every effort to reduce the durability of an object is mistaken. In all the objects that we produce we must increase their durability over time. Then it is correct. I have a fabric that is bad, I have a suit made, and the fit lasts a third as long as a good one does. One to three! A good suit means thrift, a bad one means a waste of money. That is a large and extraordinarily significant economic question. But if things are produced in the best material and by the best technical staff, objects of socalled craft, which fall out of fashion in a few years because of their eccentric form – that is waste. Working away for months with lace shuttles just so that the lace can be torn in a single night is a bad thing. Those laces are produced effortlessly and disproportionately more cheaply by machines. Let us seek refinement and economy. I don’t know who is more thrifty: someone who drinks good wine or someone who drinks large quantities of bad wine. But I also want to say something about the psychology of saving. If I buy a cigarette-case, I don’t want to be hoaxed, I don’t want someone to take away my delight in material and labour and give me the doubtful pleasure of ornament. I want the material itself in a purposeful finish. A ring is a piece of good gold in hoop form. A cigarette case is two shallow bowls of good silver, quite smooth. The beautiful smoothness of the silver surface, so pleasing to the touch, is the best decoration. But people don’t like that. They want something complicated, something effortful. Which means African conditions in our country. The Middle Ages! All this effort and complication! How can I enjoy a meal if it has been prepared with great effort and the application of a great deal of ingenuity over a whole week: all that effort, complication and excessive care will only make the meal tasteless and stale. Just because it has been worked on for a week. Modern man finds it hard to bear such excesses of energy. How can I delight in an object which has been worked on for five years? That is gentlemanly sadism. These days we are simply above such things. On the contrary, we want to save on work, spare our fellow man and above all economize on material. I admit that I am almost pathologically thrifty, and would like to be a leading saver. If I see a lopped board, I feel sorry for the material because I complete the missing piece by imagining the part in the empty spot. And I feel sorry for the piece. In Prague I have seen noble material being mercilessly cut and turned into lathed and complicatedly assembled objects. That is a sin. Every era is thrifty in its way. The eighteenth century spent a great deal on food and saved a lot on cleanliness. It is a stinking century. You can even smell it in its furniture. Today more attention is paid to cleanliness. American soldiers set up bathrooms for themselves even in the trenches. And what happened? People exclaimed: ‘Are they supposed to be soldiers?’ Why? Because here in Europe the idea of the soldier is inseparably linked with an unclean soldier. And, again, everyone saves differently on different things. I am convinced that the proletarian is a much less thrifty person, that he spends money much more easily. The worker does not think for long about whether he should drink a glass of beer; the official thinks long and hard, but the same official thoughtlessly throws money at a stupidly decorative tie, about whose purchase the worker would need to think for at least half a day. The former love of ornament must be replaced by a pleasure in material. We don’t know material at all. Once upon a time gold ducats were thrown out of the window – a lordly diversion – and pearls were dissolved in vinegar, and the solution was drunk. Pearls were also carved. No one would do such a sinful thing today. And we have the least feeling for material; the least respect for substance is to be found in cabinet-making. Modern architects have eliminated this feeling for material in architecture and cabinet-making. A Chinese man was given a task; he went into the forest and looked for a suitable tree. He looked for a long time; in the end he found it and said, ‘If I had not found the tree, I would not have carried out my work. That is how to have feeling for material! Material must be deified again. Materials are nothing less than mysterious substances. We should be deeply and reverentially astonished that anything of the kind was ever made. And decorating a perfectly beautiful material with ornaments? ‘Improving’ fine mahogany with a purple stain? Those are crimes. Someone tells me it is a cruel punishment to be sentenced to such an ordinary prison, pleasant because of its very simplicity, because of the language of the whitewashed walls, the plank bed. If so, I can’t think how much more terrible prison in a very contemporary interior made by a ‘modern architect’ would be, from carpets to curtains, from the ashtray to the clock-hand and from the coal-scuttle to the fountain pen. Ten years’ imprisonment for such a designer! Our architects – furniture designers and decorators – see their main task as outdoing. Please, I repeat: outdoing. The shoemaker who makes good shoes can never outdo those good shoes of his. And if I know how to look after his products, because I have a lot of shoes, they will always be modern. Shoemakers don’t outstrip one another, thank God. And God forbid that architects should make shoes. Then shoemakers would be outdoing one another at least every two years. I have had shoes for twenty years and they have not fallen out of fashion. I don’t need to draw my designs. Good architecture, how something should be built, can be written. The Parthenon cannot be written down. I am opposed to taking photographs of interiors. Something else always comes out. There are architects who furnish rooms not so that human beings can live comfortably in them, but so that they look good in photographs. They are the so-called architectures on paper which, with their mechanical composition of lines of light and shade, correspond more appropriately to a mechanical apparatus, in this instance the dark room. I cannot judge the furnishing of my apartment on the basis of photographs or reproductions. I am sure that in a photograph it would look wretched and ineffectual. Photography dematerializes, in fact, but what I want is for people to feel the material in my rooms, I want it to have an effect on them, I want them to know about the closed space, to feel the material, the wood, to perceive with their sense of vision and their sense of touch, sensually; in short, to be able to sit carefully and feel the chair on a big area of their peripheral physical sense of touch and say: this is a place where one can sit perfectly. How should I prove to the person who sees this photograph, prove so that he can judge how well one sits on my chair, however it is photographed? So you can see, photography says nothing. Photography draws little pictures that are pretty or not so pretty. These distract people from the most authentic thing. Bad manners. It is on photography’s conscience that people want to furnish their homes not in order to live well but so that things look pretty. Photography deceives. I have never wanted to deceive anyone with my things. I reject such a method. But our architects are only brought up in this method of deception, and grow from it; they base their reputation on pretty drawings and beautiful photographs. They do it deliberately, because they know that people are so perplexed that a drawn, photographic illusion is enough to live in and even to be proud of. And the customers are so dishonest with themselves that they refuse to admit to themselves that they are living with self-denial in all these drawings and photographs. – Folk art? What is that? Bare knees? National costumes? – Folk dancing? And those of us who live in the city are expected to go there as if going to the theatre, sit on benches and watch? Is that not so much fiddle-faddle? Is that not as shaming for us as it is for the country people? Do we city-dwellers and the people in the country need such a thing? The barriers between country and city in general should fall. This difference is both artificial and ridiculous. We see the people from the country as primitive people. They are ridiculous to us city-dwellers. We are ridiculous to the country-dwellers. It’s an artificial barrier of which we should be ashamed: the lack of understanding of the fundamental functions of life, the lack of understanding of people’s work, of the higher vocation that every working person has, whatever useful thing he does, wherever he lives, in Paris or some remote Moravian village. Two such people may have their significant quality, because the Moravian may be good for nothing as a human being and the Parisian may be a complete dunderhead, or one of them is something and the other nothing – the circumstance that someone lives in a particular place on the globe, does this work or that, still does not in any way define his humanity. Only a limited person from Prague or Vienna could imagine that they were something more than someone who lives and works in Iglau or Lhota. I am always glad when I have lived for a long period in America and England. The English bride would most like to take away all her parents’ furniture. In our own country brides do not want to hear that they would ease their parents’ financial burden by taking some of their furniture. They want to have something new, ‘fashionable’, ‘modern’. They even want to have an ‘artistic design’. And in four years they will want another ‘artistic design’, because they will find that their furniture is entirely unmodern, and very new artistic designs are being made. That’s terrible! It’s a waste of energy, work, money; this does terrible economic damage. At the same time, English furniture is the apogee of comfort, and ours – ‘from artistic designs of modern architects’ – a pyramid of nonsense and sins against material, purpose and treatment. An English club armchair is an absolutely perfect thing. In England and America such perfect models exist in other genres of furniture. I think that every year all around the world only one good model is made that is capable of a long existence. Everything else disappears in a few years, it becomes unbearable to people like an old lady’s hat. The so-called decorative arts create entirely broken-backed things, and such ‘artistic furnishings’ can only exist because they are ordered in advance and paid for in advance, because they have been produced before, because they stand in the apartment in a single set, and people must patiently endure them whether they want to or not – if they have got into similar trouble in the past. So I don’t like it when people call me an architect. My name is simply Adolf Loos. The Viennese think saving is a truly terrible thing. It is a real mania, how they must constantly change their apartment, constantly buy or rearrange things, run from architect to architect. This chaos is a sign of our time. And anyone who contributes to a bit of peace in our architecture will render a service. We have no architecture, we have houses that are dressed. It’s like saying: not a saddle, but a dressed saddle. That is a saddle that has an ornamental form, and whose purpose becomes apparent either not at all or quite inadequately beneath an applied-art dress, as a woman’s body is hidden in an applied-artist dress ‘from a design’. We must dress ourselves, but why we dress our architecture I don’t understand. If the Ringstrasse had not been built in the 1870s and were being built today, we would have a complete architectural catastrophe. I want only one thing from the architect: that he show decorum in his building. On all the occasions when I have been in Brno and seen the Deutsche Haus and the Czech ‘Beseda’, the character of these two buildings immediately told me what would eventually have to happen in Brno. I would like to be able to reproduce these two pictures side by side somewhere. But after what I recently saw in Prague, I think the Czech architects have been converted to the forms of the Deutsche Haus in Brno. That is a bad sign. One millimetre more or less in the profile – that causes me pain. The present-day architect is by both attitude and upbringing an unthrifty person. And of those involved in theatre decoration we may expect nothing sensible. They are people for whom not saving on material has become a long-standing habit. They become specialists in cardboard rocks, in all kinds of tricks and illusions, and completely lose their sense of dimension because it is the only way in the theatre: everything is temporary, to be looked at. Theatre directors have invited me to performances of plays. I didn’t go. It contradicts my entire nature. I find theatrical props entirely unbearable. They aren’t architecture. You can most easily tell if something is modern or not by whether it looks suitable in the vicinity of old things. I assure you that my furniture fits in the vicinity of European furniture of all centuries and all countries and no less well with Chinese, Japanese and Indian objects. Try something similar with the creations of our ‘applied art’. The first thing of all in a room is the chair. If I am to furnish something, I first of all need a chair, and from there I move on to everything else. I consider it a great mistake when people buy furniture made from fine woods and precious materials. Then they must always take care that nothing is damaged. For real living we have materials for all eternity, and they would be none other than pig’s leather, oak, wool. The apartment must never be finished. Is a human being ever concluded, finished in a physical and mental respect? Does he stop at a dead point? And if the human being is in constant motion and development, if old needs pass and new ones come into being, if the whole of nature and everything around us changes, should the thing closest to the human being, his apartment, remain unchanged, dead and furnished for all times? No. It is ridiculous to prescribe to people where a thing should stand, arrange everything for them from the bathroom to the ashtray. On the contrary, I like it when people organize the furniture around them as they (not I!) need it, and it is entirely natural, and I approve when they bring in their old paintings, their memories that they love, whether the things are tasteful or tasteless. That bothers me little. But for them it is a piece of sensitive life and familiar intimacy. That means that I am an architect who designs interiors humanely and not artistically and inhumanely. It amazes me that so many people allow themselves to be tyrannized by so-called interior architects. At the academies our architects are taught the lesson: ‘How beautiful it once was – and how unsuitable it is now.’ I was taught it myself. And it was years before I violently forced myself to abandon those impossible views, re-educated myself and understood that it is in fact the aristocrat who can serve us as a model in one respect. I mean that he has a sense of material. Not horses as such, or beautiful horses, but thoroughbred if less attractive horses. Not just any suitcase, but one made from the very best material. A sound one for whole centuries. And so I came to understand that the fundamental principle that guides many otherwise intellectually limited members of the jockey-club is entirely correct. Aristocrats paid heed only to the material and the precise and perfect work. That was a difficult process for me. Why? Because it was considered shameful to say that it was correct. Incidentally, this is all down to Ruskin. I am his sworn enemy. It was not until some point in 1895, when I was in America, that I understood that a Thonet chair is the most modern chair. Any joiner can make the objects that I use in my interior design. I am not making myself a patent architect. Any marbler, any textile maker or industrialist can make my things and doesn’t need to ask me respectfully. The main thing is that he does an honest job. And I have not guarded against anything as much in my life as the production of new forms. Architects are there to grasp the depth of life, think through to its most far-reaching consequences the need to help those who are socially weaker, to equip as large a number of households as possible with perfect utility objects, and architects are never there to invent new styles. But these are all views which, even in Europe today, will be understood by as many people as could be counted on the fingers of one hand.