Epilogue Critique of Ornament Joseph Masheck So much of the discourse on Adolf Loos concerns his theoretical standing as one of the founders of architectural modernism by virtue of his active opposition to ornament, that, for many, the Loos of negative polemic is so exclusively the object of concern that they never come face to face with his work at all. Is there any modern painter or sculptor so badly off as to audience? Possibly John Cage in music; and pursuing solely his reputation, without artistic engagement with any works or performances, must also lead back to the same mistaken conception – ultimately dismissive of just what we are looking for, i.e. art – of Loos as merely the Marcel Duchamp of architecture. Then again, some people listen to Cage, and many people actually look at Duchamp’s readymades. Giving Loos more of a chance as artist-architect also gives good reason for fresh reading of his two most important and problematic texts: ‘Ornament and Crime’ and ‘Architecture’, which, ironically, require and deserve more textual attention than they usually receive – ironically because part of the problem has been a too visually oblivious, especially form-oblivious, approach to Loos, and yet his prime written texts nevertheless suffer from not being taken seriously enough as problematically textual: Loos has been approached in an overly literary way; but, in respect to his actual written texts, not literarily enough. Put this way, it becomes obvious why those who only read his words, and take them as hermeneutically self-evident, are left with no solid sense of this great architect’s project on any level and are as much as unqualified to vote on the question of whether or not it was or is art at all. Let us try to consider, then, more of what is at stake for modern European art in its formative phase in ‘Ornament and Crime’ (1909) and ‘Architecture’ (1910) as differently and variously problematic as they are, in succession and as having implicit connections with other, less-known texts of the architect.<sup>1</sup> The very title of the lecture and pamphlet ‘Ornament and Crime’ demands attention. Loos’s use of the neuter Latinate ‘das Ornament’, not the masculine Germanic ‘der Schmuck’, already welcomes more general and categorical construal – even of the Romanized Greek orders as grammatical complexes passed on philologically through the Renaissance and then the classical academic system – as more than just a matter of cosmetic superfluities. Loos understood and respected the classical orders much more than the reactionaries who, still to this day, dumbly fetishize them: to him the understanding that they could no longer symbolize the essence of architecture as no longer a matter of stone upon stone, was no reason to consider them anathema. Also, in 1909 the title ‘Ornament and Crime’ would have carried a touch of the edginess of Karl Kraus, who had published a critique of sexual inequality titled Sittlichkeit und Kriminalität (Morality and Criminality) in 1902. The note of criminality carrying over from the Kraus title would have reinforced the known historical relevance to the Loosian problem of the early criminologist Lombroso, to whom we shall return. And on the heels of Kraus had come another timely Viennese double-barrelled title with an ethical ring to it: Otto Weininger’s sensational Geschlecht und Charakter (Sex and Character) of 1903. Young Weininger had committed suicide soon after his book appeared, just as Loos’s career was starting up; that might not seem pertinent but for something Allan Janik has pointed out: that according to Sex and Character, criminality as such is anti-social yet essentially aesthetic. In other words, though aesthetic conviction was not, for the moment, a selling point, a note of scepticism about aesthetic superficiality, specifically ornamental superfluity in architecture, quite possibly was. After all, criminality had even been toyed with in early modern aestheticism: in 1890 the dandyish American painter Whistler had promulgated in his Gentle Art of Making Enemies a list of revisionist aesthetic propositions, beginning with: ‘That in Art, it is criminal to go beyond the means used in the exercise’ (Whistler 76). In Weininger’s terms, criminal behaviour is the result of an individual’s being given monomaniacally over to pleasure as gained by any means necessary of possessive consumption of his or her objects of desire (Janik, ‘Paul Engelmann’s Role’ 49). But if that meant a bad mark for aestheticism as possible motivation for a bad life, let us not miss the Loosian point of this as, if anything, a propitious occasion for the definitive pronouncement of a very rhetorically inflected anti-aestheticism. This was particularly directed against the arty sensuousness of the Secession’s entire decorative arts project; and if Loos seemed like Beau Brummell arguing against the threat of fashion when he stood up to say it, that might be all the more scandalously effective. Taking these writings simply as nihilistic or Viennese-sarcastic may be a way of dismissing them that is seriously problematic in the case of such an ironist and wit as Loos. With ‘Ornament and Crime’ – when virtually all literate adults still assumed that ornament was precisely what set architecture as a fine art above mere building – Loos takes the lust for ornament as symptomatic of a lack of sublimatory cultivation. Chronic complaints about the presumed unfairness of imagery which entails that tribal peoples are not as advanced as Westerners, too often miss or radically mistake the thrust and aim of Loos’s literary figure, which, by means of analogy, exclusively concerns modern city-dwellers, however crude, merely unsophisticated, or positively decadent. ‘Ornament and Crime’ has become notorious for purported racism in taking a tribal people given to tattoo as an extreme of cultural inferiority, a problem which requires more literally critical attention than the dismissive moralism for which it has tended to be taken as an easy target. It is, however, not simply that the prevailing view distorts Loos’s exposition by taking it out of context in a multi-imperial moment when such offences were regrettably commonplace in European and American establishment culture, though that is true enough: no, we are not looking for a loophole by which to save Loos’s reputation by, as it were, ‘innocence by association’, not when the whole logical thrust of Loos’s argument concerns knowing better now. Unfortunately, latter-day objection to the terms of the statements at issue, most often from a literary viewpoint, is so concerned with Loos’s figures as not to be concerned to ascertain what Loos was actually saying on behalf of architecture by employing them, as if only literary folk are allowed to put figures to work. So it may not necessarily be reactionary for one who cares about art and architecture to want to get past a problematic imagery, after a hundred years, in order to come to terms with this ‘world-historic’, if also notorious, text, the only work by our polemically inclined architect, with a high sense of irony, of which most people who have heard of him even know. The essay stands in a certain German tradition of acerbic critique that includes Nietzsche as well as Loos’s friend Karl Kraus. In ‘The Use and Abuse of History for Life’ (1873), for example, in the second volume of Untimely Meditations (or, Thoughts Out of Season), Nietzsche sounds quite Loosian in condemning the phoniness of culture as a mere cover, supposedly a ‘decoration’ of life but really a ‘disfiguring’ of it: ‘for all adornment hides what is adorned’ (Nietzsche, Thoughts 99). Then, in ‘Schopenhauer as Educator’ (1874), he speaks with Loosian sarcasm of how German culture can be expected to be Frenchified after overrunning France in the Franco-Prussian War: ‘[W]e have no reason to mind the French despising us for our want of interest, elegance and politeness, and being reminded of the Indian who longs for a ring through his nose, and then proceeds to tattoo himself’ (loc. cit. 162). It is bad enough when readers of Loos fail to follow through with the sense of his references to cultural backwardness and atavism (neutral conditions in pre-industrial cultures, European and otherwise) as figures critically directed at the ‘barbarisms’ (metaphoric but fully culpable) all too rampant in modern, supposedly refined, societies. But it is either naïve or unfair to criticize Loos’s evolutionary presuppositions in the matter – which owe nothing to the horrors of ‘social Darwinism’, and it is scandal-mongering to make it seem they do – without acknowledging the only available theoretical alternatives. The progressivist sense of cultural evolution appealed to by Loos, whereby differentials in cultural development are differences, parallel in the prevailing historical time, in the playing out of the same cultural scenario, rests on ‘uniformitarianism’ in the geology of Darwin’s friend Charles Lyell, by which the forces shaping the earth today are presumed to be the same as those which shaped it in the distant past. I like to think that, given his penchant for mirror-play in interiors, Loos would have been interested in a younger Hungarian anthropologist turned Freudian analyst, Géza Róheim, a defender of cultural evolutionism who also studied folkloric ‘mirror magic’ (Spiegelzauber, 1919; Robinson 84–89). However, the only alternatives to such ‘cultural evolution’ or ‘parallel development’ were (a) diffusionism, whereby every advance in culture must be a hand-me-down from another culture, or (b) functionalism, in which the historical dimension is ignored and each culture’s hardware and myths belong to a game so closed unto itself as not even to be comparable to another. So unless one would have preferred either (a) or (b) instead, one should by rights make some peace with Loos’s highly figured appeal to some sense of cultural evolution. Thus when the German predecessor in modern social criticism of architecture, Hermann Muthesius, had written only a few years before ‘Ornament and Crime’, in his Style-Architecture (2nd edn, 1903), as noted, of ‘a barbarism, such as our culture had not seen before, penetrat[ing] the substratum of the trades with little notice’ (Muthesius 59) without even incidentally offending contemporary tribal peoples, he was deliberately offending his own, once tribal German people. Loos even seems insistent and repetitious on this theme, which does not entail less developed peoples being less human, but does insist that some people among us ought to know better than to do the sorts of things that people less constrained by civilization do, and hence are distinctly culpable where tribal peoples are definitely not. But the matter of tattooing in particular, especially the tattoo art of the Maori people of New Zealand, coded in a way by Loos as ‘Papuans’, has special significance, though for present purposes there is no need to observe ethnological distinctions between references to Maori (Polynesians of New Zealand) and Papuan (Melanesians of New Guinea) tattoo or other ornamentation. It is enough to note that the serious ethnographic reports and collected artworks of the Maori proved to have serious artistic interest to the great Viennese critical art historian Aloïs Riegl (Masheck, ‘Vital Skin’); thus it seems likely that Loos’s talk of Papuans was laterally caricatural, to some extent sending up the Western infatuation in the one case with the name of another comparable group, though Maori ornament is as a rule more curvilinear. Also, as may become evident, the Maori people were better known to Western culture, so that if anything, Loos may have turned to the less theoretically rehearsed category. Otherwise, the still looser, and more regrettable, usage ‘Red Indian’, now found in some translations of Loos – most conspicuously in a quotation at the beginning of E. H. Gombrich’s The Sense of Order: A Study in the Psychology of Decorative Art (1979) – cannot be blamed on him. However objectionable, it is a standard Britishism for distinguishing Native Americans or American Indians from what the British would more usually mean by unqualified ‘Indians’, i.e. the people of India. Wherever it occurs, Loos himself used der indianer, the special German word for American Indians, as against der indier for Indian Indians (the lower case ‘I’ is no insult because Loos preferred to drop the usual German capitalization of nouns). There is some consensus that Loos’s attenuated tattooing trope owes something to the positivist and determinist criminology of Cesare Lombroso, which was widely read by the turn of the century: in America, an article by Lombroso titled ‘Savage Origin of Tattoos’ appeared in Popular Science Monthly for April 1896. Lombroso’s classic Criminal Man (1876), expanded four times (5th edn, 1896–97), already contained a long chapter on that most remarkable of ‘criminal stigmata’ (meaning marks deviating from a standard ideal of beauty), tattooing, which Lombroso finds confined to the lower classes and, especially, criminals. He thought that the word for tattooing comes from ‘an Oceanic language’ (one doubts that this can mean the Maori ta moko as resembling the Italian tatuaggio), and observes that the only men who had tattoos on their backs or pubic areas had either been in prison or ‘to Oceania’ (Lombroso 58). Tellingly, with a view to Loos’s text: ‘Among Europeans, the most important reason’ for being tattooed is ‘atavism and that other form of atavism called traditionalism, both of which characterize primitive men and men living in a state of nature’. Such atavism is not simply primitivism by another name, even if primitivism appeals to it. ‘It is only natural that a custom widespread among savages and prehistoric peoples would reappear among certain lower-class groups’, including sailors and prostitutes, the former ‘display[ing] the same temperament as savages with their violent passions, blunted sensitivity, puerile vanity, and extreme laziness. Sailors even adopt the habits, superstitions, and songs of primitive peoples’ (61–62). Lombroso saw tattooing as closely tied to criminality in contradistinction with insanity; and Allan Janik believes that ‘Ornament and Crime’ ‘depends entirely upon Lombroso’s premises’ (Janik, ‘Weininger’ 29). That can be factually true as a point of departure without denying that Loos’s shamelessly independent wit would have found scope for play with a Lombroso phrase like ‘that … form of atavism called traditionalism’<sup>2</sup>. A case from the second edition (1878) is telling for what it says about Lombroso’s sense of art. A murderer named Cavaglià decorated his prison water jug by scratching into the glaze simple drawings of his acts of murder and planned suicide; these are deemed sufficiently selfevidently inept to justify the judgement that ‘he told the story in a mixture of words and pictures in a way that evoked the customs of savage peoples, whose language is too poor to clearly express complicated ideas’ (151). In the fourth edition (1889) Lombroso has, at his fingertips for just such situations, a new technique, ‘pictography’, based on the notion that ‘[c]riminals tend to express their thoughts through drawings, even when they could express them in words’. But this is because of something presumably atavistic as such about ‘a picture’ versus ‘writing’, so that, again, ‘[a]part from atavism, it is impossible to find another explanation for the custom of tattooing’ (239). At the same moment the Norwegian writer Knut Hamsun (later a fascist), reporting in a now sometimes disturbingly racist way on his rather negative first-hand experiences of The Cultural Life of Modern America (1889) – an account that would have piqued Loos’s curiosity if only for its criticism of American affectations of petit-bourgeois British ways – mentions New Guinea natives in connection with cultural atavism. Human breeding, in the sense of cultivation, is likened to animal evolutionary stages: ‘When the fish became a bird, it learned better manners.’ After an observation on the curious ways New Guinea and Malay tribesmen greet one another, Americans’ adoption of a suburban English ‘How do you do?’ is attacked as belonging to the ‘dog stage’ of culture: this ‘is their greeting – an expression of their temperament and level of development’ (Hamsun 136–37). Whether or not Loos read Hamsun, the provocative report on America by this eventually famous novelist had a place in the career of the literary topos of the backward New Guinean or Maori. In the interest of overcoming the persistent nineteenth-century naturalist notion that ‘merely’ ornamental forms do not qualify as art, let us note that by 1870, in his The Origin of Civilisation and the Primitive Condition of Man, the tattoos of the ‘Polynesians’ favourably reminded Sir John Lubbock, the very framer of the Palaeolithic/Neolithic distinction, of Bronze Age Greek spirals (Lubbock 26). In 1885, well before Riegl’s discussion of the Maori’s spiral ornament as an all the more decisively formal matter in the absence of the metal tools which would have made it more readily determined, the anthropologist Otto Finsch, commenting on Papuan tattooing as clothing the body (‘Bekleidung’ finds an English cognate in ‘cladding’), called attention to a particular kind of tattooed men’s belt. Because such work was so difficult to execute without iron tools, ‘it must be unconditionally characterized as artwork’ (Finsch 14). On the hurried, ‘downtown’ terms of ‘Ornament and Crime’ it might seem absurd to think that ornament’s being extra-difficult to execute should make it more art-worthy; but in fact, this is exactly how Maori ornament would serve the more ‘idealist’ argument of Riegl in Stilfragen (Problems of Style; 1893), against the ‘materialist’ view of Gottfried Semper: that this shows the Maori carvers’ spirals as something they really wanted to make, not something that more or less had to come out that way, given the materials, tools, ‘techniques’. Problems of Style, subtitled Foundations for a History of Ornament, has a diffusionist theoretical thrust – diffusionism, again, being the theory that similar art forms do not arise independently but through lines of transmission. Yet Riegl’s speculations on Maori ornament were ultimately in the interest of modern artists and modern art. The same cannot be said of a once classic diffusionist attempt, published shortly after Loos’s death, to situate Maori ornament globally by locating its source in sophisticated Zhou dynasty Chinese ornament, calling it ‘a barbarized (barbarisé) art … that could only have been born in a high civilization’ (Heine-Geldern 202). Comparing Maori with Scandinavian interlace ornament, the same scholar – though he has to admit that thought of a connecting population is far-fetched – points to Josef Strzygowski’s notion of ‘real ties between ancient art of Northern Europe and the art of New Zealand’, while he himself suggests that autochthonous Neolithic spiral ornament of Bohemia and Moravia did reach the Far East (204). It might be entertaining to imagine what Adolf Loos could have added to ‘Ornament and Crime’ about Bukovina as ultimate formal source for the ornamentation of the great Shang or Zhou dynasty bronzes! Here, supposedly, was the connection between the Maori and the Scandinavians: the Zhou dynasty, before it ‘strongly influenced the art of New Zealand’, had itself inherited ‘Danubian’ and ‘ultimately Mycenaean’ forms; and this may well make for an indirect connection between the Scytho-Sarmatian forms of the steppes too, and New Zealand (205). Something of a Maori sort – Loos’s ‘Papuans’ – was stirring. Loos was an Anglophile and proud of it, aspiring in a way to a visual equivalent of the stiff upper lip as an epitome of developmental refinement connoting an unaffected, confident civility, social but private, with a ‘noble simplicity’ of public restraint. This character, which also pervades his concern with tailoring, also evokes, once again, the often impassively classico-plain façades of Neopalladian country houses. The diffusion of the British Neopalladian style had extended in the later eighteenth century into Central Europe (examples include Schloss Williamshöhe, near Kassel, and Schloss Belvedere at Warsaw), although the forced spatial symmetry of the interior layouts of Neopalladian buildings, even medium-sized private houses, is something one cannot imagine Loos bearing to impose (worse than the rigorous surface symmetry of the Papuan or Maori’s facial tattoo?). What might be considered proto-Loosian in the Neopalladian mode, and in turn a root of Neoclassicism, was its essentially rationalist critique of Baroque rhetoric. Thus there is something of the spirit of Loos in the chapter ‘On Building Without Any Orders’ in Marc-Antoine Laugier’s Essai sur I’Architecture (1753), where the great proto-functionalist practically preaches, telling architects how not everything has to be grandly important, and how positively interesting it can be to compose a building with no classical ‘order’ of columns at all. And as I have noted before, in his Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics That Will Be Able to Come Forth as Science (1783), Immanuel Kant speaks of a possible ‘adornment … through heightened clarity’. Indeed, Loos finds something of an ally in the Kant who produced a distinctly cleansing ‘critical’ philosophy. In remarks appended to his 1783 Prolegomena, which is something of a rehearsal for the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant acknowledges his qualified idealism as having been provoked by the same George Berkeley even as he critiques Berkeley’s ‘dogmatic’, and in proceeding to speak against ornamentation he employs two expressions that would surely have appealed to Loos, one as it were abstract and ‘sentimental’, the other, more vernacular yet ‘anti-naïve’. The first concerns effecting ‘adornment by greater clearness (den Ausputz durch … vergrösserte Deutlichkeit)’, while the second recasts much the same basic conception in a homey figure worthy of the farmhouse: ‘though the old false feathers have been pulled out, it need by no means appear poor and reduced to an insignificant figure but may be in other respects richly and respectably adorned’ (Ak. 382; Kant Prolegomena 122; Werke 4: 138). Some of Loos’s smaller, but by no means insignificant built projects, early on, show him subsuming appropriate formal influences even where, a century ago, there would not have been enough to describe as ornament. Similarly, ignoring an element of eclecticism, something like a default of English Regency style also has Anglophile relevance to Loos’s work. For instance, in two early boutique-sized Viennese shop fronts – the Sigmund Steiner Plume and Feather Shop (1907; demolished) and the Kniže haberdashery in the Graben (1909; 1913) – a quarter-rounding of the shop-windows at the doorway, or at the Kniže store, of plinth and showcases left and right, pays formal respects to the boutique shop-fronts of Samuel Ware’s elegant Burlington Arcade of 1819 – which may even have been under discussion at the time because the Piccadilly entrance was soon to be remodelled, in 1911 (by Beresford Pite). Loos’s Anglophilia was not peculiar in contemporary Germanic artistic culture. Muthesius’ major, handsomely illustrated study The English House (1904–5), researched while its author was German cultural attaché in London, conveyed an impressive sense of the English ‘free style’ and newly ‘open’ planning. One of the more overlooked candidates for influence, or at least corroboration, of what would become Loos’s way of thinking might be the Welsh-born décadent poet Arthur Symons, who was sufficiently popular in Loos’s world for several of his fictional works to be translated into German and even Czech early in the new century. Symons addressed the eminently Loosian theme of the plain being all the harder to come by than the meretriciously ornamented. In an essay of 1903 on ‘The Decay of Craftsmanship in England’, after criticizing the cult of the ‘detachable picture’ together with stuck-on ornament, Symons says: things you will have to pay much more than you would pay for a carpet or a wallpaper covered with hideous patterns. Surely the mere printing, not to say inventing, of these patterns must cost money; why, then, cannot a cheaper and a less objectionable thing be offered to you without them? For this reason, say the shopkeepers, only one person out of a thousand will buy it. That the pattern is a bad pattern, no one seems to mind; there must be some scrawl for the money. (Symons 183–4) I read this passage into the record because, as will become evident, it so closely resembles critical complaints soon to be lodged in this, Loos’s most famous text, ‘Ornament and Crime’. That text is a great reformist contribution to early modernism as worthily high art. It will be best to deal straightaway with the problem of its now problematic culture-evolutionary aspect, if, that is, we can for once, in this situation, keep our eyes on the ball of what Loos, despite any now objectionable terms, was actually trying to say. But if the view on which Loos leans for his sense of the cultural-evolutionary aspect of ‘Ornament and Crime’ was biological seems cause for concern now, at least it is one which has retained some cultural respect as a figure of thought: the notion, framed by Ernst Haeckel, that the embryological ‘ontogeny’ of the single human being developmentally ‘recapitulates’ the anatomical form of ‘the phylogeny’, that is, the overall developmental species pattern of the animal kingdom at large. In its time, the theory countered the pessimistic press of destiny in the more social Darwinist view. More importantly for the text at hand, it was the basis of a cultural analogy that in Loos’s hands was not evidently any more tainted by racism than were most other liberal-minded middle-class Europeans in 1909, or anyone who went on to welcome the 1919 revolutionary spirit in Central Europe and gave serious attention to social housing, etc. For the cruder early phases of human culture consisted by definition of the best there was at the time – just as Marx can speak well of feudalism over and against slavery; and indeed, Loos points up at the start of his text something of which most Americans have no inkling when he sets between the innocent (though not exactly noble-savage) Papuan (= age two) and Socrates (= age six), in his developmental scale of culture, the pre-feudal European ‘tribesman’ (= age four; OC 167) so conveniently forgotten in the modern Euro-American’s sanitized sense of his or her own origins. In any case, the thrust of Loos’s figure was not to criticize anybody else’s lack of sophistication but only the contemporary ‘stragglers’ as he calls them more than once, of his own modern culture, who, he always insisted, really ought to know better.<sup>3</sup> Given his critical outlook, a different sort of embryological speculation, anciently Indo-European, would have appealed to him in respect to architectural cladding as a building’s embryologically final epidermis: the original Sanskrit conception of ornament as final, outermost layer of something properly crafted as it comes into its own. The great orientalist Coomaraswamy (1877–1947) explains that by linguistic devolution the Sanskrit word meaning ‘made adequate’ came more simplistically to mean merely ‘embellished’; the debased usage ‘I adorn him’ had once meant something more profound that would have appealed to Loos: ‘I fit him out’ – as an outfitter (Coomaraswamy 378). Of special interest to our modernist architect who loved well-crafted saddlery would have been a discussion of words pertaining to harness, as where, in the Rig Veda, what matters is the aptness, not superficial ‘beauty’, of the gear. Loos would agree with Coomaraswamy that mere aestheticism is childish, though not about how that matters: unless we get beyond it, we cannot comprehend the fundamental meaning of such bodily adornments as ‘tattooing’ (380). ‘Ornament and Crime’, however, does propose a progression – like Haeckel’s formula of the ontogeny recapitulating the phylogeny, that is, that the human embryo recapitulates ‘all the evolutionary stages of the animal kingdom’. ‘[W]hen a human being is born,’ Loos says, ‘his sense impressions are like a newborn dog’s. In childhood he goes through all the stages in the development of humanity’ (OC 167). Thus develops the present-day child: At two he sees with the eyes of a Papuan, at four with those of a Germanic tribesman, at six of Socrates, at eight of Voltaire. At eight he becomes aware of violet, the colour discovered by the eighteenth century; before that, violets were blue and the purple snail was red. Even today physicists can point to colours in the solar spectrum which have been given a name, but which it will be left to future generations to discern (ibid.). This last point is important because it implies that, like the Papuans, we moderns are not incompletely human today just because cultural development is likely to continue, culture being a process of refinement that is never over. Loos cannot be arguing that Voltaire was better than and/or superior to Socrates, which would follow analogically if the Teutonic tribesman were better than the Papuan. Then, too, there is the idealizing respect for the Papuan that a perhaps dandyish Voltaire must have for a Socrates. But in the second paragraph the now century-old but notorious account of tattoo begins; and the present-day critical reader would do well to remember that the Maori as well as the Papuans, were cannibals, notwithstanding their undeniably beautiful ornament, including tattoo. Some confusion with regard to ‘Ornament and Crime’ derives from the fact that Loos is already more culturally relative than is expected: the Papuan’s cannibalism cannot be fully culpable because he literally knows no better: ‘But if a modern person kills someone and devours him, he is a criminal or a degenerate’ (ibid.). Similarly, then: ‘The Papuan covers his skin with tattoos, his boat, his oars, in short everything he can lay his hands on.’ But: ‘He is not a criminal.’ (One might have expected Loos to complete the parallelism with ‘nor a degenerate’, but he may want to leave room for a touch of décadence.) ‘The modern person who tattoos himself is either a criminal or a degenerate’ – a thought that unfurls into a wittily hyperbolic Loosian cadenza: ‘There are prisons in which eighty per cent of the inmates have tattoos. People with tattoos not in prison are either latent criminals or degenerate aristocrats’ (OC 167). ‘If a tattooed person dies at liberty, it is only that he died a few years before he committed a murder’ (AAL 100). Loos obviously knows he is being outrageous; and in estimating what he is intellectually up to we should not overlook his Viennese high sarcasm. As Peter Vergo notes with uncommon boldness, ‘critics have failed to notice’ that in this prime text Loos is ‘far from being entirely serious’, and statements like the one of dying fortuitously before committing an inevitable murder, are ‘surely humorous’ (Vergo 172). An amusing example from one of his early exhibition reviews, on ‘Glass and China’ (1898), has our subject talking about a popular engraver of drinking glasses at this exhibit of wares engraving people’s names ‘while-they-wait’: ‘Particularly delightful is a goblet decorated with good-luck charms, which I am sure has a future … What I have in mind is the delightful arrangement of the charms, which recalls the principle of decoration under Emperor Francis I’ (OC 72). While the irony in ‘Ornament and Crime’ is subtler than that, it is strange that our literary friends, of all people, often seem to suppose that when this friend of Kraus, criticizing contemporary European culture, made such a statement as that someone tattooed dying at liberty would soon have become a murderer, he can possibly have been speaking with a straight face. Yet beyond the scandalous hyperbole there was important thinking here – a hundred years ago now, amazingly: Loos’s concern is not with an absolute primitive state of nature but with a relative primitivism under supposedly advanced developmental conditions. His observations here on the barbarous behaviour of his more uncouth contemporaries stir up matters not only of anthropology but also of historical and political philosophy, including Giambattista Vico’s pre-Nietzschean sense of cultural progress as repeatedly broken by regression to a more primitive state, with recovery to a somewhat higher plane; and of how in the final ‘Age of Man’ a barbarism comparable to the ‘second barbarism’ of the early Middle Ages returns with social breakdown and ‘barbarism of the soul’ (Vico, conclusion to The New Science, 1725). Closer to home, the Industrial Revolution had brought the social barbarism of alienation and cultural deprivation of a lumpenproletariat which Loos obviously has in mind without putting it quite so. Even a notorious comment on those who inscribe and bedeck with drawings public lavatory walls comes closer, in tenor, than we would expect to Engels in The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844 (1845) on the slums of Manchester as habitable only by ‘a physically degenerate race, robbed of all humanity, degraded, reduced morally and physically to bestiality’ (Engels 63). Loos finally makes a decisive and sweeping point when he insists, ‘We have the art that has superseded ornament’ (OC 174; emphasis in source). ‘The art, which has taken the place of ornament,’ the same notion of supersession and even sublimation will even extend (once there is such a thing) to abstract painting as in part adumbrated by ornamental stylization in the crafts; and this is also a good condensation of the whole case that ‘Ornament and Crime’ was never about how the tribal artisan doesn’t know any better, and not even about how the lowly presentday cobbler doesn’t know any better either, disappointed as he is when you offer to pay him more if he will just make your shoes without the absurd ‘wing-tip’ pattern of dots – a markedly sharp criticism on Loos’s part, which has a fourth-century Eastern precedent: St John Chrysostom preaching in Constantinople: ‘Even the shoemaker’s … [art] stands in need of restraint, for they have lent their art to luxury, corrupting its necessity and artfully debasing art (Homily 49 on Matthew, qu. Coomaraswamy 381). No; it is really about how we are remiss: ‘What is natural in the Papuan or the child is a sign of degeneracy in a modern adult. I made the following discovery, which I passed on to the world: the evolution of culture is synonymous with the removal of ornament from objects of everyday use’ (OC 167; emphasis in source). However questionable – ‘they don’t know any better’ – as a set-up, the challenging punch line, as it were, of Adolf Loos’s message was and undeniably remains ‘we ought to know better’. Yes, Loos has to report that his attempt to announce the good news that ornamentation as such is now over with, and that the production of ornaments might finally cease, has not pleased but disheartened people: ‘What? We alone, the people of the nineteenth century, were not capable of doing something every … tribesman could do, something every age and nation before us had done!?’ (OC 167). From this sentence I have dropped a casual and unnecessary mention of race, because, usage in such things now being more sensitive (which Loos would take as improvement), the word in question is by now, 100 years later, a distraction from the real object of Loos’s analogical concern with the unsophisticated provincials of the contemporary Austrian empire as all the worse for having less excuse than surviving non-European tribal cultures. Of the jubilee parade of Emperor Franz Joseph in 1898, with its endless files of ethnically costumed imperial subjects from every corner of the empire, he says with typical outrageousness, ‘[W]e shuddered to learn that here in Austria we still have tribes from the fourth century. Happy the land that does not have many cultural stragglers and laggards. Happy America!’ (170). It was with these ‘stragglers’, here the peasants within the outer limits of the Austrian empire, that Loos was primarily concerned with all his imagery of the primitive in ‘Ornament and Crime’. Otherwise, ‘otherness’ as such was hardly a distasteful condition for this cultural loose cannon who titled the short-lived journal for which he wrote the copy himself Das Andere – ‘The Other’. As for the presumption of a modern European’s necessarily patronizing pre-modern culture as backward vis-à-vis modern urbanity, Loos spoke at a moment of cresting conviction in Germanic Expressionism, which inherited a German Romantic appreciation of primitivity. As early as 1799, the Heartful Outpourings of an Art-Loving Monk, of Wilhelm Wackenroeder, had called tribal music as good in the eyes, or ears, of God as the chants of the Church (cf. Masheck, ‘Raw Art’). That was more to the modern point than the Baltic German historical writer Carl Gustav Jochmann’s essay ‘The Regression of Poetry’ (1828), taking primitives’ scarification, probably more than tattoo as such, as plainly evil (no doubt in light of Leviticus), which Walter Benjamin seems to have rediscovered in awareness of Adolf Loos.<sup>5</sup> Let us be clear: there was no onus whatever in sophisticated circles on being primitive as such – the condition was even romanticized – only on behaving inexcusably like a primitive in the middle of Vienna. Moments after the turn of the century Aloïs Riegl, who had already written a short book on folk art, and then Problems of Style, which actually engages with Maori tattoo, produced the first volume of a momentous book aesthetically rehabilitating the barbarian metalwork of precisely that ‘Migrations’ period to which Loos referred, published by the imperial and royal press in 1901, as if in celebration of the dual monarchy itself, under the title Die spätrömische Kunst-Industrie; nach den Funden in Österreich-Ungarn (Late Roman Art Industry; Based on the Finds in Austria-Hungary; 1901). If concern with such ‘industrial art’ was, by and large, more akin to the Secessionist sense of ‘decorative art’ from which Loos distanced himself, other studies of the turn of the century were also important. Consider an illustration of Maori tattoo from an influential German book whose enthusiasm for tribal art was nationalistically concerned with the new German overseas empire; but it also had the perhaps more interestingly nationalistic motivation, according to Goldwater, that hearty tribal peoples were to its author, Leo Frobenius, surprisingly German or at least appealingly unlike the French. The title, with all its implications, if not the actual book, would surely have been known to Loos: The Childhood of Man (1901; English translation, 1909), though the original title is more apologetic: Aus den Flegeljahren der Menschenheit: ‘Out of Humanity’s Awkward Age’. A parallel can even be suggested between a certain Papuan or Maori tattoo type from timelessly ‘outside’ the European sphere and Riegl’s tendril motif as amazingly genealogically continuous down through the ages in Western art. Thus can a type of wood-carved stamp illustrated by Frobenius, which one might suppose was for textile printing but which is in fact a tattoo pattern from Borneo, compare with a mechanically printed wallpaper pattern, perpetuating the tendril motif in Loos’s Vienna, in Freud’s apartment at Berggasse 19, in the IX District of Vienna (between 1891/92 and 1938). Also, the otherwise culturally distinct Borneo Dayaks, Melanesian Papuans of New Guinea and Polynesian Maori of New Zealand had the practice of tattoo in common; and such stamps for tattooing occur in the latter cultures as well – more remotely from Southeast Asia, with which the diffusionist would associate the Borneo one in order ultimately to connect up, across Asia, with the Western lineage. Freud’s wallpaper will simply stand for all the ubiquitous leafy scrollwork, based on the tendril motif whose formal genealogy Riegl had worked out in Freud’s generation, a little ahead of Loos. It is also a good generic example of what Otto Wagner, a bit older still, basically conceived as ornamentally claiming a wall, like a clinging vine, as a faced surface, as, so beautifully, on the façade of his great Viennese apartment block, the Majolikahaus, of 1898. Loos himself used wide, rich vegetal friezes, related to tendril ornament (with interjected tailor’s shears), in the Ebenstein Tailoring Salon, Vienna I, of 1897. Janet Stewart has explored Loos’s ‘Papuan’ theme, associating it, reasonably enough, with the living exhibition, in a Viennese zoo in 1897, of an ‘“African village” peopled by Ashanti men and women’, as instigating a spectacle of exotic tribal ‘otherness’ in the background of Loos’s 1898 Jubilee Exhibition essays – after perspicaciously suggesting that the more remote ‘otherness’ of Oceanic tribal villagers may have symbolically mitigated Loos’s personal situation: for though culturally ‘German’ (by language) and Catholic, he was a Moravian-born cosmopolite with many Jewish friends at a time when Czechs and Jews were the largest categories of ‘others’ in Vienna. But attention needs to be paid to how the essentially ornamental-abstract Maori art became sufficiently familiar, particularly in turn-of-the-century Vienna, to be available for Loos to put it to analogous work in his famous or infamous text. Two factors were at work here: a serious Western artistic interest in native Maori art was already being taken for a long time; and the less happy fact that, as reduced to a preserve within a functionally ‘Western’ country, New Zealand, Maori culture was already quite ‘on the map’. In 1907, before ‘Ornament and Crime’ was drafted, something of an intersection occurred between Maori and upper-class British culture that would have amused Loos: in honour of New Zealand’s passing from British colony to dominion status, Royal Doulton produced a china pattern based on the highly curvilinear patterns of Maori house decorations. By 1910 the Maori were sufficiently part of the ‘world’ of Western imperial culture, however subordinated, to be visited by John Philip Sousa’s band on their world tour of that year. (I have, from my grandfather, a souvenir photograph printed as a postcard to be sent home by members of the band, who appear standing with some Maori people before a newlooking but traditionally ornamented Maori dwelling-house). Maori art-historiography is a happier subject than imperial conquest. Maori ornament tattoo and other curvilinear ornament has a long history of aesthetic citation in the West after Captain Cook’s and Joseph Banks’ collections and reports, including not only the former in Kant’s Critique of Judgment (1790) but also, as I have pointed out, the latter in the British neoclassical sculptor John Flaxman’s lecture on ‘Style’ (Masheck, ‘Vital Skin,’ 158–60; though in my previous treatment of this problem I was too sceptical of Loos’s sweeping negativity, which was braced against prevailing excess). Possibly the earliest disseminations of visual evidence of Maori ornament in France were two articles in the then new Magazin pittoresque in 1833 (Donne, 5–6), and prints of the great Romantic etcher Charles Meryon. Aware of Flaxman, the American sculptor Horatio Greenough wrote in ‘American Architecture’ (1843): When the savage of the South Sea islands shapes his war club, his first thought is of its use. His first efforts pare the long shaft, and mold the convenient handle; then the heavier end takes gradually the edge that cuts, while it retains the weight that stuns. His idler hour divides its surface by lines and curves, or embosses it with figures that have pleased his eye or are linked with his superstition. We admire its effective shape, its Etruscan-like quaintness, its graceful form and subtle outline, yet we ignore the lesson it might teach. This sculptor shows a lively response to such ‘primitive’ ornamental art even before the New York novelist Herman Melville returned from the Pacific and stimulated popular interest in Oceanic culture with Typee: A Peep at Polynesian Life (1846) and Omoo: A Narrative of Adventures in the South Seas (1847). Greenough follows through with the Loosian-Corbusian proto-functional statement of that lesson: If we compare the form of a newly invented machine with the perfected type of the same instrument, we observe, as we trace it through the phases of improvement, how weight is shaken off where strength is less needed, how functions are made to approach without impeding each other, how straight becomes curved, and the curve is straightened, till the straggling and cumbersome machine becomes the compact, effective, and beautiful engine. (Greenough 59) Maori tattoo and ornament were then taken up by Owen Jones, but then too by John Lubbock and, notably, by Riegl in Vienna, of whom Loos was aware. The first book to distinguish the Old and New Stone Ages – Lubbock’s Pre-Historic Times; As Illustrated by Ancient Remains and the Manners and Customs of Modern Savages (1865)<sup>6</sup> – two illustrations of facial tattoo from his Origin of Civilisation and the Primitive Condition of Man were re-published by Riegl along with his own 1890 illustrations of Maori weaving and carving in his great anti-Semperian work of 1893, Problems of Style. There followed in the same line not only the expressionist theoretician and Riegl enthusiast Wilhelm Worringer, but also, in Vienna, Adolf Loos.<sup>7</sup> Only a few years before Loos began to write criticism, another classic work on prehistoric art appeared, treating both Maori and Papuan ornament, which would have facilitated his effective substitution for a more longstanding topos of the Maori by his Papuans: The Beginnings of Art (1894) by Ernst Grosse. Papuan canoe-prow ornaments are mentioned along with Maori ornamental and figurative art, with Grosse suspending aesthetic judgement on Maori figurative work, interestingly enough, because he cannot tell whether respect for convention has disadvantageously affected figures which seem to him less than adequately naturalistic. Grosse is generally concerned with tattoo, not particularly with Maori or Papuan practices. Of Loosian interest is his sense that tools very often go unornamented even among peoples who do tattoo their bodies, except that one may often ‘recognize embellishment not in ornamental decoration only, but in the smooth and even finish of an implement’ (115). That is from Grosse’s chapter on ‘Ornamentation’ in which reverberations of Riegl’s contention with Semper can be discerned, and in which Loos would have noticed the sense of progressing developmentally ‘higher’: Ornamentation has in [the] lowest stage of development only a secondary artistic character; pleasing forms attach themselves to the practical, significant features only as the tendrils of a young climbing plant to the branches of a tree. But later on the vine develops faster and more richly than the tree, and finally the form of the tree almost disappears under the dense green foliage and bright blossoms of the vine … There is … a great difference between the ornamentation of the primitive and that of the higher peoples in nature, and consequently in influence. The … social influences of the higher forms of ornamentation … are certainly not insignificant, whenever, at least, the shameful prostitution of ornamental art to the interests of our modern manufacturing enterprise has not destroyed its charm and force. (Grosse 162) Grosse still assumes like a good Victorian burgher, if unlike Loos, that ornament fluoresces with cultural development, though he has room for the insight that we can respond aesthetically to ‘embellishment’ not only in ornamentation but in, in a sense of the opposite, the smooth, even feel of a presumably plain tool. Loos had introduced the theme before ‘Ornament and Crime’, only four years after Grosse’s Beginnings of Art: That is from ‘Ladies’ Fashion’, 1898, revised in 1902. The bicycle motif occurs even more tellingly in other of Loos’s 1898 reviews. In ‘Glass and China’, even the rhetorical concession that the Greek vases are ‘as beautiful’ as a machine or a bicycle attaches to a praise of modern The great development of culture in this century has left ornamentation far behind. Here I must repeat myself: The lower the cultural level, the greater degree of ornamentation. Ornament is something that must be overcome. The Papuans and criminals decorate their skin. The Red Indian covers his canoe over and over with decoration. But the bicycle and the steam engine are free of decoration. As it progresses, culture frees one object after another from ornamentation. (OC 109) engineering that includes the salute to engineers (and the English) as ‘our ancient Greeks’. In ‘A Review of Applied Arts – I’, after noting the modern bentwood Thonet chair as ‘the fruit of the same spirit’ as an elegant Greek chair, Loos praises the bicycle again, this time as worthy of comparison with ancient Greek bronze tripods: ‘I do not mean the votive offerings, but the ones that were put to practical use – are they not exactly like our own constructions of iron?’ (OC 134–35).<sup>8</sup> In 1907 and 1908, leading up to the lecture, the same parity of 1898 persists. In Loos’s promotional tour brochure ‘Guided Tours of Apartments’ (1907): ‘The inability of our culture to create new ornament is a sign of greatness. The evolution of humanity goes hand in hand with the disappearance of ornamentation from objects of everyday use. Whatever our applied artists, prompted by the survival instinct, might say, for people of culture a face without a tattoo is more beautiful than one with a tattoo, even if designed by Kolo Moser himself. And people of culture also want not only their skin but also their bookbindings and bedside tables protected from the Indian ornamental frenzy of these self-appointed cultural barbarians’ (OA 54). Again, in ‘Surplus to Requirements (The German Werkbund)’ (1908): It is a fact that the cultured products of our time have nothing to do with art … The Papuans cover their household goods with decoration … Albrecht Dürer was allowed to produce shoe patterns. But to modern man, glad he is living today and not in the sixteenth century, such a misuse of artistic talent is barbarism. This separation was a good thing for our intellectual and cultural life. The Critique of Pure Reason could not be written by a man with five ostrich feathers in his cap, the Ninth did not come from a man with a platesized wheel around his neck, and the room where Goethe died is more magnificent than Hans Sachs’ cobbler’s workshop, even if every object in the latter were designed by Dürer. (OC 155) Obviously Loos does not mean that Dürer is even relatively inferior to any modern artist, so it cannot be entailed that a Papuan’s ornamental design is inferior to Dürer’s shoe design: no, but even Dürer’s shoes are on the wrong track for what is wanted in modern culture. While the notoriety of ‘Ornament and Crime’, along with the scandal among the burghers of the Looshaus, undoubtedly helped to certify the avant-gardist’s controversial standing, already in 1911 Loos had to explain that people misunderstood his position if they thought he was categorically against any and all ornament. ‘Thirteen years ago,’ he wrote, i.e. in 1898, in an essay on ‘Otto Wagner’ (whose disciples he found worse ornamentalists than their master), I sent out a warning, expressing the opinion that we are no longer capable of inventing new ornamentation. (My enemies take this to mean that I am opposed to all ornamentation, while all I oppose is any kind of imitation in materials.) Anyone who wants to decorate something should therefore use old ornamentation. I do not consider the invention of new ornamentation as a sign of strength but – in cultivated people – a sign of degeneration. The Papuans can go on inventing new ornaments until they finally reach the stage when they are beyond ornament. (OA 90) In the 1920s, writing on ‘Ornament and Education’ for a Czech review, Loos repeats himself on the same lines, in 1924 actually referring back to the original ‘Ornament and Crime’ lecture – and, if seemingly by a slip, advancing the age of the figurative Papuan: ‘Every child is a genius. Not only its parents and aunts know that, we all know it. But the genius of a Papuan, that is of a six-year-old child, is of no use to humanity’ (OC 184). supposedly most civilized and the supposedly least], which is entirely religious or – symbolically – erotic in significance, and which, thanks to its primitive nature, comes close to art … (185–86) Twenty-six years ago I maintained that the use of ornament on objects of practical use would disappear with the development of mankind … By that I did not mean what some purists have carried ad absurdum, namely that ornament should be systematically and consistently eliminated. What I did mean was that where it had disappeared as a necessary consequence of human development, it could not be restored, just as people will never return to tattooing their faces. (187) At the end of the decade the theme recurs in Loos’s obituary salute to Josef Veillich (1929), the stalwart craftsman who made most of the copies of eighteenth-century English chairs which he required for the interiors of his apartments and houses: ‘In Frankfurt-am-Main the chairman of the local branch of the German Werkbund said I wasn’t nationalistic enough. True, as they understand the term. In those circles my remark “Why do the Papuans have a culture and the Germans none?” is seen as anti-German, as a malicious wisecrack. That my remark comes from a bleeding German heart is something the German will never understand’ (OA 188–89 n. 2). When, if ever, does one hear Le Corbusier accused of racism when he borrows effectively from Loos fifteen years later – time that, if anything, should mean, in Loosian terms, knowing all the better? His Towards a New Architecture (1923), the most influential architectural book of the twentieth century, is quite close to the spirit of Loos: Civilizations advance. They pass through the age of the peasant, the soldier and the priest and attain what is rightly called culture. Culture is the flowering of the effort to select. Selection means rejection, pruning, cleansing; the clear and naked emergence of the Essential. (128) … Art, in a highly cultivated country, finds its means of expression in pure art, a concentrated thing free from all utilitarian motives – painting, literature, music. (132) … Now this seems rather like a hasty digest of ‘Ornament and Crime’, complete with some equivalent to the Loosian ‘Beethoven’ motif. The appeal to ‘harmony and proportion’, however, sounds much too French: Loos would never speak so glibly of proportion (as cultural conservatives often do). More important here, however, is something Le Corbusier actually does not press: a sense, not so Loosian, that somehow a house should be a ‘a machine for living in’<sup>10</sup> quite instead of a work of architectural art in the conventional sense. One hastens to add that looking like a sleekly beautiful machine is for Corbusier a new way to look like architectural art: the famous slogan is after all a figure of speech, coming from a new aesthetic place but aesthetic nevertheless. This was not exactly Loos’s way of stating the specially qualified non-art case for architecture, but it is effectively something he in some sense stated first. That ‘Ornament and Crime’ always turns out to be more challenging than one expects, concerns the difficulty of breaking through conventional presuppositions about ornament as necessarily a refinement, to which even the Papuan-Maori analogue for the cultural ‘stragglers’ of modern times is subordinate. Loos finds it frustrating to deal with even certain made-to-order articles, such as gentlemen’s shoes with ‘wing-tips’ perforated with curlicues – possibly the most classy English ‘Papuan’ fetish – to have them furnished plain, without ornamentation. The cobbler himself, however, proves sentimentally attached to the ornament he has, however absurdly, always been obliged to impose on the shoes he makes; and on the theoretical plane this must to some extent spoil a ready analogy with carpentry in building construction by which Loos wants to maintain that the craftsman knows better than the architect – certainly better than any architect who considers himself an artist and tries to impose his ‘creativity’ – how to make a plain good and almost by necessity beautiful thing.<sup>11</sup> There does seem to be some confusion over the basically good idea of well made, simpler shoes which will not go quickly out of style, together with higher pay and shorter hours for shoemakers, as a good thing all round. The confusion is not so much in the economics as in regard to the gratification versus alienation of the at least temporarily disappointed craftsman who always thought he liked punching the holes of the regularized wing-tip pattern as much as the peasant woman whom Loos otherwise permits to go on unembarrassedly enjoying her needlework because Beethoven is out of her cultural reach. Well, Loos could still look forward to public education bringing Beethoven to the artisan class as the peasantry disappeared; and it is no fault of him or of modernism that his essay becomes all the more challenging now that almost no Europeans or Americans except for cooks and some artists actually make anything anymore, while educational ‘pragmatism’ (US sense) discourages many youngsters from bothering about Beethoven, let alone his Viennese modernist successors.