## Bibliography Coomaraswamy, Ananda K. ‘Ornament.’ Art Bulletin 21 (1939), 375–82. Donne, J.B. ‘Maori Heads and European Taste.’ RAIN (Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland), no. 11 (November-December 1975), 5–6. Engels, Friedrich. The Condition of the Working-Class in England in 1844, trans. Florence Kelly Wischnewetsky. London: Allen and Unwin, 1892. Finsch, Otto. ‘Über Bekleidung, Schmuck, und Tätowirung der Papuas der Südküste von New-Guinea.’ Mitteilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien 15 (1885), 12–33. Greenough, Horatio. Form and Function: Remarks on Art, ed. Harold A. Small. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1947. Grosse, Ernst. The Beginnings of Art. Anthropological Series. New York: Appleton, 1900. Hamsun, Knut. The Cultural Life of Modern America (1889), trans. and ed. Barbara Morgan Morgridge. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969. Heine-Geldern, Robert. ‘L’Art prébouddhique de la Chine et de l’Asie du Sud et son Influence en Océanie.’ Revue des Arts Asiatique; Annales de la Musée de Guimet 11 (1937). 177–206. Janik, Alan. ‘Paul Engelmann’s Role in Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Development.’ In Judith Bakacsy, Anders V. Munch, and Anne Louise Sommer, eds., Architecture: Language, Critique. Studien zur Ősterreichischen Philosophie. Amsterdam and Atlanta: Rodopi, 2000. Pp. 40–58. —. ‘Weininger and the Science of Sex: Prolegomena to Any Future Study.’ In Robert P. Pynsent, ed., Decadence and Innovation: Austro-Hungarian Life and Art at the Turn of the Century. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1989. Pp. 24–32. Kandinsky, Wassily. On the Spiritual in Art and Painting in Particular, 2nd edn, trans. and ed. Kenneth C. Lindsay and Peter Vergo. In their edition Kandinsky, Complete Writings on Art, 2 vols. Boston: Hall, 1982. Vol. I (1901–21), 114–219. Kant, Immanuel. Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics That Will Be Able to Come Forward as a Science, trans. Paul Carus, rev. James W. Ellington. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1977. . Werke, ed. Ernst Cassirer et al. 11 vols. Berlin: Cassirer, 1912–23. Vol. 4: Schriften 1783– 1788, ed. Arthur Buchenau and Ernst Cassirer. Le Corbusier. Towards a New Architecture, trans. Frederick Etchells (1927). London: Architectural Press, 1946, repr. 1965. Lombroso, Cesare. Criminal Man, trans. Mary Gibson and Nicole Hahn Rafter. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2006. Variorum edition. Lubbock, John. The Origin of Civilization and the Primitive Condition of Man (1870), ed. Peter Rivière. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978. Masheck, Joseph. ‘Raw Art: Primitive “Authenticity” and German Expressionism’ (1982). In his Modernities: Art Matters in the Present. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1993. Pp. 155–92. —. ‘The Vital Skin: Riegl, the Maori, and Loos.’ In Richard Woodfield, ed., Framing Formalism: Riegl’s Work. Critical Voices in Art, Theory and Culture. Amsterdam: G+B Arts International, 2001. Pp.151–82. Muthesius, Hermann. Style-Architecture and Building Art: Transformations of Architecture in the Nineteenth Century and Its Present Condition, trans. Sanford Anderson. Texts & Documents. Santa Monica, Calif.: Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities, 1994. Nietzsche, Friedrich. Thoughts Out of Season, Part II, trans. Adrian Collins. In the Complete Works, ed. Oscar Levy. Edinburgh and London: Foulis, 1909. Robinson, Paul A. The Freudian Left: Wilhelm Reich, Geza Rohem, Herbert Marcuse. New York: Harper and Row, 1969. Stewart, Janet. Fashioning Vienna: Adolf Loos’s Cultural Criticism. London and New York: Routledge, 2000. Symonds, Arthur. ‘The Decay of Craftsmanship in England.’ In his Studies in Seven Arts. London: Constable; New York: Dutton, 1906. Vergo, Peter. Art in Vienna 1898–1918: Klimt, Kokoschka, Schiele and Their Contemporaries, 3rd edn London: Phaidon, 1993. Vico, Giambattista. The New Science, 3rd edn, trans. Thomas Goddard Bergin and Max Harold Fisch. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1984. Whistler, James Abbott McNeill. The Gentle Art of Making Enemies, 2nd edn. New York: Putnam, 1982; repr. New York: Dover. 1967.