## Notes 1 Privy Councillor Arthur von Scala: Arthur von Scala (1845–1909), the director of Vienna’s Oriental Museum, took over the Museum of Art and Industry, which he remodelled along the lines of the English Arts and Crafts movement. 2 Eitelberger: Rudolf Eitelberger von Edeleberg (1817–85), art historian and reputed founder of the Vienna School of Art History. 3 Meister Diefenbach: Karl Wilhelm Diefenbach (1851–1913), German painter. 4 Rigo: Rigó Jancsi (1858–1927), a famous Hungarian Romany violinist who has a type of chocolate cake named after him. 5 Holy Clauren: Pseudonym of Karl Heun (1771–1854), author of sentimental tales that appealed to the German bourgeoisie. 6 Lenbach: Franz von Lenbach (1836–1904), a prominent German portrait-painter. 7 Sacher-Masoch, Catulle Mendès and Armand Sylvestre: Leopold von Sacher-Masoch (1836– 95), an Austrian author best known for the novella Venus in Furs (1870). He gave his name to the term masochism. Catulle Mendès (1841–1909), a French poet and writer, author of the erotic novel Roman d’une nuit, for which he was imprisoned. Paul-Armand Silvestre (1837– 1901), a French poet, author of erotic verse, notably Les Sept Péchés capitaux. La luxure (1901). 8 le cul de Paris: A type of bustle popular in the 1870s. 9 Peter Altenberg: Peter Altenberg (1859–1919), Austrian writer and bon viveur, noted for his psychological studies of Viennese women and girls. 10 The Barrisons: The Barrison Sisters, a risqué vaudeville act from Copenhagen who toured Europe and the United States in the 1890s. Known as ‘the baddest girls in the world’. 11 Hic Rhodus, hic salta: Literally ‘This is Rhodes, jump here!’, from the Latin version of Aesop’s fable ‘The Boastful Athlete’. Meaning: ‘Prove what you can do, right now. 12 a meaning preserved in the Germanic languages even today: The German word Decke means both ‘ceiling’ and ‘blanket’. 13 Schmidt: Friedrich von Schmidt (1825–91), architect, designer of Vienna City Hall. 14 Hansen: Theophil Hansen (1813–91), architect, one of the designers of Vienna’s Ringstrasse. 15 Ferstel: Heinrich von Ferstel (1828–83), architect, major contributor to the design of late nineteenth-century Vienna. 16 chamotte: A hard ceramic material, also known as grog and firesand. 17 Philippopel: A small town in Bulgaria. 18 Otto Eckmann: Otto Eckmann (1865–1902), German painter and designer, of the ‘floral’ Jugendstil school. 19 Van de Velde: Willem van de Velde (1633–1707), Dutch painter of seascapes. 20 Olbrich: Joseph Maria Olbrich (1867–1908), Austrian architect. 21 Copenhagen cat: A porcelain figure of a cat made by the Danish Royal Porcelain Manufactory in the 1890s. 22 Habsburgwarte: A watchtower built on Hermannskogel, a hill in the Vienna Woods, in 1888–9. 23 the Hussars’ Temple: A neoclassical temple, also in the Vienna Woods, built in 1810. 24 revenue houses: Zinshaus, the nineteenth-century precursor of the tenement block. 25 Lainz: A part of western Vienna. # Epilogue by Joseph Masheck ## Abbreviations AAL The Architecture of Adolf Loos: An Arts Council Exhibition, ed. Yehuda Safran and Wilfried Wang (1985), 2nd edn (London: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1987). Especially Loos’s ‘Architecture’ as translated by Wang, pp. 104–9. OA Adolf Loos, On Architecture, ed. Adolf and Daniel Opel, trans. Michael Mitchell (Riverside, Calif.: Ariadne, 2002). OC Adolf Loos, Ornament and Crime, ed. Adolf Opel, trans. Michael Mitchell (Riverside, Calif.: Ariadne, 1998). T Adolf Loos, Trotzdem; 1900–1930, ed. Adolf Opel (Vienna: Prachner, 1988). Especially ‘Architektur,’ pp. 90–104. 1 The dates conventionally given to Loos’s essays ‘Ornament and Crime’ and ‘Architecture’ – ‘1908 and 1910, respectively’ – prove questionable. In re-dating these key texts I follow Christopher Long in favouring 1909 for the former (as it was written out in 1909 and delivered as a lecture in the following January), while retaining the usual date for the latter as 1910, notwithstanding its expansion in 1911: ‘The Origins and Context of Adolf Loos’s “Ornament and Crime”,’ Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 68, no. 2 (June 2009), 200–23. 2 When Loos addressed the subject, the great sociologist Durkheim, aware of Lombroso, was at work on his classic study of the sociology of religion, which sees tattoo as removed from religion (even in archaic culture it is not innately totemic-religious despite sixth-century testimony of early Christians having ‘the name of Christ or the sign of the cross’ inscribed on their skin), and clearly a matter of social position. Loos’s sense of tattoo as practically identifiable with a lumpenproletarian underclass ressentiment is effectively seconded by Durkheim’s speaking freely of tattoo as characteristic of ‘men of an inferior culture … shar[ing] a common life’ as ‘led, almost instinctively’, to such practices for solidarity. Émile Durkheim, The Elementary Forms of Religious Life (1912), trans. Karen E. Fields (New York: Free Press, 1995), 116, 233. 3 The problem, here, of recommending the aloof cultural non-interference of the ‘aristocrat’, vis-à-vis his or her cultural inferiors (even allowing for the idealistic implication that anybody who cares might ascend to such taste), is similarly relative, if gentler: Loos is advocating what now seems like liberal toleration over and against any more presumptuous, pseudo-progressive cultural cleansing of the lower echelons ‘for their own good’. Besides, surviving naïve folk crafts may not only be innocent of atavism but also better than the alienated industrial rubbish likely to replace them. 4 Two of the founders of abstract painting, Wassily Kandinsky and Piet Mondrian, use the same memorable figure within a few years of ‘Ornament and Crime’. After beginning Concerning the Spiritual in Art and Painting in Particular (1911) with the motif of art of a child born into historical time, and a developmental trope of the ancient Greeks in juxtaposition with an ape pretending to read a book, Kandinsky, who had Arnold Schoenberg as a friend in common with Loos, declares that contemporary materialism ‘create[s] a sharp distinction between our souls and those of the “primitives”’, and proceeds to invoke Beethoven repeatedly – as with Loos, as a great artist more advanced than the world at large. Interested from early on in folk ornament, Kandinsky writes that ornamentation ‘is … either no longer comprehensible to us (ancient ornament) or else is only an illogical confusion … a … world in which, so to speak, grown men and embryos are treated in the same way and play the same role in society …’; he also mentions the sexual origins of the dance as still resonating in folk-dancing (Kandinsky 198, 197, 199). Even the Calvinist Mondrian occasionally speculated on a horizontal natural (female) element and a vertical spiritual (male) element’. This sort of thing is often enough explained away in both artists as theosophical; but Kandinsky was living in Munich when Loos gave ‘Ornament and Crime’ as a lecture there (Long 213–14). Mondrian was living in Paris in June 1913, when the first published version in any language of Loos’s rather striking text appeared in Cahiers d’aujourd’hui, but that text shyly lacks Loos’s sexual motif. The present author discounts this sex topos as well as Theosophy as ultimately important to Mondrian in his Classic Mondrian in Neo-Calvinist View, The Watson Gordon Lecture 2017 (Edinburgh: National Galleries of Scotland, 2018), 41, n. 1, with more discussion of the topos in his ‘A Christian Mondrian’, The Bavinck Review (online) 6 (2015), 37–72. 5 Walher Benjamin was obviously remembering ‘Ornament and Crime’ when, in the Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung for 1939–40, he published excerpts from Jochmann’s ‘Regression of Poetry’, e.g. ‘The first care the savage takes of his body consists in its superstitious embellishment; he thinks he is adorning himself by torturing himself, beautifying himself by self-mutilation … [He] distorts and poisons his divine spiritual image … long before he knows how to protect and preserve that image.’ In Benjamin, Selected Writings, ed. Marcus Bullock and Michael W. Jennings, 4 vols (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996–2003); vol. 4, 1938–1940, trans. Edmund Jephcott et al., ed. Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jennings, 370–80, here p. 364. While one understands Benjamin’s wish to find this ‘a new positive concept of barbarism’ (p. 732) for purposes of the kind of fresh start initiated by Loos’s clean sweep, there would seem to be confusion between the notion of a golden age in the past and that of a golden age to come, it being impossible to confuse Loos’s conception of a high-cultural fresh start with even a metaphoric primitivism of given basics or elementals: Loosian elementals definitely had to be worked up to. Thanks to Charles W. Haxthausen for calling my attention to this text. 6 Cf. John Lubbock, Pre-Historic Times; As Illustrated by Ancient Remains and the Manners and Customs of Modern Savages, 2nd edn (London: Williams and Norgate, 1869), 3: ‘even the rudest savages … are known to be very fond of personal decoration’. On Lubbock’s influence on Nietzsche: David S. Thatcher, ‘Nietzsche’s Debt to Lubbock’, Journal of the History of Ideas 44, no. 2 (April–June 1983), 293–309. 7 Cf. Masheck, ‘Vital Skin’. In 1899 Thorsten Veblen held a less favourable view of the admittedly ‘well-carved handles of the ceremonial adzes of several Polynesian islands’: though ‘undeniably beautiful’ in terms of ‘pleasing composition of form, lines and colour,’ and formidable as to ‘skill and ingenuity in design and construction’, these were ‘manifestly ill suited to serve any other economic purpose’ than social display, so much ‘wasted effort’. But Veblen shows a Calvinist prejudice against something ceremonial as useless and wasteful, and possibly the nineteenth-century naturalistic prejudice that only representation really counts as art (‘elements that would bear scrutiny as expressions of beauty’); The Theory of the Leisure Class (New York: New American Library, 1953), 110. 8 The bicycle and the steam-engine, and for that matter the Greek tripod which the bicycle resembles as a complex of tension and compression, leave, as it were, no room for ornament, showing their orderliness fully and self-evidently. That in their linguistic way, precisely as self-evident manifestations of order, the Greek ‘orders’ of columns can be said to do the same allows them, when properly deployed, not necessarily to contaminate or disqualify the blankness Loos seeks. He speaks rather indiscriminately of ornament and what could be distinguished as ‘decoration’; this is a complicated subject, partly because, when such a distinction is in effect, ‘decorum’ may concern ornament. It helps to understand the importance of order to ornament, on which see Jacques Soulillou’s Loos-aware ‘Ornament and Order’, trans. Mark Heffernan, in Bernie Miller and Melony Ward’s anthology Crime and Ornament: The Arts and Popular Culture in the Shadow of Adolf Loos (Toronto: XYZ Books, 2002), 86–99. 9 Hence being an artist can hardly, in and of itself, be a bad thing. 10 On this figure, I have written ‘Textual Life of the Living-Machine’, in Joseph Masheck, Building-Art: Modern Architecture Under Cultural Construction (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 77–94; with notes, 252–9. 11 Was Loos, with his modicum of Benedictine education, aware of significant late-antique Christian precedents for his imagery in this vital point of ethico-aesthetic critique? In early modern Viennese culture Augustine was of conspicuous interest to Riegl and to Wittgenstein. John Chrysostom, already briefly noted in this essay, says that the rich man, having no worthy craft, such as metalworking, shipbuilding, weaving, or house-building, should cultivate ‘a better art than all those,’ by ‘learn[ing] … to use his wealth aright, and to pity the poor,’ i.e. charity, which ‘far excels’ even arts as necessary in the here and now as ‘housebuilding’. Not even painting, let alone embroidery, should count as art, ‘for they do but throw [people] into useless expense’, whereas ‘the arts ought to be concerned with things necessary and important to our life’. Like Loos on more than men’s shoes, Chrysostom observes: ‘the sandal-makers … should have great retrenchments made in their art. For most things in it they have carried to vulgar ostentation, having corrupted its necessary use, and mixed with an honest art an evil craft; which has been the case with the art of building also. But even as to this, so long as it builds houses and not theatres, and labors upon things necessary, and not superfluous, I give the name of an art,’ whereas ornament strikes him as effeminate, and markedly exotic ornamentation stems from tribal culture. Apropos of men’s shoes in particular there is found a most Loosian cadenza: ‘for first a ship is built, then rowers are mustered, and a man for the prow, and a helmsman, and a sail is spread, and an ocean traversed, and, leaving wife and children and country, the merchant commits his very life to the waves, and comes to the land of the barbarians, and undergoes innumerable dangers for these threads, that after it all thou mayest take them, and sew them onto thy shoes, and ornament the leather. And what can be done worse than this folly?’ Making matters worse, all this amounts to so much social sin, for it is instead of helping the Christ to be found in the poor: for ‘how many thunderbolts must ye not deserve, overlooking Him in want of necessary food, and adorning these pieces of leather with so much diligence?’ There is even a Rieglesque note where the motif of the tendril again, in Riegl’s Problems of Style is devoted to the evolution of tendril ornament – as in the wing-tip shoe ornament criticized in ‘Ornament and Crime’ – is specifically pointed up in association with the wasteful and selfindulgent luxury of ornamenting clothing and shoes (St John Chrysostom, ‘Homily XLIX on Matthew’, in Early Christian Fathers: Nicene and Post-Nicene, ser. I, vol. X, sects 4-7 [http://www.ccel.org/fathers2/NPNF1-10-55.htm#P4738\_1492441]). More likely encountered would have been the Confessions of Augustine, Book X, which addresses more broadly the problem of the visual allure of exaggerated sensuous attractions, including superadded ornamentation. ‘To entrap the eyes men have made innumerable additions’, as Augustine calls them, ‘to the various arts and crafts in clothing, shoes, vessels, and manufactures of this nature, pictures, images of various kinds, and things which go far beyond necessary and moderate requirements …’ These errors of excess are charged to some spiritual failing on the artist’s part, but ‘higher’ beauty is unscathed by private ethical disqualification; even so, when ‘the artists and connoisseurs of external beauty draw their criterion of judgement’, they miss ‘a principle for the right use of beautiful things’ which ‘is there but they do not see it, namely that they should not go to excess, but reserve their strength for holy things “and not dissipate it in delights”’, such as superfluous ornamentation, ‘that produce mental fatigue’ (X.xxxiv.53; St Augustine of Hippo, Confessions, trans. and ed. Henry Chadwick (Oxford World Classics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992), 210). These patristic sources are part of the cultural background to Loos’s ethico-aesthetic critique of ornamental superfluity, with its preferential option for simplicity. In the High Middle Ages calls to simplicity are found in thinkers as different as Peter Abelard and Bernard of Clairvaux: e.g. the former’s appeal to nature against cosmetic luxury in his letters to Heloise and a famous letter of the latter against luxurious and distracting church decorations. Thomas Aquinas speaks several times against superadded ornamentation in the Summa Theologica. # THE BEGINNING Let the conversation begin … Follow the Penguin twitter.com/penguinukbooks Keep up-to-date with all our stories youtube.com/penguinbooks Pin ‘Penguin Books’ to your pinterest.com/penguinukbooks Like ‘Penguin Books’ on facebook.com/penguinbooks Listen to Penguin at soundcloud.com/penguin-books Find out more about the author and discover more stories like this at penguin.co.uk