# the new social contract, or we’re all in this together An organization that commits itself to the human-centered tenets of design thinking is practicing enlightened self-interest. If it does a better job of understanding its customers, it will do a better job of satisfying their needs. That is simply the most reliable source of long-term profitability and sustainable growth. In the world of business, every idea—however noble— must survive the test of the bottom line. But this is not a one-sided proposition. Businesses are taking a more human-centered approach because people’s expectations are evolving. Whether we find ourselves in the role of customer or client, patient or passenger, we are no longer content to be passive consumers at the far end of the industrial economy. For some this leads to a quest for more meaningful pursuits than “getting and spending.” For others it may take the form of holding companies accountable for the impact of their products upon our bodies, our culture, and our environment. The net effect, however, is a far-reaching shift in the dynamic between sellers of goods and providers of services, and those who purchase them. As consumers we are making new and different sorts of demands; we relate differently to brands; we expect to participate in determining what will be offered to us; and we expect our relationship with manufacturers and sellers to continue beyond the point of purchase. To meet these heightened expectations, companies have to yield some of their sovereign authority over the market and enter into a two-way conversation with their customers. This shift is happening at three levels, and they will shape the argument of this chapter. First, there is a seemingly inexorable blurring of the line between “products” and “services,” as consumers shift from the expectation of functional performance to a more broadly satisfying experience. Second, design thinking is being applied at new scales in the move from discrete products and services to complex systems. Third, there is a dawning recognition among manufacturers, consumers, and everyone in between that we are entering an era of limits; the cycle of mass production and mindless consumption that defined the industrial age is no longer sustainable. These trends converge around a single, inescapable point: design thinking needs to be turned toward the formulation of a new participatory social contract. It is no longer possible to think in adversarial terms of a “buyer’s market” or a “seller’s market.” We’re all in this together. ## the shift to services In some sense, every product is already a service. However inert it may seem, a product implies a prior association with the brand that stands behind it and carries the expectation of the maintenance, repair, or upgrade that will follow once we have purchased it. By the same token, few services do not include something tangible, whether it be the airplane seat that carries us across a continent or the BlackBerry that connects us to a vast network of telecommunications services. The line between product and service has become blurred. Some companies—Virgin Atlantic Airways, the European mobile operator Orange, Four Seasons Hotels and Resorts— have been quicker to recognize this than their competitors and have been rewarded by a loyal customer following. It is surprising, then, that service businesses have been so much slower to innovate than companies that produce office furniture, consumer electronics, or sportswear. Few of them have built strong research and development cultures. Their business operations are rarely informed by the strategies that have proven so successful elsewhere. The core of the problem is that the manufacturing sector deals with machines and the service sector deals with people. This is a rather gross oversimplification, of course, but it rests on a principle that is quite complex. Industrialization was driven by sweeping innovations in technology. One need only dip into the novels of Charles Dickens, Émile Zola, or D. H. Lawrence to observe how people were dragged along in its wake. Companies competed with one another on the basis of their technological prowess and adopted practices designed to increase their capacity for technological innovation. As small start-ups grew into industrial empires such as General Electric, Siemens, and Krups, they established research labs, design studios, university affiliations, and other means of systematizing innovation. Historians such as David Noble and Thomas Parke Hughes have tracked how new forms of intellectual property —patents, copyrights, and licensing arrangements of every imaginable sort —were tied to the growth of these new megacompanies. Even governments took on the role of protectors of intellectual property as a matter of national competitiveness: Britain in the 1850s, Germany in the 1910s, Japan in the 1950s, and China today. Investing in a future stream of technical innovation became part of the management of the large industrial company. Thomas Edison led the way with the opening of the first modern industrial research lab—the so-called invention factory—in 1876, and research and development has been part of manufacturing companies ever since. Though they may not be quite as ambitious as “the Wizard of Menlo Park”—Edison famously promised a minor invention every ten days or so and a “big trick” every six months— most manufacturing companies assume that the way to ensure a stream of products tomorrow is to invest in technological research today. Investment in innovation continues to grow and evolve. It now includes a variety of models. Apple Inc. does not maintain a large research facility, but it does invest hundreds of millions of dollars every year in the design and engineering of new products. Procter & Gamble maintains a large commitment to R&D but also invests heavily in consumer-centered innovation and design. Toyota, the world’s biggest automaker, is famous for investing in process innovation to improve the quality of its manufacturing. Product companies are so dependent on their stream of new ideas that the stock market often values them on their commitment to innovation. Why is this not the case with the service sector? Among service companies one rarely finds a culture built around investing in future innovations. Where it does exist, it tends to be concentrated on the infrastructure that makes a service possible rather than the service itself. Telecommunications companies invested in copper wire– based networks and then in mobile technology, but they paid little attention to the customer experience. AT&T built one of the most famous research laboratories of them all, but even during its heyday Bell Labs behaved more like a manufacturer of telephones than a provider of telecommunications services. In the Main Street world of retailing, food services, banking, insurance, and even health care, there was little thought given to systematic innovation before the advent of home computing and more specifically the Internet. Citibank gained its reputation as one of the most innovative financial institutions in 1977 when it installed networked ATMs in its branches around New York. This radical service innovation allowed customers to do their banking on their own terms. For the first time since the invention of the slot machine, a piece of technology got between us and our money, and many people had a difficult time with that. Eleanor Wetzel, whose husband invented it, claims never to have used one. Prior to the computer and the Internet, almost every service relied on direct interaction between the service provider and the service recipient. In this people-to-people world, a company’s competitiveness rested on how well service personnel could look after their customers. This translated into a simple formula: the more premium a service, the more people were generally involved in delivering it. A luxury hotel had more bellboys, concierge staff, cleaners, and cooks per customer. A premium private bank gave its wealthy customers one-on-one service rather than forcing them to line up for a teller like the rest of us. As long as it was people who determined the quality of the service customers received, there was little incentive to think about the sort of breakthrough service innovations that could redefine a market. Of course, there are exceptions. Isadore Sharp created Four Seasons on the premise that large-scale hotels and great service were not incompatible. Howard Schultz built Starbucks into a global brand on the insight that ambience is as important to coffee drinkers as caffeine. Whether he is selling records, bridal wear, or airplane tickets, Sir Richard Branson recognizes the centrality of the service experience. By the end of the 1990s, many companies had finally acknowledged that technology was destined to replace, or at least significantly augment the role of people in defining the consumer experience. In just a few years, companies such as Amazon, Zappos, and Netflix went from untested startups to major brands. eBay went one step further, creating a clever infrastructure that enabled customers to do all of the work and charging them for the privilege of doing so. Other sectors recognized that these new networks offered huge potential. Dell found that it didn’t need to rely on archaic electronics stores to distribute its computers. Instead it went direct to the customer. Wal-Mart used computer networks to manage a gigantic group of suppliers with a level of efficiency never before seen and at the lowest possible price. Suddenly, it seemed, service companies were competing based on their leverage of technology and not just of people. Competitiveness became dependent on innovation. At the same time, not all service-sector companies have gone on to discover the hard-won lesson learned by their manufacturing counterparts: technology alone does not necessarily result in a better customer experience. Coming from the British Midlands, I sometimes think of the interminable loops of telephone answering systems or the confounding Web sites of so many e-tailers as the modern-day equivalent of the “dark satanic mills” that haunted the imagination of William Blake during the first throes of the industrial revolution. They subordinate humans to the inscrutable logic of the machine; they degrade and frustrate us; they compromise the quality of life and the efficiency of work. Service companies that use innovative technology but do not innovate to improve the quality of people’s experience are destined to relearn the bitter lesson of the companies of the industrial age: that past innovation is no guarantee of future performance. Netflix is one service company that understands this. During its first few years, once it had launched its breakthrough innovation of renting DVDs via the Internet and having them delivered by the postal service, Netflix focused on building its core proposition and securing a customer base large enough to sustain it. Early experiments were incremental and focused on improving the usability of its Web site and tinkering with different subscription levels. Next the company began identifying networks of trends and providing subscribers with a repository of film data and rankings. More recently it has begun experimenting with what is probably the inevitable shift to using the Internet not just as a sales counter but as an online movie delivery system. This first required downloading movies and watching them on a home computer, but technology is advancing. The California-based company Roku builds a set-top box that allows people to download movies and watch them on a standard television. The South Korean giant LG Electronics has Netflix-downloading capability built into its standard Blu-ray players. With every advance, Netflix has focused on the design of the experience and not just the technology. There is still a long way to go before thousands of letter carriers no longer drop millions of red envelopes into mailboxes, but Netflix has begun to guide its customers on a gradual journey without frustrating them, alienating them, or losing them along the way. Just as products become more like services, services are becoming more like experiences. Underlying this profound and inevitable evolution is an understanding of the importance of investing in systematic, design-based innovation that engages people—both employees and customers—at the deepest level. Eventually it will be as natural to see innovation labs in service-sector companies as it is to see research and development facilities in manufacturing companies. ## systems at scale and why we should act more like honeybees Every design challenge at IDEO begins with a “How Might We?” Navigating between the overly general and the too specific, we ask ourselves, “HMW simplify the interface on an emergency heart defibrillator? HMW encourage healthy snacking among preteens? HMW promote the revival of a historic jazz district in Kansas City?” “How might we improve the human condition?” is too big a problem to get our arms around. “How might we adjust the tension in a disk-drive eject mechanism?” is probably too small. Here is a good one: how might we improve the airport-security experience? Airport security is one of the challenges that every design thinker must have thought about a hundred times since September 11, 2001 —I certainly do every time I struggle to take my shoes off and put them onto the conveyor belt without holding up traffic, share the indignity of my Indian traveling companion as he pretends to ignore furtive glances in his direction, or watch somebody’s forgetful grandmother surrender her shampoo bottle to an apologetic officer. It is hard for me as a designer not to think about how we might better meet our legitimate need for security in the post-9/11 world. As both a citizen and a designer, I was thrilled when the U.S. Transportation Security Administration (TSA) came and asked us that very question. Our work with the TSA proved to be among the most challenging assignments in IDEO’s thirty-year history. It illustrates how design thinking has to move into the hands of all participants if we are to improve the performance of our large-scale systems. Reconfiguring the space and flow of the checkpoint will certainly make for an easier traveling experience by giving passengers more time to organize themselves and providing a better informational context for what is going on. The space is just the physical dimension of a larger systemic problem, however. The key idea was to move upstream and rethink the manner in which passenger and Transportation Security Officer (TSO) participate in a common experience. TSA was attempting to redirect its focus from the detection of objects to the detection of hostile intent: a pair of sharp manicure scissors in a lady’s purse poses little threat, whereas an empty soft drink can—as a TSA official demonstrated, to the consternation of one of our designers—can be made into a lethal weapon. A set of top-down regulations issued from Washington was not enough to bring this about, however. To implement the new security strategy, a comprehensive new design strategy seemed essential. The guiding principle for any systemwide project on this scale is to ensure that the objectives of different participants are aligned. In the case of airport security, this insight meant recognizing that security personnel and the traveling public are not adversaries but partners, whose respective goals —to spot likely terrorists and to get to their departure gates quickly and with minimum stress—are complementary. Taking the stress out of the normal passenger experience makes it easier to spot abnormal behaviors of those who might do us harm (if everyone in the queue is nervous and agitated, the malefactor with a bomb in his shoe will blend right in). This became the framework within which we pressed forward with concrete proposals for how we might streamline processes and modify environments. In the observation phase of our research we saw how passengers, confronted with opaque procedural rules, become anxious, aggressive, and uncooperative. TSOs, for their part, responded by retreating into scripted roles that made them appear intimidating, aloof, and unsympathetic. A vicious circle of inefficiency and unpleasantness is the result, and to the extent that an adversarial climate creates unnecessary distractions, it actually impedes the common goal of safe travel. Thus the designer’s question—“How might we reconfigure the security checkpoint?”—evolved into the design thinker’s question “How might we instill a feeling of empathy in participants on both sides of the X-ray machine?” Our physical design solutions became tactics in the service of a broader, human-centered strategy. This led us in two parallel directions. First, we created a program of environmental and informational design elements designed to smooth the transition from lobby to final checkpoint and brought to life in a working prototype in Baltimore Washington International Airport. The physical layout and information displays were designed to explain as much as possible about what to expect. If passengers understand what is being asked of them and why, they are more likely to be tolerant of procedures that might otherwise seem pointless and arbitrary. At the same time, however, we helped create for TSA officers a training program designed to give them authority to engage the system in a new way. It encourages a broadening out from rote-based procedures to a more flexible yet rigorous reliance on critical thinking. The new training includes an emphasis on understanding behavior, people, and security measures, while instilling confidence among colleagues and passengers. Much has been written about complex nonhierarchical systems in which the behavior of the system is the result not of centralized command and control but of a set of individual behaviors that, when repeated thousands of times, achieve predictable results. Anthills and beehives are good examples, but when it comes to colonies of humans, we have to reckon with the additional factors of individual intelligence and free will (often to the despair of designers, police officers, and high school teachers). The implication is that we must think differently. Instead of an inflexible, hierarchical process that is designed once and executed many times, we must imagine how we might create highly flexible, constantly evolving systems in which each exchange between participants is an opportunity for empathy, insight, innovation, and implementation. Every interaction is a small opportunity to make that exchange more valuable to and meaningful for all participants. Colonies of bees, ants, and humans must adapt and evolve if they are to be successful, and one way to achieve this is to empower individuals with some degree of control over the end result. In the case of TSA, this proved to be a powerful argument for the design thinker’s gambit of handing off the tools of design to the people who will ultimately be responsible for implementing them. ## working both sides of the counter One does not have to grapple with the extraordinary challenges of asymmetrical warfare, nonstate actors, and terrorism to see value in the empathic approach of the design thinker. In 2004 Julie Gilbert, the vice president of customer centricity at Best Buy, created the Women’s Leadership Forum, known as WOLF. Each “WOLF Pack” consists of twenty-five women and two men who come together from all parts of the organization to focus on challenges arising in a retail industry built by men and for men but in which 45 percent of all purchases are made by women. As a result of their efforts—which have involved more than 20,000 customers and employees—there has been an increase in female job applicants of 37% and a nearly 6% decrease in female employee turnover. Women—again, on both sides of the counter—have become active coparticipants in transforming Best Buy as a place to shop and to work. Initiatives include widening aisles so that baby strollers can fit down them, whittling the stacks of equipment down to make the environment less intimidating, and displaying wide-screen TVs and surround-sound systems in living room mock-ups so that shoppers can see what the products will look like in their home. Instead of intimidating customers with performance features, staff is now trained to talk to them about their lifestyles and what they want the technology to do for them. Toyota’s total immersion training program demonstrates the same commitment to softening the distinctions—between management and employees, between customer and staff. Toyota is, in effect, training its leaders to listen and its employees to speak up, to the advantage of both. The management consultant Steven J. Spear has observed how a new Toyota plant manager experiences his first few weeks on the job by working directly on the manufacturing line. The American manager, who could not speak Japanese, spent a week working alongside a Japanese production worker with no English; using a common language of observation, prototyping, and role playing, they identified solutions to more than thirtyfive production problems, ranging from reducing the distance a worker had to walk to check a part by 50 percent to improving the ergonomics of a tool change, and fixed them on the spot. By redefining the role of leaders and employees, Toyota promotes a level of collaboration unimaginable in most Western-run industrial companies. Spear identifies four principles fundamental to Toyota’s success with total immersion training: “There’s no substitute for direct observation” “Proposed changes should always be structured as experiments” “Workers and managers should experiment as frequently as possible” “Managers should coach, not fix.” Observation? Prototyping? Experiment? Throw in a brainstorming session or two, and you have a pretty accurate description of a culture in which design thinking has moved out of the studio and into the boardroom and the factory floor. Sometimes, as with Toyota, the principles of design thinking are formulated explicitly. In other instances it takes the form of a more generalized commitment to the alignment of system and participants. In January 2000, Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger began to create a free, online encyclopedia with content supplied by volunteers. Their initial approach was quite conventional: accredited experts would submit articles for peer review. After nine months this careful process had generated exactly twelve articles. By chance the team had learned about wiki software, a type of collaborative, open-source Web site launched by the programmer Ward Cunningham about five years earlier that allows anyone to modify its content without consulting some centralized authority. Wales had the idea to use this new tool to speed up the process of getting articles for the encyclopedia. Wikipedia was launched in January 2001, inviting users to submit articles directly. Within a month they had one thousand articles. By September, ten thousand. Wikipedia is today by far the largest publication on the Net, providing references for almost every high school paper and business book in existence (including this one). By positioning Wikipedia as a nonprofit foundation rather than a business, Jimmy Wales held to his core principle that unpaid contributors are crucial to the enterprise. Its entries are created by people who care about the content, rather than by paid professionals, which gives Wikipedia its credibility, controls its quality, and ensures its relevance. Wikipedia is a testament to the power of participation in a system whose participants are aligned in their objectives. It is instructive to compare the successes of Wikipedia, Toyota, and Best Buy with some of the broken systems we encounter in our everyday lives. The ordeal of renewing a driving license, negotiating with a health insurance provider, or voting in an election suggests that too many of our large-scale systems fail to deliver a respectful, efficient, participatory experience. We might resign ourselves to the ponderous workings of government bureaucracies, but we should not forgive the companies we patronize for their decided lack of imagination. Every media company that resists the digitization of content, every mobile service provider that forces us to buy services from a single source, every bank that exacts outrageous fees opens up opportunities for more agile and imaginative competitors. The open-source platform Android, now owned by Google, is a good example of a disruptive innovation that is poised to dislodge more established mobile phone providers. Thousands of developers are already working on Android applications, far outstripping the capabilities of Google’s in-house development teams, and the first Gphones operating the Android operating system are appearing on the market. Demand is outstripping supply. In banking, another industry whose titans are falling from power, online social lending institutions such as Zopa, are taking a new approach. Zopa’s direct, peer-to-peer model sidesteps the banks and helps potential borrowers and lenders find a “zone of possible agreement” between them. Since its founding in 2005, Zopa has spread from its base in Britain to the United States, Italy, and Japan and has achieved remarkably low default rates. The idea of participation is attractive but not sufficient. No one wants to use a poorly designed mobile application or deposit a paycheck in an insecure bank, no matter how “participatory” it may feel. These new kinds of systems must also deliver high-quality performance that is at least as good as that of companies that rely on a top-down approach. Android applications will have to be as engaging and intuitive as those from Apple and Nokia, or they will remain the preserve of open-source techno-geeks, and Zopa’s customers must be assured that their money is safe. This confidence does not come from a network administrator. If open, flexible, large-scale systems are to realize their enormous promise, their developers must have the courage to open them up to the people who will use them. Design is about delivering a satisfying experience. Design thinking is about creating a multipolar experience in which everyone has the opportunity to participate in the conversation. ## the future of companies, economies, and Planet Earth What all of these themes and examples have in common is direct engagement with people—whether they happen to be customers, clients, members of an audience, or solitary viewers of a Web site. The widespread shift, even among traditional manufacturing companies, from a “product” orientation to a “service” orientation is key to scaling up the tools of the design thinker to grapple with complex systems on the order of airport security. It is the very essence of open-source, social networking and Web 2.0. Having looked at systems designed to move travelers through airports, products through markets, and electrons through the encyclopedic virtual world of the Internet, we can now turn to the biggest system of them all: the fragile, beautiful, delicately balanced life-support system that Buckminster Fuller called “Spaceship Earth.” If a task ever required the combination of analytic and synthetic practices, divergent and convergent thought, the designer’s mastery of technology and insight into human behavior, preserving the health of our planet would be it. Holding the economic sustainability of society and the biological sustainability of the planet in balance requires the most “opposable” of minds. As a designer, I am proud that we have helped create better products that meet people’s needs and help humanize the technology they rely on. We have better buildings that allow us to live and work more comfortably. We have innovative media that inform and entertain us and allow us to communicate with one another in undreamed-of ways. But we also have a Pandora’s box of unanticipated problems that may have already contributed to long-term damage to our culture, our economy, and our environment. Some years ago a talented team at IDEO worked with Oral-B to design a better children’s toothbrush. The team began with an intensive research phase, going into the field to watch kids of all ages clean their teeth—or at least try to. One reason why children struggle to keep their teeth healthy is that brushing teeth is not an activity that most kids would choose to do. It hurts. It’s not fun. It tastes funny. Another is that young children do not have the manual dexterity to hold a toothbrush. Most children’s toothbrushes were scaled-down versions of those designed for adults (like the Dutch Masters of the seventeenth century, industrial designers of the twentieth century simply treated children as miniature adults). The solution led to the first toothbrushes with the squishy “comolded” rubber handles that are now the norm for all toothbrushes, for both children and adults. The team also gave the Oral-B brushes bright colors, bold textures, and forms evoking turtles and dinosaurs. The new toothbrushes were a huge hit. Oral-B had a successful product, and lots of kids had healthier teeth. But this is just the “front end” of the story. Just six months after its launch, the lead designer in this group was walking along an isolated beach in Baja California and noticed a colorful blue object lying just out of reach of the surf. It was not a turtle. One of our ergonomically designed, dentistapproved, commercially successful Oral-B toothbrushes had washed up on shore. With the exception of some tiny barnacles that indicated that it had been in the water for some time, the toothbrush looked more or less the same as it had on the day someone had thrown it away. The circle closed. One of our signature products had found its final resting place on a pristine beach in Mexico. Designers can’t prevent people from doing what they want to with products they own, but that does not excuse them from ignoring the larger system. Often, in our enthusiasm for solving the problem in front of us, we fail to see the problems that we create. Designers, and people who aspire to think like designers, are in a position to make important decisions about what resources society uses and where they end up. There are at least three significant areas where design thinking can promote what the Canadian designer Bruce Mau calls the “massive change” that is called for today. The first has to do with informing ourselves about what is at stake and making visible the true costs of the choices we make. The second involves a fundamental reassessment of the systems and processes we use to create new things. The third task to which design thinking must respond is to find ways to encourage individuals to move toward more sustainable behaviors. ## informing ourselves Environmentalism entered the cultural mainstream with the publication of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring in 1962, but it would take another forty years —after two oil crises and a broad scientific consensus—for a general awareness of the crisis to sink in. A major stimulus was the release of Al Gore’s documentary, An Inconvenient Truth, in 2006, an event that suggests the power of imagery to motivate fundamental change. Together with the fact-based investigations of journalists, the data-driven analyses of scientists, and the politically inspired activism of communities, the work of visual artists can play a vital role in moving us back from the precipice. Chris Jordan is an American artist who uses the power of scale to connect us to many different social issues. His series Picturing Excess includes images such as a five-by-ten-foot representation of the number of plastic water bottles—about 2 million—consumed in the United States every five minutes. Another composition depicts 426,000 cell phones—the number retired by Americans every day. The visual impact of his work exposes our profligate use of the earth’s finite resources in a way that words cannot. Another artist, the Canadian Edward Burtynsky, has traveled the planet recording the beauty and the horror of human impact. Burtynsky’s largeformat photographs draw the viewer into the lives of Chinese villagers breaking apart used computer monitors with hammers or laboring in the cavernous factories of Shenzhen. The eerie beauty of orange tailings snaking across the landscape from the nickel mines of Ontario conveys the scale of our activities in a way that is visceral and emotional. The vast photographic landscapes of Edward Burtynsky and the intricate visualizations of data conceived by Chris Jordan overwhelm us with scale, but design thinkers have also shown that it is possible to approach the challenge of sustainability at a more immediately accessible level. As director of the global foresight and innovation initiative at the engineering firm Arup, Dr. Chris Luebkeman created decks of cards he calls Drivers of Change. Each mutually reinforcing set covers a major category of environmental change—climate, energy, urbanization, waste, water, and demographics—with each card illustrating a single driver for change from a different perspective: society, technology, economics, environment, and politics. By means of imagery, graphs, and a few well-chosen facts, each card gives a clear picture of a single issue without overloading the viewer’s capacity to absorb and understand. One asks, “How important are trees?” and goes on to explain the issue of carbon emissions from deforestation. Another asks, “Can we afford a low carbon future?” and explains the impact of developing economies on carbon output. Arup uses Drivers of Change as a tool for discussion groups, as personal prompts, for workshop events, or simply as an inspirational “thought for the week.” By thinking like a designer and using insights as a source of inspiration, Luebkeman has created a valuable tool that may inspire other design thinkers in their search for solutions. ## doing more with less Pangea Organics—“pangea” means “whole earth”—is a small company based in Boulder, Colorado, that makes natural body care products. After four years in operation Pangea soaps, lotions, and shampoos could be found in natural food stores within a limited range, and its founder, Joshua Onysko, began to think about how to grow the company without compromising the core environmental values on which it was based. A competent designer might have proposed a nationwide advertising campaign complete with eye-catching packaging and a more mainstream message. A team of design thinkers, however, saw the brief more broadly: it was not just about selling soap but about selling the idea of sustainability, wellness, and responsibility. Taking into account Pangea’s need for a viable business strategy and its customers’ desire for products that made them feel like responsible custodians of the earth, the team turned to the question of what was feasible within the constraints of low cost and minimum environmental impact. The result was a comprehensive rebranding that leads customers on a journey not from factory to landfill but rather, to borrow the words of the architect and designer William McDonough, from “cradle to cradle.” Just as the “packaging” of a banana becomes a nutrient for the next generation of trees, the new compostable carton for Pangea’s soaps is embedded with wildflower seeds: soak it in water, toss it into your backyard, come back a few days later to find a garden. The author Janine Benyus, who has popularized the concept of biomimicry, has observed that the industrial age was founded on the triadic principle of “heat, beat, and treat.” This muscular approach has to be replaced by alternatives that are far less intrusive and wasteful and whose inspiration is more biological than mechanical. The brief being handed to design thinkers today is to find new ways of balancing desirability, feasibility, and viability, but in a way that closes the loop. What Pangea Organics is attempting to do on a small scale, Amory Lovins wants to do for the whole of the automobile industry. Lovins does not start by asking how we might design a more appealing or even economical car. He and his colleagues at the Rocky Mountain Institute (RMI) have framed the question with different parameters, more akin to the tenets of design thinking than of design: “How do we get to a three-to fivefold increase in fuel economy, equal or better performance, safety, amenity, and affordability compared to today’s vehicles?” From this human-centered, systemswide brief they arrived at the Hypercar, a vehicle that makes use of advanced composites, low-drag design, hybrid electric drive, and efficient accessories. RMI set up the Hypercar Center in 1994 to prototype ideas, and the institute now has a for-profit company, Fiberforge, that is developing advanced composites to support this effort. By thinking upstream, beyond the artifact, RMI formulated a different design problem from the one that most automotive companies concern themselves with today. In the past there was a streak of utopianism in RMI’s quixotic campaign, but the precarious state of the automotive industry may help to pull such efforts in from the margins. If we take time to examine the whole cycle of creation and use of a product—from the extraction of raw materials used in manufacturing to disposal at the end of its useful life—we may be able to find new opportunities for innovation that reduce environmental impact while enhancing rather than diminishing the quality of life we have come to expect. By thinking in terms of the whole system, companies can capture bigger opportunities. But we can’t stop there. Design thinkers must also consider the demand side of the equation. ## altering our behaviors The SUV may be the defining artifact of our time. More than any other product, it embodies the nature of corporations to respond to what people want, usually with more of the same—in this case much more—no matter what the cost. The popularity of these dangerous, expensive, inefficient, and ecologically disastrous vehicles demonstrates that change needs to happen simultaneously at the level of demand and supply. We need to find ways to encourage people to see energy conservation as more of an investment than a sacrifice, as so many have when they resolved to give up cigarettes, lose weight, or save for retirement. The U.S. Department of Energy understood this when officials in its Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) used design thinking to broaden their efforts. DoE had traditionally begun with the assumption that people already care about energy efficiency and directed its resources toward R&D programs whose fruits—new energy-efficient technologies—would satisfy this demand. In a program codenamed Shift Focus, IDEO proposed a new, human-centered approach that began by questioning this assumption. After an intensive period of field research, in which the IDEO team sampled consumer opinion in Mobile, Dallas, Phoenix, Boston, Juneau, and Detroit, it came to an arresting conclusion: people do not care about energy efficiency. This does not mean that the public is ignorant, profligate, or irresponsible but that “energy efficiency” is an abstraction that is at best a means of achieving goals that people really do care about: comfort, style, community. This finding led the design team to recommend that DoE shift from finding engineering solutions to people’s presumed needs to finding ways to engage them at the level of their actual values and at meaningful points in their lives. The design proposals that followed built upon these foundations: stylish but thermally efficient window coverings, retail displays of energy-efficient lighting, informational and educational tools to capitalize upon people’s heightened receptivity at moments of change such as buying a new house or upgrading their utilities. We are in the midst of an epochal shift in the balance of power as economies evolve from a focus on manufactured products to one that favors services and experiences. Companies are ceding control and coming to see their customers not as “end users” but rather as participants in a two-way process. What is emerging is nothing less that a new social contract. Every contract, however, has two parties. If people do not wish companies to treat them like passive consumers, they must step up to the controls and assume their fair share of responsibility. This means that we cannot sit back and wait for new choices to emerge from the inner sanctum of corporate marketing departments, R&D labs, and design studios. The implications are clear: the public, too, must commit to the principles of design thinking, just like the nurses at Kaiser, the production workers at Toyota, the WOLF Packs at Best Buy, and the public servants at the Transportation Security Administration and the Department of Energy. As the circle of design thinkers grows, we will see solutions evolving that will improve the character of the products and services we buy. Even on a large scale and even at the level of the most challenging problems we face in our society today, design thinking can provide guidance. Left to its own, the vicious circle of design-manufacture-marketing-consumption will exhaust itself and Spaceship Earth will run out of fuel. With the active participation of people at every level, we may just be able to extend this journey for a while longer.