# design activism, or inspiring solutions with global potential A half century ago Raymond Loewy boasted of his role in boosting the sales of Lucky Strike cigarettes by fiddling with the graphics on the box. Few designers today would even touch this type of project. The rise of design thinking corresponds to a culture change, and what excites the best thinkers today is the challenge of applying their skills to problems that matter. Improving the lives of people in extreme need is near the top of that list. This is not merely a matter of collective altruism. The greatest design thinkers have always been drawn to the greatest challenges, whether delivering fresh water to Imperial Rome, vaulting the dome of the Florence Cathedral, running a rail line through the British Midlands, or designing the first laptop computer. They have searched out the problems that allowed them to work at the edge because this was where they were most likely to achieve something that has not been done before. For the last generation of designers, those problems were driven by new technologies. For the next generation, the most pressing—and the most exciting—challenges may lie in the highlands of southeast Asia, the malarial wetlands of East Africa, the favelas and rain forests of Brazil, and the melting glaciers of Greenland. I do not mean to suggest that designers have never before taken on problems at the scale of sustainability and global poverty. Victor Papanek’s Design for the Real World was required reading when I entered art school three decades ago, and I still recall our late-night discussions about design being for “people, not profit.” Out of this righteous indignation came any number of tin-can radios and emergency shelters, but apart from a dawning consciousness of our social responsibilities, there is little evidence of its having had a lasting impact. The reason is that as designers we focused our skills on the object in question and ignored the rest of the system: Who will use it, how, and under what circumstances? How will it be manufactured, distributed, and maintained? Will it support cultural traditions or disrupt them? A better model is that developed by Martin Fisher, a Stanford PhD who was denied a Fulbright scholarship to work in Peru because he didn’t speak Spanish. Fisher reluctantly agreed to a ten-month assignment in Kenya, where he ended up staying for seventeen years. In Nairobi he observed that people in poor countries who have been thrust into the global economy do not need money so much as the means to earn money. Together with his development partner Nick Moon, Fisher founded KickStart, a provider of low-cost “microtechnologies” including a treadle-operated deepwater pump significantly called the “Super MoneyMaker”—that have helped more than 80,000 local farmers launch small businesses in East Africa. Fisher understood that the ingenious pumps, brick presses, and palm-oil extractors were not enough. His customers needed a local infrastructure including marketing, distribution, and maintenance. Educated in the high-technology world of Silicon Valley and schooled in the slums of Nairobi, Fisher shows how design thinking extends the perimeter around a problem. ## the most extreme users of them all When Hewlett-Packard asked IDEO to study microfinance in East Africa, our human factors experts did not know what they were getting into. We did not have much experience with Africa, and it would be generous to say that we are experts in microfinance. So of course we accepted the assignment. The two-person team traveled to Uganda, where they planted themselves in various rural communities and in the capital city of Kampala, where they talked to local women about the on-the-ground realities of microfinance. In the course of their fieldwork, the pair noted an acute need for keeping accurate records of financial transactions but also saw the obstacles of doing so with the tools and technologies we take for granted in the West. The use of electronics is not widespread in rural Africa. Components need to be simple and robust. Products need to be designed so that they may be easily repaired or inexpensively replaced. Reprogramming a Windows-like interface is far too costly for the small populations of tribes speaking numerous languages and dialects. The closer the team looked, the more daunting the list of constraints became. With the return of the field researchers, the full design team began work on a product that owed more to IDEO’s decades-long work with the toy industry than with consumer electronics. The device uses simple, off-theshelf electronic components that are inexpensive, readily available, and easy to repair. Instead of an interface based on a large, expensive display, a simple printed-paper keyboard sits over the buttons so that adapting to a new language is as simple as printing a new piece of paper—or even handwriting a new sheet. The “Universal Remote Transaction Device” would not have been a big hit at the annual International Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, but it was an appropriate tool for an emerging market in a developing country. Even better, the device could be used not just for keeping track of microfinancial transactions but also for remote monitoring of health care incidents, agricultural issues, supply-chain management, and more. I wrote early on about the benefits that come from seeking out extreme users and why the most compelling insights often come from looking outward, to the edges of the market. The objective is not so much to design for these marginal, outlying populations as to gain inspiration from their passion, their knowledge, or simply the extremity of their circumstances. We may, however, be far too timid about what this concept implies. Even when we look at tech-savvy teenagers in Korea to help us think about what’s next for middle-aged Americans, we are sticking to the places and people we already know and to consumer-oriented problems that are basically our own. We do not often think of going to the poorest, most neglected corners of the earth to learn about the lives of people who have fallen out of the system, but this is where we may find globally applicable solutions to the world’s most pressing problems. Sometimes necessity is the mother of innovation. This argument can be misconstrued. Though it is praiseworthy to contribute our talents to the eradication of preventable disease, disaster relief, and rural education, too often our instinct has been to think of these interventions as social acts that are different from and superior to the practical concerns of business. They are the domain of foundations, charities, volunteers, and NGOs, not of “soulless corporations,” which attend only to the bottom line. Neither of these is any longer an acceptable model, however. Businesses that focus solely on bumping up their market share by a few tenths of a percentage point miss significant opportunities to change the rules of the game, and nonprofit organizations that go it alone may be denying themselves access to the human and technical resources necessary to create sustainable, systemic long-term change. The influential business strategist C. K. Prahalad has written about the fortune to be found at the “bottom of the pyramid” by companies that dare to approach the world’s poorest citizens not as suppliers of cheap labor or recipients of their charitable largesse but rather as partners in creative entrepreneurship. Prahalad’s description of the Aravind Eye Hospital in Madurai, India, is a case in point. ## a passage to India Aravind was founded in 1976 by the late Dr. G. Venkataswamy—“Dr. V,” as everyone called him—to explore ways to deliver medical care to inhabitants of poor and developing countries. The alternatives, at that time, were to import practices and facilities from the West—which placed them impossibly beyond the reach of most Indians—or to rely on “traditional” practices, which deny people the fruits of modern research and often simply mean no treatment at all. Dr. V felt there must be a third way. My own passage to India began with a visit to one of Aravind’s mobile eye camps in the “suburbs” of Madurai in the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu. I didn’t expect neat, three-bedroom houses in planned communities. On the other hand, I was not prepared for what I saw: shantytowns cobbled together out of cardboard boxes and corrugated metal, simple houses mixed with workshops left over from the Raj, shops the size of a Wal-Mart parking space selling every imaginable necessity. But I also saw people having their eyes tested. I saw how more complex cases were transmitted via satellite back to the hospital, where experienced doctors could make the final diagnosis. I watched patients with operable cataracts boarding a bus headed for Aravind, where they would have the operation the same day. Aravind has its own in-house manufacturing facility that makes the intraocular lenses and sutures used in cataract operations. It is an amazing example of the use of extreme constraints as the inspiration for breakthrough innovation. Dr. David Green, who has been honored by the Ashoka Foundation, the MacArthur Foundation, and the Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship, working with Dr. P. Balakrishnan at Aravind, hypothesized that it might be possible to use small-scale computer-aided manufacturing technology to make the lenses locally rather than importing them from foreign medical suppliers at a cost of approximately \$200 per pair. In 1992, through his nonprofit Project Impact, Green set up a small manufacturing unit in the basement of one of the hospitals and started making plastic lenses. Over time it expanded to make sutures as well and ultimately met all the international standards it needed to export products internationally. Aurolab (as they eventually named their basement start-up) is now the biggest exporter of lenses and sutures in the developing world. It has recently relocated to a new factory. A confessed “serial social entrepreneur,” Green has turned his attention to hearing loss and pediatric AIDS drugs—a global campaign that started as a prototype within the Aravind system. In the hospital itself we dressed in scrubs and toured the wards, where physicians perform more than 250,000 surgeries per year. Assembly-line operating procedures are at the core of Aravind’s productivity. As a surgeon removed the damaged lens from one patient in a quick but skillful procedure, the next patient was being prepared right alongside in the operating room. Postoperative recovery did not take place in a fancy ward with satellite TV and cut flowers but in a simple room with rush mats on the floor, where patients spent the night before returning home the next day. It was not luxurious by the standards of the West, but it was as comfortable as the beds they slept in at home. For about a third of the patients it was free; the remainder paid on a sliding scale, which began at 3,000 rupees (about \$65) and for which they received exactly the same care. It is unlikely that a Western doctor, hospital administrator, architect, or industrial designer would have forgone expensive wards in favor of rush mats and concrete floors, even if their mission were to help the blind. This insight grew out of Dr. V’s empathy with the culture of the poor. He realized that giving his patients something consistent with what they were accustomed to in their villages but still good enough to meet acceptable medical standards, allowed him to serve the poor in an economically viable way. And he has succeeded. The Aravind Eye Hospital has served millions of patients. Aurolab operates at a 30 percent profit, which is plowed back into clinics in Nepal, Egypt, Malawi, and Central America. While the Aravind management team takes private donations to fund additional work, the operating model is self-sustaining and the clinic is no more reliant on charitable donations than the majority of Western health care facilities. Although many people have praised Aravind for its entrepreneurial model of “compassionate capitalism,” as a designer my experience there showed me the enormous potential of working under extreme constraints. How ironic that the holy grail of corporate America—where innovation leads to breakthrough solutions and enhanced profitability—should be realized on the straw mats of an eye clinic in rural India. Not only is Aravind providing untold benefits to the citizens of Madurai, Pondicherry, and the other cities in which its hospitals now operate, it is also exporting its ideas and approaches to other health care facilities throughout the developing world—and perhaps beyond. Indeed, there are signs that Aravind’s approach, and that of others like it, may become accepted practice in the West. Not only are young surgeons coming from the United States and Europe to train at Aravind, patients too are beginning to travel to India in search of world-class care at a fraction of the price they would pay in New York or Los Angeles. Dr. Venkataswamy died in 2006. To the end of his life, when he spoke about his vision for Aravind he liked to use McDonald’s as the standard of scale and efficiency that he dreamed of bringing to health care. His achievement was to use the design thinker’s tools of empathy, experimentation, and prototyping to reach McDonald’s-like efficiency in an organic, sustainable way. ## food for thought A thousand miles to the north, on the outskirts of New Delhi, lies the demonstration farm set up by International Development Enterprises (IDE), India. Founded by the social entrepreneur Paul Polak, IDE’s mission is to provide low-cost solutions that meet the needs of small farmers in developing countries. The narrow road that leads to the farm passes through fields of healthy crops irrigated by a variety of techniques. In one corner there are drip irrigation pipes, in another sprinklers made from very simple, low-cost materials. Amitabha Sadangi, who heads IDE (India), repeats the same message over and over: designing for the poor begins and ends with a focus on cost. Every detail must be designed to be no more expensive than necessary, and no efficiency is too small not to seize. This approach would seem sensible to most western manufacturers, but Sadangi and Polak take it one step further. In a rural twist on the quarterly bottom line, they require that any investment made by a farmer be repaid many times over in just one growing season. Whereas an American farmer may take out a loan to buy a hundred-thousand-dollar tractor and repay it over many years, farmers in the developing world cannot take the risk, nor do they have the capital to make such investments. This constraint has led to innovations that have the potential to transform agriculture in the developing world—and perhaps beyond. Many of IDE’s drip irrigation products are designed to last not a decade or two, as we might expect in the West, but for only one or two seasons. This seemingly shortsighted approach may seem irresponsible to a Western engineer, but by using less durable and therefore less expensive materials, IDE has brought the cost of irrigation down to approximately five dollars for a 20-meter-square (67-foot-square) plot of land. A farmer can expect to reap many times this amount in extra profit by growing fruit or vegetables, which will enable him to irrigate more land in future seasons. By driving the cost down, IDE enables farmers to reinvest the additional profits to reach economic sustainability faster and with less risk. And by thus increasing demand for its low-cost systems, IDE, like Aravind, operates on the basis of a sustainable business model. This approach has the potential to make a significant difference to subsistence farmers in India, Africa, and beyond, but its potential impact may be greater than that. The idea of designing products in an integrated manner such that low cost, entry-level offerings create wealth quickly for customers has applications well beyond farming. In the developing world this business model is being applied to mobile computing, communications services, clean water delivery, rural health care, and affordable housing. Why could it not apply to many of the same sectors in the West? The economic convulsions rocking the developed world as I write suggest that the prevailing model is not working. There could be no more opportune moment to imagine how we might move in the direction of a society where what we buy helps create wealth rather than just consume it. The idea of designing products, services, and business models that create a rapid return on investment seems very attractive, and it is no accident that it first appeared in places where most people have no choice. Organizations such as the Aravind Eye Hospital, International Development Enterprises, and many others like them are experimenting with approaches that measure success not by profit but by social impact, and they challenge us to think about how these lessons might be applied elsewhere. In one sense, we have seen this kind of innovation before. Toyota, Honda, and Nissan all began their meteoric rise by creating inexpensive solutions for their own markets at a time when Detroit measured the success of its cars by the height of their tailfins. They went on to demonstrate to the world that there is nothing intrinsically “Japanese” about good design, efficient manufacturing, reduced fuel consumption, and low cost. Might the Aravind model not “bounce back” to show us all the way forward? The argument for working with the most extreme users, where the constraints are unforgiving and the cost of failure high, is not just a social one. It may be how we will spot opportunities that have global relevance and how we will avoid becoming the victims of the new competitors who thrive in environments where more prudent organizations fear to tread. ## whom to work with Whether or not they have adopted or even heard of “design thinking,” many of these social entrepreneurs are applying its tenets. Social issues are, by definition, human-centered. The best of the world’s foundations, aid organizations, and NGOs know this, but many of them have lacked the tools to ground this commitment in ongoing, sustainable enterprises fueled not just by outside donations but by the energies and resources of the people they serve. In 2001 Jacqueline Novogratz created Acumen Fund, a New York-based social venture fund that invests in enterprises in East Africa and South Asia committed to serving the poor in an ongoing and sustainable way. Acumen has invested in both for profit and not-for-profit enterprises ranging from franchised health clinics to affordable housing. Its model is gaining worldwide attention. Novogratz has spoken explicitly about how her leadership team used design thinking—in addition to the standard metrics of investment “performance”—to evaluate the success of individual investments based on a balance of business sustainability and social impact. Indeed, our shared interest in using design thinking to balance business goals with philanthropic objectives has led IDEO into an ongoing partnership with Acumen Fund. Our collaboration began with a series of workshops in which we explored a set of critical needs that might be translated into viable projects, ranging from antimalarial bed nets to hygiene and sanitation. We decided to focus on clean water. In the developing world, some 1.2 billion people are at risk of disease from drinking unsafe water. Even when water is collected from a high-quality source, it often becomes contaminated during the lengthy trip, often by foot and usually over bad roads, to its final destination. The team drew up its own brief: how might we create safe and easy means of water storage and transportation that improve the health and living conditions of low-income communities while creating opportunities for local entrepreneurs? As the project progressed, we gathered as many insights into how to implement our ideas as into solutions themselves. No matter how compelling an idea might be, it is of little value if it cannot be sustained by its intended customers in India or Africa. To achieve this, the project team tapped into what the anthropologist Clifford Geertz called the “local knowledge” of NGOs and entrepreneurs in the field, which resulted in numerous culturally appropriate ideas: new types of payment using mobile phones or prepaid coupons, better branding of delivery vehicles to spread awareness, local delivery depots that could be owned and run by the community. Future steps will focus on ways to support these local groups as they bring ideas to market. Aravind, IDE, and Acumen Fund offer examples not just of welldesigned products but of design thinking applied across the entire spectrum of a problem: the product, the service in which the product is embedded, the business model of the enterprise that provides the service, the investors behind the enterprise, and more. It is a mistake to think of them as organizations of well-intentioned, well-heeled do-gooders. These social enterprises have set out to achieve the integration of the desirabilityviability-feasibility triad. This has naturally led to cross-disciplinary initiatives. In Aravind’s case most of the design thinkers involved were doctors, not designers. The design thinkers at the Acumen Fund are venture capitalists and development experts. They have learned to maneuver their way through government bureaucracies and adapt their efforts to available infrastructure because systemic problems can be addressed only through systemwide collaboration. ## what to work on In contrast to companies that may be struggling to extend their brands into a new subniche of a saturated market, the opportunities for socially engaged design are everywhere. Indeed, that is itself a problem, at least while there is a limited amount of design thinking talent to go around. The Rockefeller Foundation recently asked IDEO to consider how the design industry might make a greater contribution to solving social problems. After talking to dozens of NGOs, foundations, consultants, and designers, one of our most telling insights was that our efforts are in danger of being spread far too thinly. There are ten potential projects for every design thinker with the time and the talent to tackle them, and 95 percent of them are in Africa, Asia, and Latin America—which complicates the challenge of getting out into the field to gain insight or quickly and iteratively prototype our ideas. The solution is to find some way to aggregate the efforts of design thinkers globally so as to create a critical mass, build momentum, and begin to make real progress on some of the selected problems we want to address. One of the most promising examples of this is the charitable organization Architecture for Humanity, cofounded in 1999 by Cameron Sinclair. In its first iteration Sinclair used the Web to bring architectural talent to bear on the design of emergency housing and shelters in response to major disasters such as the 2004 tsunami that devastated Southeast Asia and Hurricane Katrina in the following year. A TED prize enabled him to create the Open Architecture Network, which provides a platform for tackling longer-range, systemic issues, not just responding to ad hoc emergencies. The network’s modest mission is to “improve the living standards of five billion people” by setting design challenges, posting design solutions so that they can be shared and improved, connecting stakeholders, and creating a participative approach to solving design problems. It seeks, in effect, to leverage the collective energies of architects and designers worldwide in a way that aggregates, focuses, and amplifies them. If we need to set priorities, the United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals would be a good place to start, but “eradicating extreme poverty” and “promoting gender equality” are far too broad to serve as effective design briefs. If the Millennium Development Goals are to be met, they will have to be translated into practical design briefs that recognize constraints and establish metrics for success. More promising questions might be: How might we enable poor farmers to increase the productivity of their land through simple, low-cost products and services? How might we enable adolescent girls to become empowered and productive members of their community through better education and access to services? How might we train and support community health workers in rural communities? How might we find low-cost alternatives to wood-burning and kerosene stoves in urban slums? How might we create an infant incubator that does not need an electrical supply? The key, as every designer knows, is to craft a brief with enough flexibility to release the imagination of the team, while providing enough specificity to ground its ideas in the lives of their intended beneficiaries. ## sometimes the thing to do is stay home Not all the most critical social design issues are to be found in the developing world. Western health care—to take what is only the most obvious example—is facing an imminent crisis. Indeed, for many millions of Americans the system has already broken down. Rising costs are threatening the stability of the system, while as a society we have committed ourselves to unhealthy lifestyles that exact a tremendous social and economic toll. Medical researchers focus their energies on cures for chronic diseases—heart disease, cancer, stroke, diabetes—and policy experts work to improve the efficiency of health care administration and delivery. In isolation, however, these efforts will never be sufficient. A sustained effort to integrate these paths and explore divergent alternatives is needed, and this is where design thinking can help. In medicine, once the patient has been stabilized, the larger task is to identify the source of the condition—to move as it were, from the curative to the preventive side of the problem. A case in point is obesity, which contributes to several of the leading causes of death in Western society and is now clinically described as having reached epidemic proportions. Some of the relevant factors relate to a person’s biological, cultural, demographic, and geographic circumstances, while others lie within the domain of personal choice. All of them present opportunities for design thinking. The incidence of childhood obesity has skyrocketed in recent decades; according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the number of overweight and obese children has tripled since 1980. What used to be called adult-onset diabetes has had to be renamed type 2 diabetes because it is no longer just adults who get it and it is no longer unusual to see kids taking insulin. At the individual level we might start by thinking about why kids develop poor eating habits early in life that are difficult to change later on. We can then begin to think about ways to address some of those issues. Some school districts have banned junk food in cafeterias and vending machines, but simply depriving kids of food they want is self-defeating. More promising are positive inducements such as that of Alice Waters, the founder of the renowned Berkeley restaurant Chez Panisse. Waters has started an initiative called Edible Schoolyard to encourage schools to grow produce to provide healthy ingredients for school lunches while educating kids about where their food comes from. In the United Kingdom, Jamie Oliver developed his School Dinners program, which works with local authorities to introduce healthier, better-tasting food. Each of these can be thought of as the response to a classic design challenge. Instead of the Millennium Development Goals’ righteous exhortation to “end childhood obesity,” they are asking the design thinker’s question: “How might we… encourage kids to eat healthier foods?” The other half of the obesity equation has to do with fitness and exercise—what both economists and nutritionists might agree to call an “input-output” model. While we consume more calories than ever, ours may be the least active generation in history. Here, too, lie opportunities for design thinking to contribute to what has typically been considered either a medical or a public policy issue. Nike, for instance, has mobilized its internal design teams to help them not just to provide equipment to athletes but to learn about their behaviors. This has in turn led to some significant product innovations. Since 2006 Nike’s customers have tracked more than 100 million miles using a simple device that sits inside their running shoes and communicates data about their pace and distance to their iPods. On arriving home, they download the data to a Web site where they can review their progress over time or against that of fellow runners. Nike’s innovation is to close the information loop by allowing people to evaluate the effects of their behavior. The Wii Fit from Nintendo similarly taps into people’s need to see results but—alas—without having to leave the comfort of their living rooms. These first small steps toward encouraging healthier behaviors will have to be repeated countless times before significant societal benefit is realized, but they do indicate that there is hope. Design thinkers have become adept at approaching important social issues from the angle of individual motivations and the behaviors that follow, but there is also a level of analysis that needs to be directed at the social forces that constrain the choices we are able to make in the first place. Healthy bodies are a necessary but not sufficient condition of a healthy society, but the reverse is also true. Around the world, design thinkers have become activists and are applying their skills to sources of social dysfunction. ## from global to local The British Council for Industrial Design was formed at the end of World War II to assist in postwar economic recovery, but since that time it has broadened its mission to the application of design to a diverse range of contemporary social issues. In recent years the Design Council, as it is now known, has collaborated with national and local authorities to bring creative problem solving to bear on questions that could scarcely have been imagined a decade ago. In “Dott 07 (Designs of the Times),” the Council sponsored a year of community-based projects, competitions, exhibitions, conferences, symposia, and festivals throughout northeast England to explore such questions as “Can design help in the fight against crime?” “Are our food production systems ripe for a redesign?” “How can design make schools more sustainable?” One particularly successful program, Design and Sexual Health (DASH) set out to balance the requirements of publicity and discretion in encouraging people to take advantage of a social service that typically carries a stigma. The project team first surveyed 1,200 residents, community leaders, and health professionals and then went on to create an integrated program of communication, education, and clinic and service design that focused not on diseases but on the experience of visitors to the clinics. Hilary Cottam, herself a onetime director of the Design Council, has taken this approach to local design thinking one step further. Teaming up with the innovation expert Charles Leadbeater and the digital entrepreneur Hugo Manassei, she created Participle, an organization dedicated to creating new social solutions through the collaboration of local communities and leading experts from around the world. Taking a designled approach and basing its work on the philosophies of the British welfare state first established by Sir William Beveridge, the team at Participle has tackled issues ranging from loneliness in old age to improving the integration of youth into society. One project, called Southwark Circle, resulted in a new membership organization that helps the aged take care of household tasks. Ideas were refined and prototyped in collaboration with older people and their families before the service was launched in Southwark, South London, in early 2009. Cottam believes that locally created solutions can ultimately lead to national models for communitybased social services. ## designing future design thinkers Perhaps the most important opportunity for long-term impact is through education. Designers have learned some powerful methods for arriving at innovative solutions. How might we use those methods not just to educate the next generation of designers but to think about how education as such might be reinvented to unlock the vast reservoir of human creative potential? In 2008 I spoke to students at the Art Center College of Design in Pasadena about “Serious Play,” the connection between the activities we all participated in as children and the characteristics of innovation and creativity. I argued that exploring the world with our hands, testing out ideas by building them, role playing, and countless other activities are all natural characteristics of children at play. By the time we enter the adult world, however, we have lost most of these precious talents. The first place this begins to happen is at school. The focus on analytical and convergent thinking in education is so dominant that most students leave school with the belief either that creativity is unimportant or that it is the privilege of a few talented oddballs. Our objective, when it comes to the application of design thinking in schools, must be to develop an educational experience that does not eradicate children’s natural inclination to experiment and create but rather encourages and amplifies it. As a society our future capacity for innovation depends on having many more people literate in the holistic principles of design thinking, just as our technological prowess depends on having high levels of literacy in math and science. Surprisingly, perhaps, for a firm that won its reputation doing industrial design for the likes of Apple, Samsung, and Hewlett-Packard, engagements with public and private schools, with the educational initiatives of groups such as the W. K. Kellogg Foundation, and with colleges and universities has become a growing part of IDEO’s work. Ormondale is a public elementary school in the affluent Bay Area community of Portola Valley. The school’s staff had become convinced that “in order to produce 21st century learners, we could not use 18th century methods.” In contrast to the expectations of our corporate clients, Ormondale asked us not to deliver a finished design but rather to facilitate a process in which those designing the program—the teachers themselves— would be responsible for implementing it. The team brainstormed, led workshops, developed curricular prototypes, and conducted observations of analogous institutions ranging from a wildlife conservation network to a Mormon food distribution network. The Ormondale teachers have now developed a set of tools based on a shared philosophy of “investigative learning” that engages students as seekers of knowledge rather than receivers of information. The process—participatory design—mirrored the end product: a participatory teaching and learning environment. Opportunities to rethink the structure of education exist all the way up the chain. Within the structure of a traditional art school, the California College of the Arts in San Francisco has applied the principles of design thinking—user-centered research, brainstorming, analogous observations, prototyping—to crafting its strategic plan for the future of arts education. The Royal College of Art in London is collaborating with its neighbor, the Imperial College, to leverage the different but mutually reinforcing types of creative problem solving found in art and engineering. In Toronto students at the Ontario College of Art & Design have the opportunity to team up with their counterparts at UT’s Rotman School of Management in a shared pursuit of creativity and innovation. One of the newest experiments can be found at Stanford University in the Hasso Plattner Institute of Design—the so-called d-School. The d-School does not seek to educate traditional designers and does not, in fact, offer any “design” courses at all. Rather, it serves as a unique environment where graduate students in fields as far flung as medicine, business, law, and engineering can come together to work on collaborative design projects in the public interest. The d-School encourages human-centered research, brainstorming, and prototyping in every student project, but it also applies these core principles of design thinking to itself. Spaces are fungible, academic ranks are irrelevant, the curriculum is in permanent flux—it is, in short, an ongoing prototype of the educational process itself. Finding ways to apply the principles of design thinking to the problems of society—on the outskirts of Kampala, in the offices of a social venture fund in New York, or in the classrooms of an elementary school in California—is the sort of problem that is attracting the most ambitious designers, entrepreneurs, and students today. They are motivated not by an altruistic desire to “give something back” for a few months after graduation or upon retirement but by the fact that the greatest challenges are always the source of the greatest opportunities. The projects and personalities highlighted in this chapter are about not charity, philanthropy, or self-sacrifice but a genuine reciprocity of interests. There is nothing wrong with “stopping out” for a year or two to help the Peace Corps build a playground in Nepal or El Salvador. The initiatives examined here, however, do not call for highly trained specialists to interrupt their careers but for them to redirect them in ways that serve those in extreme need. If we are to build on one another’s good ideas—one of the key tenets of design thinking—we will, at least for the time being, have to focus on a finite set of problems so that our successes can be cumulative over time and place. This begins with nurturing the natural creativity of all children and keeping it alive as they advance through the educational system and into professional life. There is no better way to fill the pipeline with tomorrow’s design thinkers.