To say Change by Design was a team effort risks stating the obvious, but the fact remains there were many who made invaluable contributions. Many of the most important insights should be credited to them. All of the errors should be assigned to me. My silent partner Barry Katz, through his skillful use of words, made me appear more articulate than I really am. I thank him for the many contributions he made to the text and for the considerable time and effort he put into turning my draft manuscript into something ready for public consumption. My agent, Christy Fletcher, saw the potential of this project and introduced me to the wonderful team at Harper Business, and particularly to editor, Ben Loehnen. I have heard said that the art of book editing is dying out in the rush of modern publishing, but Ben shows that high-quality editing and speed are not mutually exclusive. It has been a delight to work with him. Others who played essential roles in shepherding the project through to completion include Lew McCreary at Harvard Business Review, who edited my original article “Design Thinking” Sandy Speicher, Ian Groulx, and Katie Clark, who created the cover concept; Peter Macdonald, who illustrated my mind map; publicists Debbe Stern and Mark Fortier, who work diligently to get the message of Change by Design out in the world; Scott Underwood, who made sure I was being factual about IDEO projects; and my assistant, Sally Clark, who somehow managed to get me to the right places at the right time despite my best attempts to foil her plans. In the course of researching this book I had the pleasure of visiting some wonderful organizations. I would particularly like to thank Pavi Mehta and Thulsi Thulasiraj of Aravind Eye Hospital; David Green; Amitabha Sadangi of IDE India; and Makoto Kakoi and Naoki Ito of Hakuhodo for being so generous with their time and ideas. I have had the good fortune to spend time with some very smart people who have significantly influenced my thinking. Many of them have been mentioned in the text, but I wish to acknowledge Jacqueline Novagratz, Bruce Nussbaum, Naoto Fukasawa, Gary Hamel, John Thackera, Bob Sutton, Roger Martin, and Claudia Kotchka, because it is to their accomplishments that I owe many of my ideas. I would also like to thank Chris Anderson of TED, who through his wonderful conference has introduced me to countless ideas and people included in Change by Design. At IDEO I would like to thank Whitney Mortimer, Jane Fulton Suri, Paul Bennett, Diego Rodriguez, Fred Dust, and Peter Coughlan for being regular sounding boards for my ideas. But there would be no Change by Design without the project contributions of my colleagues at IDEO and our clients, both past and present. They continue to be an endless source of inspiration. Change by Design reflects as much as anything my journey from designer to design thinker. Without the counsel of certain people I would never have made that journey. They include my parents, who gave me the confidence to head off to art school when all my friends were choosing far more promising careers; Bill Moggridge, who took the significant risk of hiring me; David Kelley, who was willing to entrust his company to my leadership; David Strong, who has the patience to run a business alongside a designer who can barely count (never mind use a spreadsheet); and Jim Hackett, whose leadership advice has provided a constant safety net to me and my colleagues. Finally, and most important, comes the pleasure of thanking my family —Gaynor, Caitlin, and Sophie. Their willingness to tolerate my frequent absences from home and the many weekends spent hunched over my laptop constitute just a small part of the debt of gratitude I owe them. TIM BROWN Palo Alto, California, May 2009