# PROCLAMATION # sans prétention DADA 1919 L'art s'endort powr la naissaace du monde nouveau. -Art" — mot cacadou - remplacé par DADA Plésiausaure ou moucholr. Le talent qu'on peut apprendre talt du poète un drogutste. Aujeard'hui la critique balance ne lance plus des ressemblances. Hypertrophiques peintres hyperesthésiés et hypnotysés par les hyacints des muezzins d'apparence hypocrite, ## consolidez la recolte des calculations exactes. Hypodrome des garanties immortelles: Il n'y a aucune importance il n'y e pas de transparence nl d'apparence. Tlusiciens cassez vos instruments aveugles sur la seène. En ce moment je hals l'homme qul chuchote avant l'entr'acte - exu de cologue - théâtre algre. Le vent allègre. Si chacan dit le contraire c'est qu'il a ralson. La serlngue n'est que pour mon entendement J'écris parce que c'est naturel comme je pisse comme je suis malade. Cela n'a pas dimportance que pour mol el relativement. L'art a besoin d'une opération. L'art est une prétention chauffée à la timidié du bassia urinaire. L'hystérle née dans l'ateller Nows cherchons la force drojte ## PURE SOBRE UNIQUE mous ne cherchons RIEN nous alirmons la VITALITE de chaque INSTANT l'anti-philosophie des acrobaties spontanées. Préparex l'action du geyser de notre sang - formafion sous-marine d'avions transchromatiques, mélaux cellulatres et chiffrés dans le raut des images aa-dessus des règlements du "BEAU" et de son comirôle. Ce n'est pas pour les avorions qul adoremt encore leur nombril TRISTAN TZARA. Figure 37. Proclamation, T. Tzara, Dada (Zurich: 1919). gression in the course of these several issues of Dada, and each one in turn introduced more variation into the structure of the pages. They demonstrated a steady undermining of any of the graphic devices which might have maintained a residual influcnce from the literary journals of their epoch—where the main typographic feature was a distinction between text and titling type. Other elements which entered into this Dada style were: ımarginalia, random pieces of copy which acted as editorial commentary, the interplay of vertical and horizontal elements within the page. The result was a scrapbook sense of order, typical of the busy pages of nineteenth-century gazettes and of the many ads tucked alongside the editorial features of daily papers, though most conspicuously filling the back pages. It is important to remember, in all of this, that the look of literary journals had been more austerely homogenous, with the floral chapter headings or decorative marks to terminate pieces, and dark, even blackletter (in Germany), solid blocks of uninterrupted type. Literary journals carried few if any advertisements, except in their back pages, where other literary journals or publications might be allowed a modest advertisement. Thus from the very outset, Tzara moved the graphic appearance of Dada publications away from “art" and toward “life”—in other words, from literature to press: Art is not the most precious manifestation of life. Art has not the celestial and universal value that people like to attribute to it. Life is far more interesting. Dada knows the correct measure that should be given to art: with subtle, perfidious methods, Dada introduces it into daily life.118 The visual features of these pages had their greatest impact in the force with which they distracted their readers from any simple clue as to the organization and hierarchy of elements on the pages. The material presented escaped genre recognition as well: it could be poetry, an announcement for an event, a bit of nonsensical random language. All of these were slid together into the form which made up the sheet, printed together to diffuse the focus of the page, distracting the eye which had to struggle to decode the unconventional order. Many of the scraps of language which appeared in the pages of Dada remained uncategorizable, thus successfully disintegrating the criteria on which literary forms had been guaranteed by undermining both the actual “forms," that is shapes, of literary works, and the context which had supported them. The five issues of Dada track a general, subversive undoing of those conventions which had kept intact the visual identity of literary genres. In addition, the pages of Dada reveal no single unified editorial position or voice. The reader is continually adrift within the shifting posi- ## Experimental Typography as a Modern Art Practice tions of enunciation marked out by the radical changes in graphic treatment from one part of the page to the next. United only by the material fact of their appearance on the same page, the elements of Dada make an ad hoc unity only by association and synthetic effort. But the very gratuitous quality which Tzara managed to effect in these pages has another aspect to it, namely, that it successfully separated the elements of signification from each other. The sensation of gratuitousness is itself produced by the interference in the regular transparent operation of the sign. The impossibility of slipping easily from signifier to signified returns the reader to the signifying operation, calling attention to the materiality of the signifier itself, which is thus termed gratuitous because it insists on its own participation in the process. There is strong evidence to support Tzara's direct involvement in the typographic production, at least at the design level, of his works. There are at least two handdrawn mockups among his papers, one for “Bilan” and one for “Une Nuit d’Echecs," which prescribe not only the layout of the work but attempt to render the typefaces to be used. The result was something like a calligraphed version of typography, and it is clear Tzara was working from specific typographic samples, not merely manufacturing differences arbitrarily and then asking a compositor to fill in at random with any suitable face. Further evidence of Tzara's direct interest in typography can be found in an exchange of letters he had with Pierre Albert-Birot in the period between 1917 and 1919.119 Tzara was still in Zurich at the time, and the two men had become aware of each other through an exchange of publications. They began to send material to be published and in almost every piece of correspondence mentioned the graphic format of the works in question, pointing out the necessity of preserving the typographic features of the texts: I send you two poems, very different from each other, and I ask simply that you scrupulously respect the typographic form of them. Here are two poems. I ask you to note carefully their typographic form, one should resemble a mathematical rectangle, the other is arranged to note a vocal trio. I ask you to pay attention to the outside curves on both sides and put much white space around them, to use as much as possible small, complex and very dark characters.120 The shared understanding clearly articulated here was a concern with the specific qualities of typographic representation: all the miscellaneous elements whose assemblage transforms itself into an unforseen, homogenous coherence, in which the elements take their place in a newly created composition.121 Tzara continually worked to shift the frames in which the domains of commercial and literary language were contained, polluting the one with the other to belie the myth of individual, authorial subjectivity as it had been supported within the canon of literary activity. That is, he negates the production of language as an original act deriving from an interior psychic domain and places poetics squarely in the realm of the social. The subject of production here is a socially produced linguistic subject, one whose poetics demonstrate the continual circulation of already spoken language through the very intimate, supposedly private, realm of the (therefore mooted) personal voice. The role of typography is in part to mark the undigested (indigestible?) character of such language. It remains other than the personal, marked as derivative and signed as already itself participating in the domain of commodities. It is itself, this language, an object, with material properties, a life, a history, and a semiotic and economic function to perform in the cultural context of linguistic operations. Characteristic of Tzara's well-achieved individual' pieces are the poems in the vein of “Bulletin”—of which “Boxe," “Bilan” (in at least two versions), and “Proclamation” are also representative examples (figures 38 and 39). In these works, taking “Bulletin”" (see figure 40) as the sample, the typeface changed line by line, exemplifying the method of composition which Tzara had advocated in his famous prescription for a chance composition.122 Roughly paraphrased, this was: take a newspaper article the length of a poem you wish to write, cut it in strips, put the strips in a hat, pull them out one at a time, write them as they appear in the sequence, and that is your poem. The strips in “Bulletin” followed this logic a step further, they seemed to have been cut from a number of articles rather than just one and the typographic treatment of each was preserved, phrase to phrase. The simple effect was that of disjunction, an emphasized and underscored disjunction, which continually posed the problem of the relation of the elements within the “poem" line to line: As for the absolute dadaist poem, needless to say, it gives the reader a most striking impression of incoherence——“words at liberty," shreds of sentences, disintegrated syntax, and occasionally phrases borrowed from contemporary advertisements.123 ## Experimental Typography as a Modern Art Practice Both the eclectic typographic sensibility, a catchall approach of a job shop printer using the means at hand to diversify the copy for the sake of generating visual interest in a client's project, and the language of advertising, forms of address and language, which assaulted the reader in a manner totally distinct from that of the literary form were in use here. These visual and linguistic aspects of commercial printing, as used in the discursive strategies of advertising, have been pointed out by François Sullerot, in “Des Mots sur le Marché," where he noted the various features of advertising language appropriated by Tzara: the language which took the part of the reader, assumed a dialogue, called the reader to action, used repetition, used words almost decoratively in a sloganlike capacity, and implied both distance and complicity by the use of a familiar tone.124 It is easy enough to identify these elements in Tzara's work, but more problematic to understand the effect of these devices in the interplay between them and the typographic treatment which was so conspicuously part of the page. Tzara's phrase for this enterprise, “Language is made in the mouth," can be recast as “language made on the page," that is, language inseparable from its actual, physical, material production. Tzara's gaming has often been misunderstood, even by his peers, because it was out of synch with the positions of other Dadaists. Georges Hughnet, for instance, wrote that The aspiration of Dada towards an indisputable truth which was that of man expressing himself outside the limits of formulas learnt from or imposed by the community, by logic, language, art or science.125 But Tzara was not in search of any truth value, rather in search of its negation, of the act of the inevitable logic of discourse itself, making language, poetry in the mouth and on the page in an activity which pointed out all too clearly the parameters of the social domain as they inscribed themselves in these representational systems. The desire to put formulas aside is not accompanied by a desire to replace them with a new and better formula, but rather, to make an invention in poetics which will continue to invent itself on ever-renewed terms of alogical innovation. Dada cannot be written off as a mere parody of advertising. Instead, Dada, in the hands of Tzara, was a method of proceeding which did not observe the expected norms of either commercial or literary sensibility. This method, as embodied in “Bulletin," used some of the expectations and strategies of advertising for visual effect (figure 40). As each