# Introduction This is not simply a book about things. It is about some of the ways of looking at things in the China of the latter part of the Ming dynasty (1368-1644). It does, however, have its origins in the experience of working with surviving material objects, as a curator in the Far Eastern Department of the Victoria and Albert Museum. It was in the course of work on these objects that I first encountered what I initially interpreted as a literature of connoisseurship produced in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, the texts of which form the central source material of this book. The very close 'fit' between artefacts coming down to us from the period and the precise descriptions of them in these texts, which are often elegantly phrased but never willfully obscure, was very attractive. So attractive, in fact, that it initially acted to obscure the broader implications of the creation of a specialized discourse of objects in the late Ming. These texts, with names like Eight Discourses on the Art 0/ Livingor have too often been read to shed Treatise on Superfluous Things, light on those objects which do survive, principally paintings but also ceramics, jade carvings, pieces of metalwork, etc., and not enough regarded in their coverage of more perishable aspects of material culture. They have been generally used within the framework of the positivism which has continued to be identified as one of the chief weaknesses in museum presentations of the past. However, 'things' have recently been judged to be too important to be left to curators and have increasingly attracted the attention of scholars working from within the broader disciplines of history and anthropology. The work of Mary Douglas and Baron Isherwood, particularly their introduced to a wide audience The World a/Goods, the concept of a system of goods as a symbolic language, a way of