sending and receIvmg messages about society and about an individual's place within it. Seeking to explain the growth of capitalism and a modern world-view, Chandra Mukerji's, From Graven Imageshas also made broad claims for the role which is to be allotted to material culture. She has written: 'Objects are carriers of ideas ... [they] help to make autonomous forces out of ideas by remaining in the physical world long after their production ... That it can be botha physical and symbolic constraint gives material culture a particular power over human action. ,I Focusing on particular historical circumstances, Richard Goldthwaite's concept of an 'empire of things' in Renaissance Florence relates new patterns of consumption to a way of generating new and more complex social identities and posits for this period some of the nascent habits of consumerism which underpin the modern world-view. Simon Schama has brought some of the same ideas to bear on the Netherlands of the 'Golden Age', with an interpretation which again makes the relationship of consumers to the objects of consumption a moving force in broad patterns of change.2 Mukerji, Goldthwaite and Schama's ideas about the role of material culture as instrument as well as symptom of social change touch some of the same points as the American literature of material culture studies, a burgeoning discipline whose leading lights have been scholars like Jules Prown and Henry Glassie and which has had considerable influence over current curatorial practice in the United States and in Britain. The introduction to a recent anthology of these writings explicitly derives the greater degree of concern now felt by historians for 'material life' from the work of Fernand Braudel. 3 A weakness which a number of critics have identified in this school, however, is its tendency to see the meanings which are ascribed to items of material culture as being unambiguously fixed once and for all at the moment of production. More recently, the ideas of Arjun Appadurai and Igor Kopytoff have seemed to offer a solution to the historically divorced discourses of material culture (the province of the curator or archaeologist) and its 'context' (the province of the historian). Arjun Appadurai has written: 'even though from a point of view human actors <sup>e</sup>ncode things with signifitheoretical cance, from a point of view it is the things-in-motion methodological that illuminate their social and human context.4 At the same time the justly controversial work of Pierre Bourdieu, for all its theoretical sophistication and methodological rigour, has underlined the importance of paying close attention to the precise forms of cultural practice within a given situation. They are not arbitrary choices.