So far,. most of the theoretical work done on the 'consumption question' has rested on the empirical basis of historical investigation of the European and American traditions. This book, therefore, has two aims. One is to make historians of China consider more seriously the claims of the discourse of material culture upon their attention. Every member of the Ming elite made consumption choices, for example about clothes or about furniture, and it must, therefore, be a matter of legitimate concern to attempt to discover what conditioned these choices. The second aim is to draw the attention of those who work on the Western tradition to the existence of the Chinese world of goods, with its sometimes striking prefigurations of and paral1els with early modern Europe. This needs to be done before the 'birth of a consumer society' becomes set as a new explanation for the 'Rise of the West'. I encountered the literature on the consumption question in the West through teaching students on an MA course in the history of design, offered jointly by the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Royal College of Art. The course director, Charles Saumarez Smith and his students have been among my best teachers. One of the aims of this project was to see the extent to which the insights of design history (which typically takes the mid-nineteenth century as its point of departure) had validity for the very large body of pre-modern made goods which typically now comprise the collections of museums like the Victoria and Albert, as well as being the objects of discourses of connoisseurship centred around the art market. The claims of the 'new art history' to provide a form of access to this body of material were also worked through with students over a number of years, though here results were less satisfying, largely because, despite claims to reject the whole notion of an established canon, the majority of recent work remains centred on the same types of artistic practice as does the work it seeks to supplant. I have, therefore, sought in this book to find ways of talking about the deployment of luxury objects in late Ming China which were equally valid for categories like painting, with a highly self-conscious aesthetic of their own, and for clothing, where no such coherent framework of ideas exists ready made in the Chinese sources. It was the V &A/RCA course, too, which brought into the Museum historians working on early modern Europe like Peter Burke, Lorna Weatherhill, Margaret Spufford, Keith Thomas and Peter Earle, with their most recent work on the compelling issues of luxury consumption and the social strategies involving the manipulation of luxury goods, art (however categorized) not excluded.5 Their work seemed to hold out the possibility of better ways of understanding