Chinese goods in their full and original meaning, through the use of a comparative and methodologically informed framework. In particular, Peter Burke's brief account of the condition of seventeenthcentury Japan, in his larger study of Renaissance Italian culture and society6 seemed to demand a return of the compliment, through a comparative perspective on the China of the late Ming. I hope particularly that in my use of comparative material from early modern Europe I have not traduced the work of those historians on whose efforts I am wholly dependent and that I may be judged to have put something back into their enterprise through the provision of some material previously only available in Chinese. The concept of an 'early modern period', from about 1500 to 1800, is a familiar one to historians of the West but is a less comfortable concept when applied to China. I am encouraged to make use of it by the example of the innovative Chinese historian Zhu Weizheng, whose book, Zouchu zhong shiji, Coming Out of the Middle Ages Zouchu zhong shiji, Coming Out oj the Middle Ages(introduced to me by Tim Brook), posits just such a turning point in the late Ming - early Qing.7 It seems to offer a more fruitful way of looking at the period than does the now-hackneyed 'sprouts of capitalism' controversy, initiated in China in the 1950s, which subjected a limited body of evidence on historical changes in the relations of production during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries to intense scrutiny, searching for signs of autochthonous roots for Chinese capitalism and confirmation of Marx's iron laws of history. The material which was recovered about the growth of a commodity economy, of a market for labour and about changes in a limited number of industries involved in processing agricultural raw materials was of great value, but of controversial significance. The same quotations were interpreted in diametrically opposed ways, and the same phenomena observable in the late Ming were searched for and found in periods as far back as the eleventh century, or even earlier. 8 The present study attempts to say something of relevance on this question, if only by taking attention away from the question of production and focusing it more firmly on consumption. I am well aware that this has become a 'fashionable' subject of historical enquiry but am at the same time convinced that it is an approach which can yield a fresh understanding of the period, if only because it is better documented and better articulated within the sources as a matter of concern to the literate elite of Chinese society. I have not attempted a history of the late Ming empire, a political unit of broadly similar size to Europe with 150-175 million inhabitants in about 1600. It was roughly the same size in terms of conceptual geography, too, the speed of travel from the north to the south