In this kingdom they make much of antique things; and yet they have no statues nor medals, but rather many vases of bronze which are highly valued, and they desire them with a certain particular corrosion. Without it, they are worth nothing . Other antique vases of clay or of jasper stone (Le. jade) are valuable. But more than all these things are valued paintings by famous persons, without col ou r , but in ink alone; or letters by ancient writers on paper or on cloth, with their seals to confirm that they are genuine. For they are greatly given to forging antique things, with great artifice and ingenuity, so that those who do not know enough can spend great sums of money on things which then are worth nothing.<sup>6</sup> The r est of the discussion i n this chapter can to an extent be seen as an expansion of and commentary on Ricci's comments. L<sup>i</sup>ke any educated European of his day, he ' would expect the category o f 'antiquities' t o b e made u p p;-imarily of coins and medals a n d ant<sup>i</sup>que m arbles. Hence, his remarks on the<sup>i</sup>r absence in China . His contemporaries i n early modern Europe would further h ave concurred that the catego ries o f 'ant<sup>i</sup>quity' and of 'fake' were sim<sup>i</sup>larly intertwined. Enea Vico, writing in 1 555, spends a considerable amount of space on the discussion of fakes and their avo<sup>i</sup>dance, while in 1 697 John Evelyn was still complaining that: And now after all this T<sup>r</sup>avel and Diligence, Cost and Caution in this (as in most things else) one is perpetually in danger o f being deceiv'd, and imposed on by Cheats, Falsaries and Mercenary Fourbs: I do not mean our ordinary Coiners of False Money by Mixtures, or A lchymical Sophistications only . . . but by such as make a common Trade of Imposing upon the unexperienc'd in this particular of Medals. 7 Ricci's emphasis on the pla<sup>c</sup>e of antiques as market commo dities, on their very great financial values and the dangers of forgery w h i ch these engendered will also be l oo ked at in m ore detail in the next chapter . The sense that objects could provide a link o f great i mmediacy with the rem ote past preceded the M ing, period by some centuries. The per<sup>i</sup>od involved stretched loosely through the Xia (conventionally d ated 2205- 1 767 BC), Shang ( 1 766- 1 1 23 BC), Zhou ( 1 1 22-249 BC), and d ow n t.o the Han dynasty (220 Be - AD 200). The Xia (the h istorical status of w hich remains a matter of debate), Shang and Zho periods were collectively known as san dai 'the Three Ages' or shang gu 'High Antiquity', and retained great, though not total, preeminence as sources o f political, cultural and soc<sup>i</sup>al examples . The