bronze vessels of antiquity in particular had long been objects of study.8 They were objects of wonderment, the embodiment of fabulous cultural power and magical import to the early unifying empire of the Han period . But it was in the Song period (960- 1 279) that a culture driven by a revivified and systematized Confucianism elevated ancient bronzes to a pinnacle of esteem from which they were never to descend. The earliest extant work to be devoted to archaic bronzes is the Kao gu tu, Researches on Archaeology Illustrated of 1 092, containing 2 1 1 vessels from both the palace co-Hections and the collections of some thirty p rivate individuals. The catalogue entries for each piece show a rubbing and deciphering of the inscription, together with its shape, weight and provenance. It further set up the system of classification of bronzes by period which was to be used by the majority of post-Song compilers. The Chong xiu Xuan he bo gu tu lu, Drawings and Lists of all the Antiquities stored in the Xuan he Palace is often known by its abbreviated title of Bo gu tu lu, Drawings and Lists of Antiquities. Although it has rather confused origins, the work claims to have been completed in 1 1 23 and catalogues the forms and inscriptions of 840 or so bronzes in the imperial collection . Given this focus on provenance, and by contrast with the Researches on Archaeology Illustrated, it includes objects without inscriptions. The compilers used the same system as the earlier work, however, in describing the bronzes and assigning them to different periods. It was more accurate as far as the n ames of the vessels (derived from the unillustrated classic texts of Confucian ritual) were concerned. However, a far greater advance in the field of what European antiquarians would later call studies of rea/ia was achieved in the closing years of the Northern Song dynasty by the great scholar and politician Ouyang Xiu ( 1 007- 1 072), wjth his Ji gu lu, Records on Collecting Antiques, a collection of 400 rubbings of inscriptions on bronze and stone objects. As the first book to be devoted to this subject, its subsequent influence was immense. Among the immediate followers of Ouyang Xiu was the private scholar Zhao Mingcheng and his wife, the eminent poet Li Qingzhao. Their Jin shi lu, Collection oj Texts on Metal and Stone was compiled between 1 1 1 9 and 1 1 25" containing some 2,000 rubbings of inscriptions, w ith added explanations of when the objects on which they are found were made, and other relevant details. In the preface, Zhao tackles t he problem of discrepancies between the textually transmitted historical account and the evidence of actual objects : When archaeological materials . are used to examine these things, thirty to forty per cent of the data is in conflict . That is because