contending for power with the first Ming emperor around the time of the collapse of the Mongol Yuan dynasty: The descendants of the false ruler Chen Y ouliang were scattered throughout Huang and were all menial people. One family owned a you [a bronze shape rather like a bucket with a domed lid] of very ancient manufacture, which my friend Wu Yuanbi obtained for one bolt of brocaded satin, when magistrate of the district. The bronze was big enough to contain a dou [ t o. 3 1 litres] of millet, with a colour of yellow earth both inside and out, and flecks of vermilion and azure in it, and was inlaid with gold , silver and copper. It had corroded and bore an inscription all in rectangular characters. It was a genuine Shang object. 17 There is little trace here of any curiosity as to what the inscription might actually say, a position which would seem unacceptably obtuse by the eighteenth century. From this time objects were actually identified from their inscri ptions (e.g . the famous 'Marquis of Kang gui' in the British Museum), not by the more ephemeral connection of an owner, like the failed warlord Chen You liang. It should be said right at the beginning that the value of a passage like this, which could be duplicated from a number of contemporary authors, for the study of these bronze vessels in their original context of manufacture is nil. Wen Zhenheng and Wang Qi , along with the great maj ority of their contemporaries, are simply wrong about all the points of distinction they choose to draw out. One of the most widespread and striking of these mistaken beliefs is the universal Ming convi ction, seen in both authors, that the earliest , and particularly the Xia dynasty, bronzes were inlaid with gold and silver. Whatever the outcome of the current ferment over the mythical status or otherwise of this most venerable of Chinese state formations, inlaid bronzes are out o f the question . The objects believed to be Xia must therefore be from the Warring States era of the late Bronze age at the very earliest, and at the latest they were of the Yuan and Ming periods , several thousand years closer to Wen's own time. The very large number of surviving inlaid bronzes for which this later date now looks plausible goes some way towards dimly suggesting the vast market for these supposedly most venerable traces of High Antiquity . <sup>18</sup> In the passage from Wen Zhenheng quoted above, he is the carrier of a clear Ming consensus about which forms of bronze vessel were most desirable, the clear favourite being the ding, a deep bowl shape on three legs (Plate 3). These tripods are listed first in the Y an Song inventory, but are also ranked first by Wang Qi and Zhang Dai . 19