being broadly equal to that from Venice to London. The secondary materials for a study of China in this period which are available in English are now comparatively rich and present no conceptual problems to those coming fresh to the subject, who want to know more.9 There is also a considerable body of other synthesizing literature to which I am indebted, most of it of fairly recent production, as the late Ming dynasty has shaken off its historically bad press as an age of stagnation and decline. The long reign of the Wanli emperor ( 1 573- 1 620), during which much of the source material of this book was composed, may have been an age of increasing sclerosis in the heart of the bureaucracy, but it was also one which saw the first integration of China into a developing world economy and the consolidation of the kind of rural order under which a quarter of the world's population were to exist until within living memory. That rural order stemmed from a surge in population, coupled with a decline in the size of the average landholding which resulted from the eschewal of the principle of primogeniture in the countryside. Not only were agricultural products turned into commercial commodities on an unprecedented scale, but there was a commercialization of state revenues, as both taxation in kind and labour services were commuted to payment in silver. There was an expansion in the size of existing towns and the foundation of new towns, which created prosperous urban units whose commercial importance as marketing centres was well out of proportion to their insignificance on the administrative map, which remained static. The growth in size and complexity of the Chinese marketing network at both a national and regional level was similarly not matched by any 'rise of the merchants', since there was no guarantee of prosperity for the individual entrepreneur and certainly no way of translating commercial strength into political influence. That remained firmly in the hands of the theoretical meritocracy of the officials, sanctified by the award of degrees in the imperial examination system. Under their control, the centralized imperial state took no part in stimulating any 'modern' type of comm'ercial activity and only an intermittent part in exploiting it. This book, as I have said, is deliberately not aimed solely at sinologists. I have, therefore, tried whenever possible to underpin my argument with work in western languages, allowing its validity to be tested by the reader, and I am in the debt of the numerous specialists on late imperial China whose writings are detailed in the bibliography of secondary literature. A major weakness of which I am well aware is that I have approached the work of Japanese sinologists only at