This enlargement of the boundaries of the desired which is observable in the late Ming was a process that contemporaries were well aware of, and it was not, in fact, restricted to ceramics. One of the classic statements of the way this shift was perceived is that by Wang Shizhen quoted in chapter 2 (p.61). Another version of the same passage with very similar wording can be found in the biji of Shen Defu, one of the honorary editors of Wen's Treatise, writing in 1606: In objects for amusement and enjoyment it is the antique which is valuable, but in the present dynasty this has ceased to be so. Thus, the prices of Yongle carved red lacquer, Xuande bronzes and Chenghua porcelain vie with those of antiques. The Song dynasty is famous for carved lacquers, which are now extinct and can hardly be obtained. The bronze vessels and ritual objects of the Three Ages are fewer day by day. From the Five Dynasties and the Song period the so-called Chai, Ru, Guan, Ge and Ding wares [note again the traditional list] are particularly thin, brittle and easily destroyed, so they are replaced with recently produced pieces. This began with one or two men of elegance, got its first strength among the fashionconscious gentry of Jiangnan, and spread to the easily persuadable great merchants of Anhui.36 It does not seem too far-fetched to argue that this broadening of the category of ‘antique' to include material which, though it might not be sanctified by association with the revered dynasties of former times, was yet rare enough and expensive enough to be difficult of access did owe something to the expansion of the numbers of those anxious to deploy culturally prestigious goods to make social statements about themselves. The supply was enlarged to meet increased demand by altering the definition of what constituted culturally prestigious goods. We see this in Ranking of Antique Objects (remembering that ‘antique' does not have to mean chronologically old) by the famous Li Rihua (1565-1635; DMB, 826-30) as translated by Chutsing Li: 1 Calligraphic pieces of the Jin and Tang dynasties 2 Paintings of the Five Dynasties, Tang and early Song 3 Calligraphic writings and rubbings of the Sui, Tang and Song 4 Handwritings by Su Shi, Huang Tingjian, Cai Xiang and Mi Fu 5 Paintings of Yuan artists 6 Handwritings by Xianyu Shu, Yu Ji and Zhao Mengfu