collection (or stock, the source is typically ambiguous) of sixteen bronze wine goblets of the particularly slim and elegant form known as mei ren gu, 'beautiful lady beakers." These were much in demand as flower vases, and someone further away from the source of the supply would have been very unlikely to possess so many. Such a nurber could only have been built up by systematic digging, differing from the age-old practice of grave robbing in that the search was not for instrinsically precious materials like gold and silver, but for antiquities. The despoliation of graves was held in general abhorrence, but one early seventeenth-century writer complained that it was becoming common, as dealers and their peasant agents searched for, 'the bronze vessels of the Three Ages, and the jades, ceramics and paintings of the Tang and Song dynasties." The ritual bronzes of Duke Jing of Qi, the same ones which ended up on an ancestral altar in Anhui, came to light when someone excavated (the word used is fa jue, still the modern Chinese term for an archaeological excavation) his tomb. Chance finds did continue to play a part, and one example can stand in for many. In 1639, while digging was going on in the ramparts at Shangzhou in the remote north-western province of Shaanxi, a grave was accidentally brought to light which contained a sword, scales of golden armour and a jade jar decorated with nine fabulous beasts.⁴ The latter was ‘speckled with blood,'stained from long burial in a manner which made it even more attractive to connoisseurs of jades, among whom the erroneous belief was universal that contact with a corpse could impart this patina to the stone. Evidence for excavation and for chance finds of antiquities is scattered through the biji of the period. The evidence for systematic forgery is, if anything, even richer. Faking came to occupy such a prominent place in certain sections of the luxury handicraft trades that it has seriously distorted our understanding of what was going on in these industries until very recently. The chief areas affected were the 'high'arts of calligraphy and painting, metal working, jade working and, to a lesser extent, ceramics. The notion of forgery is intimately connected with the notion of a market, either a real or a symbolic one, in the types of objects concerned, and the history of forgery in China can be written as a history of the development of a commodity market in luxury goods, the scope of forgery expanding in keeping with the expansion of that market-place, as more and more types of cultural products came to be viewed as having the potential to be commodities.47 Calligraphy and painting were bought and sold first, and so forged first, from as early as the fourth century AD.48 The Song period saw