only ceramic type out of a total to be so noted). Now here is Shao Changheng, in Wai-kam Ho's version, warning of the dangers of the Suzhou marketplace: In old Suzhou , at Changmen the city gate, Many shops stand neatly in rows like fish scales. Among the most numerous are antique stores. Let's see what works of calligraphy and painting are in store. W ang Xizhi is represented by look-alike 'iron-stones', Zhu You is called Wu Daozi . P reviously , fakes were mixed with the genuine; Now it has become cleverer in recent years. The good artists do not create their own works, They copy and take pride in their close-likenesses . Buffalo and horses are invariably signed Dai Song and Han Gan, Landscapes are always called the Elder and Younger Li. From Dong Yuan and Juran to Tang Yin and Qiu Ying, Every master is subject to all manner of imitation. Calligraphy by Su Shi and Huang Tingjian were copied by filling out the shapes delineated with double outline. Tang and Song stelae are ground and cleaned. Sutra papers are made to look old by smoking, Xuanhe collection is doc<sup>u</sup>mented by 'imperial seals'. The bigger the name, the easier the sale; A t housand pieces of gold is nothing uncommon. The current trends have been dominated by Dong Qichang; Labels boasting his name can be found in every village . How amazing that the world of brush an<sup>d</sup> ink could be so commercia lized by a few unethical merchants ! When it comes to the authenticity of bronze yi and ding, Be wary of the Qin and Han archaic scripts . Patination can be made by chemicals; How pleasing are their colours in rich red and green . Ceramic wares of Chai, Ru, Guan, Ge and Ding: Their prices are comparable to fine jade pieces. People in high places are so proud of their connoisseurship, They will keep on buying with all the money they have. How many authentic antiques can there be? No wonder the market is filled with forgeries . Trust your ears and ignore what you see - All sad things in the world are j ust like thi s . <sup>52</sup> Clearly the area in which concern about fraudulent manufacture was most concentrated was that of calligraphy and painting. This was