of the elite in distancing themselves from the much broader group who could both afford works of art and were aware of which works of art carried high status but were not themselves active participants in the world of art. In the same spirit, avant-garde artists of the twentieth century have 'forged'their own work, or the work of others, as a signalled distance from the disciplines of the market. Far from subverting the market, of course, such activities were only likely to reinforce the importance of ‘authenticity' as a value and strengthen the mechanisms of authority by which the market operated. These mechanisms tended not to be so much related to the actual pictorial representation, or sample of calligraphy, in question as to the apparatus surrounding it. This involved signatures of artists (since by this period only workshop productions of low social status went unsigned) and seals and inscriptions of the artist, of owners and of friends of both who were invited to view the work and append their comments to it. On many, though not all, of the occasions when a painting went from being a commodity to being singularized as the possession of an individual, the fact of the singularization was permanently marked by the affixing of a seal. Although this was not unknown in Europe, where Lorenzo de'Medici was accustomed to have his name inscribed on antique vases and cameos in his possession,57 and drawings and prints have since the seventeenth century carried owner's stamps, it was certainly not the case that paintings, once they became the subject of an art market, carried with them intrinsic evidence of their pedigree. The pedigree was just as important, but the evidence for it remained in the main extrinsic to the work. A possible explanation for this may lie in the very much larger size of the Ming market, where social contacts between a numerically very large elite spread over an immense empire could not of themselves be relied upon to carry the history of a given art work. Hence, the necessary support of seals and inscriptions. It was, therefore, understandably around this apparatus that much of the ingenuity of forgers was focused. A common strategy was to separate the authenticating apparatus from the picture itself and then use the former to support the claims of a second, forged picture.8A typical late Ming 'fake' painting (Plate 5) produced from scratch will expend very little effort on a simulacrum of the stylistic mannerisms of the supposed artist, compared to that put into the seals and inscriptions.9 However implausible these (which as pieces of writing were by far the easiest to produce) may look now, they were what sold the work. The lustre of a famous owner made for a considerable part of an object's market value, as I shall try and demonstrate in the next chapter.