second hand, through its reflection in European languages. I have tried to limit the number of citations and keep them as simple as possible. All translations from Ming and Qing sources are my own, except where otherwise specified. In the latter case, I have standardized romanizations to the system for the sake of consispinyin tency, something for which I ask the forgiveness of other <sub>translators</sub>. In my own translations, I have silently altered the use of or hao, zi studio names to the principal by which a person is listed in the ming (cited as DMB) or other biographical Dictionary oj Ming Biography sources, and I have standardized the literary names of cities, provinces and regions to those now obtaining on generally available atlases. This has been done to ease the path of the reader who is unused to these Chinese literary conventions, in the interests of establishing a better dialogue between specialists in different fields. The quantity of unfamiliar names is still daunting enough, and I have tried to give a biographical reference on the first appearance of any figure. Where possible, this is to DMB, and where it is not, a reference is given to the larger but less detailed Chinese language biographical dictionary (cited as MRZJ). It is worth reminding Ming ren zhuanji ziliao suoyin the reader that in Chinese the family name comes first, to be followed by the personal name. Zhenheng was a great-grandson of Zhengming. As well as the authors listed in the bibliography, I have benefitted from many general and specific pieces of aid. A British Academy/Chinese Academy of Social Sciences Exchange Scholarship in 1986 enabled me to study rare editions of the central texts in Chinese libraries, and I am grateful to the staff of the Institute of Literature, CASS (in particular its librarian Jiang Guangtian), the Suzhou Municipal Library, the Nanjing University Library and Nanjing Municipal Library. During that trip Professor Xu Shuofang of Hangzhou University discussed some of the issues withe me and helped me through the biography of Gao Lian's father, later sending me a punctuated transcription. I have been helped, too, by the staffs of the British Library's Oriental Collections and of the National Art Library. Peter Burke introduced me to Sabba di Castiglione and also to the importance of studying aesthetiC terminology. Rose Kerr, Curator of the Far Eastern Collection, made the production of this book possible at the V &A through her generous and understanding management of my time as a member of her staff, as well as with many specific pieces of advice on Ming objects. Malcolm Baker, Tim Brook, Rupert Faulkner, Derek Gillman, Paul Greenhalgh, Andrew Lo, David Lowenthal (at whose seminar on 'The Uses of the Past' I first tried out the ideas in Chapter 4), Joseph McDermott, Liz Miller,