Marxian view of the commodity and focusing on its total trajectory from production, through exchange/distribution to consumption. If this work is correct, and I would be among those who say that it is, then the effort put into the investigations of the 'capitalist sprouts' has been misdirected. Not wasted, in that it has brought to light and subjected to fierce, often partisan, discussion a body of extremely valuable material on the Ming economy and society. However, that material clusters around questions of the organization of production and pays relatively little attention to questions of consumption, or even to the crucial stage of an object's social life during which its status as a commodity is most exposed, the moment of sale. We know something about Ming workshops, particularly in those industries, like textiles and ceramics, where the ‘sprouts'were deemed to be most prominent, but very little about Ming shops and retailers. We know something about the accumulation of capital, but relatively little as yet about spending patterns, even among the best documented sections of the elite. If we are to accept the much broader definition of a commodity situation proposed by Arjun Appadurai, with its triple division into the commodity phase (allowing thereby for the possibility of a thing moving in and out of the state of being a commodity), commodity candidacy (the cultural framework which determines which things can be exchanged) and commodity context (the social or geographical arenas in which the possibilities for the exchange of things can be concretely realized), then how can we use this model to approach the Ming world of goods? To begin with, the attribute that logically comes first is that of commodity candidacy, 'the standards and criteria (symbolic, classificatory and moral) that define the exchangeability of things in any particular social and historical context'.² What could and could not be a commodity in Ming terms? The answer seems to be that there was very little which was not at least potentially a commodity; in addition to the manufactured artefacts under consideration here, agricultural land, entertainment, sexual services, religious and ritual services (all of them things which are or have been rigorously excluded from the commodity sphere in some other cultures) were susceptible to this definition. Rights in people, too, were included. Although full slavery was not a part of Ming social relations, various types of servile and semiservile tenant status existed in the countryside, and personal servants, too, were often indentured under terms which severely limited their personal freedom to seek another master.3 Their status as at least