temporary commodities could be marked by their names; it is fairly easy in reading a Ming novel to tell who the servants are from the distinctive nature of their names, which often link them to their functions and to the objects for which they were responsible. It could even be argued that women in Ming society, particularly those whose status was that of secondary wives or concubines, were in effect commodities, exchanged between families for very large sums of ready cash. They also often have the names of things. When in the early 1640s the scholar bureaucrat Gong Dingzi exchanged 1,000 ounces of silver for the celebrated courtesan Gu Mei, he was not simply living out one manifestation of Ming romanticism, where affairs between men of the elite class and women who lived on the sale of sexual and cultural services were generally acceptable to the former.4 The fact that the woman's price should survive as a matter of record is powerfully suggestive of the kind of relationship of which it was just a particularly spectacular example. Another kind of commodity, and one which was new in the late Ming period, was knowledge, transmitted personally or through the medium of published books. The almanacs and encyclopaedias, the route books of Ming merchants, the collections of model essays for the civil service examinations and the very guides to elegant living themselves are commodities which make a commodity out of kinds of knowledge which had existed in earlier centuries but which had not been boug ht and sold. Then, the merchant had learned the route from Nanjing to Suzhou by experience, the son of an elite family had learned the approved style for examination essays from his tutor, and the rules of taste in things had been learned through social intercourse with a peer group. By 1580 all of this knowledge, or a version of it at least, could be bought. Certainly, none of the types of artefact included in the twelve chapters of the Treatise on Superfluous Things stood outside the commodity sphere, the products of the arts of calligraphy and painting not excepted. It has been suggested that it was not until the eighteenth century, in the merchant-dominated ethos of the city of Yangzhou that 'the taboo against speaking of a painting as a commodity within a transaction' broke down. Certainly, there is no Ming evidence for the posting of a blatant price list of one's works, as the retired official Zheng Xie (1693–1765; ECCP, 112) did in 1759. Xu Zhengji has shown how Zheng Xie's action was in effect a protest against the age-old, subtler forms of treating a picture as a commodity, w hich could enmesh an artist in a whole network of reciprocal social obligations.6 I will argue, however, that to see the eighteenth century as the first age in which it was socially permitted to talk about