a painting as a commodity puts the turning point too late. A great deal of the discourse of Ming art history , both in writings of the time and in more modern scholarship, relates to the supposed difference between the work of 'professional' and 'amateur' painters, the latter not only being fully within the social elite while the former only potentially enjoyed that status as a by-product of elite patronage. It is quite clear that in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries this perceived difference was of very great importance. H owever, there may be a gain to us now in being less bound by the emic categories of the time and looking at all types of picture-making as potentially providing objects of exchange, whether they were made to the order of a patron and paid for at the time of execution, or whether they were made as part of some more insubstantial social transaction between members of the elite, since inscriptions suggest that hardly any paintings were made for the painter's own amusement or for his own continued possession. Every painting was for something. In a crucial paper, Celia Carrington Riely has demonstrated how Dong Qichang us<sup>e</sup>d his own painting as a tool of great strategic importance in the creation and maintenance of a network of connections, guanxi, which were the indispensable condition for a successful bureaucratic career. 7 Paintings by those with regional or national reputations were valuable from the minute they were painted and could enter the commodity market at any time after they had left the possession of the original recipient. This was true even of the work of the classic exemplars of the 'scholar-amateur' model in <sup>l</sup>rt, such as Shen Zhou ( 1 427- 1 509; DMB, 1 1 73-7) and the family of Wen Zhenheng himself, chiefly represented in this context by his greatgrandfather, Wen Zhengming, and his grandfather and great-uncle, Wen Peng ( 1 498- 1 573) and Wen Jia ( 1 50 1 - 1 583) . Their work was particularly prized by the art market, paradoxically for its associations with a denial of the possibility of treating a work of art l ike a commodity. James Cahill has written: 'learning and a high level of culture theoretically placed one outside the marketplace, where one's creations were not for sale; but in a strictly practical sense, the fruits of learning were objects of value, marketable commodities just as were the productions of the artisan'. 8 This ambivalence applied equally to calligraphy and literary skills. Wen Zhengming was himself well a ware of this ambivalence, and the multitude of anecdotes surrou nding his life include the claim that, at the same time as he refused to paint to order for politicians, foreigners or merchants , he would give works to needy friends or relations as a form of subsidy, in the knowledge that they would be sold immediately. Wen's work was definitely being forged in his own lifetime, a sure