and those of ‘antique pictures'in a chapter entitled Antique pictures have no fixed prices': Pictures have their prices; that of a contemporary picture depends on the fineness or coarseness of the work, that for a contemporary name depends on the size of the reputation. They do not vary that much, being based on no more than whether people esteem them or don't esteem them. But as for famous pictures by men of ancient times, how can they have set prices? Once, there was a man who owned a Jing Hao landscape scroll which he wanted to sell, amd the Song dynasty Court Servitor Yue Zhengxuan bought it from him for 100,000 copper cash. This was later seen by Wang Boluan, who obtained it by adding 300,000 to the price and considered himself fortunate thereby. Boluan at that time was a Painter-in-Attendance in the Hanlin Academy, charged with determining the quality of all court painting, and all the painters of the age looked on Master Wang's likes and dislikes as the standard, as his connoisseurship was very capable. Then again, Wang Guxiang (1501-1568; MRZJ, 69) obtained a set of pictures in four scrolls by Shen Zhou, of a marvelous quality. A vulgar official of Suzhou heard of their beauty and enteręd into negotiations with him, offering 200 ounces of silver, but Wang was unwilling in the end to sell. Later, Wang Xianchen (jinshi of 1493; MRZJ, 80) spent two days sitting or reclining in front of this picture. Its owner, Guxiang, said that the painting had met its true friend and went on to tell the story of the 200 ounces. Wang Xianchen then exchanged an estate worth 1,000 ounces for it. Then again Li Xianggong of Xinghua once lost a scroll by Xie Shichen (1487-after 1567; DMB, 558-9) and posted a notice, rewarding its recoverer with 50 ounces of silver, from which the value of the painting can be known. Stories like this are unending, so blind men mustn't keep asking the price of paintings.' The value of works of art, as we see here, was a slightly m ysterious thing, more unpredictable than the price of rice or land, but there is no suggestion that the fact of being able to buy and sell them is strange or untoward. It is the actual prices which astonish. One productive source for these prices in the late Ming period is the cataloque of paintings seen by an otherwise not particularly famous member of the elite named Zhan Jingfeng, whose precise dates remain unknown but who passed the second level juren degree in 1567. His Dongtu xuan lan bian, Compiled Hermetic Connoisseurship of Dongtu, which has a preface dated 1591, is similar to a number of Ming painting catalogues in the lack of any discernible formal