## Things in motion arrangement to its 400 or so accounts , of various lengths, of works of art seen either in the hands of friends and acquaintances or in the market-place. 16 What makes the work particularly valuable for present purposes is that a number of the entries (although still a tiny minority) contain anecdotes about the cost of art works or the circumstances in which they changed hands. A close reading of the text suggests that Zhan Jingfeng may well have worked as an agent for the much more wealthy and prominent members of the elite such as Wang Shizhen , his brother Wang Shimou ( 1 536- 1 588) and another high official from Suzhou, Han Shin eng Uinshi of 1 5 68), on whose behalf he describes seeing works or visiting dealers and collectors. He may well have derived income, as well as patronage, from his role as a negotiator between the elite, of which he formed a part, and the art market . His Compiled Hermetic Connoisseurship appeared posthumously and shows little sign o f editing or tidying up by his heirs . Hence, the survival of m aterial on the prices of art works may betray its origins in some sort of diary or account book, maintained as a necessary professional reference. A skillful piece of textual recovery has reassembled what may once have been the catalogue cum collector's notebook belonging to the famous merchant magnate Xiang Yuanbian ( 1 525- 1 590). Xiang seems to have arranged his art collection by assigning each object a character from the Thousand Character Essay, a piece of continuous prose used in teaching children to read and also as a sort of ABC. Weng Tongwen has recently tracked down in later collector's catalogues sixty-six pieces of painting and calligraphy bearing these distinguishing marks . 1 7 Some of these entries also record inscriptions on the paintings in which Xiang records the prices he paid for the work. This seems to have been a unique practice of his, and it is hard to avoid the temptation of attributing it to his mercantile background and to his willingness to be explicit about what everyone knew but no-one cared to record . In more than one instance he employs a slightly curious formula to record the fact of paying money for a picture without recording the actual price . His inscription on a painting of 'Plum Blossoms' by the Yuan d-ynasty artist Yansou, now in the Freer Gallery in Washington, reads :'Ink plum blossoms by Yansou, in the collection of the Dweller in the Forest of Ink, Xiang Yuanbian . Obtained for a price of [ ] ounces from Mr An of Wuxi. Recorded on the first day of the eighth m onth of the Third year of the Longqing reign [ = 1 569] . 18 There is simply a blank where the figure ought to be, a blank which is scarcely big enough for one character and would certainly not take two. The price was therefore either under ten ounces of silver or a round hundred . Why did Xiang do this? As the