inscription stands it is a record of the fact that h ard cash was paid and, thus, a blatant infringement on any taboo against speaking of a painting as a comm odity, without a record of the sum. It forces our attention to the painting as a commodity, while continuing with the sort o f mystification more applicable to reserved goods, held back from full participation in exchange. We cannot tell , either, why Xiang chose sometimes to foreground the price of a work in his collection by mentioning it in his inscription and sometimes omitted it. W as he boasting about bargains? Boasting about his wealth? The latter explanation is attractive but unlikely, since, as we shall see, some of the prices recorded are not huge by the standards of the art market . Appendix II contains a brief note on each of the priced works found in Zhan Jingfeng's Compiled Hermetic Connoisseurship and in Weng Tongwen's reconstruction of the Xiang Yuanbian catalogue, together with one or two other works once belonging to Xiang Yuanbian recorded in other sources, and a selection of prices for bronze vessels and ceramics which survive in the biji literature. These mostly come from the period 1 5 60- 1 620. I have arranged the prices in the appendix in ascending order, the unit being the ounce of silver, or liang, equivalent to 3 7 . 5 g . Of course, i t is i mpossible a t this distance t o say anything about the genuineness or otherwise of the objects I have listed, and for the present purposes it does not real1y matter. What is recorded is simply that a given item fetched a given price on the assumption of the purchaser that it was genuine and , hence, worth so much . It is similarly impossible to 'do' any sort of economic history from this scattered and anecdotal data, but it does seem plausible that some of the relative values at work in the art market can be discerned even from such a small s ample . Further data, which doubtless exists though in a scattered form, would confirm or undermine what I am suggesting here as some of the broad principles governing the prices of these particularly privileged classes of objects in the years between about 1 560 and the fall of the dynasty in 1 644. Firstly, and this is not particularly surprising, the dearest pieces o f calligraphy were considerably more expensive than the dearest paintings. O n ly four paintings reach or surpass the figure of 200 ounces of silver (disregarding the album of sixty leaves for 300 ounces). Significantly, two of those reached these very high prices following the intervention in their favour of the arbiter Dong Qichang. By contrast , we have a record of eight sales of works of calligraphy making these very high prices, including three four-figure sums, and the Ming record price for work of art, the 2,000 ounces paid for Wang Xizhi's Zhan jin tie, 'Gazing Nearby Letter'. The particular place