consequent tax and rent resistance movements of an overburdened peasantry, who sold their produce for copper coins which were fast devaluing against the silver in which they were required to pay their taxes . There was a steep rise in the price of foodstuffs and other necessities and, it has been posited, a decline in the price of nonessential goods. Wages too rose, the annual remuneration of a mercenary soldier being around six ounces in the 1 5 50s, as against eighteen ounces by the beginning of the seventeenth century. 28 China was experiencing a 'price revolution' every bit as dramatic as that on the other side of the world. The trans-oceanic linkage of the Americas, Asia and Europe had brought into being that 'world system' which henceforward would mean that no one area would develop in total isolation, unaffected by changes to its trading partners . The information available to us on the prices paid for items o f nonessential consumption, against which we might measure the prices of the art works recorded above, is very scattered and in any case sparse. So, too, is any material on the income of the Ming elite which might enable us to gauge what proportion of capital an art collection might represent. The salaries of Ming officials were pegged at a very low level; th e President of one of the Six Ministries in theory received 1 52 ounces of silver a year, but the actual income of such a figure was vastly magnified by presents, customary fees and bribes, all of which are unrecorded . It was not his official salary which allowed the Grand Secretary Zhang Juzheng to build a mansion in Peking valued, on its confiscation , at 1 0,000 ounces of silver .29 There is , however , a considerabl e body of prices embedded in the inventory of Yan Song's possessions from the early 1 560s, and although this predates the very steep rise in prices of the latter part of the century, it is of some value in the creation of a very broad-brush picture. It has to be borne in mind that the most valuable items in each category are not expressed in the inventory i n cash equivalents, as they were simply absorbed wholesale by the treasuries of the imperial household. One o f the categories there which shows the greatest differentiation of types of products is that of silk textiles , clearly not only a very important part of luxury consumption but also the product by this time of a highly commercialized industry. The most-expensive items recorded are bolts30 of a patterned silk ,called gaiji, a novelty in the early part of the sixteenth century. These were valued at 2 ounces of silver each . Gauzes (sha) were the same price. The next most expensive kind of silk was valued at 1 . 5 ounces per bolt, and so on variously down to the cheapest type of silk at 0 . 3 ounces per bolt. The garments for which money prices are available (remembering that these were not the g randest items in Yan Song's wardrobe) varied between 1 . 3