Treatise on Superfluous Things or Eight Discourses on the Art of Treatise on Superfluous Things Eight Discourses on the Art ofwhile engaged in this sort of work and could equally be Living, accused of using their contents in this simplistic way, as if they 'told us what things were like'. They have been little studied as texts in their own right, as consciously constructed attempts to reduce the confusion of the Ming world of goods to order. When studied at all, they have been excerpted and truncated in ways which give undue prominence to our present concerns and gloss over those parts, in some cases the majority of the text, which fail to answer immediate needs. For example, the connoisseurship of swords is prominent in these texts, but since swords have no place in the art market or in the standard museum presentations of Chinese culture, this material is simply elided. The first Western scholar to get to grips with this body of material was, typically, the great Dutch sinologist Robert van Gulik, whose comments are still worth quoting extensively: Copious material relating to Chinese connoisseurship ... can be extracted from books of a special genre, viz. compilations meant as guide-books for the scholar of elegant taste. Such books describe the interior in which the refined lover of art and literature likes to live. They deal with the furniture of his library, the brushes and paper, ink and incense he prefers, the art treasures he likes to contemplate and the books he likes to read . . <sub>.</sub> He identifies as the founding text of the genre the Dong tian qing luwritten in the ji, Record of the Pure Registers of the Cavern Heaven, first half of the thirteenth century by Zhao Xigu ( 1 1 70- 1 242). As Zhao's work set much of the pattern for the much larger number of texts of this type which would be published in the period covered by this book, it is worth looking at its contents and the kinds of topics it covers. There are ten sections, covering antique zitherS, antique qin inkstones, antique bronze vessels, curious rocks, table screens, brush rests, water vessels for the desk, antique manuscripts and calligraphy, antique and modern rubbings of stone inscriptions, and antique paintings. The mix of antique and contemporary items is what sets Zhao's apart from the larger number of purely antiquarian Record texts being produced at the same time (some of which are discussed below in Chapter 4), as does the sense that these are objects for possessing. Van Gulik goes on: The genre continued to be popular till the end of the Ming dynasty, thereafter interest in the subject declined ... The men who