Luxury shops and businesses associated with the antiques trade clustered together, as in the famous Zhuanzhu Lane in Suzhou and along the banks of the canal linking Suzhou to the nearby beauty spot o f Tiger Hill to the n orth-west, a popular resort of the well-to-do. A trip round the antique dealers could be a pleasant recreational outing, as when Feng Mengzhen, then residing on Hangzhou's West Lake, made such an outing 'to see all the things'. Feng also made the purchase of 'rare books, old works of calligraphy and paintings', a task he set himself to accomplish once every six months, giving some idea of the r ate at which the collection of a wealthy man might grow. 50 The most important thing from a dealer's point of view was to be near a steady supply of such well-off customers as he. Thus, we hear about a Taoist monk who operated an antiques business from his monastery on the island of Jiaoshan, in the middle of the Yangtze near the city of Zhenjiang, perfectly placed to i ntercept prospective customers en route along the river, travelling from south to north China, or s imply making one of the short excursions which were such a feature of upper-class male life.51 Zhou Danquan (encountered in the previous chapter as a forger of Ding ware incense burners) was also a Taoist monk, at least during one stage of his colourful career, and he, too, seems to have operated a business from within the cloister w alls . 52 A third Taoist dealer was Wang Fuyuan, once a disciple of Wen Zhengming himself, w hose base of operations was the small but wealthy city of J iaxing .53 Shops catering to the elite could j ust as well be situated outside the city walls in some scenic spot, and Zhang Dai recalls one such parade of shops specializing in luxury ceramics, including Yixing teapots, set i n attractive scenery at Mingshan, a couple o f miles outside the city of Wuxi . 54 A number of periodic markets provided specialized contexts for the sale of a rt works and antiques. In Hangzhou, such a market was held every day at the Zhaoqing Temple,55 while in the capital there were three such periodic markets. That at the Lamp Market was held o nce a year fro m the first to the tenth of the first month, and Zhan Jingfeng seems to have found this one of his most fruitful hunting grounds for bargains . 56 The market at the Temple of the City God was held each month from the fifteenth to the twenty-fifth day. Here, according to Shen Defu: Calligraphy, antiques and paintings, both genuine and false. are displayed. The northerners cannot tell them apart. and they are often acquired cheaply by the merchants of Suzhou. Carved lacquers and incised lacquers from the Palace have recently increased their prices tenfold. In ceramics the dearest are those of the