from H enan encountered in the capital. 60 I f we come down from the general level of the context in which works of art as commodities changed hands, we are fortunate in that the types and quantities of documentation attached in particular to the most prestigious paintings mean that we are able to deploy in this context I gor Kopytoffs fruitful concept of an object 'biography', to trace these obj ects' movements through society. The cumulative effect of a number of such studies would be of immense value in exposing lines of cultural as well as economic power in imperial China, but nothing of this scope is attempted here. Instead, advantage will be taken of two exemplary studies of the pedigrees of individual paintings, or at least of those segments of their total biographies relating to the late Ming. These are Riely's study of the ownership of H uang Gongwang's masterpiece from the Yuan dynasty, 'Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains' (Plate 8), and Wen Fong's equally detailed account of 'Rivers and Mountains after Snow', another handscroll believed in the Ming at least to be by the great Tang poet and painter Wang Wei . 6 1 The 'Fuchun Mountains' scroll is recorded by the Ming artist Shen Zhou in 1 488 as having at some earlier stage been in his collection, but we a re then ignorant of its whereabouts for nearly a hundred years, until a colophon by Wen Peng (also a famous artist in his own right, and ancestor of our Wen Zhenheng) records it in 1 570 as being in the collection of someone mimed Tan Zhiyi in the southern capital of Nanjing. From then on, the density of documentation increases. In the early 1 590s the painting was in the hands of another official in Peking , surnamed Zhou. It must have changed hands, and m oved all the w ay across China, shortly after that, for in 1 596 its most illustrious Ming owner, Dong Qichang, wrote on it: 'Recently, I was sent as an imperial envoy to the Sanxiang region in Hunan, and passed through J ingli, where my friend the Secretary to the Grand Secretariat Hua arranged for me to buy this painting . . . '62 Dong still owned the painting in 1 627 , but by 1 634 it belonged to a Wu Zhengzhi, resident in Y ix ing, who in turn bequeathed it at some stage to his son, Wu Hongyu. In 1 65 1 , at the very beginning of the Qing dynasty, a colophon by Shen Hao reminisces about seeing it 'twenty years earlier' in the hands of Wu H ongyu, who told him how Dong Qichang had pawned t he scroll to his father for 1 ,000 ounces of silver. Further colophons from 1 65 2 , 1 65 7 and 1 669 record two further owners. What this tangled h istory reveals is that the painting, in the century from 1 570 to 1 669, changed hands eight times, an average of once every twelve and a half years, much more frequently than once a generation, even in a situation of youthful marriages. Only two of