those transmissions were definitely by inheritance rather than sale, though the most significant transfer was, in fact, an act of pawning between close friends (Dong Qichang to Wu Zhengzhi), for the weight of 375 kilograms of silver, a considerable fortune. The painting's mobility across time is paralleled by its geographical mobility, from Nanjing to Peking to Hunan, then with Dong Qichang at his home in Songjiang from 1602 to 1622 and probably accompanying him to Peking and Nanjing again before his colophon of 1627 back in Songjiang, before its move to Yixing. A painting like this was concentrated capital, not just in monetary terms but in terms of cultural prestige. Its owner was guaranteed the type of connections essential to a successful bureaucratic career. The same degree of volatility is reflected in the history of 'Rivers and Mountains after Snow'. Between 1595 and 1642 the painting changed hands, not counting occasions on which it was borrowed, five times (or once every 9.4 years), only one of those transfers being by inheritance. Again, it passed through the hands of Dong Qichang, being borrowed by him from Gao Lian's friend Feng Mengzhen in Hangzhou in 1595. In a colophon written on the scroll in 1642 by the politician and poet Qian Qianyi, we see very explicitly the notion of an 'unworthy purchaser', in a metaphor vivid with the unease felt by some at the reduction of an art work to an item of trade: After Feng Mengzhen died, the scroll was purchased by a rich man from Xin'an. Thus, a fine work of mist and clouds fell into being a heap of copper cash for more than thirty years, but finally I was able to rescue it.63 Qian might have rescued' Wang Wei's masterpiece from its distasteful commodity state temporarily, but no one was able to ensure that such things did not have to descend into the soiled world of commerce again. The market was a powerful force in Ming society, a powerful metaphor for new kinds of interaction between people, as well as between things. By the time Dong Qichang pawned 'Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains' for 1,000 ounces, he had himself created a very large part of that value trough the very fact of his ownership, manifested through colophons and seals. He had also done it through his fundamental rearrangement and systematization of the canons of quality in the history of Chinese painting, where he had vigorously championed Huang Gongwang and his Yuan contemporaries as the most accomplished of all masters from the past.ªI am far here from aiming to suggest a crude manipulation of the market on Dong's part but am, rather, positing that in our reading of the aesthetic debates