He argues that ancient artisans made only essential things and wer<sub>e</sub> thu s , an aid to the farmers , not a parasitical hindrance to them, an<sub>d</sub> continues with an updated version of the anecdote from the Garden oj Tales. In this story the political fate of an unsuccessful warlord, one of the origi nal rivals of the Ming dynasty's founder , is foretold by the luxury of the artefacts with which he surrounded h i mself: Our Great Progenitor August Emperor swept out the barbarian M ongol Yuan dynasty and took possession of the empire. It happened that the officers garrisoning Jiangxi province presented the carved and gilded couch which had belonged to Chen Youliang. The E mperor said to his attendants, 'What is the difference between this and the seven-treasures urinal of Meng Chang? If his very couch was of such intricate workmanship, the rest of his possessions can be i magined. Both father and son of the Chen family were limitlessly greedy and covetous, how could they avoid extinction ! ' And he ordered the couch destroyed. The implications in Zhang's following passage are that subsequent Ming e mperors w ere far from upholding the virtuous frugality of their great ancestor . He goes on then to a comparison of the different regions of the empire, in terms w hich would have commanded almost universal acceptance: As for the customs of the populace, in general those south of the Yangtze are . more extravagant than those north of it, and no extravagance south of the Yangtze surpasses that of Suzhou. From of old the customs of Suzhou have been habituated to excess and splendour and a delight in the rare and strange, to which the sentiments of the people there are invariably drawn. The clothes of Suzhou people are splendid, as if to be otherwise were to be without culture. The vessels of the people of Suzhou are beautified, as if to be otherwise were to be without value. The whole world appreciates the clothes of Suzhou , and Suzhou gives clothes still more craftsmanship. The whole world values Suzhou vessels, and Suzhou gives vessels still more craftsmanship. In this way the extravagance of Suzhou customs becomes even more extravagant, so how can the desire of the world for the things of Suzhou be stifled and turned to moderation? To turn people's inclinations from moderation to excess is easy, but to return them from excess to moderation is difficult . Zhang Han concludes by <sup>f</sup>ocusing his disapproval on unseemly and unnecessary decoration, on 'carving and inlaying' as a source of