compiled these handbooks borrowed freely from each other, quoting entire passages. Since such passages are as a rule verbatim not marked, one can locate them only by a careful comparison of the texts preserved. This labour is often rewarded. Usually a writer who incorporated a statement made by one of his predecessors in the field would make slight changes in the wording so as to make the passage agree with his own argument. Thus a comparison of the various versions of a statement on some aesthetic principle will bring to light controversial points that would otherwise remain unnoticed. I Van Gulik's point about the Ming as a high point of this kind of writing is even more strongly taken when it is remembered that his earliest Song dynasty example was in fact only first published in the late Ming (having previously circulated in manuscript), in an encyclopedic collection of texts printed somewhere between 1 607 and 1 620, the Shuo fu, Tales Within a City Wall. Shuo Ju, Tales Within a City Wall. is a 'collected writings' or Tales Within a City Wall congshu, 'collectanea', a form of literary artefact with its origins in the late twelfth century, common in China from the Ming period, though rarer in the Western tradition.2 In the absence of any sort of legal protection for intellectual property, and in the context of a flourishing and commercially organized publishing industry, it was standard practice to issue large, multi-volume sets of writings by different authors, gathering together a number of texts connected by some common denominator, be it subject matter, geographical proximity of the authors involved, or some other criterion. Many were congshu simply reissues in a uniform format of a number of rare printed or manuscript items in the library of a given bibliophile, and it is this aim of scholarly preservation which has usually been seen as the main point of the enterprise.3 However, the profit motive was behind at least as many Ming It was the same motive which led to the congshu. frequent 'piracy' and retitling of constituent texts from one congshuto another and to the association of the names of nationally or locally known cultural leaders with these texts, in an attempt to increase their saleability. All these factors mean that the question, 'What is a book?', is a difficult one to answer in the late Ming context. The major traditional bibliography of often vastly overestimates a writer's oeuvre congshu4 by the simple device of listing all of his works as they appear in the contents pages of these numerous 2011ectanea, without making it clear that these may be just chapters or sections of larger, integral works dismembered and republished as if they were independent texts. Very