to much of the distinctive late Ming attitude to the world of commodities. This attitude in turn gives rise to the manuals of taste and style, such as Eight Discourses on the Art of Living and Treatise on Superfluous Things, with which the earlier part of this book has been concerned. That these more 'modern' forms of brake put on consuming should appear in China at roughly the same time as - or even, as I have argued, ahead of - their appearance in early modern Europe, and yet were part of societies which after the sixteenth century were to diverge at an ever increasing rate, suggests that the distinctively European development of a capitalist society may well have to be explained at a level deeper than that of a special attitude to material culture and manufactured things. The ‘sprouts of capitalism'remain as hard to dissect in early modern Europe as they are in Ming China, even if their ultimate flowering in the former and ultimate failure'in the latter part of the world is impossible to ignore. A comparative look at the situation in China and Europe in the century or so from 1550 to 1650 reveals a strikingly similar picture, with an increasing lack of regard paid by consumers to the state's attempts to intervene in their behaviour. However, in China as elsewhere the formal legal structures of the sumptuary laws remained in place, even if widely flouted. What did vary was the actual types of commodity consumption with which such legislation was concerned. Not all sumptuary legislation was concerned with material culture, and one of the key lines of social stratification, at least in early Chinese culture, was determined by the length and elaborateness of mourning rites allowed to individuals. The elaborateness of graves and funerals remained one of the major focuses of control into the later imperial period, as well. The bones of those parts of the Ming laws which are concerned with things are, however, contained in the ‘Monograph on Carriages and Dress'contained in the official Ming History which, although not published until the early eighteenth century under the Qing dynasty, is based on contemporary source material, principally the Ming legal code as embodied in the Da Ming hui dian,Statutes of the Great Ming, particularly the revised edition of 1587. These Statutes are illustrated, at least in those sections which pertain to the ceremonial dress of the emperor and his court." The 'Monograph'has four chapters and is concerned with imperial ceremonial, as well as with the sumptuary laws. Thus chapter 1 deals with carriages, sedan chairs, parasols and horse trappings, chapter 2 with garments for the emperor, empresses and princes of the blood, chapter 3 with official garments and chapter 4 with seals, tallies, palace buildings, other types of