building and, lastly, utensils (qiyong). The complete Ming History text of this last entry, which is identical to the wording given in the 1587 Statutes, is as follows: Prohibitions on the Use of Utensils: In the twenty-sixth year of the Hongwu reign (1393) it was decreed that Dukes, Marquises and officials of the First and Second Ranks might have wine pots and wine cups of gold, and for the rest use silver. Officials of the Third to Fifth Ranks might have pots of silver and wine cups of gold, while those of the Sixth to Ninth Ranks might have pots and cups of silver, for the rest making use of porcelain or lacquer. Items of woodwork should not make use of cinnabar, gilt or painted gold decoration, or of carvings of dragons or phoenixes. The common people should have pewter wine pots, wine cups of silver, and for the rest use porcelain or lacquerware. Couches, screens and window lattices of variously coloured and decorated lacquer belonging to officials should not be carved with dragon designs or be of vermilion lacquer decorated with gold. Military officials and officers should have bows and arrows of black lacquer, while bow cases and quivers must not employ vermilion lacquer or painted gold decoration. In the fourth year of the Jianwen reign (1402) a reprimand was issued to officials and populace, forbidding the unlawful use of gold goblets (jue, actually an archaic bronze shape) for wine and the use of golddecorated vermilion lacquer on woodwork. In the sixteenth year of the Zhengde reign (1521) it was decreed that officials of the First and Second Rank might not use vessels of jade, but only of gold. Merchants and practitioners of craft skills might not use vessels of silver and were in all respects to be as the common people.'² Although these prohibitions remained in force throughout the dynasty, it is worth nothing that there seem to have been no new types of object brought within the scope of the regulations after 1521. This kind of ranking ultimately goes back to systematizing ritual texts such as the Rites of Zhou or the Record of Rites which, though purporting to describe the ideal institutions of the Western Zhou dynasty around 1000 BC, were actually edited or even composed in the first centuries of the unified bureaucratic Han empire after 206 BC. These early texts, which as one of the Thirteen Classics' and 'Five Classics'respectively enjoyed an unchallengeable canonical status in the Ming, go into even greater detail about the paraphernalia surrounding the ruler and his courtiers: For his memorandum-tablet, the Son of Heaven used a piece of sonorousjade; the prince of state a piece of ivory; a great officer