regulation of dress, and indeed, its only lasting success seems to have been the exclusion of the ruff from the fashionable dress of the Spanish court and aristocracy, and its replacement by a plain starched collar.'6 However, the publication of the Junta's Articles of Reformation in 1623, not long after the Treatise on Superfluous Things appeared at the other end of the globe, is perhaps indicative of a growing gulf between the 'modern'Protestant states of northern Europe and those of the Catholic south and east. The sumptuary dress laws of England, first promulgated in the middle of the fourteenth century, were actually repealed on the accession of James 1 in 1604, and attempts over the next two decades to revive them had more to do with trade protection than with social control." In the Netherlands, whose consumption behaviour has been so exhaustively documented and comprehensively analyzed by Simon Schama, sumptuary laws on the consumption of artefacts were never even promulgated, let alone enforced. Despite the attempts of Calvinist divines to have such godly regulation of behaviour made part of the law of the land at the Synod of Dordrecht in 1618, they failed to have enforced measures which were so manifestly at variance with the source of the republic's commercial strength and, hence, the prop of its very existence. When national disaster threatened in 1655 and penitential resort was had to a moderation of consumption, it was the size and length of feasts which were the targets of restriction.'8 There is then a paradox here. China's sumptuary laws in the late Ming period were unprecedentedly complex, reaching into areas of consumption with a degree of detail which was not paralleled in Europe. The prohibitions on tableware, for example, were more rarely applied in European states, two of the best documented examples being the Bohemia of the Emperor Rudolf 11 in the decade after 1600'9 and the Spain of Olivares' Junta in the early 1620s. These cases were both innovations, moving beyond the traditional concentration of European sumptuary laws on dress. But at the same time the Ming regulations were something which had lain on the statute books for some hundreds of years since the founding of the dynasty. The great majority of the regulations in the 1587 Statutes date from the reign of the founding emperor in the late fourteenth century, the only vaguely ‘contemporary' reference being a regulation of 1574 forbidding the 'hat of loyalty and calm'(zhong jing guan) to those who were not officials.2º There was no attempt made to alter the regulations to take account of new types of product or of the shift in terminology applied to silk textiles in the two centuries since the regulations were first promulgated. The Yan Song inventory of 1562