clearly ranks the material in a rough order of value and ranks the textile section also in order of value (this can be confirmed by looking at those textiles which were converted into sums of cash). Yet the sumptuary laws persist in 'forbidding'to the ‘common people' some textiles of relatively low value, while allowing others which were ranked more highly by the compilers of the inventory. There is no mention at all in the law code of gaiji (literally, ‘altered loom'), a sumptuous brocaded type of fabric which was only developed in Fujian province in the early part of the sixteenth century and which was one of the most expensive types in Yan Song's luxurious and extensive wardrobe. The Ming sumptuary laws received no updating or reinforcement at a period not only when they were being most openly and consistently ignored but when some major European powers were still turning to them as a fit object of the statesman's concerns and a major weapon of economic and social policy. In very crude terms, the Chinese willingness, even if it was only a result of inertia, to let the sumptuary legislation wither through neglect thus aligns this feudal' (in Chinese Marxist terms) state more closely with the bourgeois, capitalist Netherlands than it does with a great land empire like that of the Spanish Habsburgs and makes Chinese consumption behaviour of the late Ming period seem rather more ‘modern'than we might otherwise expect. The seeming lack of interest on the part of the government in updating the sumptuary laws may well have been simply a recognition that they were no longer enforceable in the face of universal disregard for the sanctions they contained.2 This disregard could go right to the very top, as when the emperors themselves by the gifts they gave to favoured individuals wreaked havoc with what was supposed to be a precisely designed system of the manifestation of official status through dress. In Ming theory, garments decorated with the long, the five-clawed, horned dragon, were reserved for the very highest mem bers of the imperial clan itself. Officials were supposedly dressed in robes decorated with another mythical reptilian beast, the mang. Shen Defu records that mang-decorated robes presented by the court were highly prized and that in his time there were innumerable examples of them in commodity circulation in the Huating and Jiangling regions of the lower Yangtze. He recounts how in 1447 an edict had noted the illegal manufacture of garments with designs of long, mang and two other mythical animals supposedly reserved for the dress of high officials and had prescribed the death penalty for makers of such things. In 1488 an erudite official had pointed out that, by the earliest and soundest philological sources, a mang ought to be a creature