few books, and certainly very few books on the arts, have been transmitted from the Ming to the present as integral wholes, without undergoing incorporation or disintegration in the format at congshu some stage in their biographies. Not to have done so at all, or to have done so only rarely, is in some sense an index of a work's rare and peripheral status to the generality of discourse on these subjects. This is, for example, the case with the only Ming work on the connoisseurship of artefacts to have been subjected to anything like a full critical study, though it is a study dominated by a search for the 'purest' early text, rather than by a concern for the degree of influence this text may have enjoyed through republication. This is the by Cao Zhao, an Ge gu yao lun, Essential Criteria oj Antiquities author from the lower Yangtze city of Songjiang. The book was first published as an integral work in Nanjing in 1 388, during the very first years of the Ming dynasty. The full translation, with critical and bibliographical study, of this work by Sir Percival David is well known and supplies the material for the following discussion. S Its availability in English makes it by far the best known piece of Ming connoisseurship literature in the art market and in Western museums. David's concerns were essentially those of the object-centred connoisseur and collector, seeking in the written record for confirmation or contradiction of views held about surviving pieces. As its name would suggest, the takes little cogni-Essential Criteria zance of contemporary material culture and is largely occupied with valued products of earlier periods. It opens with a study of archaic bronzes, proceeds through 'ancient painting', calligraphy, rubbings of calligraphy (the largest single section by a long way), ancient qinzithers, ancient inkstones, precious objects (largely natural curiosities but also including worked jades), metals, ancient porcelain, ancient lacquer, textiles, rare woods and rare stones. It then acts as a minor sort of in its own right, reprinting a number of short texts congshu of antiquarian interest from the Song dynasty (960-1 279), before concluding with 'studio objects' and various detailed studies of early imperial patents, seals, tallies and other impedimenta of imperial government. In a number of ways, the sets a Essential Criteria oj Antiquities pattern which is to be replicated in a number of later texts. Firstly, it shows a concern with 'authenticity' as the major value of the (zhen) enterprise of connoisseurship, over more overtly aesthetic values. The author's preface makes this plain. Whenever I came upon an object [of interest), I would search through all the books and illustrated catalogues [at my disposal) in