commercial investment, which in China lagged far behind those to be encountered in the Europe even of the fifteenth century, meant that investment in trade or production was similarly stultified. In a powerful critique of the whole 'sprouts of capitalism' argument, Ray Huang has argued that the immense size of the Chinese empire and its huge population (estimated at around 1 50 million in 1 600) gave the lower Yangtze Valley the appearance of a developed economy without the substance. The priorities of the central government were economic stability, not economic growth, and any imbalance between the wealth of different areas was seen as dangerous. Huang stresses the small-scale nature of most merchant enterprises at this time, the majority having capital in the region of only 200-300 ounces of silver. A successful merchant was by definition one who had ceased to trade, in favour of landholding or the investment of wealth in pawnbroking, a reliable but economically deadening source of income. He quotes the economic historian Peng Xinwei to the effect that there were 20,000 pawnshops in the empire in the sixteenth century, as opposed to 7,000 in the nineteenth, though these figures cannot be other than very speculative. 48 In the light of Huang's telling arguments , it seems reasonable to posit that increased wealth , and the distribution of increased wealth to a broader section at the top of society, was in fact channelled into increased consumption and new forms of consumption, of material culture , j ust as contemporaries d escribed . With regard to England at this time, Lawrence Stone has stated: No one denies that at all times and in all countries, merchants have put some of their wealth into the purchase of land, since it was a secure, ir-not particularly rewarding, investment . But the issue here is how far they aspired to the trappings of gentility that went with establishment in a rural seat. 49 The position being advanced here is that, in the richest parts of China, where landowners themselves often no longer lived on their estates but rather in the towns , the 'trappings of gentility' had become more or less 'entirely divorced from ownership of land . Luxury goods, and in particular those prestige-bestowing goods like antiques and paintings, were all entirely within the late Ming commodity sphere, and so the 'trappings of gentility' were potentially available to all who could afford them. Not only were they available, they were acutely competed for in a situation where demand was rising much faster than supply. Sandi Chin and Cheng-chi Hsu, in t heir study of Anhui merchant