culture and patronage, quote the words of one late Ming - early Qing writer which capture the gusto with which the merchants of Huizhou entered into a new world of goods: I remember the past splendours of the collections in our Huizhou area - there was no place that could compare with Xiuning and Shexian. Moreover, the difference between refinement and vulgarity [of a person] was thought to depend on whether or not he owns antiquities. Accordingly, people fought to acquire things, without concern for price. The antique dealers all rushed to the area. Those who were doing business outside the area collected antiques eagerly and brought them more. Thus, extensive collections came into being. This fashion started with the official Si-ma Wang and his brothers; then a certain Wu family in Xin'an and a Wang family in the Conglu Ward all followed . . .s0 The ‘Si-ma Wang'referred to here is none other than Wang Daokun (1525-1593), already encountered in this book as the author of the funeral inscription for Gao Lian's father and as a man who, in fact, lived by the sale of the cultural skills of the elite, turning"his prestige as holder of the highest examination degree into a lucrative practice as a hired writer. The transfer of forms of cultural valuation is here personalized in the extreme, but this idea that social emulation is at work in the extension of forms of consumption from the bureaucratic elite to the merely rich is seen elsewhere in Ming writing. In this vein, there is the ascription of the taste for hardwood furniture in the fashionable interior to the painter and aesthete Mo Shilong, and I have already quoted the claim of Wang Shizhen that fashions in collecting began in Suzhou, the heartland of the cultural elite, and spread to Anhui, more famous for merchants than for scholars. Shen Defu talks of how the fashion for including pieces of the early Ming period in the category of ‘antiques', 'began with one or two men of elegance, got its first strength among the fashion-conscious gentry of Jiangnan, and spread to the easily persuadable great merchants of Anhui'.1 In a passage entitled ‘Things that have the names of people', Shen lists items of dress in use among the elite and concludes, Thus there can be no doubt at all that famous scholars set the fashions in dress."² The appearance of the concept of 'fashion' brings us back to the central Ming anxiety·about objects and to a potential palliative for that anxiety. ‘Elegance' can smooth away at least some of the social anxieties engendered by excess, by re-establishing the necessary distance from those whose houses may be crammed with ‘paintings