by famous hands', yet who hang them in a crass and vulgar manner. The writer of the preface to Treatise on Superfluous Things, Shen Chunze, puts into his own and the author's mouths a piece of dialogue which, while it overtly seems to suggest that trivial things are not the correct concern of the scion of such a distinguished family, actually reinforces the idea that ‘taste' is not only the natural inheritance of the product of such a distinguished lineage, but something over which, in a sort of noblesse oblige, they are compelled to set and maintain standards: I said to Wen Zhenheng, 'Your late great-grandfather, the Grand Scribe Wen Zhengming was the very nonpareil in the Suzhou region of sincere antique virtue and lofty rectitude and lived to be nearly a hundred years old. The family's transmitted renown has been both fragrant and widespread. Its “paintings in poems" and "poems in paintings"have been the very high point among the ingenious minds and marvellous hands of Suzhou, who are all members of your lineage. When in days past I visited you and dallied with you for some days in your Hall of Grace and Beauty, your Studio of the Jade Bureau, both more beautiful than painting can convey, this compilation was always among your personal belongings. Is this not troubling yourself needlessly, just wielding your brush to waste your paper?’He said, 'No, it is not. My only fear is that as the minds and hands of the men of Suzhou change day by day, just as you say, so the very foundation of these small idle affairs and superfluous things may be unknown in days to come. I hope to prevent it with my writings.'This is indeed the case. The words, 'cutting away excess and doing away with extravagance' would of themselves be a sufficient preface for this book." And yet, there remains the problem of the self-subverting, almost auto-destructive nature of a text like the Treatise on Superfluous Things. It is, one most repeat, a guide to how to consume commodities appropriately, which is itself a commodity. Cannot anyone, therefore, vulgar or not, simply purchase à copy and avoid such solecisms as hanging paintings opposite one another? The only way out of this seeming dilemma is to accept a degree of difference between authorial intention and possible reception and to remember that, once a society has been fully penetrated by commodity exchange and a mechanism of fashion and emulation set up, it is a constant and self-sustaining system, in which those who are constantly encouraged to catch up with the makers of taste can never do so, as the desirable acts of consumption are constantly shifted. The Treatise is, thus, in a sense