order to trace its origin, evaluate its quality and determine its authenticity before 1 laid it aside . . . There are certainly some among the younger gentle-folk of today who are interested in this lofty pursuit; but unfortunately, despite a genuine love for such things, these people lack discernment. 6 Another top os in this kind of literature is the author's self-presentation as a person of detachment and indifference to worldly affairs, keen only to save the well-meaning from falling into error. Given the almost total lack of independent biographical material on Cao Zhao himself, we are at liberty to posit this as the donning of a familiar and acceptable cultural role, rather than unvarnished fact. What we know of his social status is largely negative; he is not recorded as a bureaucratic degree holder, the major formal distinction of status in Ming China, nor does he have any other recorded writings to his credit. His position as a member of the cultural elite can be inferred, but we are not in a position to say anything about his economic or political status. And to award him the title 'scholar' loosely is to extend this term to mean simply, 'literate person', an unacceptable degree of <sup>.</sup> ImpreCISIOn. Thirdly, there is throughout an anxiety about forgery, inauthenticity and fraud which suggests that as early as the fourteenth century, at least in the most commercially developed parts of the empire, all the major types of luxury commodity which presented themselves through the market-place were potentially unreliable. Hence, the social message about their owners which these objects might be expected to carry was potentially unreliable, too. Thus, the texts offer the justification for their own existence in the necessity for searching out reliable information on which to make judgements about things. There are parallels here with what the American anthropologist Clifford Geertz has identified as the 'bazaar-style' economy, where accurate commercial information is hard to find and where those who wield it possess considerable power and prestige. Such a fixation on the search for reliable information is typical of any situation where the quality and correct financial value of goods is not standardized, precisely the sort o f situation which pertains in any market for antiques, or where non-intrinsic criteria like 'fashionability' govern the major part of the value of goods. 7 What is distinctive about China, however, is that there was an uneven distribution of not knowledge about how to deploy consumption to achieve social ends. Such knowledge exists in all societies and is unevenly distributed in all cases showing social stratification. The Chinese distinctiveness lies in the very early reduction of this type of knowledge to a commodity,