father-in-law. The second son, Wang Liu, was the commentator on Wen's text who we are concerned with here, while a sister of theirs was married to Wen's uncle, Wen Yuanshan. Wang Liu provided Wen Yuanshan's obituary. A son of Wang Liu, named Wang Qi, has the distinction of being the creator of the only work of art other than 'Clearing Weather after Sudden Snowfall' to bear the seals of Wen Zhenheng, his brother-in-law; Contag and Wang ( 1 940). Wang Qi must have been older than Wen, as his earliest known work is dated 1 600; Yu Jianhua ( 1 98 1 ). 2 Pan Zhiheng (MRZJ, 775). Born in 1 556 and dying in 1 622, Pan was a scholar of a generation above Wen Zhenheng and was a personal friend of Wang Daokun, encountered already as the semiprofessional author and provider of the obituary of Gao Lian's father. Pan's interest in popular material culture is confirmed by his authorship of at least two treatises on card games ; Lo ( 1 988) . 3 Li Liufang (DMB, 838--9). Li, whose dates are 1 575- 1 629, is best remembered as an artist, one of the 'Four Gentlemen of J iading', and a member of the artistic tendency crystallized around the great artist, artistic theoretician and major politician Dong Qichang ( 1 555- 1 636: ECCP, 787-9). In terms of the canons of Chinese painting as laid down in the late Ming and perpetuated into the Qing dynasty, he was thus part of a more advanced circle, the 'Jiading school', rather than the supposedly exhausted 'Wu' (i .e. Suzhou) school embodied by Wen h imself; Li and Watt ( 1 987). Li's participation in the project of the Treatise is thus important for establishing links between a quintessentially Suzhou figure like Wen Zhenheng and the group associated with the town of Jiading, near modern Shanghai . 4 Qian Xiyan. A figure about whom little as yet has been discovered , except in the negative sense that he was not a holder of the jinshi degree and has no surviving biography or tomb inscription . He was in Hangzhou in J.596, visited the Dongting Lake in 1 599, published various works on drama in 1 6 1 3 , and was still alive in 1 622; Zhang Huijian ( 1 986), pp. 365, 375 , 423 , 461 . 5 Shen Defu (DMB, 1 1 90- 1 ). Shen ( 1 578- 1 642) was a wealthy member of an old-established family with a distinguished official history, who is best known as the author of one of the finest and most frequently quoted examples of Ming biji or 'note-form' literature, the Random Gatherings of the Wanli Era ( Wanli ye huo bian) of 1 606.