published in a book and hence available in the market-place to any player wanting to enter the search for ways of transforming economic power into cultural power. Despite being a clear forerunner of much later work, the Essentialof 1 388 generated few immediate successors, Criteria oj Antiquities although it was significantly expanded in a republication of 1 459. The written in 1 508 by Gu qi qi lu, Record oj Curious Ancient Vessels, Lu Shen ( 1 477- 1 544; DMB, 999-1 003), appears in bibliographies as if it were a work of the same precisely documented type, but it is rather a collection of miracle tales about extraordinary happenings associated with numinous ancient objects, a genre with a long history. David has located five Ming texts which note or cite Cao Zhao's but three of these are bibliographies and do not Essential Criteria, support his conclusion, for the Ming period at least, that 'the frequency with which KKYL has been referred to [Essential Criteria] should be sufficient to show its value'. <sub>8</sub> However, it remained in print as an active player in the decades of most intensive attention to writing on this sort of subject, those between about 1 590 and 1 630, a more detailed look at which forms the body of this chapter. Appearing as an integral text in the middle of the sixteenth century, in a of 1 596, and twice again on its own in about 1 600 congshu (making four republications in fifty years), it formed part of an explosion of publishing interest in the fields of what might loosely be called luxury consumption, encompassing not just high-status and high-value works like painting, calligraphy and early bronzes, but also a whole range of contemporary products necessary to the presentation of self in elite life. No less enigmatic, if rather better documented than Cao Zhao, is the author of a work which in its history subsequent to its first publication in 1 5 9 1 exemplifies the shifting and unstable nature of the Ming text, and also the shifting and unstable nature of the Ming authorial persona, as viewed through the traditional bibliographical apparatus and its development in modern sinological practice. The book in question is called Zun sheng ba jian, Eight Discourses on thev <sub>"</sub> and it was written by a man called Gao Lian, whose Art of Li ingproblematic social status and personal! cultural connections provide a microcosm of the very complex context for Ming writing on cultural topics. To put it at its crudest, Gao Lian's authorial persona has disintegrated over the centuries into its constituent parts, even as his writings have been dissected, retitled and incorporated into different published settings. To reintegrate him into the whole person seen by his contemporaries is not an easy task, but one of considerable importance.