## Appendix I 200 ounces: ·Paid in 1 564 for Wang Xizhi's 'Offering Oranges Letter', and the price inscribed on the work; Ledderose ( 1 986). 300 ounces: The 'Offering Oranges Letter' sold for this price in 1 6 1 7 by Xiang Yuanbian's descendants; Ledderose ( 1 986). This i s the only instance in the period when it is possible to see the movement in the price of a given object. 300 ounces: Album of sixty Song and Yuan dynasty album leaves, recorded as sold to Xiang Yuanbian; Zhan Jingfeng, 1 .29. 300 ounces: Price of a jade cup, ostensibly from the Song dynasty imperial collections; Jiang Shaoshu , 1 .6-7 . 300 ounces: Price of the three decorated bronze vases from the tomb of Duke Jing of Qi; Zhang Dai, r. 84. 300 ounces: Paid for a modern fake set of the Chunhuage tie rubbing collection ; Shen Defu, p . 656. 350 ounces: Particularly fine bronze ju vessel from the reign of King Wen; Zhan Jingfeng, 4.2 1 7 . 350 ounces: Ceramic incense burner o f Ding ware; Zhan Jingfeng, 4.2 1 7 . 500 ounces: Offered b y Xiang Yuanbian for a 'white Ding incense burner, a Ge ware vase and a Guan ware ewer for wine' belonging to the uncle of Zhang Dai; Zhang Dai, p . 80. 550 ounces: Paid in 1 577 by Xiang Yuanbian for a version of the 'Orchid Pavilion Manuscript' in the calligraphy of the Tang writer Feng Chengsu; Weng Tongwen ( 1 979), p. 1 65 . 800 ounces: Paid in 1 572 b y Xiang Yuanbian for a piece o f calligraphy by Su Shi ( 1 037- 1 1 0 1 ) ; Weng Tongwen ( 1 <sup>9</sup>79), p. 1 69 . 800 ounces: Price of the Jiang gan xue yi, sold to a rich man of Huizhou following its attribution to Wang Wei (70 1 -76 1 ) by Dong Qichang; Shen Defu, p . 658. 1, 000 ounces: Paid in 1 534 by the collector An Guo for the 'centre' copy of the rubbings of the archaic 'Stone Drums' inscriptions ; DMB , p . 1 0.