and allots him the hero's role in the resistance to eunuch-led corruption. 27 The text is given in an appendix to the edition of Wen Zhenheng's Treatise specified in the Bibliography of primary sources. 28 Zhong shu she ren , rank 7b in the nine-rank structure; Hucker (1 985) p . 1 93 . 29 Wakeman ( 1 985), p. 1 5 3 . 30 Ru ren; Hucker ( 1 985), p. 273 . 3 1 A little information on him is preserved in a local gazetteer and in a late Ming/early Qing collection of painter's biographies, the Ming hua /u, Register of the Painters of the Ming of 1 673; M RZJ, 1 72. 3 2 I n L i a n d Watt ( 1 987) , p . 5 . 3 3 Wen Zhenheng p. 1 53 ; Hucker ( 1 985), p. 48 1 . 34 Whi tfield ( 1 987), p. 1 9 . 3 5 Wen Zhenheng, Zhang wu zhi jiao zhu, 'Treatise on Superfluous Things', Edited and A nnotated, by the eminent botanist Chen Zhi (b. 1 898). He is the collator and source of most of the biographical and bi bliographical material used in this study, and it is t his edition which is used throughout. Chen, a professor at the Nanjing Institute <sup>o</sup>f Forestry, had principal research interests in the history of botany and in the garden in China, being responsible for a critical study of another key Ming text in this area, the Yuan ye, The Craft of Gardens of 1 63 5 , by Ji Cheng (fl. c. 1 600- 1 640; DMB, 2 1 5 - 1 6: this text has been translated in full as Hardie ( 1 988). A preface tells us that Chen's work on Wen Zhenheng was completed in 1 965 , but the bitter repression of scholarship which then ensued meant that, like so many other pieces of intellectual work, publication did not take place until 1 984, after Chen Zhi's deat h . The political turmoil and the violence which shattered Wen Zhenheng's life have not, for Chinese scholars of the l ater twentieth century, simply been distant historical events of no contemporary resonance. 36 Mote and Chu ( 1 989), pp. 1 89-92. This may well be the case with Chen Jiru's supposed editorship of an edition of Gao Lian's best-known play, The Jade Hairpin , as there is no independent con firmation of his connection with Gao at any stage. 37 DMB, p. 1 326, entry on Tu Long by Chaoying Fang. 38 Weng Tongwen ( 1 983). 39 Si ku quan shu zong mu ti yao, p. 2576. 40 Ibid . , pp. 2576-7. 4 1 I b id . , p . 27 1 4 . 42 I bid . , p . 2577. 43 Beurdeley ( 1 966), pp. 1 1 8-28 concerns Zhang Yingwen and his milieu. 44 The Ping shi is also translated into French and annotated in full in Vandermeersch ( 1 964).