45 This, one of the largest of all Ming congshu, continued to appear on into the early Qing period, and has a particularly tangled publishing history; Chang Bide ( 1 979). 46 Tadao ( 1 970); Brook ( I 988b) . 47 Wang Zhongmin ( 1 983), p. 347. 48 Ruitenbeek (1 989), p. 45 . 49 Wu Jinming ( 1 987). 50 Evans ( 1 979) , p. 389. This literature of domestic economy can be traced in Italy as far back as the mid-fifteenth century, with a text like Leon Battista Alberti's La cura della jamiglia. 5 1 Y . W . Ma,'pi-chi', in Nienhau-ser ( l 986} , pp. 650-2; Xie Guozhen ( 1 98 1 ) gives more detail o n the most important examples. 52 David Roy, 'Chin P'ing Met, in Nienhauser (1 986), pp. 287-91 . Early translations of this have either been severely aboreviated, or else depend on inferior Chinese recensions, and invariably preserve the erotic action at the expense of the density of texture which makes the novel an encyclopedia of Ming material culture and domestic life. Andre Levy's masterly new French version redresses the imbalance with a full and fluent translation which omits none of the valuable detail ; Levy ( 1 985). David Roy's own complete English version appeared too late t o be used here. ## CHAPTER <sub>2</sub> IDEAS ABOUT THINGS 1 Wen Zhenheng, p. 3 1 . 2 Ibid. , pp. 46-7. 3 I bi d . , pp. 1 1 2- 1 3 . 4 I bi d . , p . 1 23 . 5 I bid . , p . 1 83 . 6 I bi d . , p . 225 . 7 Ibid . , p. 23 1 . 8 I b id . , p. 247 . 9 I bi d . , p. 3 3 3 . 1 0 Ibid . , p . 345 . 1 1 Ibid . , p. 3 5 2 . 1 2 Ibid., p . 3 69. 1 3 I bid . , p . 409 . 1 4 More lengthy extracts drawn from Chapter 5 , 'Calligraphy and painting can be found in translation in van Gulik ( 1 958). The material on furniture has been used extensively in Clunas 1 988a), while further quotations from Chapter 7 'Vessels and utensils' can be found i n Clunas ( l 984b) (dealing with attitudes to ivory as a material) and Li and Watt ( 1 987), covering mostly ceramics . More extensive citation of this sort of Ming connoisseurship literature is available to those who do not read Chinese in a number of scattered sources; Waley ( 1 925) translates Gao