Once again .it is easiest to begin with negatives. Gao Lian held no degree and, hence, no place within the political power structure. We do know that he was a resident of Hangzhou, living on the shores of the fashionable West Lake, probably the leading focus of elite tourism in the whole of China at this period. The only clear dates associated with his life are 1 58 1 , when a collection of verse appeared in his name, 1 590, when (according to the preface by an otherwise unknown Taoist priest named Li Shiying) he completed the manuscript of Eight Dis-and 1 59 1 , when it was published. The evidence of the prefaces courses, is that he was still alive at the time of publication, and the form of titling of the book, as Ya shang zhai zun sheng bQ jian, Eight Discourses on the Art of Living from the Studio where Elegance isusing the name given to a studio within his own residence, Valued, suggests that, as was not uncommon at this period, the publication was undertaken at his own expense and possibly by itinerant blockcarvers and printers working in his own home and under his direct supervision. We know a little about Gao's family background from the tomb inscription which he caused to be written for his deceased father Gao Jigong, choosing to employ one of the most prestigious writers and cultural figures available, Wang Daokun ( 1 525- 1 593; DMB, 1 427-30). It is Wang's fame as a writer which has ensured the survival of this conventional eulogy, incorporated into his collected works,9 rather than the prominence of the subject. This very fame was by the late Ming a type of commodity, as Wang made his living after the abandonment of his political career by writing to order such 'epitaphs, birthday notes, poems and prose for others, particularly for merchants'. He was, literally, the best that money could buy, though clearly in a context where the financial element of the transaction had to be masked by the forms of elite civility and reciprocal services between friends and equals. The text makes explicit the fact that Wang Daokun was a client of the Gao family and lived with them over a possibly extended period. It would, however, be very unwise to posit a relationship of close personal friendship between Wang Daokun and Gao Lian, his patron of the moment, on the basis of what may well have been a very standard type of arrangement. The epitaph which Wang provided gives Gao Lian's father an impressive but unprovable line of descent of great antiquity, as the descendant in the fifteenth generation of a sixth-century empress, whose family had taken up residence in Hangzhou at some unspecified time in the distant past. He became extremely wealthy through the lucrative trade in supplying grain to the state and was esteemed by the relevant high officials for his probity and reliability. Following the