62 Translated in Kerr ( 1 990) , p . 24. 63 E.g. Bush and Shih ( 1 985), pp. 75-8. 64 Stanley-Baker ( 1 986), p . 5 8 . I would, however, reject the notion at any point of a 'direct encounter between man and art', with which the Chinese social relationship can be juxtaposed . 65 Bush and Shih ( 1 985), p. 99. 66 Shen Defu, vol. 3, p . 658 . 67 Wen Zhenheng, p. 1 5 1 . 68 I bi d . , p . 1 3 8 . 69 I bid . , p . 1 53 . 70 Ho ( 1 976); Cahill ( 1 982), p. 87. 7 1 Barnhart ( 1 983). 72 Wen Zhenheng, p. 1 42 . 73 This has been translated in full in van Gulik ( 1 958), pp. 4-6. 74 He Liangjun, p. 3 1 5 . 75 Wen Zhenheng, p. 249. 76 Li and W att ( 1 987), p . 1 64 . The privileging of 'ceramics' as a distinct category of artefact in this catalogue is a concession to modern curatorial and art-market practice in what is otherwise an attempt to deal seriously with the Ming hierarchy of objects. 77 Bour<sup>d</sup>ieu ( 1 984) , p. 29. 78 Ibid. , p . 479. 79 Wen Zhenheng, p. 10. ## CHAPTER <sub>3</sub> WORDS ABOUT THINGS I van Gulik ( 1 968). 2 Chaves ( 1 983). 3 Bush and Murck ( 1983). 4 A stimulating exception is that of Cahill ( 1 976), in which James Cahill teases out the implications of the word jang, 'imitation' as it bears upon the concept of originality in painting; also that of Li and Watt ( 1 987), in which James Watt gives a broad survey of some key terms deployed across the whole range of concerns in late Ming aesthetics. There is also the example of Japan to show that this kind of historical lexicography can be approached with great success from inside a cognate culture, with some of the same problems of a seemingly unchanging set of graphic signifiers; Kuki Shuzo's pioneering study earlier this century o n 'The Structure of iki', a word given dictionary equivalents such as 'stylish', 'chic' even 'sexy', cf. Kuki ( 1 930), and the more recent work of Tanikawa Tetsuzo on the distinctive connoisseurly vocabulary of the tea ceremony, cf. Tanikawa ( 1 980- 1 ) , have been major advances for which there is as yet n o Chinese equivalent. 5 Baxandall (1 985); Burke ( 1 986) . 6 H andlin ( 1 983); the author points to the ambiguous nature of 'the