birth of Gao Lian, his only son, to a concubine, he began to take an interest in the appurtenances of elite culture, acquiring a library and forming a collection of antique bronze vessels. His son was 'broadly learned and rich in knowledge, consorting with a multitude of famous gentlemen'. However, an attempt to convert the family's economic position into political power failed when Gao Lian was unsuccessful in the examination system. His father then set him up with a primary wife, named Miss Zhang, and a secondary wife also called Miss Zhang (though written with a different character) and died leaving him a considerable fortune and a quantity of conventional exhortations. On the basis of this fairly standard eulogy, we can make one characterization of Gao Lian as a rich merchant, with a sufficient degree of cultural tastes and accomplishments to make him presentable to the cultural elite, and someone whose family had a reputation as liberal patrons. It is, however, very difficult to quantify Gao Lian's degree of cultural involvement in elite activities, other than on the basis of the evidence he himself presents. Some arguments can be advanced Gao did not himself paint, or at least has left no recorded ex silentio. works of painting or calligraphy from his hand. This is not of itself that surprising. Although histories of Chinese art sometimes succeed in giving the impression that facility with the brush was the birthright of everyone above a certain social level, even the most cursory mapping of collections of artists' biographies onto the names of the top level of the cultural/political elite of a given year, categorized as those three hundred individuals passing the highest level of the examination system, shows that a more than family-based reputation for artistic achievement was in fact quite rare. Perhaps more surprising is the fact that seals or colophons by Gao, which would record his ownership of or at least exposure to these works, do not appear on recorded works of art, with one exception. There can be no sense, here that his social position as a merchant debarred him from participation in the quintessential elite pastime of art collecting and appreciation, since not only had all social, as opposed to economic, barriers to owning pictures dissolved by the sixteenth century, but some of the most important connoisseurs of the day were from a background in trade. And, indeed, Gao's own writings on painting suggest an acquaintance with, and a history of ownership of, a number of significant works and a familiarity with most of the objects deemed worthy of attention in Ming art-historical discourse. The most prominent example of the merchant as collector is Gao's possibly rather older contemporary Xiang Yuanbian ( 1 525-1 590; DMB, 539-44), whose collecting was financed by a lucrative chain of pawnshops; yet he was on terms of social ease with