members of the landholding classes and owned a number of the most important early samples of painting and calligraphy to have survived to his day. The sole recorded work to carry evidence of its having been in Gao Lian's collection does not, by contrast, appear to have been in any way an important or distinguished painting, a large hanging scroll showing the conventional subject-matter of two herd boys and a water buffalo. Nor are Gao's comments in the colophon, in which he uses the jokey 'Master Gao states . . .'formula discussed below, anything other than banal and conventional.'º There is another glimpse of Gao Lian in the role of art collector in the diary of Feng Mengzhen (1546-1605; DMB, 343), who enjoyed a distinguished official career before retiring to the West Lake at Hangzhou in 1597. He was closely connected to Gao Lian's client Tu Long (see below), by virtue of their both having obtained the highest level degree in the same year, 1577. This was a type of relationship particularly pregnant with meaning among the Ming scholar bureaucracy. He talks of a visit to Gao Lian in his home, and records that works of art were looked at, in the following terms (the date involved must be somewhere between 1599 and 1602): On the seventh day of the second month, when the weather had just cleared up, I climbed Master Gao's tower to gaze upon the snow upon the mountains. My host produced a copy of the 'Wangchuan Villa' by Guo Zhongshu [910-977], and an 'Illustrations to the Odes of Lu and Shang' by Ma Hezhi [active twelfth century] to show me. Both were pieces I had been hoping to appreciate all my life, and my heart and eyes were both delighted to an unspeakable degree. When I left him, I made this note in recognition of a rare experience in connoisseurship." Feng's record of this encounter with Gao Lian as the owner of valuable early works of art tells us something about Gao's social role and the circles in which he moved, and it is of some use, too, as a testimonial to his aesthetic standards. Feng Mengzhen was not particularly renowned as a writer on painting. His own collected writings show that he only very rarely provided colophons for the work of others. However, his views can be given some weight by the fact that he owned at least two of the most important works of art in circulation in the Ming period. These were the painting, 'Rivers and Mountains after Snow', generally accepted at this date as being from the hand of Wang Wei (701-761), and a piece of calligraphy, the ‘Clearing Weather after Sudden Snowfall Letter', believed to be among the most