been appropriate after Dong's promotion which, again, took place in 1 622. However, even this gives a problem with regard to Song Jizu, editor of chapter 1 0. As a jinshi of 1 553, he cannot have been born much later than the very early 1 530s. If he was 20 when he took this highest degree, then he would have been an extremely venerable ninety-two years old in 1 625. Another possible argument in favour of an earlier date of writing is that the author's brother, Wen Zhenmeng , was away from the Jiangnan region for much of the early 1 620s, either taking thejinshi examinations in Peking or embarking on his political career in the capital . The date after which the text was finished can arguably be established by the omission of Wang Zhideng, who died in 1 61 2, when Wen Zhenheng was, by the western style of reckoning, twenty-seven years old . Given the nature of the relationship between this much older man, the grandfather of the author's wife, and Wen Zhenheng, we might reasonably expect him to have been called upon to give the work his i mprimatur . That he did not do so argues for a dating after his decease, and it therefore seems likely on balance that the Treatise on Superfluous Things was completed in the second half of the 1 6 1 Os , the declining years o f the Wanli era, when its author would have been in his early thirties . The subsequent publishing history of Treatise on Superfluous Things is in many ways much simpler than that of the work of Gao Lian. The original Ming edition, here posited as a work of the period c. 1 6 1 5-20, is now a very rare work, indeed, and one which I have not had the opportunity to study. The text, similarly, does not seem to have undergone the same process of dismemberment as that suffered by Gao's Eight Discourses. Only one section appears as an independent text in a congshu, and that is chapter 1 0, 'Placing and arrangement', which is reprinted in its entirety as 'Placing and Arrangement of the Pure Studio' (Qing zhai wei Zhl) in a well-known collection, Shuo fu xu, Tales Within a City Wall, Continued Uuan 27) of 1 646, j ust subsequent to Wen Zhenheng's death. This, however, should not be taken as meaning that the text received a poor reception, as a number of manuscript versions of potentially late Ming or early Qing date are preserved in various l ibraries, including one in the Percival David Foundation of Chinese Art, London, wb..lch emanates from the collection of a famous bibliophile named Qian eng ( 1 629-after 1 699). 34 Indeed, it was to a manuscript that the editors of the massive Imperial library proj ect were forced to turn, when they catalogued the Treatise as part of their attempt to record all literature then deemed worthy of transmission , between 1 77 3 and 1 782. This again was a transmission in manuscript