occasion'ally useful collection of medical prescriptions. Compared to those who engage in 'pure talk', he is to a degree better . 39 ## On Zhang Yingwen , the verdict is this : The body of the text is modelled on that o f Pure Registers of the Cavern Heaven, and the wording frequently follows that of the discussions of earlier authors . . . without noting his sources, he adheres to the Ming habit of extensive unattributed quotation . . . there is some useful material in his extremely detailed accounts of the detection of falsehood , of the ranking of works of art, col lecting and mounting. At the end he records works he has owned and seen . . . subsequently his son Zhang Chou wrote Qinghe's Listing of Calligraphy and Painting, (Qinghe shu hua biao), listing thirtyone works under Zhang Yingwen's name. Now the present text was written when Yingwen was on his deathbed, and he could not have added so much to his collection. Chou's listing is done simply to exaggerate his wealth, and cannot be trusted.<sup>4O</sup> The entry on Tu Long is briefer than either of the above and contents itself with noting : 'This treats in a miscellaneous fashion of the pure pleasure s of the studio . . . its various topics are rather trivial . ,4 1 Typically, the lengthier entry on Wen Zhenheng's Treatise on Superfluous Things begins with a retelling o f its author's disti nguished ancestry, and his martyr's death, before commenting: In general it deals with matters of leisure and enjoyment , with niceties and trivialities . It has a distant source in Zhao Xigu 's Pure Registers of the Cavern Heaven and a more immediate model in Tu Long's Desultory Remarks. Late Ming recluses and artists made much of each other over these matters, the so-called 'pure presentation' (qing gong). There were, indeed , those who, through dissembling words about 'elegant connoisseurship', in fact only increased their air of vulgarity. However Zhenheng's family had been renowned over generations for their painting and calligraphy, and he himself was steeped in the art's and distinct from the throng . . . Furthermore, he died a martyr for his dynasty, as a beacon of righteousness; thus, whatever comes from his hand ought to be valued and not allowed to be lost . Hence, a special attempt has been made to record an<sup>d</sup> preserve this work here.<sup>42</sup> The implication is q uite clear that Wen Zhenheng's work on 'trivia' is saved for posterity purely on account of its author's social position and m oral qualities, not for any intrinsic m erits in the tex t .