collections of texts which can be dated generally to the period c. 1 600- 1 640, but no m ore precisely than that. They include : Shui bian lin xia, By the Waters, Beneath the Trees: a collection which makes use of several pieces of Gao Lian and Tu Long, removed from their original context and retitled. Among them are Gao's Shan zhai zhi, Record oj my Mountain Studio (taken from Treatise 3), his work on wild plants suitable for use as foodstuffs , and Tu's thoughts on goldfish and on incense. Chong ding xin shang pian, Recompiled Texts on Connoisseurship: Here we have almost a full roll-call of the prestigious writers in this sort of field; Gu Yuanqing, Yuan Hongdao (the History of Vases, as well as his Shang zheng, Regulations oj the Goblet o n wine drinking), Zhang Chou on flower arranging, Gao Lian in inkstones, Pan Zhiheng (one of the commentators, it will be remembered, on Wen Zhenheng's Treatise), Wang Zhideng and many others- on paintings, tea, food, prostitutes and all the other luxury c o mmodities available to the late Ming man of fashion and wealth. The presence within the one purchasable commodity (a book) of information on a very wide spread of other commodities appears to j ustify the project of treating upper-class consumption as a continuum. To extract the information on the high-status acti vity of painting, or on areas such as ceramic collecting which modern patterns of consumption have retrospectively raised in status , while ignoring the concerns with food, gambling and sex, is to grant anachronistically privileged positions to some areas of elite concern and lose in the process any hope of understanding the bigger picture. Ju jia bi bei, Necessities Jor the Householder: a considerable proportion of this collection consists of work by Gao Lian over a wide range of concern. The arrangement of the collection is in seven large sections, being: family management, familial instruction, household economy, health, observation of taboos, food and drink , the arts . With this m anual for the householder we enter a conceptually different world from that of the great Suzhou magnate, living in the city on the basis of rents from land he may never have been. We enter the world of the late Ming s m all landlord, the l ocal elite scattered across the vast area of the empire, whose sense of continuity o f interest w i t h t h e regional and national elites <sup>w</sup>as s u c h a key factor in ensuring social stability and gentry hegemony. This tex<sup>t</sup> acts to demonstr<sup>a</sup>te a very important transition between the higher levels of