downward of the luxury artefacts of the rich. The market mechanisms were in place to ensure that brushes from Anhui province or ceramics from the great potteries of Jingdezhen were available across the the empire to those who could pay for them. Crucially, the networks of information were also in place, through the medium of books like the encyclopedias of daily use, to ensure that no one was excluded from participation in the market for luxury commodities on the grounds of ignorance of how to consume appropriately. For a certain stratum of the Chinese elite, the baffling and unreliable information networks of the bazaar had given way to elements (only some elements) of the consumer culture. The operation of this proto-consumer culture will be examined in the rest of this book, and in the next chapter through a closer look at some of the contents of the material culture literature discussed so far and the ideas about self and society they promote. The specialist treatises d iscussed above are, however, far from being the only kind of Ming literature to shed light on the creation and consumption of luxury goods. Considerable use will also be made of the rich seam of Ming biji literature, the genre of miscell aneous notes which many members of the elite used to record interesting, instructive or merely entertaining anecd<sup>o</sup>tes, stories about the inner workings of the political system , or their thoughts on a wide variety of social or artistic topics . s l The form, which flourished particularly in the late imperial period, remains much exploited by those working in almost every field o f traditional Chinese studies but underinvestigated by historians of literature. Thus the biji have tended to be used as if they were fascinating but unstructured heaps of raw material, and little attention seems to have been paid to the extent, if any, to which their loose, baggy form rnigft profitably be treated as a structure embodying a coherent viewpoint . Some of them , such as Shen Defu's invaluable, Random Gatherings of the Wanli Era, contain material germane to the present study in identifiable sections, while others have it scattered throughout what can be very lengthy works. Deliberately sparing use has also been. made of Ming imaginative literature , in the form of the prose fiction which in the late sixteenth century was getting into its stride as one of the glories of traditional Chinese culture. Here, the most useful work , almost a crash-course in Ming civilization, is the lengthy but unflagging Jin ping mei, known in English usually by the name The Golden Lotus. Despite being ostensibly set in the twelfth century, this anonymous masterpiece is generally held to reflect social conditions and attitudes in the decades immediately preceding its probable first publication in 1 6 1 7 . It deals