## Chapter I : Studios and retreats The teahouse: Build a structure of one column's span, adj acent to a mountain studio, and set therei n the tea utensils. Train a boy to the exclusive service of tea, so that the whole day may be spent there in pure talk, the chilly night spent in sitting there in a digni fied attitude. This is the first priority of the recluse, which cannot be dispensed with . 1 ## Chapter 2 : Flowers and trees Camellias: Sichuan camellias (Camellia japonica) and Yunnan camellias (Camellia reticulata) are both valuable, and the yellow ones are particularly hard to obtain . People often match them together with magnolia, since they bloom at the same season, and the white and red make a dazzling show. This is rather vulgar. There is another variety called 'Drunken imperial concubine' (Camellia japonica var. anemoniflora) which opens when the snow is on the ground and is particularly attractive.2 ## Chapter 3: W ater and rocks Lake Tai rocks: Those Lake Tai rocks which come from under water are valuable, where long years of buffeting by the waves have pierced them through and turned them into caverns and hollows, reticulated on every side. Those from the mountains are called 'dry r ocks' and have a dull, unlustrous surface. They can be faked up into the waterpierced rocks and have an elegant appearance only after a number of years when the traces of the chisel have completely disappeared . The artificial mountains which are so valued in Suzhou are all made of these rocks . There are also smaller rocks which have been long submerged in the lake and which are dredged up by fishermen in their nets. These are rather like lingbi or ying rocks, but they have an inferior tone and do not ring clearly when struck.3 ## Chapter 4 : Birds and fish Parrots: Parrots are capable of speech and, thus, must be taught short poems and harmonious phrases. They must not be allowed to hear the chattering of the market-places, well-heads and villages , a violent