assault upon the ear. Their bronze perches and feeding jars must all be elegant and curious. However, these birds, just like golden pheasants , peacocks, collared finchbills and turkeys, are all categorically things of the women's quarters; they are not among the necessities of the recluse .4 ## Chapter 5 : Calligraphy and painting Storing paintings: Paintings should be stored in caskets of fir wood , with absolutely no use of lacquer or glued paper linings internally, lest they seep out and stain the picture . In the fourth or fifth month, you should unroll every piece and give them a brief sight of the sun , then return them to their boxes at a distance of ten or so feet from g round level , to pre ent foxing. Generally, when displaying pictures , they should be changed every three to five days, to prevent both fatiguing the eye and damage by dust. When taking them down, first whisk the dust o ff both sides o f a scroll, so that the surface will remain undamaged .5 ## Chapter 6: Tables and couches Tables and couches: When the ' men of old made tables and couches , although the length and width were not standardized , they were invariably antique, elegant and delightful when placed in a studio or room. There was no way in which they were not convenient, whether for sitting up, lying down or reclining . In moments of pleasant relaxation they would spread out classic or historical texts, examine works of calligraphy or painting, display ancient bronze vessels , dine or take a nap, as the furniture was suitable for all these things . The men of today make them in a manner which merely prefers c arved and painted decoration to delight the vulgar eye, while the antique pieces are cast aside, causing one to sigh in deep regret. 6 'Natural' tables [i . e . tables with a top made from one solid plank, as opposed to a framed top of several pieces] : 'Natural' tables are made of some grained wood , such as huali (Pterocarpus sp.), tieli (Mesua !errea) or xiangnan (Machilus odoratissima). The length should not exceed eight feet, nor the thickness of the top five inches . The end flanges must not be too sharp , but smooth and rounded , which is the antique p attern . Those which have stretchers between the feet at ground level, Ii ke a Japanese table, are even more curious. They