shQuld n'Ot have fQur legs like the pattern fQr a writing table. SQme are set i ntQ supPQrts 'Of 'Old tree rQQts . Otherwise, use pieces 'Of thick , wide timber like that 'Of the tQP, hQllQW them 'Out and carve them lightly with designs such as clQud scrolls and ruyi heads. They must nQt be carved with such vulgar patterns as dragQns, phQenixes, flQwers, and grasses. The IQng, narrow 'Ones made recently are ab'Ominable.? ## Chapter 7 : Vessels and utensils Incense burners: The bronze ding and yi vessels 'Of the Three Ages and 'Of the Qin and Han dynasties and thQse ceramic vessels 'Of Guan ware, Ge ware, Ding ware, LQngquan ware 'Or Xuande ware are 'Objects 'Of cQnn'Oisseurship and are nQt cQnvenient fQr daily use. The mQst suitable are · the rather larger bronze i ncense burners dating from the Xuande reign ( 1 426-35), and thQse cast by the Jiang family in the SQng dynasty are alsQ acceptable. HQwever, it is unacceptable tQ use temple burners, 'Or thQse 'Of gilt white brass , 'Or thQse in the shape 'Of pairs 'Of fish 'Or 'Of elephants. Particularly tQ be aVQided are all the vulgar fQrms such as the 'eight preciQus emblems', 'Japanese landscapes' 'Or 'hundred nail head' burners cast by the bronze-wQrkers 'Of the Pan and Hu families at Yunjian, as well as the recently made ceramic burners 'Of Jian ware 'Or 'Of PQrcelain decQrated in five CQIQurs. Antique blue-green BQshan incense burners can be used sQmetimes, while wQQden tripQd burners are acceptable in the mQuntains, and stQne 'Ones are sQlely acceptable for Buddhist wQrship. All the rest are nQt wQrth cQnsidering . The tripQd vessels 'Of the ancients all have stands and CQvers, and nQwadays peQple make these 'Of WQQd, with ebQny being the best, thQugh zitan WQQd and huali WQQd (Pterocarpus sp. ) are alsQ acceptable. AVQid the vulgar shapes like water-caltrop flQwers 'Or mallQw flQwers. The knQbs 'Of these lids shQuld be SQng dynasty jade buttQns, mythical animals 'Or sea beasts , and 'Of a size appropriate tQ the incense burner. Materials like agate and crystal can be used if they are Qld . 8 ## Chapter 8 : CIQthing and adQrnment Bed curtains: Bed curtains fQr the winter mQnths shQuld be 'Of PQngee silk 'Or 'Of thick cQttQn with purple patterns . Curtains 'Of paper 'Or 'Of plain-weave, spun-silk clQth are bQth vulgar, while gQld brocaded silk curtains and thQse 'Of bo silk are fQr the wQmen's quarters . Summer