curtains can ·be of banana fibre, only these are not easy to obtain . Curtains o f blue fine gauze from Suzhou, or curtains of patterned towelling are also acceptable. There are those which are made of silk for painting, w ith landscapes or monochrome ink paintings of plum blossom on them , but these all achieve vulgarity while striving for elegance. Then there are some particularly large curtains, known as 'sky-covering curtains'. To sit or lie inside them in the summer months , with tables , cOijches , cupboards or shelves , is rather suitable, although not in the antique style. In the months of cold one should place curtains of cotton over the window frames of the studio, but only blue or purple can be used . 9 ## ( Chapter 9: Boats and carriages Small skiffs: A small skiff should be j ust over ten feet long and about three feet wide. It can be set on a pond or lake, sometimes speeding along in mid-current, sometimes tethered in the shade of willow trees to a meandering bank, where you can fish with a pole, enjoying the moon and chanting with the breeze. Make a long awning of blue cotton, attached to the gunwales at both sides, held on two bamboo poles at the front and tied round the two stern posts at the back o f the boat . One boy i s enough to row it. <sup>10</sup> ## Chapter Placing and arrangement Placing vases: Depending on the style of the vase, set it on a Japanese table of appropriate size, using bronze in the winter or spring, porcelain for the summer and autumn. Vases for the reception hall s hould be large; those for the studio should be small. Value bronze or ceramic, and h old gold and silver cheap, avoiding those with ring handles, or which come in pairs. Flowers should be emaciated and curious; they should not be over-complicated . If using a cut branch, then it m ust be selected to be curious and antique. If there are two, then their relative heights must be suitable . I t i s particularly important to have no more than one or two varieties, since too many gives the appearance of a wine shop . This does not apply to a small vase with an arrangement of autumn flowers. In placing flowers do not burn incense with the windows closed , lest the smoke blight the petals . This is particularly the case with narcissi . Nor should flowers be placed on a painting tabl e . <sup>I I</sup>