## Chapter 1 1 : Vegetables and fruits Mandarin oranges: Mandarin oranges from the region of Lake Dongting are particularly sweet, while those from Xinzhuang have no juice and need to be peeled with a knife before eating. There is another variety with an even thicker skin, called miluo mandarin oranges which are particularly fine. The little ones are called 'golden mandarins', and the round ones 'golden beans'. <sup>12</sup> ## Chapter 1 2 : Incense and teas 'Tiger Hill' and 'Heaven Pond' teas: 'Tiger Hill' is of the most refined quality, supreme throughout the empire, but unfortunately very little is produced and that is mostly commandeered by the o fficials. The humble mountain dweller, if he gets hold of one or two potfuls, considers this a rare treat , but its flavour is in fact inferior to that of 'Cen' tea from Changxing in Zhej iang. As for 'Heaven Pond' tea, that which comes from the area around Longchi is fine, but that from Nanshan is picked very early and has a slight flavour o f grass. <sup>1 3</sup> These few brief extracts can only give a n outline of the sort of ideas contained in Treatise on Super/luous Things, ideas which are conveyed in language which is, in the context of the total range of Ming prose, relatively direct and easy to understand, even at times suggesting something of the patterns of elite speech. (The question of the vocabulary used is discussed in more detail below.) Although selections from this and related texts have been translated before, 14 and however valuable these renditions are, they suffer from the common weakness of privileging one type of object of the discour se of Ming connoisseurship at the expense of studying that discourse itself. The concentration on painting and on ceramics in the choice of what use to make of the total texts has to an extent skewed our perception of what those texts are 'about ' . Subjects such as dress and food , areas where there . is no contemporary connoisseurship or market for the goods, have received much less attention , certainly not as much as their positioning within the text would justify . Looking , then, at the total picture of Ming elite material life given in Wen's Treatise, to what extent does it match James Watt's description of it as 'encompassing the full range of objects organised as a reflection o f spiritual values'? 1 5 What does it, in fact , include, how does it categorize, and how do those categories match those of other, differently focused , contemporary descriptions of the material world?