Here, ther.e is a heavy reliance on generalities, 'ingeniously wroughf, 'beautiful and artistic things', as against Wen's precision of colour, from, decoration and dimensions. Ricordo 1 3 , Cerca it vestire, is similarly restricted to generalities on the appropriate dress of a gentleman. And it must be remembered that the Ricordi are in no way devoted exclusively to material culture in the manner of Wen's Treatise. The oft-quoted remarks on ornamenting the house are placed between an entry, Cerca la cupidita delle richezze, and one entitled Cerca if tiranno, both classic humanist topics which are far removed from a concern with the things of the material world. The unwillingness to descend to specifics in the matter o f material goods is a constant of early modern European conduct books. Sabba di Castiglione has been referred to so often because he is unusually detailed in this respect . There is nothing comparable in the Civil Conversation of Stefano Guazzo, another international best-seller, written in 1 574 and published in an English edition in 1 586 .23 Guazzo is concerned with what makes 'gentrie' or a 'gentleman' in terms of the distinction between blood alone and blood plus 'virtue'. Wealth and conspicuous consumption are an important part of 'liberality' and can add to the esteem in which a gentleman is held, but there is no guidance offered as to what exactly wealth is to be spent on. Later, when deploring the growing tendency of rich p easants to attire themselves un'suitably like gentlemen, to the degree where 'a man can discern no difference in estates', he recommends that the lower orders should be forced 'to wear such apparel as may be at least different from gentlemen, if they will needs have it as costly'. His readership is presumed to be acquainted with the dress of a gentleman, without the need for specifics. A native English example of the genre, Henry Peacham'S Compleat Gentleman of 1 622 (and, thus, closely contemporary with the Treatise on Super/luous Things) is also willing to allude but not to describe. His chapter 1 5 , 'Of reputation and carriage' includes advice on clothing, but again only in terms of the broadest generalities.24 His language elsewhere, like that o f all early m odern European writing on the question of luxury consumption, is that of moralit:y and of humanist idealism and not in any way comparable to the material precision of the Chinese writin gs . This precision of language, good enough to serve as an identifying label for surviving types of object after some four hundred years, may partly be the answer to a question which has never, to my knowledge, been posed. Why is a book about things, like the Treatise on Superfluous Things or the relevant sections of Eight Discourses o n the Art 0/ Living, not illustrated? Not only was the technology easily available to publishers (illustration in wood block was essentially the same