be a venerable literary topos, quoting the Song dynasty scholar Ouyang Xiu (1007-1072), like his praise of Korean lanterns which similarly goes back to Record of the Pure Registers of the Cavern Heaven, but his mention of religious texts in Tibetan (certainly unreadable but adding an elegant air of Buddhist scholasticism)is more likely to be based on contemporary practice. The same is true of Japanese bronze hand-warmers, bronze rulers, steel paper-knives and scissors, and from the same country, lacquered incense boxes, wrist rests, inkcake·boxes, dressing cases, tables, cupboards and display shelves (the Japanese tana). There is no hint of a patronizing tone in Wen's enthusiasm for these foreign goods: Japanese caskets are of black lacquer with inlaid gold and silver sheet. The large ones measure over a foot. Their hinges, pins, and locks are all marvelously curious and ingenious. They are highly suitable for storing antique jades, precious objects and small scrolls of the Jin and Tang dynasties. There is another sort which is rather larger, of an antique and elegant pattern, with designs such as diamond diapers and ‘strings of beads'. They are as light as paper and can also hold scrolls, aromatics, medicines and bibelots. It is advisable to have several ready for use in one's study.⁴ Indeed, as was to be the case with seventeenth and eighteenth century European customers, the quality of Japanese lacquering was held generally to be pre-eminent, being mentioned often by Gao Lian and praised as ‘supreme' in Zhang Yingwen's Pure and Arcane Collecting of 1595.4² Wen Zhenheng also mentions folding fans as an item of fashion, and these too were regularly imported from Japan, having been introduced from there to China in the early part of the fifteenth century. Although no surviving pieces of Japanese lacquer of the relevant period have been identified in China (they surely rest unnoticed in the stores of China's great museums), some of these fans, which are either Japanese in manufacture or else very precise Chinese imitations of Japanese manufacture, have been recovered by archaeologists from tombs of Ming date.⁴3 This receptiveness to exotica on the part of the elite adds depth to the eagerness with which high officials, and the imperial court itself, embraced the gifts of clocks, engravings, prisms and other European imports, when they were offered by the first generation of Jesuit missionaries in China, led by the famous Matteo Ricci (1552-1610; DMB, 1137-44). This episode is often recounted as proof of China's fascination specifically with the scientific advances of the West, when