at the time·to be something of a novelty and worthy of comment and record. One of the longest and most explicit notices of what was felt by a typical member of the upper classes to be happening in the whole area of the luxury trades is found in the biji writings of Wang Shizhen (1526-1590; DMB, 1399-405).4 I will have occasion to refer to it again for its claims about how the fashion mechanism was Operating, but it is for what it has to say towards the end of the passage about the role of leading craftsmen that it is worth quoting extensively here: Once it was Song dynasty painting which was valued, but in the past thirty years there has been a sudden emphasis on the men of the Yuan, so that the value of a Ni Zan (1301-1374) or of a Shen Zhou (1427-1509) from our present Ming dynasty has shot up tenfold. In the field of ceramics, once it was Ge ware and Ru ware which were valued, but in the past fifteen years there has been a sudden emphasis on wares of the Xuande reign (1426-35), so that the value of those of the Yongle (1403-25) and Chenghua (1465-87) reigns has shot up tenfold. Probably it was the men of Suzhou who began this, and the men of Anhui province who brought it on. It is an extraordinary thing. Nowadays, the jades worked by Lu Zigang, rhinoceros horn pieces worked by Bao Tiancheng, silver worked by Zhu Bishan, pewter worked by Zhao Liangbi, fans worked by Ma Xun, inlay work by Zhou Zhi (all of whom are from Suzhou here), and then the goldsmithing of Lu Aishan, the agates worked by Wang Xiaoxi and the bronzes worked by Jiang Baoyun (both from Shexian in Anhui province) – all these are several times the price of ordinary pieces. This sort of person gets as far as sitting with the gentry. Recently, I gather that this fashion has entered the palace, and its rise isnot yet at an end.⁴ The same mixture of fascination and unease about the fluidity of social boundaries can be seen in the writing of Zhang Dai, who consciously prolonged the style and the concerns of the late Ming 'minor appreciation' (xiao pin) writer into the following Qing dynasty: The matchless skills of Suzhou are: Lu Zigang's jade carving, Bao Tiancheng's rhinoceros horn work, Zhou Zhu's inlay work, Zhao Liangbi's comb making, Zhu Bishan's gold and silversmithing, Ma Xun and Lotus-leaf Li's fan-making, Zhang Jixiu's qin zithermaking and Fan Kunbai's making of three-string guitars. All of them have been without rival for a hundred years. But the excellencies of their craftsmanship and their efforts have reached a level of competence in their arts. Their qualities and contrasts fit them