increased need of the elite to fix bench-marks of discrimination between different types of goods than of any more relaxed social atmosphere. For a start, not all of the names are contemporary with their rise to a prominent position in the late Ming connoisseurship literature. Zhu Bishan the silversmith was, for example, first recorded by a contemporary Tao Zongyi (c. 1316-c. 1402) as being active in the middle of the fourteenth century, and the most famous surviving objects attributed to him are all dated in a way which would accord with this. Late Ming lists of silversmiths are only able to repeat the same four names as Tao, showing that no more figures in this craft had registered on the consciousness of the elite in the intervening two centuries. And, indeed, it can be shown that objects with his signature but which stylistically cannot have been made before about 1580 were in circulation in the late Ming.1 Zhu Bishan was the silversmith, sufficiently well known to give a higher profile to the craft even if no more contemporary names were necessary. This core name, one famous personage who was of himself sufficient to stand in for the whole craft, was a necessary part of fixing any given type of craft on the hierarchy of elite esteem. Some forms of making, principally bamboo carving and the carving of seals (closely related to calligraphy) were prestigious enough to attract gentleman-practitioners and, thus, escape the stigma of the artisan's humble status altogether. Li Liufang, the commentator on chapter 3 ('Water and rocks') of the Treatise on Superfluous Things enjoyed a contemporary reputation as a bamboo carver without it damaging his social standing in the eyes of his peers. At the opposite end of the hierarchy were those crafts where not a single name of a producer is recorded in the writings of the consuming class. The outstanding examples of this are probably furniture making and the manufacture of clothes. As we have seen from the extracts quoted above, clothes and furniture existed in the same continuum of consumption as other areas which (on first sight, at any rate) are better documented. Fine clothes and fine furniture were an important part of the presentation of an upper-class persona to the world, yet we do not have the name of a single Ming tailor or a single Ming cabinetmaker. In the middle of this scale of values came those luxury trade like silversmithing, bronze casting and jade working, where it seems to have been necessary for the operation of the discrimination between the acceptable and the unacceptable that there be a name to which praise or blame could be attached, but without there having to be the full spread of names which would follow from a fuller engagement with the actual processes of manufacture.