Lu Zigang plays this role for jade carving, but once again the contemporary evidence for his activities is surprisingly slight, by contrast with his reputation, sustained throughout the Qing period and into the modern art market-place, as the finest jade worker of all time. There is in existence a box with his signature dated 1562, which if genuine would have to place his birth some way before the mid-point of the century. He appears as a contemporary in the passage by Wang Shizhen (who died in 1590) quoted above, and in a poem by Xu Wei, dead in 1593. The 1642 edition of the Gazetteer of Taicang Prefecture records him as a native of that district, with the words; Fifty years ago there was of this prefecture a certain Lu Zigang, whose skill at carving (jade) with the knife remains unsurpassed to the present. Jade hairpins by him sell for fifty or sixty ounces of silver each. The skill was not handed on at Zigang's death.5 This may be a meagre quantity of documentation on which to build an artistic biography, but it is still a lot more than we know about Hu Wenming the worker in bronze, equally famous in later centuries. With the exception of the notices, not all of them complimentary, by arbiters like Wen Zhenheng (and it has been shown that he is less an authen tically original voice than the mouthpiece of a consensus), there is a bare notice in a very suspect gazetteer of his native district of Songjiang, supposedly of Ming date but remaining in manuscript until the middle of the eighteenth century. There are a larger number of pieces ascribable by inscription to him and also to his son or to the continuer of his workshop style, one Hu Guangyu.s Through what I have just written, as well as through almost all of the modern writing about the Ming 'decorative arts', runs the assumption that Lu Zigang and Hu Wenming were individuated artistic personalities, single, artistically conscious wielders of the knife, the abrasive wheel, the cauldron of molten metal. The emergence of these and other 'names' at this particular period has been linked not only with the gradual freeing of the artisan class from the restrictions placed on them by the ‘service'system of the early Ming, whereby they had been compelled to spend regular periods in the unpaid employ of the state. As a part of the growing commercialization of the period, the state from about 1550 more or less abandoned the attempt to enforce these obligations in favour of a straight purchase in the market-place of the goods and services it required.s4 It has also been linked with the development of a concept of ‘individualism', rather as the growing practice of signing pictures in Italy after about 1500 used to be seen by Western art historians as the rise of an essentially