individual patron - client relations lying behind the apparent rise in the practice of recording craftsmen's names, is why a few names should be recorded, repeated endlessly and hardly ever augmented. Lu Zigang is jade carving. Hu Wenming is bronze-casting. This problem is even more perplexing when we consider that, in fact, the conditions of production often provided the ideal conditions for the recording of craftsmen's names, due to the common practice of workers in the capital-starved luxury trades often taking up residence in a patron's home and working there on expensive raw materials supplied by him. This can certainly be shown to have happened in jade carving. The inventory of Yan Song's property contains a significant amount of uncut jade in boulder form, awaiting the hiring of s killed hands to turn it into something decorative or useful. Zhang Dai records how an uncle of his got hold of a piece of particularly fine jade and hired a craftsman to turn it into a cup in archaic style.6º The word used for 'hire'(mu) carries the meaning that he took the craftsman, whose name is quite pointedly not recorded, into hisown household. Similarly, silversmiths would come and make jewellery in a client's house and to his immediate oral specifications, while cabinet-makers, too, seem to have been in the habit of bringing tools and timber to the client's house and working there under his supervision.61We even have one piece of evidence for a bronze-caster named Pan working in the home of our own Gao Lian, but the mention of his name seems here to have as much as anything to do with verifying the amazing tale of his capture by Japanese pirates, subsequent artistic training in bronze-working in Japan and return to China.2 The immediacy of the contact between customer and maker may well have been of crucial importance for the nature of pre-modern Chinese design, but what it does in the present context is make more, rather than less, curious the fact that Lu Zigang is more or less the only Ming jade carver whose name survives. Does his fame really rest on the measureless superiority of his products, or is it more likely to be related to some necessity within the Ming system of object distinction and discrimination for a name, any name, in a given craft? The answer may well lie in the field of the grandest and most prestigious kind of luxury commodity, painting. Put bluntly, I would argue that the late Ming was a period when a number of luxury trades came within the ambit of a system of discrimination which had long been applied to paintings when in their commodity state. Names, even a very few names, were essential to the operation of this mechanism. This was far from having always been the case. Such few remnants of Chinese painting as survive from the