Wen Zhenheng himself provides several examples, one of which refers to the regularly unsigned work of the court painters of the Song imperial‘academy': When people nowadays see an unsigned painting they at once add a signature on the basis of its subject matter, in search of a high price. So they see an ox and it must be by Dai Song, see a horse and it must be by Han Gan, and so on. This is particularly laughable.67 In his general discussion on painting at the head of chapter 5 of the Treatise on Superfluous Things he carefully makes a distinction between those unsigned works which, by their pre-eminent aesthetic qualities, are clearly by the hand of a master' and those works of a 'vulgar brush'which yet bear a pretentious signature ‘added later'.68 Interestingly, the possibility of a genuine but poor work by a 'famous name' is never admitted. And having made his obeisance in the direction of this time-honoured position, he goes on to do what seems to have in fact been the more common Ming position when faced with the task of discriminating between pictures; he lists acceptable and non-acceptable names. Or rather, he lists mostly acceptable names, with a few significant exceptions in the other direction. His list of painters to be collected is very broad, indeed, encompassing all of the famous names of the Song and Yuan periods, professional masters of the sixteenth century and, in prominent positions, his own distinguished ancestors, Wen Zhengming, Wen Jia and Wen Boren, with the words, 'these are all famous masters whom you cannot be without. It is not appropriate to preserve the work of anyone else, and if you have, it is not appropriate to bring it out to show people.'69 There is of course a voluminous literature on Ming art history in both Chinese and Western languages, and a number of distinguished syntheses exist. But these are by their very nature likely to concentrate on painting as if it were a totally different type of artefact, inhabiting a sphere of pure aesthetics unconnected with other kinds of luxury consumption. They are also likely to concentrate on what seems at the time innovative, interesting and culturally enriching, at the expense of what seems conventional, trite and unmotivated by deeper personal motives. Thus, a reading of the secondary literature on Ming art history can convey an impression of a period of intense aesthetic debate and cultural ferment, of struggle over the definition of the canon and of a very polarized discourse, split between those who saw the ultimate roots of meaningful painting as lying in the Song period (960-1279) and those who saw the exemplars of good'practice as being the painters of the subsequent Yuan dynasty (1280-1367). The