simply being one type of rather special commodity, some continuities and some disjunctions in Wen Zhenheng's treatment of the question of 'names' emerges. At the most basic level, names of makers were a way of identifying and categorizing things . This is obvious , but it needs stating. Names could in particular travel with an object through a whole series of encounters in the market-place, being turned several times into a commodity again, when the name would continue to function as an index of value independent of the status of the seller or of the purchaser. Names were, with the exception of the 'wild and heterodox', used principally to say positive things about painting but could be used to identify other types of artefact negatively. N ames were applied differentially to different types of goods, with some very important types (e. g . luxury textiles) remaining formally nameless , although they may have been identified at the point of sale with the name of the enterprise responsible for making them. A very limited number of names, often no more than one to a craft, became established in the closing decades of the sixteenth century and remained constant not just through the Ming period but on into the succeeding Qing . The existence of at least one name was, it appears, sufficient to allow these goods, like j ades and bronzes, to be the objects of the sort of discrimination w hich had been applied to paintings for centuries , the sort of discrimination which we see them undergoing in the pages of Gao Lian and Wen Zhenheng. The grounds of discrimination discussed so far, being those of appropriateness to gender, geographical origin o f the product and name of the craftsman responsible, are suggestive of some of the ways objects were thought about in the late Ming. Another major line of cleavage, that between the 'antique' and the 'modern' was so important that it warrants separate treatment in a following chapter. But these are far from being the only qualities which Wen Zhenheng isolates in categorizing things , and particularly in categorizing manufactured goods. He makes distinctions very freely on the grounds of form, of material , of decoration and of appropriateness as to placing both in space and in time. An example of each of these relatively easy to grasp distinctions shows his style of working very plainly and can be drawn out o f the extracts quoted in full at the head of this chapter . So with form , an incense burner in the shape of a pair of fishes (or with fishshaped handles) or in the shape of an elephant (and surviving examples of the latter do exist, to confirm that we are dealing with a discourse about the real world) can never be acceptable. Even greater precision of form and decoration is seen in the entry on 'natural tables', where the panels between the legs must not be carved with 'such vulgar patterns as dragons, phoenixes, flowers , and grasses'