(Plate 2). When it comes to material, an otherwise acceptably shaped incense burner can be vetoed if it is made from ceramics from the province of Fujian , which in the context almost certainly means the white porcelain of Dehua. Decoration, too, can make a correctly formed object of the right material fail, as when the 'vulgar patterns, like dragons, phoenixes, flowers and grasses' bring down a 'natural table'. Finally, the entry on ‘Placirig vases' demonstrates the twin criteria of appropriateness, both as to place (large in the reception hall and small in the studio) and season (bronze in winter and spring, porcelain in summer and autumn). A great deal of the irony in the novel The Golden Lotus seems likely to stem from the wanton flouting of these criteria of taste by the rich but unspeakably vulgar hero. His wealth enables him to purchase, for example, famous paintings, but he then hangs them in sets of four on all the walls of his ‘study', a thing explicitly criticized by Wen Zhenheng. The seasonal criterion, one for which no explicit parallel can be drawn in the West, was of particular importance. It is referred to time and again, and one extensive section of the chapter on painting is devoted to the types of picture appropriate to different times of the year, not just according to season but according to individual months." I would now wish to argue that any attempt, and several have been made, to extract a set of constant underlying aesthetic principles, valid for the entire body of Ming ‘scholars', from these multifarious types of distinction is bound to fail. It might be objected that there are certain general principles enunciated in Wen Zhenheng's Treatise. For example, he tells his readers to 'Value bronze and ceramic, and hold gold and silver cheap . . .', but this is simply with regard to the placing of vases, and cannot be taken as expressing a broad distaste for the use of precious metals in other contexts, most notably in the context of the dinner table. We have a statement from another late Ming writer, in the context of a biji collection, that the use of ceramic cups for wine was a sign either of great poverty or, on the part of those who could afford precious metals, a sign of an ostentatious and unattractive puritanism. It was quite in order for the same man to praise a contemporary for the elegance of his silver tableware.74Or again, at one point Wen Zhenheng appears to lay down a general law with regard to subject-matter in decoration, stating: From of old there is the saying that, ‘First come "sword rings"(a type of abstract spiral decoration), second come flowers and grasses, and third come human figures."75 The comment is made, however, apropos of a particular kind of small lacquer box for the storing of incense, on surviving examples of which all these three types of decoration are indeed found, though