of aesthetics . <sup>,</sup>It seems inconceivable that a character like that now pronounced and conventionally translated as 'elegant', which first ya, appears in the Bronze Age and which is still very much part of Chinese vocabulary today, has not in its lorig passage through time acquired vast new areas of meaning while losing many of those which it had in its original context. H owever , we are at a loss to trace these in their full ramifications. Another problem lies in those kinds of records which survive from the Ming period, the vast maj ority of them being sources composed by or under the supervision of the dominant, educated section of society. As is well k nown , written 'classical' Chinese has always been far removed from what we can surmise of actual speech patterns, even of the speech patterns of the elite. This remained the case in the Ming period, despite the development , of certain kinds of dramatic and fictional narrative which have long been accepted as embodying much closer approximations to the way people talked. These are themselves written texts and cannot be accepted as unembellished raw data for the study of the vernacular . So we cannot know how people i n the Ming period talked about things; we can only know how they wrote about them , and this has to be viewed as a severe limitation. All the authors of the works to be analysed were men , for a start , and we cannot therefore know how, if at all, Ming women, the submerged and largely illiterate section of the empire's population, thought about the m aterial goods which they handled in their daily lives . Certainly a novel like includes many scenes The Golden Lotus of women commenting, sometimes in great detail , on the artefacts which surround them, particularly those relating to dress and personal adornment, but here again they are mediated through an anonymous but undoubtedly male author. Women , even the women of the upper class, are l argely silenced in the M ing record, as is that vastly greater majority of the Chinese male population which lived lives of hard physical work and cultural impoverishment. The way farmers and artisans thought and talked about their tools and their products would form the cornerstone of any really complete study of attitudes to material culture in the Ming, but the evidence is as yet largely lacking. Even within the copious written records of.the dominant class, there are problems of interpretation of the sources . Written Chinese may be restricted to recording just a part of the world of Ming China as it was actually lived and experienced , but it is still a very various p art . There are many different registers of written Ming Chinese, from those deemed suitable for exposition of classical Confucian texts, through th ose used for poetry, for political debate, for drama and fiction and for a whole range of other types of subject matter. There