school of poets, and with the major poet whose birthplace gave the school its name, Yuan Hongdao (1568-1610)." However, the importance of qu in these contexts, which are mostly contexts of activity, seems not to have spilled over into the world of things, and in many ways what is significant is that it is rather rarely seen in those connoisseurship texts which address themselves to a precise definition and categorizing of objects. Wen Zhenheng uses it in a manner almost impossible to translate; apropos of snuffers used for extinguishing the fire in an incense burner, he says, ‘Burners should be continuously alight to provide warmth even when incense is not being burned; only thus do you have a tasteful intent (yi qu)'. In his general discussion of interior arrangements he does talk about how in a gentleman's (yun shi) studio, as soon as one enters the door there is a lofty and elegant taste (qu) which shuts out vulgarity.'And a painting can lose its qu by being treated as a commodity in the market-place. But the word is never applied directly to a type of artefact, as is done with ya ‘elegant' or jia 'lovely'. There is, after all, a differential attitude, rather than a totally integrative and holistic one, to things as opposed to other areas of cultural value and aesthetic concern for the elite, at least on the level of the vocabulary used. Yuan Hongdao may use the word (it was almost ‘his' word) in his History of Vases, but other examples are relatively rare. One such is the use of tianqu natural $\boldsymbol { q } \boldsymbol { u } ^ { * }$ in 1595 to refer to something like the ‘naive charm'of very ancient jades, lost in later, more sophisticated ages, but this is far from common." ## DISTINCTIONS AND DIFFERENCES It is not simply the vocabulary discussed in very sketchy terms above but the broader use of language which is of some help as a way in to the mentalities surrounding the use of luxury objects. In this regard, one of the most telling examples is Wen Zhenheng's pervasive use of formulae like, ‘X is best/most elegant/loveliest, then comes Y, then again comes Z'. What is happening here is that a judgement on an object is seldom made in the abstract, but only by distinction, by opposition to other possibilities within the total world of goods. This habit is by no means an innovation of the Ming period. The whole concept of pin ‘classifying'can be related back to the necessity to classify men on the basis of their suitability to hold office in the bureaucracy. Men were ranked before things. However, the practice had spilled over as early as the Tang period, when one of its first occurrences in this way is in the eighth-century Tea Classic of Lu Yu,