# Russian Art of the Avant-Garde Theory and Criticism 1902-1934 Edited and Translated by John E. Bowlt Revised and enlarged edition with 105 illustrations Acknowledgments: Harvard University Press and Lund Humphries Publishers Ltd: "Realistic Manifesto" from Gabo by Naum Gabo. Copyright © 1957 by Lund Humphries. Reprinted by permission. Any copy of this book issued by the publisher as a paperback is sold subject to the condition that it shall not by way of trade or otherwise be lent, resold, hired out or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including these words being imposed on a subsequent purchaser. ## © 1976 and 1988 John Bowlt This revised and enlarged edition first published in paperback in the United States in 1988 by Thames and Hudson Inc., 50o Fifth Avenue, New York, New York 1o11o Originally published by The Viking Press in The Documents of 20th-Century Art, 1976, General Editor Robert Motherwell, Documentary Editor Bernard Karpel, Managing Editor Arthur A. Cohen. ## Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 88–50249 All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording or any other information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publisher. Printed and bound in the German Democratic Republic This collection of published statements by Russian artists and critics is intended to fill a considerable gap in our general knowledge of the ideas and theories peculiar to modernist Russian art, particularly within the context of painting. Although monographs that present the general chronological framework of the Russian avant-garde are available, most observers have comparatively little idea of the principal theoretical intentions of such movements as symbolism, neoprimitivism, rayonism, and constructivism. In general, the aim of this volume is to present an account of the Russian avantgarde by artists themselves in as lucid and as balanced a way as possible. While most of the essays of Vasilii Kandinsky and Kazimir Malevich have already been translated into English, the statements of Mikhail Larionov Natalya Goncharova, and such little-known but vital figures as Vladimir Markov and Aleksandr Shevchenko have remained inaccessible to the wider public either in Russian or in English. A similar situation has prevailed with regard to the Revolutionary period, when such eminent critics and artists as Anatolii Lunacharsky, Nikolai Punin, and David Shterenberg were in the forefront of artistic ideas. The translations offered here will, it is hoped, act as an elucidation of, and commentary on, some of the problems encountered within early twentieth-century Russian art The task of selection was a difficult one—not because of a scarcity of relevant material, but on the contrary, because of an abundance, especially with regard to the Revolutionary period. In this respect certain criteria were observed during the process of selection: whether a given text served as a definitive policy statement or declaration of intent; whether the text was written by a member or sympathizer of the group or movement in question; whether the text facilitates our general understanding of important junctures within the avant-garde. Ultimately, the selection was affected by whether translation of a given text was available in English, although such previously translated statements as Malevich's 'From Cubism and Futurism to Suprematism'' and Naum Gabo and Anton Pevsner's 'Realistic Manifesto'' have been deemed too important to exclude. In some cases, specifically in those of the symbolists and the "French'faction of the Knave of Diamonds, no group declaration was issued so that recourse was made to less direct, but still significant pronouncements. Categorization presented a problem since some statements, such as David Burliuk's "The Voice of an Impressionist' or El Lissitzky's"Suprematism in World Reconstruction,"are relevant to more than one chronological or ideological section. Similarly, the choice of part titles cannot be entirely satisfactory. In the context of Part III, for example, it might be argued that Olga Rozanova, in 'The Bases of the New Creation,"was not advocating a completely"abstract''art (as her own contemporaneous painting indicated) and was merely developing the ideas of Nikolai Kulbin and Vladimir Markov; but it was precisely because of such a legitimate objection that the term nonobjective"rather than"abstract"'or'"nonrepresentational''was selected, i.e., it denotes not only the latter qualities but also the idea of the "subjective,"which, in the context of Rozanova and Malevich, is of vital importance. Again, the inclusion of Pavel Filonov in the final part rather than in an earlier one might provoke criticism, but Filonov was one of the few members of the Russian avant-garde to maintain his original principles throughout the 193os—and hence his stand against the imposition of a more conventional art form was a conclusive and symbolic gesture. Unfortunately, many of the artists included here did not write gracefully or clearly, and David Burliuk and Malevich, notably, tended to ignore the laws of syntax and of punctuation. As the critic Sergei Makovsky remarked wryly in 1913: "they imagine themselves to be writers but possess no qualifications for this."1 \* However, in most cases the temptation to correct their grammatical oversights has been resisted, even when the original was marked by ambiguity or semantic obscurity. Since this book is meant to serve as a documentary source and not as a general historical survey, adequate space has been given to the bibliography in order that scholars may both place a given statement within its general chronological and ideological framework and pursue ideas germane to it in a more detailed fashion. In this connection, it will be of interest to note that photocopies of the original texts have been deposited in the Library of The Museum of Modern Art, New York. Apart from the rendition of the Russian soft and hard signs, which have been omitted, the transliteration system is that used by the journal Soviet Studies, published by the University of Glasgow, although where a variant has already been established (e.g., Benois, not Benua; Burliuk, not Burlyuk; Exter, not Ekster), it has been maintained. Occasionally an author has made reference to something irrelevant to the question in hand or has compiled a list of names or titles; where such passages add nothing to the general discussion, they have been omitted, although both minor and major omissions have in every case been designated by ellipses. Dates refer to time of publication, unless the actual text was delivered as a formal lecture before publication. Wherever possible, both year and month of publication have been given. In the case of most books, this has been determined by reference to Knizhnaya letopis [Book Chronicle; bibl. RiI; designated in the text by KL]; unless other reliable published sources have provided a more feasible alternative, the data in Knizhnaya letopis have been presumed correct. Many artists, scholars, and collectors have rendered invaluable assistance in this undertaking. In particular, I would like to acknowledge my debt to the following persons: Mr. Troels Andersen; Mrs. Celia Ascher; the late Mr. Alfred Barr, Jr.; Mr. Herman Berninger; Dr. Milka Bliznakov; Miss Sarah Bodine; Mr. and Mrs. Nicholas Burliuk; Miss Mary Chamot; the late Lord Chernian; Professor Reginald Christian; Mr. George Costakis; Dr. Charlotte Douglas; Mr. and Mrs. Eric Estorick; the late Mr. Mark Etkind; the late Sir Naum Gabo; the late Mr. Evgenii Gunst; Mrs. Larissa Haskell; Mr. and Mrs. Leonard Hutton; the late Mme. Nina Kandinsky; the late Mme. Alexandra Larionov; Mr. and Mrs. Nikita D Lobanov-Rostovsky; Professor Vladimir Markov; M. Alexandre Polonski; the late Mr. Yakov Rubinshtein; Dr. Aleksandr Rusakov and Dr. Anna Rusakova; Dr. Dmitrii Sarabyanov; the late Dr. Aleksei Savinov; Mr. and Mrs. Alan Smith; the late Mme. Anna Tcherkessova-Benois; and Mr. Thomas Whitney. In addition, a number of people should be thanked for their help in my revisions for the second edition: i.e. the late Frau Antonina Gmurzynska; Mr. Vladimir Kostin; Mr. Aleksei Korzukhin; Dr. Evgenii Kovtun; Professor Nicoletta Misler; and Mr. Aleksandr Parnis. I am also grateful to the directors and staff of the following institutions for allowing me to examine bibliographical and visual materials: British Museum, London; Courtauld Institute, London; Lenin Library, Moscow; Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.; Museum of Modern Art, New York; New York Public Library; Radio Times Hulton Picture Library, London; Royal Institute of British Architects, London; Russian Museum, Leningrad; School of Slavonic and East European Studies, University of London; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; Sotheby and Co., London; Taylor Institute, Oxford; Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow; Victoria and Albert Museum, London; Widener Library, Harvard. Last but not least I would like to extend my gratitude and appreciation to my two editors, Barbara Bur and Phyllis Freeman, for without their patience, care, and unfailing cooperation this book would not have been possible. JOHN E. BOWLT Preface vii List of Illustrations xV Introduction xix The Subjective Aesthetic: Symbolism and the Intuitive ALEKSANDR BENOIS: History of Russian Painting in the Nineteenth Cen- [NKL[ Rlsn], IKY]: Preface to The Golden Fleece, 1906 36 DAVID BuRLIUK: The Voice of an Impressionist: In Defense of Painting [Extract],1908 8 NIkOLAI KULBIN: Free Art as the Basis of Life: Harmony and Dissonance (On Life, Death, etc.) [Extracts], 1908 II VAsILII KANDINSKY: Content and Form, 1910 17 VLADIMIR MARKOv: The Principles of the New Art, 1912 23 ## I. Neoprimitivism and Cubofuturism ALEKSANDR SHEvCHENKO: Neoprimitivism: Its Theory, Its Potentials, Its Achievements, 1913 4I NATALYA GoNCHAROVA: Preface to Catalogue of One-Man Exhibition, 1913 54 IvAN AκsENov: On the Problem of the Contemporary State of Russian Painting [Knave of Diamonds], 1913 60 DAVID BURLIUK: Cubism (Surface—Plane), 1912 69 NATALYA GONCHAROVA: Cubism, 1912 77 ## III. Nonobjective Art MikHaIL LarIonoV and NaTALYA GonCHaRovA: Rayonists and Fu turists: A Manifesto, 1913 87 MIkHAIL LaRIoNov: Rayonist Painting, 1913 91 MiKHAIL LARIoNov: Pictorial Rayonism, 19I4 100 OιGA RozanovA: The Bases of the New Creation and the Reasons Why It Is Misunderstood, 1913 102 Suprematist Statements, 1915: IVAN PUNI and KSENIYA BOGUSLAVSKAYA 112 KAZIMIr MAlEVICH 113 IVAN KLYUN 114 MIKHAIL MENKOV 114 KazıMIR MaLEViCH: From Cubism and Futurismn to Suprematism: The New Painterly Realism, 1915 116 IvAN KLYUN: Primitives of the Twentieth Century, 1915 136 Statements from the Catalogue of the "Tenth State Exhibition: Nonobjective Creation and Suprematism," 1919: VARVARA STEPANOvA: Concerning My Graphics at the Exhibition 139 VARVARA STEPANOVA: Nonobjective Creation 141 IvAN KLYUN: Color Art 142 KAZIMIR MALEVICH: Suprematism 143 MIKHAIL MENKOV 145 LYUBOV POPOVA 146 OLGa Rozanova: Extracts from Articles 148 ALEKsANDR RoDCHENKO: Rodchenko's System 148 EL LissitzkY: Suprematism in World Reconstruction, 192o 151 The Revolution and Art NATAN ALTMAN: "Futurism' and Proletarian Art,1918 161 KomFUT: Program Declaration, 1919 164 BoRIs KusHNER: The Divine Work of Art"' (Polemics), 1919 166 NIKOLAI PUNIN: Cycle of Lectures [Extracts], 1919 170 ALEKSANDR BoGDANOV: The Proletarian and Art, 1918 176 ALEKSANDR BoGDANOV: The Paths of Proletarian Creation, 1920 178 ANATOLI LUNACHARSKY and YUVENAL SLAVINSKY: Theses of the Art Section of Narkompros and the Central Committee of the Union of Art Workers Concerning Basic Policy in the Field of Art, 1920 182 DAVID SHTERENBERG: Our Task, 1920 186 ANATOLII LUNACHARSKY: Revolution and Art, I92O-22 190 VAsILIl KANDINsKY: Plan for the Physicopsychological Department of the Russian Academy of Artistic Sciences, 1923 196 Lef: Declaration: Comrades, Organizers of Life!, 1923 199 ## V. Constructivism and the Industrial Arts VLADIMIR TATLIN: The Work Ahead of Us, 1920 205 NAUM GABO and ANTON PEVsNER: The Realistic Manifesto, 1920 208 ALEKsEI GAN: Constructivism [Extracts], 1922 214 BoRIs ARVATOv: The Proletariat and Leftist Art, 1922 225 VIKTOR PERTsOV: At the Junction of Art and Production, 1922 230 Concretists 240 The Projectionist Group 240 The First Working Group of Constructivists 241 The First Working Organization of Artists 243 OsIP BRIk: From Pictures to Textile Prints, 1924 244 ALEKSANDR RoDCHENKO: Against the Synthetic Portrait, For the Snap shot, 1928 250 YAκOv CHERNIKHOv: The Construction of Architectural and Machine Forms [Extracts], 1931 254 ## VI. Toward Socialist Realism AKhRR: Declaration of the Association of Artists of Revolutionary Rus sia, 1922 265 AKhRR: The Immediate Tasks of AKhRR: A Circular to All Branches of AKhRR—An Appeal to All the Artists of the U.S.S.R., 1924 268 AKhR: Declaration of the Association of Artists of the Revolution, 1928 271 October—Association of Artistic Labor: Declaration, 1928 273 OST [Society of Easel Artists]: Platform, 1929 279 Four Arts Society of Artists: Declaration, 1929 281 PavEL FILoNov: Ideology of Analytical Art [Extract], 1930 284 Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks): De cree on the Reconstruction of Literary and Artistic Organizations, 1932 288 Contributions to the First All-Union Congress of Soviet Writers [Extracts], 1934: From Andrei Zhdanov's Speech 292 From Maxim Gorky's Speech on Soviet Literature 294 From Igor Grabar's Speech 295 From the First Section of the Charter of the Union of Soviet Writers of the U.S.S.R. 296 Notes 298 Notes to the Preface 298 Notes to the Introduction 298 Notes to the Texts 300 Bibliography 309 A: Works Not in Russian 309 B: Works in Russian 338 Index 359