Participants in the group: S. Luchishkin, S. B. Nikritin, M. Plaksin, Kliment Redko, N. Tryaskin, A. Tyshler (9o various works exhibited: Luchishkin's ‘analytical painting," Nikritin's “tectonic researches' [‘drafts''], painting, maquettes, models, drawings) # The First Working Group of Constructivists I. By taking part in this exhibition, the Constructivists are not rejecting the basic tenets of revolutionary constructivism, which defends the factual rationalization of artistic labor as opposed to the now dominant cultivation of the artistic creation of idealistic art. By appearing in this instance beneath the slogan 'Associations of Active Revolutionary Art,'the Constructivists are pursuing only agitational aims: to contribute objects they have made and thereby to participate in the demonstrative discussion between the new groups and associations that have arisen within a proletarian society. This does not mean that we are turning back to art, or that we are retreating from those positions that the First Working Group of Constructivists occupied when, as early as 192o, they shouted forth the slogan "We declare implacable war on art." 2. The Constructivists rationalization of artistic labor has nothing in common with the travails of art makers who are striving, as it were, to“socialize" the flowering branches of art and to compel the latter to apply itself to contemporary social reality. In rationalizing artistic labor, the Constructivists put into practice—-not in verbal, but in concrete terms—-the real qualifications of the object: they are raising its quality, establishing its social role, and organizing its forms in an organic relationship with its utilitarian meaning and objective. The Constructivists are putting into practice this rationalization of artistic labor by means of material laborthat labor in which the workers themselves are directly involved. The Constructivists are convinced that, with the growing influence of the materialist world view, the so-called"spiritual''life of society, the emotional qualities of people can no longer be cemented by abstract categories of metaphysical beauty and by the mystical intrigues of a spirit soaring above society. The Constructivists assert that all art makers without exception are engaged in these intrigues, and no matter what vestments of realistic or naturalistic art they are invested in, they cannot escape essentially from the magic circle of aesthetic conjuring tricks. But by applying conscious reason to life, our new young proletarian society lives also by the only concrete values of social construction and by clear objectives. While constructing, while pursuing these aims not only for itself, but also through itself, our society can advance only by concretizing, only by realizing the vital acts of our modern day. And this is our reality, our life. Ideologically, as it were, consciously, we have extirpated yesterday, but in practical and formal terms we have not yet mastered today's reality. We do not sentimentalize objects; that is why we do not sing about objects in poetry. But we have the will to construct objects; that is why we are developing and training our ability to make objects. 3. At the ‘First Discussional Exhibition of Associations of New Groups of Artistic Labor,"the Constructivists are showing only certain aspects of their production: I. Typographical construction of the printed surface II. Volumetrical objects (the construction of an armature for everyday life) III. Industrial and special clothing IV. Children's books The First Working Group of Constructivists consists of a number of productional cells. Of those not represented, mention should be made of the productional cell Kinophot (cinematography and photography), the productional cell of material constructions, and the productional cell Mass Action. The First Working Group of Constructivists states that all other groups that call themselves constructivists, such as the "Constructivist Poets," the “Constructivists of the Chamber Theater,"2 the Constructivists of the Meierkhold Theater,"3 the "Lef Constructivists,"the "TsIT Constructivists,"4 etc., are, from this group's point of view, pseudo constructivists and are engaged in merely making art.