prospects. Our Party has always derived its strength from the fact that it unitedand continues to unite—particular activity and practicality with grand prospects, with a ceaseless aspiration onward, with the struggle for the construction of a Communist society. Soviet literature must be able to show our heroes, must be able to catch a glimpse of our tomorrow. This will not be a utopia, because our tomorrow is being prepared today by our systematic and conscious work. .. Create works with a high level of craftsmanship, with high ideological and artistic content! Be as active as you can in organizing the transformation of the human consciousness in the spirit of Socialism! Be in the vanguard of the fighters for a classless Socialist society! [Loud applause]. # From Maxim Gorky's Speech on Soviet Literature . . . All of us—writers, factory workers, collective-farm workers——still work badly and do not even grasp in toto everything created by us, for us. Our working masses still do not fully comprehend that they are working for themselves and in their own interests. This realization is slowly awakening everywhere, but it has still not burst into a powerful and joyful incandescence. But nothing can burst into flame until it has reached a certain temperature, and nothing has ever raised the temperature of working energy so splendidly as the Party—organized by the genius of Vladimir Lenin—and the present leader of this Party. We must choose labor as the central hero of our books, i.e., man organized by the processes of labor, who in our country is armed with all the might of modern technology, man who, in turn, is making labor easier, more productive, raising it to the level of art. We must learn to understand labor as creativity. Creativity is a term that we writers use too often—while scarcely having the right to do so. Creativity comes about at that degree of intense mental work when the mind, in its rapidity of work, extracts the more salient and characteristic facts, images, and details from the reserves