of knowledge and transposes them into very precise, vivid, and intelligible words. Our young literature cannot boast of this quality. Our writers' reserves of impressions, their depths of knowledge are not great, and one does not feel that they care much about expanding and deepening their reserves... # From Igor Grabar's Speech Comrades, we, visual arts workers, have come here to give the congress our warmest proletarian greetings in the name of the entire army of the visual arts front. Comrades, there are no realms more closely linked than those of Soviet literature and Soviet art. Comrade writers, you depict life as you see it, understand it, and feel it, and we depict it in the same way. You use the method of socialist realism, and we too use this well-tested method—the best of all existing ones. I don't have to remind you that we are not merely the illustrators of your books; we are also your corades in arms. We together have fought, are fighting, and will fight our common class enemy [Applause]. We both have the same class aspiration. We both have a common past, a common present, and a common future. It is not worth dwelling on the distant past. It is dismal enough. In those days there did not exist the Socialist direction that emerged only with the Revolution and that alone rouses us to perform real, heroic deeds. But even in the recent past, in the first years of the Revolution, not everything went smoothly from the start. Our ranks were thin. Slowly but surely they began to expand as decisive progress was made on the front of Socialist construction, and with this gradual expansion these ranks came to assume an impressive force. Comrade writers, we share with you one very important date—April 23, 1932—the day when the fact of our inclusion in the great edifice erected by the Party was recognized, an inclusion unconditional and unreserved. In this the Party displayed its trust in us and rendered us a great honor. Comrades, hitherto we have not fully justified this trust and honor, but we