# NOTE TO THE PREFACE I. Sergei Makovsky,"'Novoe'iskusstvo i ‘chetvertoe izmerenie'(Po povodu sbornika 'Soyuza molodezhi’)," Apollon (St. Petersburg), no. 7, 1913, p. 53. ## NOTES TO THE INTRODUCTION I. V. Stasov, "Dvadtsat pyat let russkogo iskusstva,"Izbrannye sochineniya (Moscow-Leningrad, 1937), vol. 2, 27. 2. Esteticheskie otnosheniya iskusstva k deistvitelnosti (Moscow, 1948), p. 10. 3. S. Yaremich on Ilya Repin, in Birzhevye vedomosti (St. Petersburg), no. 14983, June 24, 1915; quoted in I. Vydrin, "S. Yaremich o Repine-portretiste," Iskusstvo (Moscow), 1969, no. 9, p. 6o. 4. The lubok (plural, lubki) was a cheap popular print or woodcut similar to the English broadsheet of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. 5. Vesy (Moscow), no. 4, 1905, pp. 45–46 [bibl. R44]. 6. Ibid., p. 46. 7. V. K[aratygin], "M. Reger," Zolotoe runo (Moscow), no. 2, 1906, p. 97 [bibl. R45]. 8. Exhibition review by S. Gri[shi]n, Saratovskii listok (Saratov), no. 101, May II, 1904 [bibl. R199]. 9. M. Saryan, "Avtobiografiya," Sovetskie khudozhniki (Moscow, 1937), vol. 1, 294 [bibl. R177]. 10. S. Makovsky, "Golubaya roza," Zolotoe runo, no. 5, I907, p. 27 [bibl. R2o6]. I I. The nearest approach to a group declaration was the preface to Zolotoe runo, no. I, 19o6 (see pp. 6ff.). Some statements by former Blue Rose artists appeared in the miscellany Kuda my idem? [Where Are We Going?] (Moscow, 191o). 12. He used the term in his polemical tract Galdyashchie '"benua'i novoe russkoe natsionalnoe iskusstvo [The Noisy "Benoises" and the New Russian National Art] (St. Petersburg, 1913), pp. 4ff. [bibl. R270]. I3. A. Osmerkin, "Avtobiografiya,"Sovetskie khudozhniki, vol. I, 234. As a challenge to public taste, David Burliuk wore a wooden spoon at some of his lectures; Malevich is reputed to have stuck a wooden spoon to his picture Englishman in Moscow (1913/14, Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam). 14. Quoted in L. Dyakonitsyn, Ideinye protivorechiya v estetike russkoi zhivopisi kontsa 19- nachala 20 vv. (Perm, 1966), p. 145 [bibl. R101]. 15. Quoted in V. Lobanov, Khudozhestvennye gruppirovki za 25 let (Moscow, 1930), p. 62 [bibl. R108]. 16. Rech (St. Petersburg), November 13, 1914. 17. For details see p. 79. 18. Letter from Larionov to Alfred H. Barr, Jr., in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. Letter is undated but was probably written in 1930. 19. A. Efros, "N. Sapunov,"Profili (Moscow, 193o), p. 14o [bibl. R186]. 20. N. Aseev, "Oktyabr na Dalnem," Novyi lef, no. 8–9 (1927), pp. 38–49 [bibl. R76]. 21. For details see Dyakonitsyn, Ideinye protivorechiya, pp. I46ff. Kulbin's ideas on the triangle and on the symbolism of colors had close affinities with those of Kandinsky [see bibl. R224, R230]. 22. A. R[ostislavo]v, "Doklad N. I. Kulbina," Apollon (St. Petersburg), no. 3, 1910, p. 17 [bibl. R41]. 23. Quoted in V. Parkin, "Oslinyi khvost i mishen," Oslinyi khvost i mishen (Moscow, 1913), P 54 [bibl. R319]. 24. Catalogue of the exhibition "No. 4" (Moscow, 1914), p. 54 [bibl. R318]. 25. Larionov was wounded at the front at the end of 1914 and recuperated in Moscow; Goncharova returned from Paris (where she and Larionov had gone in May at Diaghilev's invitation) for the production on January 27, 1915, of The Fan at the Kamerny Theater, Moscow (for which she designed the costumes and scenery and to which Larionov contributed also); both left Moscow again in the summer of 1915. 26. A. Lentulov, "Avtobiografiya," Sovetskie khudozhniki, vol. 1, 161. 27. N. Ya[nychenk]o, "Vystavka 1915 god," Mlechnyi put (Moscow), no. 4, 1915, p. 63 [bibl. R54]. 28. “Poslednyaya futuristicheskaya vystavka kartin. 0.1o"(Catalogue; Petrograd, 1915), p. 3 [R364]. 29. Quoted in Dyakonitsyn, Ideinye protivorechiya, pp. 143-–44. 30. K. Malevich, O novykh sistemakh v iskusstve (Vitebsk, 1919), p. 10. 31. Proletkult exerted wide authority from February 1917 until 1925 and was especially active between 1918 and 1921. During these three years, in fact, it ran a network of 1,000 studioworkshops throughout the country and had a membership of more than 4oo,ooo. Proletkult published several journals, the most important of which were Gorn [bibl. R62], Gryadushchee [R63], and Proletarskaya kultura [bibl. R8o]. The ideological leader of Proletkult was Aleksandr Bogdanov (see pp. 176ff.), and Anatolii Lunacharsky was at least sympathetic to some of his tenets. For further details see the above journals and bibl. 179 and 199. 32. IŽO was established within Narkompros in January 1918. For details see bibl. 199, R16, R402, R420. 33. All art schools subsidized by the state were renamed Svomas. The Moscow Svomas were renamed Vkhutemas [Higher State Art-Technical Studios] in 1920 and Vkhutein [Higher State Art-Technical Institute] in 1926; in 193o this was changed to the Moscow Art Institute. For details on the structure of Svomas see bibl. R42o; on Vkhutemas/Vkhutein see bibl. R16, R2I, R39o, R419, R431. For a full discussion of Svomas see bibl. 23oix. 34. In 1921. For details see bibł. R2, R16. 35. Quoted in Sovetskoe iskusstvo za 15 let, ed. I. Matsa et al. (Moscow-Leningrad, 1933), p. 156 [bibl. R16]. 36. For the text of the full program see Matsa, Sovetskoe iskusstvo, pp. 126-39. Also see Kandinsky's plan for the Russian Academy of Artistic Sciences (pp. 196ff.) and consult bibl. R393, R394. For translation of the program and other relevant statements see bibl. 101x. 37. V. Kandinsky, "Doklad,"Vestnik rabotnikov iskusstv (Moscow), no. 4-5, 1921, p. 75 [bibl. R6o]. 38. For the text of Babichev's plan see Matsa, Sovetskoe iskusstvo, p. 139. 39. The words are Malevich's and Matyushin's respectively. Quoted in V. Khazanova, Sovetskaya arkhitektura pervykh let Oktyabrya 1917–1925 (Moscow, 1970), p. 25 [bibl. R21]. 40. For details see A. Ya[nov], "Krizis krasok,"Zhizn iskusstva (Petersburg, no. 45, 1923, p. 15 [bibl. R65]. 41. Statement appended to Exter's contribution to the catalogue of the exhibition ‘5 × 5 = 25' (Moscow, 1921), n.p. [bibl. R446]. 42. Statement appended to Rodchenko's contribution, ibid. The exhibition Nonobjective Creation and Suprematism" opened, in fact, in January 1919, not 1918 (see p. 138). At the 192o exhibition in Moscow (\*Nineteenth State'') Kandinsky, Shevchenko, and Varst (Stepanova) were also among those represented. Despite Rodchenko's assertion that he "proclaimed three basic colors"at “5 × 5 = 25,"Kulbin had shown works with the titles Blue on White and White on Green as early as 191o, at the "Triangle" exhibition in St. Petersburg [bibl. R241; and see p. 12]. In any case, Malevich, had, of course, painted his White on White in 1918. 43. Statement appended to Varst's (Stepanova's) contribution, ibid. 44. Quoted in Lobanov, Khudozhestvennye gruppirovki, p. 1oI. Although purist art had still been supported at the constructivists'first session within Inkhuk on March 18, 1921, attended by V. Ioganson, Konstantin Medunetsky, Aleksandr Rodchenko, Varvara Stepanova, and the Stenberg brothers, an industrial approach soon came to be favored. As early as August 192I Nikolai Tarabukin delivered a lecture at Inkhuk entitled "The Last Picture Has Been Painted" [for details see bibl. 252]. In December of the same year Stepanova gave a talk on constructivism in which she emphasized the value of industrial design. 45. In Na putyakh iskusstva, ed. V. Blyumenfeld et al. (Moscow, 1926), p. 3 [bibl. R381]. 46. Quoted in Matsa, Sovetskoe iskusstvo, p. 31o. 47. The Makovets society was named after the hill on which Sergii Radonezhsky built the Troitse-Sergieva Lavra (now the Zagorsk monastery and museum complex) in the fourteenth century, a gesture that expressed its members' emphasis on the spiritual, religious quality of art. This was immediately apparent in the society's manifesto, issued in the journal Makovets (Moscow), no. 1, 1922, pp. 3-4 [bibl. R77]. For details on Chekrygin see the catalogue of his recent retrospective [bibl. R163]. 48. See, for example, Aleksei Fedorov-Davydov's introduction to the catalogue of Kazimir Malevich's one-man exhibition at the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow, 1929 [bibl. R366]; see also Sergei Isakov's introduction to the catalogue of the unrealized Pavel Filonov exhibition at the Russian Museum, Leningrad, 193o [bibl. R507, and see p. 284]. 49. Istoriya russkoi zhivopisi v XIX veke (St. Petersburg, 1901–1902), p. 274. And see p. 5. ## NOTES TO THE TEXTS BURLIUK, Pp. 8–11 I. Member of the Wanderers. His initially tendentious exposés of Russian rural life degenerated into sentimental, historical scenes. 2. Famous for his innumerable seascapes. 3. Regarding Isaak Levitan, Valentin Serov, and Mikhail Vrubei, see Introduction. KULBIN, PP. 11-17 I. In December 19I I, at the All-Russian Convention of Artists, in St. Petersburg, Kulbin gave a lecture entitled 'Harmony, Dissonance, and Their Close Combinations in Art and Life,' which was later published [bibl. R23o]. 2. Kulbin was interested in microtone music (what he called ‘free music') and in the associations between the color spectrum and the conventional seven-tone scale. The second article in Studio of the Impressionists was, in fact, a piece by Kulbin on "Free Music: The Results of Applying a Theory of Artistic Creation to Music" [bibl. R227]; the main ideas of this article had already appeared in Kulbin's booklet Free Music [bibl. R226], and later appeared in German as ‘Die freie Musik" [bibl. 96]. 3. By profession both Chekhov and Kulbin were doctors. ## MARKOV, Pp. 23-38 I. Logic has deprived Nature of the divine." Reference not traced. Probably a quotation from Novalis or the early Hegel. 2. For explanation of lubok see n. 4 to Introduction, p. 298. 3. Presumably a reference to the writer, composer, and painter E. T. A. Hoffmann. Like Novalis and other German romantics, Hoffmann enjoyed a vogue in Russia in the 19oos. 4. Markov's ideas on "texture" [faktura] were scheduled to appear in a subsequent issue of Soyuz molodezhi [Union of Youth], but since the journal ceased publication atter the third issue (March 1913), Markov's essay was published separately [bibl. R233]. At the end of his text Markov also indicated that he would be writing on other principles, such as gravity, surface, dynamism, and consonance, but these essays were never published. ## SHEVCHENKO, PP. 41-54 I. For explanation of lubok see n. 4 to Introduction, p. 298. 2. Signboards and trays were particularly prized by David Burliuk, who had a large collection of them. Mikhail Larionov was very interested in the lubok and in 1913 organized an exhibition of them [see bibl. R252 and bibl. 132, pp. 33-37, where part of the catalogue, including Larionov's and Natalya Goncharova's prefaces, is translated into French]. Shevchenko collected children's drawings, some of which were shown at the 'Target'in 1913, together with signboards and naive paintings by the Georgian primitive Niko Pirosmanashvili. 3. Painter, wood sculptor, and stage designer known for his highly stylized depictions of pre-Petrine Russia. 4. "Grass writing"is presumably a reference to the Chinese ts'ao shu, a hieroglyphic style used in the first and second centuries A.D. In appearance ts'ao shu resembles intertwined leaves of grass. 5. The title "Old Believers" refers to those members of the Russian Church who disagreed with ecclesiastical reforms instītuted by the Patriarch Nikon in the mid-seventeenth century. Among the first to condemn Nikon's preference for the Greek Orthodox and hence more Western conception of Christianity was the famous Petrovich Avvakum, traditionally regarded as the founder of the Old Believers. The general policy of the Old Believers, who were from all classes, was, despite forceful opposition, to maintain the rich, Byzantine traditions of the Church; this affected considerably the outward appearance of their dress, icons, lubki, etc. ## 6. See Larionov's articles, pp. 87ff. ## GONCHAROVA, PP. 54-60 I. Goncharova was represented at the first and second exhibitions of ‘Der. Blaue Reiter"in 1911-12; she also contributed to Roger Fry's “Second Post-Impressionist Exhibition"in London in 1912 [bibl. 106, 107, 142]. 2. See Larionov's articles, pp. 87ff. ## AKSENOV, pp. 60–69 I. Member of the Wanderers. Known for his scenes of factory and prison life. Regarding Repin see Introduction. 2. For further details regarding the Knave of Diamonds members whom Aksenov mentions, the following references may be consulted: Mashkov [bibl. R323], Kuprin [bibl. R324, R331], Rozhdestvensky [bibl. R343], Lentulov [bibl. R3o9, R322], Konchalovsky [bibl. R316, R317], Falk [bibl. 105, R260, R346], Exter [bibl. 61, 80, R181]. 3. Aksenov means, presumably, Cézanne's Mardi Gras of 1888, which was in the Sergei Shchukin collection. It is now in the Pushkin Museum, Moscow. 4. Anton Rubinstein's opera The Merchant of Kalashnikov was staged by Sergei Zimin's company in Moscow in the winter of 1912/13. 5. In 19o9 Petr Konchalovsky was commissioned by the merchant Markushev to execute panels and ceiling decorations for his Moscow villa. The Moscow Salon was the name of an important exhibiting society that held regular shows between 191o and 1918. Konchalovsky's contribution to the first show in the winter of 191o/11, included his designs for the Markushev villa—Gathering Olives, Gathering Grapes, Harvest, and The Park. 6. In November 19ıI Konchalovsky, together with Georgii Yakulov, designed the decor for a charity ball called “A Night in Spain" at the Merchants'Club, Moscow. 7. The portrait of the artist Yakulov was executed in 191o and at present is in the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow. For Konchalovsky's own description of the work see bibl. Rio3, vol. 2, pp. 434ff. 8. Italian patriot and revolutionary. The reference, presumably, is to Mazzini's almost constant exile from Italy, during which he never ceased to believe in his dogmatic and utopian principles of Italian nationalism and working-class solidarity—despite the fact that for much of his life he was out of touch with the real moods of the Italian populus. 9. A reference to the prehistoric ivory figures of Brassempouy in southern France. ## BURLIUK, pp. 69–77 I. “Texture" [faktura] in "A Slap in the Face of Public Taste." See p. 69 and bibl. R269. 2. Which Cézanne landscape Burliuk has in mind is not clear, perhaps La Montagne Sainte-Victoire (1896–98), which was in the Ivan Morozov collection, and is now in the Hermitage 3. Poet, philosopher, and lexicographer. 4. Leading futurist poet, cosigner of A Slap in the Face of Public Taste." LARIONOV and GONCHAROVA, Pp. 87–91 I. The egofuturists were primarily a literary group, formed in 191I and led by Igor Severyanin. 2. The neofuturists were an imitative and derivative group active in 1913. Their one publication, Vyzov obshchestvennym vkusam [A Challenge to Public Tastes] (Kazan, 1913), contained parodies of futurist poems and rayonist drawings. 3. Goncharova and Larionov broke with the Knave of Diamonds after its first exhibition in 191o/1I, thereby alienating themselves from David Burliuk—and condemning 'A Slap in the Face of Public Taste." Larionov regarded the Union of Youth as a harbor of outdated symbolist ideas, an attitude shared by several artists and critics, although Larionov still contributed to its exhibitions. 4. An allusion to vsechestvo [literally, "everythingness"], i.e., the concept that all styles are permissible—an attitude shared by Shevchenko [e.g., see bibl. R355]. ## LARIONOV, pp. 9I-100 I. The Whitman extracts are from Leaves of Grass: the first from "Beginners,"in "Inscriptions"; the second from "I Hear It Was Charged Against Me," in "Calamus." Larionov's choice of author is significant: Whitman was known and respected in Russia particularly among the symbolists and futurists, and his Leaves of Grass had become popular through Konstantin Balmont's masterful translation (Moscow, 1911). For contemporaneous attitudes to Whitman in Russia, see Balmont, "Pevets lichnosti"in bibl. R44, no. 7, 1904, pp. I 1-32; Chukovsky, "O polze broma' in bibl. R44, no. 12, 1906, pp. 52-60, and Chukovsky, Uot Uitmen: Poeziya gryadushchei demokratii (Moscow-Petrograd, 1923).·Also see nn. 3 and 6 to 'Rodchenko's System," p. 305. 2. Undoubtedly Larionov owed some of his ideas, both in his theory and in his practice of rayonism, to the theories of the Italian futurists. He would, for example, have seen the Russian translations of La pittura futurista and Gli espositori al pubblicò (see p. 79). 3. The actual word Larionov uses is vitro; this, presumably, is a corruption of the French word vitraux (plural of vitrail), meaning leaded- or stained-glass windows. 4. Larionov did not, in fact, develop this theory, although a booklet devoted to the subject of pneumorayonism was scheduled for publication, according to an advertisement in the miscellany Oslinyi khvost i mishen [Donkey's Tail and Target]; among Larionov's contributions to his éxhibition "No. 4," in 1914, one work, Sunny Day, was subtitled "Pneumorayonist Color Structure" [bibl. R318]. A further development was "plastic rayonism," which appeared as a subtitle to two still lifes shown by Larionov at the ‘Exhibition of Painting. 1915" [bibl. R277]; one review of this exhibition also referred to it [bibl. 230, p. 7]. ROZANOVA, PP. I02-110 1. See pp. 69–70. 2. Rozanova has in mind the first cycle of "World of Art"exhibitions (1899–19o6) rather than the second (191o-24), since many radical artists——Natan Altman, Natalya Goncharova, Mikhail Larionov, et al.—were represented in the latter. The Union of Russian Artists was a moderate exhibiting society based in Moscow that espoused the ideas of realism and naturalism, although, unexpectedly, the Burliuks and Larionov were represented at its 19o6/1907 session in St. Petersburg, and Larionov and Aristarkh Lentulov were at its 191o session. It held regular exhibitions between 1903 and 1917, and 1922 and 1923. MALEVICH, PP. 116–35 I. Malevich is referring to “A Slap in the Face of Public Taste." See p. 69. 2. Konstantin Somov: member of the World of Art (see Introduction). Boris Kustodiev: member of the second World of Art society. Known for his colorful scenes of Moscow merchant life. 3. Malevich has in mind the rejection of the nude in painting by the Italian futurists, one of the main points of their La pittura futurista: Manifesto tecnico [see bibl. 12o, pp. 65–67], which had been translated into Russian and published in Soyuz molodezhi [Union of Youth] (St. Petersburg), no. 2, 1912, pp. 23–28 [bibl. R339]. 4. The word Malevich uses is predmetnost (from the noun predmet, which means “object''; cf. bespredmetnyi, "nonobjective'')."Objectism"or "objectness"would therefore render the meaning of the Russian. 5. All contributed to the “o. 1o"' exhibition. KLYUN, PP. 136–38 I. For explanation of lubok see n. 4 to Introduction, p. 298. "TENTH STATE EXHIBITION," PP. 138–58 STEPANOVA, PP. 139–42 I. Stepanova contributed under the pseudonym V. Agarykh. 2. These were titles of unpublished transrational poems by Stepanova herself, or by Olga Rozanova. For examples of Rozanova's verse see bibl. R332. For some details on Stepanova's graphics and poetry see Evgenii Kovtun. 'Varvara Stepanova's Anti-Book.' From Surface to Space. Russia 1916–24. Cologne: Galerie Gmurzynska, 1974. Exhibition catalogue, pp. 57–63 (text in English and in German). 3. It is not clear what exactly Stepanova has in mind—perhaps Rozanova's essay “The Bases of the New Creation"(pp. 102ff.). KLYUN, PP. 142-43 I. Klyun, a friend and one-time disciple of Kazimir Malevich, is here objecting both to Malevich's occasional recourse to ‘objective" titles for suprematist paintings (e.g., Painterly Realism of a Football Player) and to his aerial, more representational phase of suprematism. 2 Klvun means Malevich's Lackey with a Samovar (exhibited at the "Shop" in 1916). 3. In 1918 IZO Narkompros established a Museum Bureau and Purchasing Fund with the aim of acquiring works of art and theoretical materials for a complex of diverse museums, among them five so-called Museums of Painterly (sometimes called Artistic or Plastic) Culture in Moscow, Petrograd, Nizhnii-Novgorod, Vitebsk, and Kostroma. Aleksandr Rodchenko was head of the Museum Bureau and by mid-192o the Bureau had acquired 1,2oo paintings and drawings and jo6 sculptures, which it dispersed among the museums mentioned above and other provincial museums. The Museums of Painterly Culture were "collections of works of painting, sculpture, applied art, popular art, spontaneous art, and works done by experimental painterly and plastic techniques. These Museums are constructed on the principle of the evolution of purely painterly and plastic forms of expression . . . [bibl. R42o, p. 8o]. The largest was the one in Moscowhoused in the same building as Svomas/Vkhutemas. It contained examples of most of the avant-garde, including Aleksandr Drevin (three works), Vasilii Kandinsky (six), Kazimir Malevich (nine), Lyubov Popova (two), Rodchenko (five), Olga Rozanova (six), Vladimir Tatlin (one), and Nadezhda Udaltsova (four); Klyun was represented by two canvases and by a small collection of his research writings and tabulations on color. Although initially the Museum Bureau included Derain and Picasso on its list of wants and stipulated that acquisitions should cover all periods, it concerned itself almost exclusively with Russian art of the early twentieth century. Each museum was divided into four sections—(1) experimental technique, (2) industrial art, (3) drawings and graphics, (4) synthetic art. The museums worked in close conjunction with the local Svomas and, in the case of Moscow, Petrograd, and Vitebsk, with Inkhuk. For further details see bibl. R16, R66, R42o. The artist Aleksei Grishchenko presented a list of proposals concerning the museums in February 1919—see bibl. R16, p. 83. MALEVICH, PP. 143-45 I. I.e., From Cubism to Suprematism. See pp. 116ff. 2. Malevich saw the genesis of suprematism in his 1913 decor for the futurist opera Victory Over the Sun (see p. 116), one backdrop of which was an apparently abstract composition [reproduced in bibl. 45, pl. 99; bibl. 83, p. 383]. 3. I.e., at “0.10," December 19, 1915–January 19, 1916. ## ROZANOVA, p. I48 I. An extract from Rozanova's ‘The Bases of the New Creation" (pp. 1o2ff.) was also included in this section of the catalogue. Rozanova had died a few months before, and the "First State Exhibition"had been devoted to a posthumous showing of her works; works at the "Tenth State Exhibition" by Ivan Klyun, Aleksandr Vesnin, and others were dedicated to her. 2. The journal Supremus never actually appeared, although it was prepared for publication in Moscow early in 1917 under the editorship of Kazimir Malevich. Apart from Rozanova's piece, a contribution by Malevich [bibl. 16o, p. 148] and an essay on music by Mikhail Matyushin and the composer Nikolai Roslavets were scheduled. ## RODCHENKO, pp. 148-51 1. This is the title·of the first section, and the closing line, of Max Stirner's Die Einzige und sein Eigenthum [The Ego and His Own], first published in Leipzig in 1845. Max Stirner (pseudonym of Joseph Kaspar Schmidt) had achieved a certain popularity in Russia in the 19oos because of the more general interest in individualism and intuition generated by such varied influences as Bergson, Nietzsche, and Steiner. Stirner's philosophy of extreme individualism had appealed in particular to the symbolists; a Russian translation of Die Einzige und sein Eigenthum appeared in St. Petersburg in 1910 under the title Edinstvennyi i ego dostoyanie. Just after the Revolution, there was a renewal of interest in Stirner, albeit from a highly critical standpoint, mainly because Marx and Engels had treated him in some detail [see their "Sankt Max,"in Dokumente des Sozialismus, ed. Eduard Bernstein (Berlin: Verlag der Sozialistischen Monatshefte, 1905), vol. 3, 17ff.]. 2. The reference is from a play by the futurist Aleksei Kruchenykh called Gly-Gly (a transrational title). Part of the text was published in Kruchenykh's book Ozhirenie roz [Obesity of Roses]; this book carries no publication details, although it dates probably from 1918 and was printed in Tiflis. Among the play's motifs are those of painting and the color black, and among the dramatis personae Kazimir Malevich and Kruchenykh figure. 3. The Whitman extract is from Part Four of "Song of the Broad-Axe" (Leaves of Grass). For the significance of Whitman in Russia, see n. I to Larionov's 'Rayonist Painting,"p. 302. 4. This is from Otto Weininger's "Aphoristisch Gebliebenes,"in Uber die letzten Dinge ['Remaining Aphoristic,"in On the Latest Things], first published in Vienna in 1907 (the present quotation can be found on p. 56 of the sixth edition, Vienna, 192o). Like Max Stirner, Weininger was known in Russia especially during the 19oos, and his famous treatise Geschlecht und Charakter [Sex and Character] had been translated into Russian in 19o9, accompanied by several articles in the Russian press [see, for example, Boris Bugaev, '"Na perevale. Veininger o pole i kharaktere," in bibl. R44, no. 2, 19o9, pp. 77–81]. 5. Quotation not traced. Possibly a paraphrase of a passage from Stirner's Die Einzige und sein Eigenthum. See n. I above. 6. The Whitman extract is from "Gliding O'er All," from "By the Roadside"(Leaves of Grass). See n. I to Larionov's ‘Rayonist Painting,"p. 302. ## LISSITZKY, Pp. 151-58 I. Several artists and architects, among them Naum Gabo, directed their energies into designing radio masts. One of the functions of Vladimir Tatlin's Tower was to act as a transmitting and telegraph station. The Moscow radio tower, erected in 1926 after a design by Vladimir Shukhov, is perhaps the most famous. 2. If Lissitzky wrote this essay in 192o (as indicated by the source from which this text is taken), then Kazimir Malevich's Black Square, to which he refers here, would have been painted in 191 3, but we have no strong documentary evidence to support this date. The first time that the Black Square was exhibited was, apparently, at “0.10" in 1915/16 (see p. 1 10; also see n. 2 to Malevich, p. 304). ## ALTMAN, pp. 161-64 I. The Chernosotentsy, or Black Hundreds, were members of a secret-police and monarchist organization set up to counteçact the revolutionary movement in 1905-1907. Chernosotenets soon became identified with the more general concepts of 'rightist'and 'extreme conservative." ## PUNIN, pp. 170–76 I. Physicist and philosopher. 2. The Russian formalist school was concerned primarily with literature, although critics such as Nikolai Chuzhak, Nikolai Punin, and Sergei Tretyakov might be regarded as supporters of a formalist approach within the sphere of the visual arts: like the industrial constructivists, they aspired to reduce art to a rational, exact aesthetics. ## LUNACHARSKY and SLAVINSKY, PP. 182-85 I. The actual word is chernosotennye, adjective from Chernosotenets. See n. I to Altman, above. 2. Glavpolitprosvet (Central Committee of Political Enlightenment): see p. 226. ## SHTERENBERG, pp. 186–90 I. Aleksandr Kerensky was head of the provisional government during the revolutionary period from July to November 1917. His moderate Socialism did not satisfy the demands of the Bolsheviks, and he emigrated when they came to power. 2. In the summer of 1918, the Petrograd Academy was abolished, and its teaching faculty was dismissed; on October 1o, Pegoskhuma was opened and was replaced in turn by Svomas in 1919; on February 2, 1921, the academy was reinstated. See Introduction for other details. 3. In 1918, both collections were nationalized and became the First and Second Museums of New Western Painting: in 1923 both were amalgamated into a single Museum of New Western Painting; in the early 193os many of the museum's works were transferred to the Hermitage in Leningrad, and in 1948 all the holdings were distributed between the Hermitage and the Pushkin Museum in Moscow. The idea of establishing a museum of modern painting was not new in Russia: as early as 19o9, a group of artists and critics including Ivan Bilibin, Nikolai Rerikh, and Vselovod Meierkhold had favored such a proposal. See Filippov, "Gallereva sovremennykh russkikh khudozhnikov'[A Gallery of Modern Russian Artists] in bibl. R43, no. 4/6, 19o9, p. 45; the Union of Youth had also supported the ideasee Shkolnik, '"Muzei sovremennoi russkoi zhivopisi"'[A Museum of Modern Russian Painting] in bibl. R339, no. I, 1912, pp. 18–20. ## LUNACHARSKY, PP. 190-96 I. Vsevobuch [Vseobshchee voennoe obuchenie—General Military Instruction] was an inclusive title for all bodies concerned with military training of workers. By a decree of 1918, all Soviet citizens, from schoolchildren to the middle-aged, were to receive military instruction. 2. The Second Congress of the Third International opened in Petrograd June 19, 192o, and June 27 was declared a public holiday in honor of it; a parade and procession with representatives of Vsevobuch took place in Moscow. 3. On June 19, 192o, a mass dramatization, Toward the World Commune, took place at the former Stock Exchange in Petrograd; Natan Altman was the artistic designer. 4. The Twelve, written in 1918, was pernaps Aleksandr Blok's greatest poetic achievement. Ostensibly it was a description of the revolutionary force represented by twelve Red Guards. 5. Lunacharsky was present at Vladimir Mayakovsky's first private reading of the play Mystery-Bouffe, September 27, 1918. He was impressed with the work and promoted its production at the Theater of Musical Drama in November of that year. It was taken off after three days and was revived only with Vselovod Meierkhold's production of it in May 1921. 6. I.e., New Economic Policy. The period of NEP (1921–29) was marked by a partial return to a capitalist economic system. 7. This simple yet spacious monument in Petrograd to the victims of the February Revolution was designed by Lev Rudnev in 1917-19 and was landscaped later by Ivan Fomin. 8. In the early 192os everal designs were submitted for a Moscow Palace of Labor—among them one by the Vesnin brothers—-but none was executed. ## TATLIN, Pp. 205–206 I. The reference is to the Yaroslavl Station, Moscow, built in 1903-1904 after a design by Fedor Shekhtel. Its frieze and majolica details were designed by artists who had been close to Abramtsevo, including Konstantin Korovin. Similarly, several moderate artists, including Aleksandr Benois, submitted interior designs for the adjacent Kazan Station between 1914 and 1917 (designed by Aleksei Shchusev, built 1913–26). 2. From May 10 to 14, 1914, Tatlin held a one-man show of synthetic-static compositions in his studio. 3. Documents indicate that the only Moscow exhibition of 1915 to which Tatlin contributed some relief collages (hardly "on the laboratory scale") was the "Exhibition of Painting. 1915"(ex catalogue), although he may have opened his sudio to the public at the same time (March-May). In March 1915, he exhibited severr painterly reliefs at "Tramway V," in Petrograd, and in December 1915/January 1916, he contributed reliefs and counterreliefs to "o.1o," also in Petrograd. According to bibl. R447, Tatlin showed counterreliefs at a Moscow “sbornaya'[mixed] exhibition in 1915 but this, presumably, was a reference to the "Exhibition . . . 1915." 4. No contribution by Tatlin to a 1917 exhibition has been recorded. It is possible that he means the ‘Shop'of 1916, which he organized and to which he sent seven reliefs and counterreliefs. 5. I.e., Tatlin's Tower. Iosif Meerzon and Tevel Shapiro helped Tatlin build the first model in Petersburg; P. Vinogradov joined them when the Tower was re-erected in Moscow. GABO and PEVSNER, pp. 208–14 I. The measurement used in the original Russian is arshin (= 28 inches). 2. The measurement used in the original Russian is pud (= 36 lbs.). ## GAN, PP. 214-25 I. For explanation of Old Believers, see no. 5 to Shevchenko, p. 301. ## ARVATOV, PP. 225-30 I. As early as 1918 the State Porcelain Factory had produced items decorated by Natan Altman. In the early 192os cups, saucers, plates, and pots were being produced with suprematist designs by Ilya Chashnik and Nikolai Suetin. ## PERTSOV, Pp. 230-36 I. "Transsense" or 'transrational'translates the word zaum, a new linguistic medium formulated by Aleksei Kruchenykh [see bibl. R284, R295]. Kazimir Malevich, Olga Rozanova, Varvara Stepanova, et al., also wrote zaum occasionally. Zaum lines, for example, occur at the end of Malevich's essay "O poezii" [On Poetry] in bibl. R66, no. I, 1919, p. 35 [English translation in bibl. 159, vol. 1, 82]. For Rozanova's transrational verse, see bibl. R332. ## "First Discussional," pp. 237-43 I. The Constructivist Poets such as Vera Inber, Ilya Selvinsky, and Kornelii Zelinsky were members of the so-called Literary Center of the Constructivists [Literaturnyi tsentr konstruktivistov, or LTsK], founded in Moscow in 1924 [see bibl. R441] A translation of their manifesto appears in bibl. 21I, pp. 123-27. 2. Constructivists of the Chamber Theater (Aleksandr Tairov's Kamernyi teatr) included Aleksandra Exter, the Stenberg brothers, Aleksandr Vesnin, and Georgii Yakulov [see bibl. R187]. 3. Constructivists who worked for Vselovod Meierkhold's State Higher Theater Workshop in Moscow included Lyubov Popova and Varvara Stepanova; as director of the Workshop, Meierkhold developed his constructivist theory of so-called biomechanics. [For details see bibl. 190, pp. 183–204; bibl. 193, p. 70; R17 (bk. 2), pp. 486–89.] 4. The Central Institute of Labor [Tsentralnyi institut truda, or TsIT], run by Aleksei Gastev in Moscow, acted as a laboratory for the analysis of the 'rhythmic rotation of work'and aspired to create a machine man, an artist of labor. Among the institute's members were the critic Viktor Pertsov and the artist Aleksandr Tyshler [see bibl. 42, pp. 206–14]. 1. For details of Inkhuk see Introduction and bibl. 23oix, R16, pp. 126-43. Lyubov Popova, Aleksandr Rodchenko, and Varvara Stepanova had turned to productional art soon after the conclusive exhibition ${ } ^ { * } 5 \times 5 = 2 5 , { } ^ { * }$ in September 1921 [see bibl. R446]. Popova and Stepanova became particularly interested in textile design, as Stepanova demonstrated in her lecture "Kostyum segodnyashnego dnya -prozodezhda" [Today's Dress Is Productional Clothing], delivered at Inkhuk in the spring of 1923 and published in Lef [bibl. R463]. Rodchenko turned to poster art, typography, and photography; Anton Lavinsky to poster art and small-scale construction projects; Gustav Klutsis and Sergei Senkin also favored poster art and typography and later were active in the October group [see pp. 273ff. and bibl. R421, R500]. ## RODCHENKO, Pp. 250–54 I. The term ‘rejuvenation"refers to the Soviet emphasis on mass gymnastics and health exercisesparticularly stressed during the 192os and 193os. Rodchenko himself was a keen sportsman and photographed many scenes from sporting life, especially athletics 2. Lenin was a favorite subject for photographers. The file that Rodchenko has in mind was probably the Albom Lenina. Sto fotograficheskikh snimkov [Lenin Album. A Hundred Snapshots], compiled by Viktor Goltsev and published by the State Press in 1927. Rodchenko himself also photographed Lenin, and one of his portraits served as the cover to Novyi lef, no. 8–9, 1927. ## AKhRR, pp. 265-67 I. Partly as a result of this propaganda measure, several of the old Knave of Diamonds group, including Robert Falk, Aristarkh Lentulov, Ilya Mashkov, and Vasilii Rozhdestvensky, joined AKhRR. ## AKhR,pp. 27I-72 I. In 1928 a German affiliation was established in Berlin. ## October, pp. 273-79 I. The reference is to FOSKh [Federatsiya obedineniya sovetskikh rabotnikov prostranstvennykh iskusstv—Federation of the Association of Soviet Workers in the Spatial Arts], founded in June 193o. This was an organization that sought to unite the many, often contradictory, art groups still active, and it managed to encompass AKhR, OST, and RAPKh (see p. 273), as well as two architectural societies, OSA {Obedinenie sovremennykh arkhitek torov--Association of Contemporary Architects] and VOPRA [Vsesoyuznoe obedinenie proletarskikh arkhitektorov—All-Union Association of Proletarian Architects]. FOSKh issued its own journal—Brigada khudozhnikov [Artists'Brigade] [bibl. R58]. ## OST, pp. 279–81 I. A derogatory reference to the art of the Peredvizhniki [Wanderers]. The word might be translated as ‘hack realism." For details on the Wanderers see Introduction. FILONOV, pp. 284–87 I. The Russian is sdelannost, a noun that Filonov formed from the verb sdelat--‘to make/do." "Decree On the Reconstruction," pp. 288–90 I. NEP: see n. 6 to Lunacharsky, p. 306. 2. VOAPP: Vsesoyuznoe obedinenie assotsiatsii proletarskikh pisatelei [All-Union Association of Associations of Proletarian Writers]; RAPP: Rossiiskaya assotsiatsiya proletarskikh pisatelei [Russian Association of Proletarian Writers]; RAPM: Rossiiskaya assotsiatsiya proletarskikh muzykantov [Russian Association of Proletarian Musicians]. First All-Union Congress, pp. 290-97 I. Stalin called Soviet writers ‘engineers of human souls'in conversation with Gorky and other writers on October 26, 1932. See I. V. Stalin, Sobranie sochinenii [Collected Works], vol. 13 (Moscow, 1951), 410. 2. Such a congress did not, in fact, take place until 1957, although an All-Union Congress of Architects was held in 1937. 3. Pavel Vasilevich Malkov, a former pupil of Dmitrii Kardovsky, achieved a certain reputation during the\_193os and 194os for his paintings and graphics on themes such as Soviet industry and the Red Army. The present whereabouts of the portrait in question is not known.