# Bibliography The Bibliography contains only published items and makes no reference to the many archives relevant to modern Russian art that are in public and private hands. Although the Bibliography is not exhaustive, particular attention has been paid to recent Western and Soviet publications concerned with subjects under discussion. Where sources contain comprehensive bibliographies, this is indicated, and therefore, many titles already listed in these bibliographies, as well as all the texts translated in the main part of the book, are omitted below. The Bibliography is divided into two sections: A, works in languages other than Russian, and B, works in Russian. Bibliographical information on each contributor will be found in the appropriate division of section A, unless indicated otherwise. For obvious reasons the many minor references to contributors are not given, but for further information on a given artist, critic, or movement, the reader is urged to consult listings within the corresponding theoretical or chronological framework especially the periodicals. As a general rule, 1972 was set as the final date for bibliographical entries. Since the publication of the American edition of this book in 1976, a very large amount of literature, both Western, Japanese and Soviet, has appeared pertaining to the Russian avant-garde. A selection of the more important titles from these many monographs, exhibition catalogues and collections of articles has been added to the original Bibliography below in the form of supplements identified by lower case Roman numerals, e.g. 26i, R23i, etc. As a general rule, 1985 was set as the final date for these supplements. ## A: Works Not in Russian i. General Works on the History of Russian Art (1–26) ii. General Works Covering the Period ca. 1890–ca. 1930 (27–84) I. The Subjective Aesthetic: Symbolism ·and the Intuitive (85-101) II. Neoprimitivism and Cubofuturism (102–45) III. Nonobjective art (146–76) IV. The Revolution and Art (177–209) V. Constructivism and the Industrial Arts (210–52) VI. Toward Socialist Realism (253-72) 1. Alpatov, Mikhail. Russian Impact on Art. Edited and with a Preface by Martin L. Wolf. Translated from the Russian by Ivy Litvinov. New York: Philosophical Library; Toronto: McLeod, 1950. 2. L'Art russe des Scythes à nos jours. Paris: Grand Palais, 1967–68. Exhibition catalogue. 3. Benois, Alexandre. The Russian School of Painting. Translated by Abraham Yarmolinsky. New York: Knopf, 1916; London: Laurie [1919]. 4. Billington, James H. The Icon and the Axe: An Interpretive History of Russian Culture. New York: Knopf; London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1966. 5. Braikevitch, Tatiana. An Outline of Russian Art Leading to the Period Known as 'Mir Iskusstva." London: Woman's Printing Society, 1950. 6. Bunt, Cyril. Russian Art. From Scyths to Soviets. London and New York: Studio, 1946. 7. Chamot, Mary. Russian Painting and Sculpture. London: Pergamon, 1969. 8. Eliasberg, Alexander. Russische Kunst. Munich: Piper, 1915. 9. Fiala, Vladimir. Russian Painting of the 18th and 19th Centuries. Prague: Artia, 1955. 10. Froncek, Thomas, ed. The Horizon Book of the Arts of Russia. Introductory essay by James H. Billington. New York: American Heritage, 197o. I1. Gibellino Krasceninnicowa, Maria. L'Arte russa moderna e contemporanea: pittura e scultura. Rome: Palombi, 196o. 12. Gibellino Krasceninnicowa, Maria. Storia dell'arte russa. Rome: Maglione, 1935-37. 13. Grabar, Igor, ed. Geschichte der russischen Kunst. Translated from Russian by Kurt Küppers. Dresden: VEB Verlag der Kunst, 1957–65. Bibl. 14. Hamilton, George Heard. The Art and Architecture of Russia. Baltimore: Penguin, 1954. Bibl. 15. Hare, Richard. The Art and Artists of Russia. London: Methuen, 1965. 16. Matthey, Werner von. Russische Kunst. Zurich-Einsiedeln: Benziger, 1948. 17. Muther, Richard (in collaboration with Alexander Benois). "Russia." In Muther, Richard. The History of Modern Painting. Vol. 4. London: Dent; New York: Dutton, 1907, pp. 236–85: 18. Nemitz, Fritz. Die Kunst Russlands. Baukunst. Malerei. Plastik. Vom II bis 19 Jahrhundert. Berlin: Hugo, 1940. 19. Newmarch, Rosa. The Russian Arts. London: Jenkins; New York: Dutton, 1916. 20. Réau, Louis. L'Art russe des origines à Pierre te Grand. Paris: Laurens, 1921. Bibl. 21. Réau, Louis. L'Art russe de Pierre le Grand à nos jours. Paris: Laurens, 1922. Bibl. Bibl. 20 and 21 updated and reprinted as: L'Art russe. 3 vols. Paris: Marabout Université, 1968. Bibl. 22. Rice, Tamara Talbot. A Concise History of Russian Art. London: Thames and Hudson; New York: Praeger, 1963. Bibl. 23. Rubissow, Helen. The Art of Russia. New York: Philosophical Library; London: Crowther, 1946. 24. A Survey of Russian Painting. 15th Century to the Present. New York: Gallery of Modern Art Including the Huntington Hartford Collection, 1967. Exhibition catalogue. 25. Woinow, Igor. Meister der russischen Malerei. Berlin: Diakow, 1924. 26. Wulff, Oskar. Die neurussische Kunst im Rahmen der Kulturentwicklung Russlands von Peter dem Grossen bis zur Revolution. Augsburg: Filser, 1932. 26i. Alpatov, Michail. Über Westeuropäische und russische Kunst. Dresden: VEB, 1982. 26ii. Auty, R. and Obolensky, D., eds. Companion to Russian Studies. 3. An Introduction to Russian Art and Architecture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 198o, Bibl. 26iii. Bowlt, John E. Russian Art 1875-1975. A Collection of Essays. New York: MSS, 1976. 26iv. Jernakoff, Nadja and Bowlt, John E., eds. Transactions of the Association of Russian-American Scholars in USA. New York, 1982, vol. 15. Special issue devoted to Russian art. 26v. Kemenov, Vasilii. The USSR Academy of Arts. Leningrad: Aurora, 1982. ·26vi. Massie, Susan. Land of the Firebird. The Beauty of Old Russia. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1980. 26vii. Russian and Soviet Painting. New York: Metropolitan Museum, 1977. Exhibition catalogue. 26viii.Williams, Robert: Russian Art and American Money. Cambridge, Mass. Harvard University, 198o. ## ii. General Works Covering the Period ca. 189o-ca. 1930 27. Andersen, Troels. Moderne russisk kunst 1910–1930. Copenhagen: Borgen, 1967. Annenkov. Georges. See 68 28. Apollo (London), n.s., vol. 98, no. 142 (December 1973). Whole issue devoted to Russian art of the Silver Age. 29. L'Art d'avant-garde russe. Paris: Musée d'Art Moderne, 1968. Exhibition catalogue. 30. Aspects de l’avant-garde russe. 1905-1925. Paris: Galerie Jean Chauvelin, 1969. Exhibition catalogue. 31. Avantgarde Osteuropa 1910-1930. Berlin: Die Deutsche Gesellschaft für Bildende Kunst und die Akademie der Künste, 1967. Exhibition catalogue. 32. Benois, Alexandre. Memoirs. Translated from the Russian [R92] by Moura Budberg. London: Chatto and Windus; Toronto: Clarke, Irwin, 196o. 33. Berninger, Herman, and Cartier, Jean. Jean Pougny (Ivan Puni). Catalogue de l’oeuvre. Tübingen: Wasmuth, 1972. Vol. 1, Les années d'avant-garde. Russie-Berlin, 1910–1923. Bibl 34. Besançon, Alain. 'La dissidence de la peinture russe (186o-1922)."’ Annales (Paris), vol. 2, March/April 1962, 252–82. Reprinted in English as 'The Dissidence of Russian Painting." In The Structure of Russian History, ed. by Michael Cherniavsky, pp. 381-411. New York: Random House, 1970. Bojko, Szymon. See 65. 35. Bowlt, John E. "The Failed Utopia. Russian Art 1917-32." Art in America (New York), vol. 59, no. 4 (July/August 1971), 40–51. Bowlt, John E. See 40, 67. Brinton, Christian. See 66. 36. Carter, Huntly. “Russian Art Movements Since 1917."Drawing and Design (London), vol. 4, February 1928, 37–42. Cartier, Jean. See 33. 37. Chatwin, Bruce. "Moscow's Unofficial Art." The Sunday Times Magazine (London), May 6, 1973, pp. 36–54. 38. Cimaise (Paris), vol. 15, no. 85/86 (February/April 1968). Whole issue devoted to the Russian avant-garde. 39. Il Contributo russo alle avanguardie plastiche. Milan and Rome: Galleria del Levante, J964. Exhibition catalogue. 4o. Diaghilev and Russian Stage Designers: A Loan Exhibition of Stage and Costume Designs from the Collection of Mr. and Mrs. N. Lobanov-Rostovsky. Introduction by John E. Bowlt. Washington, D.C.: International Exhibitions Foundation, 1972. Exhibition catalogue. Circulated by the International Exhibitions Foundation, 1972-74. 41. Dreier, Katherine S., and Duchamp, Marcel, comps. Collection of the Société Anonyme: Museum of Modern Art, 192o. New Haven: Yale University Art Gallery, 195o. Exhibition catalogue. Duchamp, Marceł. See 41. 42. Fueloep-Miller, René. The Mind and Face of Bolshevism: An Examination of Cultural Life in Soviet Russia. London and New York: Putnam, 1928. Rev. ed.: New York: Harper, 1965. Bibl. 43. Gray, Camilla. "The Genesis of Socialist Realist Painting: Futurism, Suprematism, Constructivism."Soviet Survey (London), no. 27 (January/March 1959), pp. 32-39. 44. Gray, Camilla. 'The Russian Contribution to Modern Painting."The Burlington Magazine (London), vol. 102, no. 686 (May 196o), 205–1I. 45. Gray, Camilla. The Great Experiment. Russian Art 1863-1922. London: Thames and Hudson; New York: Abrams, 1962. Reissued as: The Russian Experiment in Art: 1863-1922. London: Thames and Hudson; New York: Abrams, 1970. Bibl. 46. Grohmann, Will. Wassily Kandinsky: Life and Work. New York: Abrams, [1958]. Bibl. 47. Guercio, Antonio del. Le Avanguardie russe e sovietiche. Milan: Fabbri, 1970. 48. Guercio, Antonio del. "Pour une histoire qui reste à écrire: l’avant-garde russe." Opus International (Paris), no. 24/25, May 1971, pp. 20–25. 49. Haskell, Larissa. 'Russian Paintings and Drawings in the Ashmolean Museum Oxford." Oxford Slavonic Papers (Oxford), n.s. vol. 2 (1969), 1-38. 50. Haskell, Larissa. "Russian Drawings in the Victoria and Albert Museum." Oxford Slavonic Papers (Oxford), n.s. vol. 5 (1972), 1–51. 51. Hilton, Alison. "When the Renaissance Came to Russia." Art News (New York), vol. 70, no. 8 (December 1971), 34–39, 56–62. 52. Jar-Ptitza (Firebird) (Berlin), 1921–26. This was an émigré journal devoted mainly to the Russian arts. Summaries of the Russian text appeared variously in English, French, and German. 53. Karpfen, Fritz. Gegenwartkunst: 1. Russland. Vienna: Verlag Literaria, 1921. 54. Leyda, Jay. Kino: A History of the Russian and Soviet Film. London: Allen and Unwin; New York: Macmillan, 196o. 55. Loukomski, George. History of Modern Russian Painting (1840–1940). London: Hutchinson; Toronto, Ryerson, 1945. 56. Lozowick, Louis. Modern Russian Art. New York: Museum of Modern Art— Société Anonyme, 1925. 57. Lwoff, Lolly. L'Art russe à Paris. Paris: La Russie et le Monde Slave, 1931. Text in French and Russian. 58. Marcadé, Valentine. Le Renouveau de l'art pictural russe. Lausanne: L'Age d'Homme, 1971. Bibl. 59. Meyer, Franz. Marc Chagall. New York: Abrams; London: Thames and Hudson, 1964. Bibl. 6o. Miliukov, Pavel Nikolaevich. Outlines of Russian Culture. Edited by Michael Karpovıch. Translated from the Russian by Valentine Ughet and Eleanor Davis. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania; Oxford: Oxford University, 1942. Vol. 3, 59–100. Translation of R116. 61. Nakov, Andrei. Alexandra Exter. Booklet issued for the Exter exhibition at Galerie Jean Chauvelin, Paris; 1972. 62. Osteuropäische Avantgarde (bis 1930). Cologne: Galerie Gmurzynska-Bargera, 1971. Exhibition catalogue. 63. Pleynet, Marcelin. "L'Avant-garde russe." Art International (Lugano), vol. 14, no. 1 (January 20, 1970), 39–44. 64. Pougny, Jean. L'Art contemporain. Berlin: Frenkel-Verlag, 1922. Published also in Russian: R172. 65. Progressive russische Kunst. Preface by Szymon Bojko. Cologne: Galerie Gmurzynska, 1973. Exhibition catalogue. 66. The Russian Art Exhibition. Introduction by Christian Brinton. New York: Grand Central Palace, 1924. Exhibition catalogue. 67. Russian Avant-Garde 1908–1922. New York: Leonard Hutton Galleries, 1971. Exhibition catalogue. Essays by S. Frederick Starr and John E. Bowlt. 68. Russian Stage and Costume Designs for the Ballet, Opera and Theatre: A Loan Exhibition from the Lobanov-Rostovsky, Oenslager, and Riabov Collections. Introduction by Georges Annenkov. Washington, D.C.: International Exhibitions Foundation, 1967. Exhibition catalogue. Circulated by the International Exhibitions Foundation, 1967–69. 69. Russische Künstler aus dem 20 Jahrhundert. Cologne: Galerie Gmurzynska-Bargera, 1968. Exhibition catalogue. 70. Salmon, André. L'Art russe moderne. Paris: Laville, 1928. 71. Schmidt, Werner. Russische Graphik des XIX und XX Jahrhunderts. Leipzig: VEB Seemann, 1967. This is an enlarged version of 150 Jahre russische Graphik 1813-1963. Katalog einer Berliner Privatsammlung. Prepared by Winifried Dierske, Glaubrecht Friedrich, and Werner Schmidt. Dresden: Staatliche Kunstsammlungen, 1964. 72. Seuphor, Michel. "Au temps de l'avant-garde.' L'Oeil (Paris), no. I I, November 1955, pp. 24–39. 73. Sjeklocha, Paul, and Mead, Igor. Unofficial Art in the Soviet Union. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California, 1967; London: Cambridge University, 1968. 74. Sotheby and Co. Catalogue of 2oth Century Russian Paintings, Drawings and Watercolours. Sold July I, 197o, London. 75. Sotheby and Co. Catalogue of 2oth Century Russian Paintings, Drawings and Watercolours. Sold April 12, 1972. London. 76. Sotheby and Co. Catalogue of 2oth Century Russian Paintings, Drawings and Watercolours 1900–1930. Sold March 29, 1972, London. Starr, S. Frederick. See 67. 77. Steneberg, Eberhard. "Die Ungeduldigen. Zum Verständnis der Ecole Russe.' Das Kunstwerk (Baden-Baden), vol. 13, no. 2/3 (August/September 1959), 3-26. 78. Steneberg, Eberhard, ed. Beitrag der Russen zur modernen Kunst. Düsseldorf: Wintersheidt, 1959. 79. Steneberg、 Eberhard. Russische Kunst, Berlin 1919-1932. Berlin: Mann, 1969. Bibl. 80. Tugendhold, Jakob. Alexandra Exter. Translated from the Russian [bibl. R181] by Count Petrovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo. Berlin: Sarja, 1922. 81. Two Decades of Experiment in Russian Art (1902-1922). London: Grosvenor Gallery, 1962. Exhibition catalogue. 82. Umanskij, Konstantin. Neue Kunst in Russland, 1914-1919. Potsdam/Munich: Kiepenheuer/Goltz, 1920. 83. Výtvarné umění (Prague), no. 8/9, 1967. Whole issue devoted to the Russian avant-garde. Partial translation in Russian, English, German, and French. 84. Woroszylski, Wiktor. The Life of Mayakovsky. Translated from the Polish by Boleslaw Taborski. New York: Orion, 1970. 84i. L’altra metà dell'avanguardia 1910–1940. Milan: Comune di Milano, 1980. (French version: L'Autre moitié de l'avant-garde 1910-1940). Exhibition catalogue. 84ii. Amiard-Chevrel, C. Le Théâtre Artistique de Moscou 1898–1917. Paris: CNRS, 1979, Bibl. 84iii. Art and Revolution. Japan: Seibu Museum of Art, 1982 (in Japanese). 84iv. Art of the Avant-Garde in Russia. Selections from the George Costakis Collection. New York: Guggenheim Museum, and other cities, 1981. 84v. The Avant-Garde in Russia 1910-1930. New Perspectives. Los Angeles: Los Angeles County Museum, 198o. Exhibition catalogue. 84vi. L'Avant-Garde au Féminin. Moscou, Saint-Pétersbourg, Paris (1907–1930). Paris: Artcurial, 1983. 84vii. Bowlt, John E., ed. Russian History. Tempe: Arizona State University, 1981, vol. 8, parts 1-2. Special issue devoted to 2oth-century Russian stage design. 84viii. Bowlt, John E. Russian Stage Design. Scenic Innovation 1900–1930 from the Collection of Mr. and Mrs. Nikita D. Lobanov-Rostovsky. Jackson: Mississippi Museum of Art, and other cities, 1982. Exhibition catalogue. 84ix. 100 oeuvres du Musée Trétiakov de Moscou. Geneva: Petit Palais, 1983. Exhibition catalogue. 84x. Contrasts of Form. Geometric Abstract Art 1910–1980. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1985. Exhibition catalogue. 84xi. Cooke, Catherine,ed. Russian Avant-Garde. Art and Architecture. Special issue of Architectural Design, London, 1983, vol. 53. 84xii. Invention and Tradition. Selected Works from the Julia A. Whitney Foundation and the Thomas P. Whitney Collection of Modernist Russian Art. Charlottesville: University of Virginia, and other cities, 198o. 84xiii. Janecek, Gerald. The Look of Russian Literature. Avant-Garde Experiments 1900–1930. Princeton: Princeton University, 1984. Bibl. 84xiv. Kean, Beverly. All the Empty Palaces. London: Barrie and Jenkins, 1983. 84xv. Kleberg, Lars. Teatern som Handling. Sovjetisk avantgard-estetik 1917–27. Stockholm: Kontrakurs, 198o. 84xvi. Kowtun, Jewgenij. Die Wiedergeburt der künstlerischen Druckgraphik. Dresden: VEB, 1984. 84xvii. Livshits, Benedikt. The One and a Half-Eyed Archer. Newtonville: ORP, 1977. English translation of bibl. R310. 84xviii. Misler, Nicoletta. Pavel Florenskij. La prospettiva rovesciata e altri scritti. Rome: Casa del libro, 1984. 84xix. Nakov, Andréi B. L'Avant-Garde Russe. Paris: Hazan, 1984. 84xx. Omuka, Toshiharu, ed. Art Vivant. Tokyo, 1982, No. 7–8. Special issue devoted to Russian art 1900–193o (in Japanese). 84xxi. Paris-Moscou. Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1979. Exhibition catalogue. 84xxii. Pasternak, Josephine (introd). The Memoirs of Leonid Pasternak. London: Quartet, 1982. 84xxiii. Rudenstine, Angelica et al. Russian Avant-Garde: The George Costakis Collection, New York: Abrams; London: Thames and Hudson, 1981. 84xxiv. Russische Kunst des 20 Jahrhunderts. Sammlung Semjonow, Esslingen am Neclear: Galerie der Stadt, 1984. Exhibition catalogue. 84xxv. Russische Malerei 1890–1917. Frankfurt: Städelsches Kunstinstitut, 1976. Exhibition catalogue. 84xxvi. Russische und sowjetischer Kunst. Tradition-Gegenwart. Düsseldorf: Städtische Kunsthalle, and other cities, 1984. Exhibition catalogue. 84xxvii. Russisk malerei fra slutten av det 19. og begynnelsen av det 20 arhundre. Oslo: Munch-Museet, 1983. Exhibition catalogue. 84xxviii. Sammlung Costakis. Düsseldorf: Kunstmuseum, 1977. Exhibition catalogue. 84xxix. Sieben moskauer Künstler/Seven Moscow Artists 1910-1930. Cologne: Galeria Gmurzynska, 1984. Exhibition catalogue. 84xxx. Vom Klang der Bilder. Stuttgart: Staatsgalerie, 1985. Exhibition catalogue. 84xxxi. Zelinsky, Bodo. Russische Avantgarde, 1907-1921. Bonn: Grundmann, 1983. ## I. The Subjective Aesthetic: Symbolism and the Intuitive Benois, Aleksandr. Autobiography: 32, R92. Other works by: 3, R26, R27, R28, R145i, R159, R193, R218, R244, R261, R262. Biography: R216. Other works on: 28, 101i, 101iii, 101ix, R194. Bibl. information: R216. 85. Bowlt, John E. "The World of Art.'"Russian Literature Triquarterly (Ann Arbor), Fall 1972, pp. 183–218. 86. Bowlt, John E. ‘Symbolism and Synthesism: The Russian World of Art Movement.'"' Forum (St. Andrews, Scotland), vol. 9, no. 1 (January 1973), 35-48. 87. Bowlt, John E. "Russian Symbolism and the. Blue Rose Movement." The Slavonic and East European Review (London), vol. 51, no.. 123 (April 1973), 161–81. 88. Bowlt, John E. "Nikolai Ryabushinsky: A Moscow Maecenas.' Apollo (London), vol. 98, no. 142 (December 1973). Burliuk, David. For bibl. references see II. 89. Guenther, Johannes von. Ein Leben im Ostwind. Zwischen Petersburg und Munchen. Erinnerungen. Munich: Biederstein, 1969. 90. Hahl-Koch, Jelena. Marianne Werefkin und der russische Symbolismus. Munich Sagner, 1967. Bibl. 91. Jullian, Philippe. Dreamers of Decadence: Symbolist Painters of the 189o's. Translated by Robert Baldick. New York: Praeger, 1971. 92. Kalmakoff. Paris: Galerie Motte, 1965. Exhibition catalogue. 93. Kalmakoff. London: Hartnoll and Eyre, 1970. Exhibition catalogue. 94. Kandinsky, Wassily. Über das Geistige in der Kunst. Munich: Piper, 1912. First English translation: The Art of Spiritual Harmony. London: Constable; Boston: Houghton Miflin, 1914. Several subsequent editions, under varying titles, e.g., On the Spiritual in Art, Concerning the Spiritual in Art. 95. Kandinsky, Wassily. "Über die Formfrage." In Der Blaue Reiter, edited by Kandinsky and Franz Marc, pp. 74–100. Munich: Piper, 1912. Several subsequent editions. English translation: "On the Question of Form." In The 'Blaue Reiter" Almanac, edited and with an Introduction by Klaus Lankheit. Translated by Henning Falkenstein with the assistance of Manug Terzian and Gertrude Hinderlie, pp. 147-87. The Documents of 2oth-Century Art. London: Thames and Hudson; New York: Viking, 1974. Kandinsky, Vasilii. Works by: 94, 95, R222, R223, R392–94. Biography: 46. Other works on: 97, 100. Bibl. information: 46. Kandinsky, Vasilii, Works by: 94, 95, 101v, 101x, 10ıxiii, 101xiv, R217iv, R222, R223, R392–94. Biography: 46. Other works on: 84xxiii, 97, 100, 101vi, 101vii, 101viii, 101xi, 101xii, 101xv, 101xvi, 101xvii. 96. Kulbin, Nikolai. "Die freie Musik." In Der Blaue Reiter, edited by Wassily Kandinsky and Franz Marc, pp. 69–73. Munich: Piper, 1912. Apart from the Russian versions of this essay {R226-27], it had also appeared in French: Nicolas Koulbine. La musique libre. Application à la musigue de la nouvelle théorie de la création. St. Petersburg: Voennaya tipografiya, 191o. Several subsequent editions. English translation:"Free Music.' In The 'Blaue Reiter' Almanac, Pp. 141–46. See under bibl. 95. Kulbin, Nikolai. Works by: 96, R224–31, R307. Biography: R240. Other works on: R102, R217iv, R218, R220, R239. Some bibl. information: 133, R240. Book illustrations: R219, R229, R291, R292, R340. Marc, Franz. See 95. Markov, Vladimir. Works by: R232–35. Biography: 98. Works on: R217iii, R217v, R217vi. 97. Roethel, Hans Konrad. Kandinsky. Das graphische Werk. Cologne: DuMont Schauberg, 1970. Ryabushinsky, Nikolai. Works by: R214, R215, R251. Biography: 88. Other work on: R218. 98. 6o Jahre lettischer Kunst. Introduction by Roman Suta. Leipzig: Pandora, 1923. Exhibition catalogue. 99. La Toison d'or. (Moscow), vol. 1, no. 1–6, (1906). The first six numbers of Nikolai Ryabushinsky's Zolotoe runo [The Golden Fleece] appeared both in Russian and in French. See R45. Ioo. Washton Long, Rose-Carol. “Kandinsky and Abstraction: The Role of the Hidden Image." Artforum (New York), vol. 10, no. 10 (June 1972), 42-49. 101. Woloschin, Margarite. Die grüne Schlange. Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlag-Anstalt, 1956. 1oii. Alexandre Benois. London: Hazlitt, Gooden and Fox, 198o. Exhibition catalogue. 1oii. Barnett, Vivian Endicott. Kandinsky at the Guggenheim. New York: Abbeville, 1983. 101iii. Bowlt, John E. et al. Mir iskusstva. Rome: E/O, 1984. 1o1iv. Bowlt, John E. The Silver Age. Russian Art of the Early Twentieth Century and the ‘World of Art" Group. Newtonville: ORP, 1979. 1oiv. Bowlt, John E. and Washton Long, Rose-Carol. The Life of Vasili Kandinsky in Russian Art. Newtonville: ORP, 198o. Bibl. 1oıvi. Hahl-Koch, Jelena, ed. Arnold Schönberg -Wassily Kandinsky. Briefe, Bilder und Dokumente einer aussergewöhnlichen Begegnung. Salzburg and Vienna: Residenz, 1980. 1o1vii. Kandinsky. Oeuvres de Vassily Kandinsky (1866–1944). Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1984. Exhibition catalogue. 1oiviii. Kandinsky. Trente peintures des Musées soviétiques. Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1979. Exhibition catalogue. 101ix. Kennedy, Janet. The "Mir iskusstva" Group and Russian Art, 1898–1912. New York: Garland, 1977. 1o1x. Lindsay, Kenneth C. and Vergo, Peter, eds. Kandinsky. Complete Writings on Art. Boston: Hall, 1982 (2 vols.). 101xi. Poling, Clark V. Kandinsky. Russia and Bauhaus Years 1915-1933. New York: Guggenheim, 1983. Exhibition catalogue. Bibl. 101xii. Poling, Clark V. Kandinsky. Unterricht am Bauhaus. Weingarten: Weingarten, 1982. Bibl. 1oixiii. Roethel, Hans K. and Benjamin, Jean K. Kandinsky. Catalogue Raisonné of the Oil-Paintings. Vol. 1, 1900–1915. Ithaca: Cornell, 1982. 1oixiv. Roethel, Hans K. and Benjamin, Jean K. Kandinsky. Catalogue Raisonné of the Oil-Paintings. Vol. 2, 1916–1944. Ithaca: Cornell, 1984. 101xv. Washton Long, Rose-Carol. Kandinsky. The Development of an Abstract Style. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 198o. Bibl. 1oixvi. Weiss, Peg. Kandinsky in Munich. The Formative Jugendstil Years. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979. Bibl. 10ixvii. Zweite, Armin. Kandinsky und München. Begegnungen und Wandlungen 1896–1914. Munich: Prestel, 1982. ## II. Neoprimitivism and Cubofuturism Aksenov, Ivan. Works by: R257, R258, R372, R452. Some bibl. information: 133. Biography: R23i. Apollinaire, Guillaume. See 119. 102. Arts Council Exhibition: Larionov and Goncharova. London, Bristol, Leeds, 1961. Exhibition catalogue compiled by Mary Chamot and Camilla Gray. 103. Ausstellung Der Sturm: Larionov und Gontcharova. Berlin, 1914. Exhibition catalogue. 104. Barr, Alfred H., Jr. Cubism and Abstract Art. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1936. Reprinted: New York: Arno, 1966; London: Cass, 1967. Bibl. 105. Besançon, Alain. “Robert Falk." Cahiers du monde russe et soviétique (Paris), vol. 3, no. 4 (1962), 564–81. 106. Der Blaue Reiter. Munich: Galerie Thannhauser, 1911. Exhibition catalogue. 107. Der Blaue Reiter. Munich: Galerie Hans Goltz, 1912. Exhibition catalogue. 108. Der Blaue Reiter. Almanac: see 95. Brinton, Christian. See 122. 109. Burliuk, David, ed. Color and Rhyme (Hampton Bays, N.Y.), 193o–66. Burliuk, David. Works by: 108, 109, 258, R269–76. Biography: 117. Other works on: 145ix, R102, R256iii, R278. Bibl. information: 133. Book illustrations: 145iv, R272, R274, R312. I1o. Bowlt, John E. "Neo-primitivism and Russian Painting." The Burlington Magazine (London), vol. 116, no. 853 (March i974), 133-40. II1. Calvesi, Maurizio. L'Arte moderna. Il futurismo russo. Milan: Fabbri, vol. 5, no. 44 (1967). Whole issue devoted to the subject. I12. Carrieri, Raffaele. I Futurismo. Milan: Edizioni del milione, 1961; English edition: Futurism. Milan: Edizioni del milione, n.d. Bibl. I 13. Chamot, Mary. "The Early Work of Larionov and Goncharova." The Burlington Magazine (London), vol. 97, no. 627 (June 1955), 170–71. I 14. Chamot, Mary. Gontcharova. Paris: La Bibliothèque des arts, 1972. Bibl. Chamot, Mary. See 102. I 15. Cooper, Douglas. The Cubist Epoch. London: Phaidon, 1971. Exhibition catalogue: Los Angeles County Museum and Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1971. 116. Davies, Ivor. "Primitivism in the First Wave of the Twentieth-Century Avant-Garde in Russia."' Studio International (London), vol. 186, no. 958 (September 1973), 80–84. I17. Dreier, Katherine S. Burliuk. New York: Museum of Modern Art—Société Anonyme, 1944. 118. Erster deutscher Herbstsalon. Berlin: Galerie Der Sturm, 1913. Exhibition catalogue. 1 19. Exposition de N. Gontcharova et M. Larionov. Compiled by Guillaume Apollinaire. Paris: Galerie Paul Guillaume, 1914. Exhibition catalogue. Fry, Roger. See 142. 12o. Gambillo, Maria Drudi, and Fiori, Teresa, eds. Archivi del futurismo. Rome: De Luca, 1958. Selected translations in: Apollonio, Umbro, ed. Futurist Manifestos. Translated from the Italian by Robert Brain, R. W. Flint, J. C. Higgitt, Caroline Tisdali. The Documents of 2oth-Century Art. London: Thames and Hudson; New York: Viking, 1973. "Futurist Painting: Technical Manifesto"appears on pp. 27-31. 121. George, Waldemar. Larionov. Paris: La Bibliothèque des arts, 1966. Bibl. German edition: Lucerne and Frankfurt: Bucher, 1968. 122. The Goncharova-Larionov Exhibition. Introduction by Christian Brinton. New York: Kingore Gallery, 1922. Exhibition catalogue. 123. Gonjarova-Larjonov-Mansourov. Bergamo: Galleria Lorenzelli, 1966. Exhibition catalogue. Goncharova, Natalya. Works by: 149, R252. Biography:114. Other works on: 84xxiii, 102, 103, 113, 119, 122, 123, 127, 132, 137, 145iii, 145xi, 145xii, 146, 148, 150, 176ix, 176xvii, R264, R335, R349, R354, R356, R357. Bibl. information: 114, 132. Book illustrations: 145iv, R272, R279, R292, R296, R299, R306, R319. Gray, Camilla. See 102. 124. Jensen, Kjeld Bjornager. "Marinetti in Russia—1910, 1912, 1914?"Scando-Slavica (Copenhagen), vol. 15 (1969), 21–26. 125. Khérumian, Raphaël, et al. Notes et Documenis. Paris: Société des amis de Georges Yakoulov, no. 1, 2, 3 (1967, 1969, 1972). Bibl. 126. Kriz, Jan. "Pawel Nikolajewitsch Filonow. Mitbegründer und Kritiker der russischen künstlerischen Avantgarde.' Alte und Moderne Kunst (Vienna), vol. 96 (1968), 32–39. 127. Larionov-Gontcharova. Basel: Galerie Beyeler, 1961. Exhibition catalogue. 128. Michel Larionov. Lyon: Musée de Lyon, 1967. Exhibition catalogue. I29. Michel Larionov. Introduction by François Daulte. New York: Acquavella Galleries, 1969. Exhibition catalogue. 130. Larionov. Paris: Galerie de Paris, 1969. Exhibition catalogue. A slightly larger version of this exhibition opened in Nevers et la Nièvre, Maison de la Culture de Nevers et la Nièvre, 1972. Separate catalogue with an Introduction by Jean Goldman. Larionov, Mikhail. Works by: 145ix, 149, R252, R361. Biography:121. Other works on: 84xxiii, 102, 103, 113, 119, 122, 123, 127–30, 132, 141, 144,145xi,145xii,146,147,148,150, R135,R253,R256iv,R286, R319, R321, R349, R356, R357. Book illustrations: 145iv, R272, R296, R297, R298, R300, R319. 131. Livchits, Benedikt. L'Archer à un oeil et demi. Translated from the Russian [bibl. R3io], prefaced, and annotated by Emma Sébald, Valentine and Jean-Claude Marcadé. Lausanne: L'Age d'Homme, 1971. 132. Loguine, Tatiana. Gontcharova et Larionov. Paris: Klincksieck, 1971. I 33. Markov, Vladimir. Russian Futurism: A History. Berkeley: University of California, 1968; London: MacGibbon and Kee, 1969. Bibl. 134. Neue Künstlervereinigung. Munich: Moderne Galerie Thannhauser, 1909. Exhibition catalogue. 135. Neue Künstlervereinigung. Munich: Moderne Galerie Thannhauser, 1910. Exhibition catalogue. I36. Neue Künstlervereinigung. Munich: Moderne Galerie Thannhauser, 1911. Exhibition catalogue. 137. Rétrospective Gontcharova. Bourges: Maison de la Culture de Bourges, 1973. This was a condensed and modified version of the exhibition “Nathalie Gontcharova'in Lyon, Musée des Beaux-Arts, 1969. 138. Ripellino, Angelo. Majakovskii e il teatro russo d'avanguardia. Turin: Einaudi, 1959. French translation: Maiakovski et la théâtre russe d'avant-garde. Paris: L'Arche, 1965. 139. Robel, Léon, trans. Manifestes futuristes russes. Paris: Editeurs Français Réunis,1972. 140. Rye, Jane. Futurism. London: Studio Vista; New York: Dutton, 1972. 141. Schafran, Lynn. "Larionov and the Russian Vanguard." Art News (New York), vol. 68, no. 3 (May 1969), 66–67. 142. The Second Post-Impressionist Exhibition. London: Grafton Galleries, 1912. Organized by Roger Fry. Exhibition catalogue. Shevchenko, Aleksandr. Autobiography: Ri77 (vol. I). Other work by: R355. Biography: R283. Other works on: R254, R256. 143. Tschižewskij, Dmitrij. Anfänge des russischen Futurismus. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1963. 144. Vergo, Peter. "A Note on the Chronology of Larionov's Early Work."The Burlington Magazine (London), vol. 114, no. 832 (July 1972), 476–79. Yakulov, Georgii. See 124. 145. Zdanévitch, Cyrille. Niko Pirosmani. Translated from the Russian by Lydia Delt and Véra Varzi. Paris: Gallimard, 197o. Zdanevich, Ilya. Works by: R356, R357. Some bibl. information: 133. Works on: 145vi, 145vii. 145i. Andersen, Troels et al., eds. Art et poésie russes 1910–1930. Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1979. 145ii. Bauermeister, Christiane, ed. Sieg über die Sonne. Aspekte russischer Kunst zu Beginn des 20. Jahrhunderts. Berlin: Frölich and Kaufman, 1983. Bibl. 145iii. Chamot, Mary. Goncharova. Designs and Paintings. London: Oresko, 1979. Bibl. 145iv. Compton, Susan. The World Backwards. Russian Futurist Books 1912–1916. London: The British Library, 1978, Bibl. 145v. Futurismo e futurismi. Venice: Palazzo Grassi, 1986. Exhibition catalogue. 145vi. Iliazd. Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1978. Exhibition catalogue. 145vii. Iliazd. Maître d’oeuvre du livre moderne. Quebec: Galerie d'art de l'Université, 1984. Exhibition catalogue. Bibl. 145viii. Khardzhiev, Nikolai and Trenin, Vladimir. Culture poétique de Maiakovski. Lausanne: L'Age d'Homme, 1982. French translation of R350. 145ix. Ladurner, H.“David D. Burljuks Leben und Schaffen 1908-1920," Wiener Slawistischer Almanac. Vienna. 1978, vol. 1, pp. 27–55. 145x. Marcadé, Jean-Claude, ed. Michel Larionov. Une Avant-Garde Explosive. Lausanne: L’Age d’Homme, 1978. 145xi. Nathalie Gontcharova. Michel Larionov. Milan: Arte Centro, 1984. Exhibition catalogue. 145xii. Pospelow, Gleb. Moderne russische Malerei. Die Künstlergruppe Karo-Bube. Berlin: Kohlhammer, 1985. ## III. Nonobjective Art ## RAYONISM 146. Berlewi, Henryk. "Michael Larionoff, N. Gontscharova und der Rayonnismus." Werk (Zurich), October 1961, pp. 364–68. 147. Daulte, François. "Larionov, le rayonniste." Connaissance des Arts (Paris), no. 179 (January 1967), pp. 46–53. 148. Degand, Léon. "Le Rayonnisme: Larionov—Goncharova."' Art d'aujourd'hui (Paris), série 2, no. 2 (November 1950), pp. 26–29. 149. Larionow, Michele, and Gonciarova, Natalia. Radiantismo. Translated from the Russian by Nina Antonelli. Rome, 1917. Larionov, Mikhail. For bibl. references see II. 150. Steneberg, Eberhard. "Larionov, Gontscharowa und der Rayonnismus."Das Kunstwerk (Baden-Baden), vol. 16, no. 8 (February 1963), 11–22. ## SUPREMATISM (Note: entries in this section are highly selective; the reader is referred to 33, 159, and 160 in particular for comprehensive bibliographies.) 151. Andersen, Troels. 'Malevich on 'New Art.'"Studio International (London), vol. 174, no. 892 (September 1967), 100–105. Andersen, Troels. See 27, 159, 160. Boguslavskaya, Kseniya. Some biographical information: 33 Work by: R382. Book illustration: R406. 152. Bowlt, John E. "Malevich's Joumey into the Non-Objective World." Art News (New York), vol. 72,no. 10 (December 1973),16–22. Gray, Camilla. See 43, 44, 45, 161. 153. Habasque, Guy. 'Documents inédits sur les débuts du Suprématisme." Art d'aujourd'hui (Paris), no. 4, September 1955, pp. 14–16. Klyun, Ivan. Works by: R289, R290. Book illustrations: R304 Works on: 84xx, 176iv. 154. Koudriachov. Paris: Galerie Jean Chauvelin, 1970. Exhibition catalogue. 155. Kovtun, E. "Malevičova mýslenka plastické beztiže." Výtvarné pracé (Prague), no. 2, 1967, p. 10. 156. Lamač, Miroslav. 'Malevič a jeho okruh."Výtvarné umění (Prague), no. .8/9, 1967, pp: 365ff. See also 83. Lissitzky, El. For bibl. references see V. I57. Malevich, Kazimir. Die gegenstandslose Welt. Bauhausbücher no. I I. Munich: Langen, 1927. English edition: The Non-Objective World. Translated by Howard Dearstyne. Chicago: Theobald, 1959. I58. Malevich, Kazimir. '"Autobiographical Fragment.'" Studio International (London), vol. 176, no. 905 (October 1968), 129–33. 159. Malevich, K. S. Essays on Art 1915–1928. Edited by Troels Andersen. Translated by Xenia Glowacki-Prus and Arnold McMillin. 2 vols. Copenhagen: Borgen, 1968; London, Rapp and Whiting, 1969; et al. 16o. Malevich. Compiled by Troels Andersen. Amsterdam: Stedelijk Museum, 1970. Catalogue. Bibl. 161. Kasimir Malevich, 1878–1935. Introduced by Camilla Gray. London: Whitechapel Art Gallery, 1959. Exhibition catalogue. 162. Casimir Malevic. Rome: Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna, 1959. Exhibition catalogue. 163. Kasimir Malevic. Milan: Galleria Breton, 1971. Exhibition catalogue. 164. Malevitch: Dessins. Paris: Galerie Jean Chauvelin, 1970. Exhibition catalogue. 165. Kasimir Malewitsch. Braunschweig: Kunstverein, 1958. Exhibition catalogue. 166. Kasimir Malewitsch. Suprematismus—Die gegenstandslose Welt. Edited by Werner Haftmann. Translated from the Russian by Hans von Riesen. Cologne: DuMont Schauberg, 1962. Malevich, Kazimir. Autobiography: 158, R187iv. Other works by: 157, 159, 163, 166, 171, 176, 176xii, 176xiii, 176iv, 176xviii, 176xix. Biography: 160. Other works on: 84xxiii, 151, 155, 156, 161, 162, 164, 165, 170, 176ii, 176iii, 176vi, 176vii, 176xi, 176xxiv, 176xxv, R360, R363, R366. Bibl. information: 159, 160. Book illustrations: 145iv, R284, R292, R293, R303, R304, R306, R351-53. 167. Nakov, Andréi. "Destination l'infini: la théorie du suprématisme."XX Siècle (Paris), n.s., no.33 (December 1969), 171–72. Also see 173. 168. The Non-objective World, 1914-1924. London: Annely Juda Fine Art; Paris: Galerie Jean Chauvelin; Milan: Galleria Milano, 1970. Exhibition catalogue. Editions in English, French, and Italian. 169. The Non-objective World, 1924-1939. London: Annely Juda Fine Art; Paris: Galerie Jean Chauvelin; Milan: Galleria Milano, 1971. Exhibition catalogue. Editions in English, French, and Italian. 170. Penkula, Eduard. "Malewitschs Oeuvre geborgen."Das Kunstwerk (Baden-Baden), vol. 11, no. 10 (April 1958), 3–16. Popova, Lyubov. Some biographical details: 45, R184, R435, R475. Works on: 84xxiii, 176i, 176ix, 176x, 176xvii, 176xxii 171. Pugh, Simon. "An Unpublished Manuscript by Malevich." Studio International (London), vol. 183, no. 942 (March 1972), 100–102. Puni, Ivan (Pougny, Jean). Works by: 64, 176, R172, R365, R412. Biography: 33. Other works on: 84xxiii, 176v, R359. Bibl. information: 33. Book illustrations: 145iv, R273, R406. Rodchenko, Aleksandr. For bibl. references see V. Rozanova, Olga. Work by: R 332. Works on: R186, R290. Book illustrations: R273, R291-96, R300, R301, R302, R306, R313, R333, R339, R340. 172. Seuphor, Michel. "Suprématisme et Néo-plasticisme." Art d'aujourd'hui (Paris); no. 7/8 (September 1950), pp. 22–24. Stepanova, Varvara. For bibl. references see V. 173. Tatlin's Dream. Russian Suprematist and Constructivist Art 1910-1923. London: Fischer Fine Art Limited, 1973. Essay by Andrei Nakov. Exhibition catalogue. 174. Vallier, Dora. "L'Art abstrait en Russie: ses origines, ses premières manifestations 1910–1917." Cahiers d'Art (Paris), vol. 33–35, (1960), 259–85. 175. Veronesi, Giulia. Suprematisti e construttivisti in Russia. L'Arte moderna, vol. 6, no. 48. Milan: Fabbri, 1967. 176. Westheun, Paul, ed. Künstlerbekenntnisse. Briefe, Tagebuchblätter, Betrachtungen heutiger Künstler. Bérlin: Propyläen-Verlag, 1925. Contains statements by Natan Altman, El Lissitzky, Kazimir Malevich, Ivan Puni, et al. 176i. Bowlt, John E.“Liubov Popova, Painter" in bibl. i 26iv, pp. 227-51. 176ii. Bowlt, John E. and Douglas, Charlotte, eds. Soviet Union. Tempe: Arizona State University, 1978, vol. 5, part 2. Special issue devoted to Kazimir Malevich. Bibl. 176iii. Douglas, Charlotte. Swans of Other Worlds. Ann Arbor: University Microfilms International, 198o. Bibl. 176iv. Ivan Vasilievich Kliun. New York: Matignon Gallery, 1983. Exhibition catalogue. 176v. Iwan Puni (Jean Pougny) 1892–1956. Berlin: Haus am Waldsee, 1975. Exhibition catalogue. 176vi. Kasimir Malewitsch. Cologne: Galerie Gmurzynska, 1978. Exhibition catalogue. 176vii. Kasimir Malewitsch (1878–1935). Werke aus sowjetischen Sammlungen. Düsseldorf: Kunsthalle, 1980. 176viii. Die Kunstismen in Russland/The Isms of Art in Russia. Cologne: Galerie Gmurzynska, 1977. Exhibition catalogue. 176ix. Künstlerinnen der russischen Avantgarde/Women-Artists of the Russian Avant-Garde 1910–1930. Cologne: Galerie Gmurzynska, 1979. Exhibition catalogue. 176x. Liubov Popova. New York: Rachel Adler Gallery, 1985. Exhibition catalogue. 176xi. Malévitch. Oeuvres de Casimir Severinovitch Malévitch (1878–1935). Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1980. 176xii. Marcadé, Jean-Claude, ed. K. Malévitch. Le miroir suprématiste. Lausanne: L'Age d'Homme, 1978. 176xiii. Marcadé, Jean-Claude, ed. Malévitch. Colloque international Kazimir Malévitch. Lausanne: L'Age d’Homme, 1979. 176xiv. Marcadé, Jean-Claude (ed.): K. Malévitch. La lumiere et la couleur, Lausanne: L'Age d'Homme, 1981. 176xv. Masterpieces of the Avantgarde. London: Annely Juda Fine Art/Juda Rowan Gallery, 1985. Exhibition catalogue. 176xvi. Meisterwerke russischer Malerei. Cologne: Josef-Haubrich-Kunsthalle, 1984. Exhibition catalogue. 176xvii. Nakov, Andréi B. Abstrait/Concret. Art Non-Objectif russe et polonais. Paris: Editions de minuit, 1981. Bibl. 176xviii. Nakov, Andréi B., ed. Malévitch. Ecrits. Paris: Champ Libre, 1975. Bibl. 1 76xix. Nakov, Andréi B., ed. Kazimir S. Malevic. Scritti, Milan: Feltrinelli, 1977. Bibl. 176xx. Plastyka radziecka. Sztuka okresu pazdziernika 1917-1930. Warsaw: Zacheta, 1982. Exhibition catalogue. 1 76xxi. Russian Pioneers at the Origins of Non-Objective Art. London: Annely Juda Fine Art, 1976. Exhibition catalogue. 176xxii. Russian Suprematist and Constructivist Art 1910-1930. London: Fischer Fine Art, 1976. 1 76xxiii. Sarabianov, Dmitrii. “The Painting of Liubov Popova" in bibl. ii 84v, pp. 42-45. 176xxiv. Shadowa [Zhadova, Zsadova], Larissa: Suche und Experiment. Russische und sowjetische Kunst 1910 bis 1930. Dresden: VEB, 1978. English translation: Malevich, Suprematism and Revolution in Russian Art 1910–1930. London: Thames and Hudson, 1982. Bibl 176xxv. The Suprematist Straight Line. Malevich, Suetin, Chashnik, Lissitzky. London: Annely Juda Fine Art, 1977. Exhibition catalogue. 176xxvi. Vanguardia Rusa 1910–1930. Museo y coleccion Ludwig. Madrid: Fundacion Juan March, 1985. Exhibition catalogue. 176xxvii. Vesnin, Aleksandr. For bibl. references see V. 176xxviii. Von der Fläche zum Raum/From Surface to Space. Russland/Russia 1916–1924. Cologne: Galerie Gmurzynska, 1974. Exhibition catalogue. ## IV. The Revolution and Art ## PROLETKULT 177. Bogdanow, Alexander. Die. Kunst und das Proletariat. Leipzig: "Der Kentaur,"1919. Bogdanov, Aleksandr. Works by: 177, 180, 209x, R367. Biography: 179. Bibl. information: 179. 178. Eastman, Max. Education and Art in Soviet Russia in the Light of Official Decrees and Documents. New York: Socialist Publication Society, 1919. 179. Grille, Dietrich. Lenins Rivale. Bogdanov und seine Philosophie. Cologne: Wissenschaft und Politik, 1966. Bibl. 180. Lorenz, Richard, ed. Proletarische Kulturrevolution in Sowjetrussland 1917-1921. Dokumente des 'Proletkult.'Translated from the Russian by Uwe Brügmann and Gert Meyer. Munich: Deutscher Taschenbuch, 1969. 181. Paul, Eden, and Paul, Cedar. Proletcult. London: Parsons, 1921. ## GENERAL ASPECTS Altman, Natan. Work by: 176. Biography: R185, 209v. Other works on: R186, R259, R434v. Bibl. information: R185. 182. Art in Revolution: Soviet Art and Design since 1917. London: Arts Council/Hayward Gallery, 1971. Exhibition catalogue. Shown in Bologna, New York, Ontario, 1971-72, under same title; in Frankfurt, Stuttgart, and Cologne as Kunst in der Revolution, 1972-73. Texts in English catalogue by Camilla Gray-Prokofieva et al. 183. Arte nella Russia dei Sovieti; il padigloione dell'U.R.S.S. a Venezia. Text by Vinicio Paladini. Roma: La Bilancia, 1925. Exhibition catalogue. See 198. 184. Barooshian, Vahan. "The Avant-garde and the Russian Revolution.'Russian Literature Triquarterly (Ann Arbor), Fall 1972, pp. 347–6o. 185. Barr, Alfred H., Jr. "The 'LEF' and Soviet Art." Transition (New York), no. 14, (Fall 1928), pp. 267–70. Bodine, Sarah. See 205. 186. Bojko, Szymon. "L'Affiche révolutionnaire." Opus International (Paris), no. 5, (February 1968), pp. 29–33. 187. Boyko, Szymon. New Graphic Design in Revolutionary Russia. Translated from the Polish by Robert Strytel and Lech Zembrzuski. London: Lund Humphries; New York: Praeger, 1972. Bibl. 188. Bowlt, John E. “Russian Art in the 192os." Soviet Studies (Glasgow), vol. 22, no. 4 (April 1971), 574-94. 189. Bowlt, John E. 'Russian Formalism and the Visual Arts."2oth Century Studies (Canterbury), no. 7/8, December 1972, pp. 131–46. 190. Braun, Edward, trans. and ed. Meyerhold on Theatre. New York: Hill and Wang; London: Methuen, 1969. 191. Bringas, Esperanza Velázquez. El Arte en la Rusia actual. Mexico City: 1923. 192. Carter, Huntly. The New Theatre and Cinema of Soviet Russia. London: Chapman and Dodd, 1924; New York: International, 1925. 193. Carter, Huntly. The New Spirit in the Russian Theatre, 1917-1928. London: Brentano's, 1929. 194. Congrat-Butler, Stefan, comp. Russian Revolutionary Posters, 1917-1929. New York: Grove Press, 1971. 195. Cossío del Pomar, Felipe. “El arte ruso y la revolución." In La rebelión de los pintores, pp. 271–328. Mexico City: Editorial Leyenda, 1945. 196. “Dans la foulée d'Octobre: Les arts soviétiques des premières années." Les Lettres françaises (Paris), no. 1207 (November 8–14, 1967), pp. 22–26. 197. Erste Russische Kunstausstellung. Introduction by David Shterenberg. Berlin: Galerie van Diemen, 1922. Exhibition catalogue. 198. Esposizione internazionale d'arte. XIV biennale internazionale d’arte della città di Venezia. Catalogue of the Russian section. Text by Boris Ternovetz. Venice, 1924. See also 183. 199. Fitzpatrick, Sheila. The Commissariat of Enlightenment. Soviet Organization of Education and the Arts Under Lunacharsky, October, 1917–1921. Cambridge: Cambridge University, 1971. Bibl. Gray-Prokofieva, Camilla. See 43, 44, 45, 182. 2oo. Gregor, Joseph, and Fueloep-Miller, René. Das Russische Theater. Mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Revolutionsperiode. Vienna: Amalthea, 1927. English edition: The Russian Theatre. Translated by Paul England. London: Harrap; Philadelphia: Lippincott, 193o. 201. Higgens, Andrew. "Art and Politics in the Russian Revolution."Studio International (London), vol. 18o: no. 927 (November 1970), 164–67; no. 929 (December 1970), 224-27. 202. Jelenski, K. A. "Avant-garde and the Revolution." Arts (New York), vol. 35, no. 1 (October 1960), 36–41. Komfut. Works by: consult R73 and references to Osip Brik, Boris Kushner, and Nikolai Punin. Works on: R497, R499. Kushner, Boris. Works by: R395–97, R470, and consult R73, R76. Some bibl. information: 133. Lef. Works by: R76. Works on: consult 84, 133, R16, R341. 203. Lunacharski, Anatoli Vasilievich. Las Artes plásticas y la política artística de la Rusia revolucionaria. Translated by José M. Güell. Barcelona: Editorial Seix y Barral, 1969. Russian texts in R402–403. 204. Lunatscharski, Anatoli. Die Revolution und die Kunst: Essays, Reden, Notizen. Selected and translated by Franz Leschnitzer. Dresden: VEB Verlag der Kunst, 1962. Russian texts in R402-403. Lunacharsky, Anatolii. Works by: 203–204, R402–403, R434i, R471. Biography: 199, 209xv: Bibl. information: 199, R402–403. Pertsov, Viktor. Work by: R434xi. Punin, Nikolai. Works by: R253, R410, R413-19, R444-45, and consult R66, R73, R82, R434vi. Some biographical information: 23oix, R435. 205. Russian Art of the Revolution. Compiled by Sarah Bodine. Cornell: Andrew Dickson Museum of Art; Brooklyn: Brooklyn Museum of Art, 1971. Exhibition catalogue. 206. Shterenberg, David. "Die künstlerische Situation in Russland."Das Kunstblatt (Berlin), no. I1, November 1922, pp. 485–92. Shterenberg, David. Autobiography: R177 (vol. 1). Other works by: 197, 206, and consult R66, R73, R489. Works on: R186, R434, R434ix. Ternovetz, Boris. See 198. 207. Umanskij, Konstantin. 'Die neue Monumentalskulptur in Russland." Der Ararat (Munich), no. 5/6, 1920, pp. 29–33. Reprinted in modified form in bibl. 82. 208. Westheim, Paul. Die Ausstellung der Russen."Das Kunstblatt (Berlin), no. II, November 1922, pp. 493-98. 209. Wollen, Peter. ‘Art in Revolution: Russian Art in the Twenties." Studio International (London), vol. 181, no. 932 (April 1971), 149–54. 2o9i. Art for the Masses. Russian Revolutionary Art from the Merrill C. Berman Collection. Williamstown: Williams College Museum of Art, and other cities, 1985. Exhibition catalogue. 2o9ii. Bowlt, John E., ed. Soviet Union. Tempe: Arizona State University, 1980, vol. 7, parts 1-2. Special issue devotęd to Soviet art of the 192os. 2o9iii. Dada Constructivism. London: Annely Juda Fine Art, 1984. Exhibition catalogue. 2ogiv. Dragone, Pier Giorgio et al., eds. Arte e rivoluzione. Documenti delle avanguardie tedesche e sovietiche 1918–1932. Milan: Unicopli, 1978. 209v. Etkind, Mark. Nathan Altman. Dresden: VEB, 1984. Bibl. 209vi. The First Russian Show. London: Annely Juda Fine Art, 1983. Exhibition catalogue. 2o9vii. Flaker, Aleksandr et al., eds. Knijevnost avangarda revolucija. Zagreb: University of Zagreb, 1981. 2o9viii. Gassner, Hubertus and Gillen, Eckhart, eds. Zwischen Revolutionskunst und Sozialistischen Realismus. Dokumente und Kommentare. Kunstdebatten in der Sowjetunion von 1917 bis 1934. Cologne: DuMont, 1979. Bibl. 2o9ix. Gleason, Abbott et al., eds. Bolshevik Culture. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985. 2o9x. Graham, Loren R. and Stites, Richard, eds. Red Star. The First Bolshevik Utopia by Alexander Bogdanov. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985. 2o9xi. Guerman, Michail. Art of the October Revolution. New York: Abrams, 1979. Editions also in Russian, German and French. 2o9xii. Magarotto, Luigi et al., eds. L’Avanguardia a Tiflis. Venice: Università degli Studi, 1982. 209xiii. Milner, John. Russian Revolutionary Art. London: Oresko, 1979. 2o9xiv. Nilsson, Nils Ake, ed. Art, Society, Revolution. Russia 1917–1921. Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1979. 2o9xv. O'Connor, Timothy Edward. The Politics of Soviet Culture. Anatolii Lunacharskii. Ann Arbor: University Microfilms International, 1983. Bibl. 2o9xvi. Peters, Jochen-Ulrich. Kunst als organisierte Erfahrung. Munich: Fink, 1980. ## V. Constructivism and the Industrial Arts (Note: in addition to the specific titles listed below and in the Russian section of the Bibliography, the reader is advised to consult the journals R61, R71, R76, and R84.) ## CONSTRUCTIVISM Andersen, Troels. See 27, 230. 210. Architectural Design (London), vol. 40, no. 2 (February 1970). Whole issue devoted to constructivist architecture in the U.S.S.R. 211. Bann, Stephen, ed. The Constructivist Tradition. New York: Viking, 1974. Bibl. 212. Elderfield, John. "Constructivism and the Objective World: An Essay on Production Art and Proletarian Culture." Studio International (London), vol. 18o, no. 923 (September 1970), 73–80. 213. Elderfield, John. "Line of Free Men: Tatlin's ‘Towers'and the Age of Invention." Studio International (London), vol. 178, no. 916 (November 1969), 162–67. 214. Elderfield, John. "On Constructivism."Artforum (New York), vol. 9, no. 9 (May 1971), 57–63. 215. Gabo, Naum. "The Constructive Idea in Art."In Circle, edited by J. L. Martin, Ben Nicholson, N. Gabo, pp. 1-1o. London: Faber and Faber, 1937. Reprint; 1971; also New York: Praeger, 1971. 216. Gabo, Naum. Gabo: Constructions, Sculpture, Paintings, Drawings, Engravings. London: Lund Humphries; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1957. Gabo, Naum. Works by: 211, 215, 216. Biography: 222. Other works on: 216, 221, 23oiii. Bibl. information: 216, 226. Gan, Aleksei. Some biographical information 23oix. Works by: 211, R372, R437, R438, R465, R466. 217. Gollerbakh, Erich. Prospectus. The Construction of Architectural and Machine Forms by Jacob Tchernikhov. Leningrad: Society of Architects of Leningrad, 1931. 218. Kállai, Ernst. "Konstruktivismus." Jahrbuch der Jungen Kunst (Leipzig), vol. 5, 1924, 374–84. 219. Massat, René. Antoine Pevsner et le Constructivisme. Paris: Caractères, 1956. 220. Matsa, Ivan. "Constructivism: an Historical and Artistic Appraisal." Studio International (London), vol. 183, no. 943 (April 1972), 142–44. Shortened translation of R442. 221. Olson, Ruth, and Chanin, Abraham. Naum Gabo—Antoine Pevsner. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1948. 222. Pevsner, Alexei. Naum Gabo and Antoine Pevsner: A Biographical Sketch of My Brothers. Amsterdam: Augustin and Schoonman, 1964. Pevsner, Antoine. Biography: 222. Other works on: 219, 221. Bibl information: 226. 223. Quilici, Vieri. L'Architettura del construttivismo. Bari: Laterza, 1969. 224. Rathke, Ewald. Konstruktive Malerei, 1915-1930. Hanau: Peters, 1967. Reprint of catalogue for exhibition at Frankfurter Kunstverein, November 1966–January 1967. With introduction by Eckhard Neumann. 225. Rathke, Ewald, and Neumann, Eckhard. "Constructivism 1914-1922."Art and Artists (London), vol. 5, no. 4 (July 1970), 12–15. 226. Rickey, George. Constructivism: Origins and Evolution. New York: Braziller; London: Studio Vista, 1967. Bibl. 227. Rodtchenko, Alexandre. "Vladimir Tatlin." Opus International (Paris), no. 4, December 1967, pp. 15–18. 228. Sharp, Dennis, ed. "Constructivism." RIBA Journal (London), vol. 78, no. 9 (September 1971), 382–92. 229. Sprague, Arthur. Chernikov and Constructivism." Survey (London and New York), no. 39, December 1961, pp. 69–77. 23o. Vladimir Tatlin. Compiled by Troels Andersen. Stockholm: Moderna Museet, 1968. Exhibition catalogue. Bibl. Tatlin, 'Vladimir. Works by: 211, R447. Biography: 230. Works on: 213, 227, 230, 230ii, 230x, 230xiii, R184, R444, R445, R450i. Bibl. information: 230. Book illustrations: R296, R312. 23oi. Bowlt, John E., ed. Soviet Union. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 1976, vol. 3, part 2. Special issue devoted to Constructivism. 23oii. Bowlt, John E. "Un voyage dans l'espace: l'oeuvre de Vladimir Tatlin," Cahiers du Musée d’Art Moderne. Paris, 1979, no. 2, pp. 216–27. 23oiii. Gabo. Dallas: Dallas Museum of Art, 1985. Exhibition catalogue. Bibl. 23oiv. Goheen, Ellen, ed. The Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art Bulletin. Kansas City: Nelson-Atkins Museum, 1982. Special issue devoted to Constructivism and the geometric tradition. 23ov. Grübel, Rainer Georg. Russische Konstruktivismus. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1981. Bibl. 23ovi. Harrison, Gail. Ex Libris 6. Constructivism and Futurism in Russian and Others. New York: TJ Art, 1977. Bibl. 23ovii. Kopp, Anatole. Constructivist Architecture in the USSR. London: Academy Editions, 1985. Bibl 23oviii. Leclanche-Boule, C. Typographies, Photomontages Constructivistes. Paris: Papyrus, 1984. 23oix. Lodder, Christine. Russian Constructivism. New Haven: Yale University, 1983. Bibl. 23ox. Milner, John. Vladimir Tatlin and the Russian Avant-Garde. New Haven: Yale University, 1983. Bibl. 23oxi. 2 Stenberg 2. The "Laboratory" Period (1919–1921) of Russian Constructivism. Paris: Galerie Jean Chauvelin, 1975. Exhibition catalogue. 23oxii. Tellini, Anna, ed. Il'ja Erenburg. Eppur si muove! Per una internazionale construttivista. Rome: Officina Edizioni, 1983. 23oxiii. Zsadova, Larisza et al. Tatlin. Budapest: Corvina, 1984. Bibl. ## THE INDUSTRIAL ARTS AND ARCHITECTURE Arvatov, Boris. Works by: 211, R259, R373–77, R455-58, R490, and consult R76, R79. Some biographical details: 23oix, R435. 231. Badovici, Jean, et al. L'Architecture russe en URSS. ière et 2me séries. Paris: Albert Morancé, n.d. 232. Birnholz, Alan. "El Lissitzky.' Artforum (New York), vol. II, no. I (September 1972), 70–76. 233. Birnholz, Alan. "Lissitzky's Writings on Art."Studio International (London), vol. 183, no. 942 (March 1972), 90–92. 234. Bojko, Szymon. "Collages et photomontages oubliés de A. Rodtchenko." Opus International (Paris), Fall 1970, pp. 30–35. Chernikhov,.Yakob. Works by: 235, R483–85. Work on: 229. 235. Conrads, Ulrich, and Sperlich, H., eds. The Architecture of Fantasy. Translated from the German by Christiane Crasemann Collins and George R. Collins. New York: Praeger, 1962; London: Architectural Press, 1963. German edition: Phantastische Architektur. Stuttgart: Hatje, 196o 236. dal Co, Francesco, et al. “L'Architecture et l'avant-garde artistique en URSS de 1917 à 1934." VH 101 (Paris), no. 7/8, Spring 1972. Whole issue devoted to early Soviet architecture. 237. Exposition Internationale des Arts décoratifs et industriels modernes: Section 249. Nakov, Andrei. "Alexander Rodcenko. Beyond the Problematics of Pictorialism." Arts Magazine (New York), vol. 47, no. 6 (April 1973), 26–33. Nakov, Andréi. See 249, 252. Rodchenko, Aleksandr. Work by: 227, R489vi. russe: l'art décoratif et industriel de l'URSS. Paris: Ministère du Commerce et d'Industrie des Postes et des Telegraphes, 1925. Exhibition catalogue. 238. de Feo, Vittorio. URSS. Architettura 1917–1936. Rome: Editori Riuniti, 1963. 239. Fiz, Simón. ‘El Lissitzky (1890-1941): de la pintura a la arquitectura." Goya (Madrid), no. 108, 1972, pp. 362–69. 240. Frampton, Kenneth. 'Notes on a Lost Avant-Garde: Architecture, U.S.S.R., 1920–30." In Avant-Garde Art, edited by Thomas B. Hess and John Ashbery, pp. 107–24. New York and London: Collier-Macmillan, n.d. Volume based on: The Avant-Garde. Art News Annual, no. 34. New York: Macmillan, 1968. 241. Jadova, L. "Rodtchenko."Les Lettres françaises (Paris), no. I162 (December 22–29, 1966), pp. 17–19. 242. Khan-Mahomedov, Selim. 'Creative Trends 1917-1932 in Russia."Architectural Design (London), no. 40, February 1970, pp. 71–76. 243. Kopp, Anatole. Town and Revolution: Soviet Architecture and City Planning 1917-1935. Translated from the French by Thomas Burton. London: Thames and Hudson; New York: Braziller, 1970. Bibl. French edition: Ville et Révolution. Paris: Anthropos, 1967. 244. Licht, Jennifer. 'Rodchenko, Practicing Constructivist." Art News (New York), vol. 70, no. 2 (April 1971), 60–63. 245. Linhart, Lubomir. Alexander Rodčenko. Prague: Státní nakladatelství krasne literatury a umění, 1964. 246. Lissitzky, El. "New Russian Art—a Lecture Given in 1922."Studio International (London), vol. 176, no. 904 (October 1968), 146–51. 247. Lissitzky-Küppers, Sophie. El Lissitzky: Life, Letters, Texts. Translated from the German by Helene Aldwinckle and Mary Whittall. London: Thames and Hudson; Greenwich, Conn.: New York Graphic Society, 1968. Bibl. German edition: El Lissitzky—Maler, Architekt, Typograf, Fotograf. Dresden: Verlag der Kunst, 1967. 248. Lissitzky, El. An Architecture for World Revolution. Translated from the German by Eric Dluhosch. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT, 197o. This edition also contains an appendix of reports concerning architecture and urbanism, 1928-33. German edition: Russland. Die Rekonstruktion der Architektur in der Sowjetunion. Vienna: Schroll, 193o. Reissued as: Russland: Architektur für eine Weltrevolution. Berlin: Ullstein, 1965. Lissitzky, El. Works by: 176, 211, 246, 247, 248, 252xiii. Biography: 247. Works on: 232, 233, 239, 247, 252xiv, 252xvi. Bibl. information: 247. Biography: 245, 252x. Other works on: 234, 241, 249, 252xii, 252xvii, 252xviii, 252xix, 252xx, 252xxii, R451, R452, R463, R474, R488. 250. Rosa, Alberto, et al. Socialismo, città, architettura URSS 1917–1937. Rome: Officina, 1971. Stepanova, Varvara. Works by: R436, R463. Some biographical information: R475. Works on: 176ix, 176xvii, 252xi, 252xxii. 251. Shidkovsky, Oleg, et al. Building in the USSR, 1917-1932. London: Studio Vista, 1971. 252. Taraboukine, Nikolai. Le Dernier Tableau. Presented by Andréi Nakov; translated from the Russian by Andréi Nakov and Michel Pétris. Paris: Editions Champ Libre, 1972. Vesnin, Aleksandr. Works by: R489i, R489ii. Works on: 252vi, 252xxiv, R489vii, R489viii. 252i. Architettura nel paese dei Soviet 1917–1933. Rome: Palazzo dell ’Esposizioni, 1982. Exhibition catalogue. 252ii. Art into Production. Oxford: Museum of Modern Art, 1984. Exhibition catalogue. 252iii. Bablet, Denis. Revolutions in Stage Design of the XXth Century. Paris and New York: Ameil, 1977. 252iv. Bablet, Denis, ed. Les Voies de la Création Théâtrale. Mises en scène années 20 et 30. Paris: CNRS, 1979. Bibl. 252v. Barooshian, Vahan. Brik and Mayakovsky. The Hague: Mouton, 1978. Bibl. 252vi. Chan-Magomedov, Selim. Pioniere der sowjetischen Architektur. Dresden: VEB, 1983. Bibł. English translation: Pioneers of Soviet Architecture. London: Thames and Hudson, 1987. Bibl. 252vii. Chernikhov, Andrei: "Artist Show Us Your World. Iakov Chernikhov 1889–1951" in Catherine Cooke, ed. Russian Avant-Garde. Art and Architecture. London: Academy Editions, 1983. 252viii. La Città Macchina. Progetti di Sant'Elia e Tchernikov. Vicenza: Assessorato Cultura, 1973. 252ix. Cooke, Catherine. Chernikhov. Fantasy and Construction. London: Architectural Design Profile, 1984. Bibl. 252x. Karginov, German. Rodcsenko. Budapest: Corvina, 1975 (and subsequent editions in Fench and English). Bibl. 252xi. Lavrentiev, Alexander. "The Graphics of Visual Poetry in the Work of Varvara Stepanova" in Grafik. Budapest, 1982, no. 1, pp. 46–51. 252xii. Lavrentjev, Aleksandr and Gassner, Hubertus. Rodcenko. Fotografien. Munich: Schirmer/Mosel, 1982. Bibl. 252xiii. Lissitzky, El: Proun und Wolkenbügel. Dresden: VEB, 1981. 252xiv. Lissitzky. Cologne: Galerie Gmurzynska, 1976. Exhibition catalogue. 252xv. Maiakovski. 20 ans de travail. Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1975. Exhibition catalogue. 252xvi. Mansbach, Steven. Visions of Totality. Ann Arbor: University Microfilms International, 1980. Bibl. 252xvii. Rodchenko and the Arts of Revolutionary Russia. Oxford: Museum of Modern Art, 1978. Exhibition catalogue. 252xviii. Rodcenko/Stepanova. Perugia: Palazzo dei Priori, and elsewhere, 1984. Exhibition catalogue. 252xix. Rodtschenko. Fotografien 1920–1938. Cologne: Museum Ludwig, 1978. Exhibition catalogue. 252xx. Rodtschenko, Warwara and Lawrentjew, Alexander. Alexander Rodtschenko. Dresden: VEB, 1983. 252xxi. Sasaki, Hiroshi. "The Best of the Constructivists. Tchernykhov and His Design" in Process. Architecture. Tokyo, 1981, no. 26, pp. 7–22. Bibl. (In Japanese). 252xxii. Von der Malerei zum Design/From Painting to Design. Cologne: Galerie Gmurzynska, 1981. Exhibition catalogue. 252xxiii. Die 20er Jahre in Osteuropa/The 1920s in Eastern Europe. Cologne: Galerie Gmurzynska, 1975. Exhibition catalogue. 252xxiv. Khan-Magomedov, Selim. Alexander Vesnin and Russian Constructivism New York: Rizzoli, 1986. ## VI. Toward Socialist Realism (Note: for detailed references to the development of socialist realism in the visual arts, the reader is advised to consult the Soviet art publications of the 1930s, 194os, and 1950s that deal specifically with the history and interpretation of Russian and Soviet painting and sculpture, particularly the journals Iskusstvo [Art] (Moscow), 1933- and Tvorchestvo {Creation] (Moscow), 1934-. For an interesting perspective on the formation and advocacy of socialist realism, the reader is advised further to consult the catalogues of Soviet art exhibitions not only in the U.S.S.R., but also in Western Europe and the United States, of which there were many during the late 192os and early 193os; references to such exhibitions can be found in bibl. R152, vols. 1, 2, and 3.) AKhRR. Works on: R493, R496, and consult 264, R16, R58, R70. Bibl. Information: R493. 253. Alpetin, M., ed. “Painting, Sculpture and Graphic Art in the USSR." VOKS. Bulletin of the USSR Society for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries (Moscow), vol. 9/1o, 1934. Whole issue devoted to the subject. 254. Andersen, Troels. "Pavel Nikolajevič Filonov." Signum (Gyldendal), no. 4, 1963, Pp. 20–31. 255. Annenkov, Yuri. "Soviet Art and Socialist Realism."Studies 'on the Soviet Union (Munich), vol. 7, no. 2 (November 1967), 152–57. 256. Bowlt, John E. "The Virtues of Soviet Realism."Art in America (New York), vol. 60, no. 6 (November 1972), 100–107. 257. Bowlt, John E. 'Pavel Filonov." Studio International (London), vol. 186, no. 957 (July/August 1973), 30–36. 258. Burliuk, David. "Filonov." Color and Rhyme (Hampton Bays, N.Y.), no. 28, 1954. Whole issue devoted to Filonov. 259. Davies, Ivor. '"Red Art 1917–1971." Art and Artists (London), vol.6., no. I (April 1971), 10–15. Filonov, Pavel. Works by: 257, 272iii, R508, R509. Biography: 263, 272iii. Bibl. information: 263. Book illustrations: R273, R347, R353. Four Arts Society. Some details: R22, R108, R515. 260. Hiepe, Richard. Die Kunst der neuen Klasse. Munich: Bertelsmann, 1973. 261. Higgens, Andrew. "The Development of the Theory of Socialist Realism in Russia, 1917 to 1932." Studio International (London), vol. 181, no. 932 (April 1971), 155-59. 262. Holme, Charles, ed. Art in the USSR. London: Studio Special, 1935. 263. Křiž, Jan. Pavel Nikolajevič Filonov. Prague: Nakladatelství československých výtvarných umělců, 1966. Bibl. 264. Lamač, Miroslav. “Filonov a jeho škola."Výtvarné umění (Prague), no. 3, 1967, Pp. 126-45. 265. Lehmann-Haupt, Hellmut. Art Under a Dictatorship. New York: Oxford University, 1964. 266. London, Kurt. The Seven Soviet Arts. London: Faber and Faber, 1937; New Haven: Yale University, 1938. October Association. Works by: R5oo, R5o1. Some details: Ri6, R22. Society of Easel Artists (OST). Some details: R108, R182. Works on: 272i, R515iii. 267. Soviet Painting. 32 Reproductions of Paintings by Soviet Masters. Moscow and Leningrad: State Art Publishers,·1939. 268. Vaughan James, C. Soviet Socialist Realism: Origins and Theory. London: Macmillan, 1973. Bibl. 269. Weidle, Vladimir. "Art Under the Soviet Régime."Studies on the Soviet Union (Munich), vol. 7, no. 2 (November 1968), 135-51. 270. Winter, Ella. "Art under Communism Today." Art News (New York), vol. 57, no. 8 (December 1958), 34-37, 58–59. 271. Wright, A. "Some Aspects of Twentieth Century Russian Painting."Canadian Slavonic Papers (Ottawa), vol. 11, no. 4 (1969), 407–23. 272. Zhdanov, Andrei, et al. Problems of Soviet Literature. Reports and Speeches at the First Soviet Writers' Congress. Edited by H. G. Scott. New York: International Publishers, 1935. This is a much abridged version, in translation, of bibl. R498. 272i. Bowlt, John E. "The Society of Easel Artists (OST)" in Russian History. Tempe: Arizona State University, 1982, vol. 9, parts 2–3, pp. 203–26. 272ii. Fitzpatrick, Sheila, ed. Cultural Revolution in Russia, 1928–1931. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978. 272iii. Misler, Nicoletta and Bowlt, John E. Pavel Filonov. A Hero and His Fate. Austin: Silvergirl, 1983. Bibl. 272iv. Koch, Hans. Zur Theorie des sozialistischen Realismus, Berlin: Dietz, 1974. 272v. Willett, John. L'Avanguardia europea. Anni venti a Mosca e a Weimar. Rome: Editori Riuniti, 1983 (a translated version of The New Sobriety. London: Thames and Hudson, 1978). Bibl ## . . . (-) .      . (24–40) ii. : 1890-1917, 1917-1930 . (41–87) v. 1890-1930: 1890-1920, 1910-1930 (88–187) .   . (188-241) . -, -. (242–357) .  . (358–366) V. . (367–434) .    . (435-489) .      (490-514) ## . . . . . . . (.): « ; , , », . , ., 1937. . , . «     - . 1757-1957», ., 1957. 3. , . , - 1916», JI., 1958-1961. . , . (.): « ( )». . ., 19; , , 1. 5. , .: « », . 19. . , . . (.): . - », . (-), ., 1970; τ. 2 (-), ., 1972. 7. , . . (.): « », . 7 (- , - .), ., 1970. 8. , : , , 1914. 9. , .: « » ( - ), , 1915. . , . (.): », ., 1934- (4 ). «      , ., 108 + , 1917 ; , 19 .

2. , .: « », ., 1919. . , . (.): « . , , , ., 9. 4. , . (.): « », Mrx, 1967. 15. , . . (.): « », ., 1929. 16. , . . (.): « 15 », .-., 19. 7. , .: «, , , . , ., 196. . , : - , 1917-1932», ., 1933. . , . « - », ., 1972. . « », (, , , ), ., ; 3 (- , , ), ., 1968. 2. .: « 1917- 1925 rr.», M., 1970. 22. , . (.): « , 1926-1932». , ., 9. . . « 1917-1925», ., 1, .

. , . (.): « .   , 1917-1921, ., 1968. . , . . (.): « ». ., 1978. . . . , . , . (.): « 1917-1941». ., 1982. ## . 24. , .: « 16- », ., 1913. 25. , .: « », .-., 1966. . , . « :  », . 10. : « », ., 1902. . 27. , «  », ., 1904. 28. , : « », ., 912 (-17). 29. , .: « , ., 1913. . , .: « », .-., 1923; , , 1948. . 31. , .: « », . 1-6, ., 1910-1915. 32. , . (.): « », . -13, ., 195- 1969. . 3. . . , .: « . », M., 1963. 4. , .: « », ., 193. . , . « , ., 9. . , .: « », , 92. . 37. . .: « ». , ., 190. . 8. , : « , M., 1962. R39. T, .: «y τ», .-., 1938. 40. , .: « », ., 1969. 40. , . (.): « ». ., 1981. 2 . . , . ,  « - - CTO». M., 1978. ii. 1890-1917 rr. R41. , C., 1909-1917 (1918). R42. , M., 1914. 43. , , 1907-1910. R44. B, M., 1904-1909. R45. 3 , ., 1906-1909 (1910). R46. τ, ., 1905. 47. . (, , ), , 191- 1912. R48. , ., 1916. 49. , , 1913-1914. 50. , ., 1915-1916. 5. , , 1909-1910. 52. , ., 1898-1902. 53. , ., 1898-1904. 54. , ., 1914-1916. 55. , ., 1916 ( ). 56. , ., 1906-1907. R57. C, M., 1914. ## 1917-1930 rr. 58. , ., 1931-1932. 59. , ., 1922. 60. (), ., 1920-1934. 61. , , 1922. R62. Γopí, M., 1918-1923. R63. Γ, Π., 1918-1921. 64. , , 1921-1926. 65. , ., 1921-1922; ., 1923-1929. 66. , ., 1919. 67. (   ), ., 1919. 68. , , 1921. 69. ( . . . ), ., 1923-1928. 70. , ., 1929-1930. 7. , ., 1924. 72. , ., 1921-1922. 73. ι, ., 1918-1919. 74. , ., 1924-1926. 75. , , 1919. R76. , ., 1923-1925; , ., 1927-1928. R77. M, M., 1922. 78. , , 1927-1930 ( .). 79. , ., 1921-1930. 80. , ., 1918-1921. 81. , ., 1927-1930. 82. , .-., 1923. 83. , .-., 1926-1928. R84. C , (), ..1926-1930. R85. T0, M., 1918-1922. 86. , ., 1919-1920. 87. , ., 1923. .     1890-1930 : 1890-1920 rr. . « », (   - . ), , . , ., 968; . 2, ., 1969. . 89. , .: « », , 1971. . , . « », .-., 1966. 91. , . , . (.): « », , , 1969. 92. , .: « . », . , -, 1955. 93. , .: « », ., 1918. 94. , .: « 25 », ., 192. . , . . . - » (. . ), .-., 1960. . -, .: « 105 .», ., 1960. 7. , .: « . », .-, 1937. . 8. , « - . », ., 1913. 9. , .: . . 2. « - , ., 1915. . , .: . . 4. ' . . », ., . . , «     - 19-. 20 .», , 1966. . , .: « . », ., 1922. . , , .

. , . , .: « , », ., 197 (2 .). 0. , .: « -  », M., 1970. . , .: « . . . - » (. . ), ., 1963. 06. , .: . », ., 1972. 107. , .: « », ., 1915. . , .: « 2 , M., 1930. . , .: . - », ., 9. 1. , .: « », . , ., 1909; κ. , ., 1913. . , .: « », , 192. 2. , .: « », -, 1955. 13. , .: « », , 1962. 14. , . (.): « . », ., 1917. . , . , . (.): « - », ., 9. . , .: « », . , . , , 1931, . 533-602. . 17. « ». . , . ., 1899-1906. 1. , . , .: -. », ., 1967. 19. « ». . , , 1894-1924. 120. « ». . , ., 1904-1915. 121. , .: « , 1890-1902», .-., 1933. 22. , .: « , ., 1964. 2. , .: « - - », ., 97. R124. Π, .: «. A. C», 1972. 2. , . , .: « - », ., 1971. 26. , . : « -  .» , , 7. R127. , .: «», ., 1929. 28. , : « », ., 1923. 29. , . ( . ): 19-- 20 », ., 1970. 3. , .: «- - », , 1924. 131. , . «», ., 1960. . . , , . . . , . - , 1909-1910. . « 2». . . - . , , 1910-191. 134. «». . . . , ., 1909. 35. , : « 1900--. 1910- .», M., 1971 136. , .: «3 », ., 1970. 37. , .: « », ., 1969. . , . « », ., 197. . 3. , . .: « - », ., 1972. 4. « ». . , ., . , 1903-1923. 4. , .: « - », ., 1970. 14. « . ., 191- ., 1912», ., 1914-1915, . I-III. 4. -, .: « - », ., .. 144. , .: « », -, 195. 145. , .: « -  », ., 1968. 5. , . (.): « . ». . 1979. 2 πT. 145. , .: « - XX ». ., 1984. 145. , .: «». -, 1976. 145. , . , . (.): « . - ». ., 1982. 2 . 145. , . . (.): « . ». ., 1974, . , 1891-1917; 1977, π.2, 1917-1941; 1983, π.3, 1941-1960. R145vi. , .: «3 ». ., 1975. 145. , . . (.): « ». ., 1979. 1910-1930 r. 146. « », τ. ( 1917-1920 ; 1921-194 ), , ., 1957. . 147. , .: «» ( . ), ., 1922. 148. , .: «17 » (. . ), .-., 1926. 149. , . (.): « », ., 1973. 150. , . , .: « , 1917-1932», ., 1933. 151. , . ( .): « ., 1917-1927». , ., 927. . 152. « », . 1, 1917-1932, M., 1965. 15. , .: «- 5 », , 1924. 54. , .: « », ., 1922. 55. , . « », ., 1927. 5. , . : « », ., 1929, . 5 6. 57. , .: « », ., 1969. 158. 3, .: « », ., 1970. . , . , . (.): « - 1917-1960), M., 1968. 160. , .: « », ., 1925. 161. , . ( . .): «5 : - », ., 1969. . , .: « (- )», ., 1917. . , . .: « ». . - , ., 199. . 4. , .: « »  , C., 1913, N 7, cτp. 53-60. 5. , .: « , , 1922. 6. , .: « », ., 193. 7. , . « .  », M., 1971. 168. , .: « », ., 1922. . , : « ( 20- ), ., 1968. 7. , .: « », , 1972. . 7. , . (.): « ». , .-., 1928. 72. , .: », , 1923. 7. , .: « ». . . ., 1927-1928. 7. , .: , . . , , . . .

17. , .: « », , 192. 176. , .: « », .-., 1923. 177. « . », ., 1937, . 1-2. , . , , , , -- , , , , , .

78. , , , . ( .): «- ., 1917-1927», ., 1927. 79. , .: « », .-., 1923. 180. , .: « », .-., 1923. 8. , .: « », , 19. 8. , . «  , ., 1. 8. , .: « » , -, 1972, N 192, . 44-48. 8. , . .: « », ., 1973. ( . . « ). 18. , .: », ., 1971. . 186. , .: «», ., 1930. , , . , , , , .

187. , .: « . 1914-1934», ., 1934. 187. , .: « ». ., 1982. 187. «-». . . . . , ., 1981. 187. , . « ». , 1983. 187. , .: « ». , 1976. ## . .

## . 18. , . . (.): « XX — X  (1895-1907), .1; ., 1968; .2, ., 1969; .3, M., 1977; κH. 4, M., 1980. 189. « ». . , , 1904. 190. , . «»,., 1910. 19. , .: « », .-., 193. 192. , .: « », .-., 193. 193. , .: « », ., 1928. 94. , . « », ., 1969. 195. , .: «» (1915), «, 1901-1921», . ., τ. 7, M.-., 1963. 196. , .: «, 1891-1910», ., 1927. 197. « ». . , ., 1907. 98. , . « », , 1907, 5, . 93-96. 9. , .: , « », . « , 1904, 11 , 101. 200. , .: « », ., 1972. . , : « »   , ., , N 5, cτp. 56-59. . , : « , '», , , 1907, Nº 5. 0. , .: «. . -», ., 19. . . ., . (, .): « »  , ., 1905, Ng 2, cp. 54-56. 205. , .: « », ., 1977. 206. , .: « », 3 , ., 1907, 5, cτp. 25-28. . , . ( . ): « », - , ., 1925. . , .: « , ,' « », ., 1907, 1 , 75. 209. , .: « » — . 88, . 1, . 341-485. 210. , .: «. 3. -, 1870-1905», .-., 1966. . . -, . (, .): « « »» - , ., 1907, 25 , N 69. 212. , .: « », .-., 1934. . . , : «. , « », . pyo, M., 1907, No 7-9, cp. 88-90. 214. , .: «», ., 1907. 15. , : «, »   , , 1908, No 7/9, ctp. 120-123. 16. , .: « », .-., 19. . 17. , .: «, » ( ), ., 1970. 217. , 3.: « 1914-1919». -, 1982. 1. « . 0 - , , 1967. 1. , . « - » .  . , 1980, . 7, cτp.411-16. 217. , : « . . .. » — - κ. . , 1980, .7, . 399-410. 21. , « . . M., 1984. R217vi. , A.: « ». ., 1984. ## . 8. , .: « » ( ) — , ., 1912, 12 . 219. , .: « . , ., 1 . ). , .   . . 4. ), Π., 1915-1916). . , : »   - , ., 1912, 14 . 22. «. . , ., 1909; , 1909/ 1910. 222. , .: « » , . 1911 . 1912 ., . 1914, τ. I, cτp. 47-76. 23. , . « «» » , 1911, 9 . 24. , . . « », ., 1910. . , : «, . , 1910- 1911, cτ. 9. . , », ., 1 (, ., 1911). (. 96). 27. , .: « » , ., 1910, cτp. 15-26. (cp. 96). 28. , : « »  . , ., 1911, . 125. 29. , .: « », ., 191. . , . , , . 1911 . 1912 , ., 1914. . . . 35-40 . , .: « », ., 1914. 232. , .: « », ., 1914. . , .: « . - τ», ., 1914. 234. , .: « », ., 1919. 35. , . , .: « », ., 1914. 23. « ». . , ., ., 1910-1914. 237. « ». . 1-3, ., 1912-1913. 8. , .: « » , ., 1913, N 3, cτp. 6-9. 9. , .: « » ( ) , ., 1919, 18, . 2-3. 40. , . . «. », ., 1912. 241. «». . , ., 1910. ## . -, -. ## -. 242. , .: « », ., 1967. 243. , : »  , ., 1909- 1910, No 2, Gtp. 63-78; No 3, cτp. 46-61. 244. , .: « »  , ., 1909, 18 . 245. «-». . , ., 1907 (-1908). 246. «». . , ., 1908. 247. «-». . , . , 1909. 248. , .: « » , ., 1972, No 4, cτp. 20-27. 249. «». . , , 1908. 25. , .: , , 1965. 2. « ». . , ., 109 ( . ) 1909 (-1910). 52. , .: « - . . ». , ., 191. 25. , .: « . . - » , ., 1928, . , . 287-291. 254. , .: « » , ., 1973, 5, ctp. 39-46. 55. « « »». . , ., 1908. . , . « (1883-1948). . ». , ., 196. 25. « , 1883-1948». , , 1978. 25. , . . (.): «. . . ». M., 1980. 25. , « ». , , 1982. R256. , Γ.: «. . » - C 79, ., 1980, τ.2, cp.238-66. ## -. 257. , .: « », ., 1916 (2 . ). 258. , .: « », , 1917 (. . ). 259. , .: « », , 1924. . , : «. »   , M.-Πr., 1923, N 2-3, cτp. 21-32. 261. , .: « » , ., 1913, 21 . ( ). 262. , .: « ?» , 1912, 23 . . , .: « »   - . . 1911 . 1912, ., 1914, τ. I, cτp. 41-43. 4. ., . . (, .): « . . 14 ». , , 191, . 92. 6. « ». . , . ., 1910-1918. 26. « ». , ., 19. 7. « . , ., 19. . « . « . , ., 1913. 269. , .: «» , ., 1912, cτp. 102-110. 7. , .: « » - », ., 1913. 7. , , , 1916, », , 1916. 272. , , , . .: « , ., 91; « », ., 191 ( . , , , , - ). 27. , . « , ., 1914 ( . , ). 274. , , , . « », ., 91 ( . . . ). 75. , , , , , . « - », ., 1912. 7. , .: « »   , ., 1913, No 3, cτp. 35-38. 277. « . 1915 ». , ., 1915. 278. , .: « . », -, 190. 79. , .: « .4 », , 1914. 280. «. . . 1900-1913». , ., 1913. 281. «. . . 1900-1913». , ., 1914. . , . « « » , 6, 1913, N 6, τp. 31-38. 8. , . , .: «. . », ., 919. 284. , ., , , .: «», ., 1913 ( . . 285. , .: «. »  , 1919, - , 1919, 3-4. 28. , .: «. . » , , 1923, 12, cτp. 26-30. 287. , .: « », ., 1931. 288. , .: « », ., 1940. 289. , .: « »  , ., 1928, 6, cτp. 194-199. . , : «   , , . . », ., 1919. 9. , .: , ., 91 ( . , ). 292. , .: «», ., 1913 ( . , , ). 2. , . «», ., 1913 ( . - ). 294. , .: «», ., 1915 ( . ). - : « », ., 191 ( . ). 95. , .: « », ., 1915 ( . ). 29. , .: «», ., 1912 ( . , , , ). 297. , .: , ., 191 ( . ). 98. , .: «», ., 1913 ( . ). 299. , .: «», ., 913 ( . ). . , .: « », ., 192 ( . ). 0. , .: « », ., 1914 ( . ). . , . « , ., 1914 . ). 0. , .: «», ., 1913 ( . ). . , ., , . , .: « », M., 1915. . , . , .: (-» 7 , ., 1913, N 28 (122), cp. 605-606. . , . , .: « », ., 192 ( . - ). . .  91 .   . 307. , .: «» τ, ., 1915, , . 197-216. 08. , .: « »  , ., 1963, 7, cτp. 43-53. 09. , .: « », ., 1969. 1. , : « , , 19. . , . »   , ., 9, : . .  . , ., 1955, . I, . 286-293. 12. , . .: « , ., 191 ( . ., . . 13. , .: « . », ., 1914 ( . - ). . , . (): « '». , ., 1927. 15. «». , ., 191. 316. , .: « », ., 192. 317. , .: «. . », ., 1967. 318. « 4». , ., 1914. 19. « ». , ., 1913. 20. « ». , ., 1912. 32. , .: « » —, , 1931, . 5, . 183-186. . , .: « »  - cτ0, M., 1972, N 5, cp. 27-37. 23. , . « », ., 1957. 324. , .: «», ., 1962. 25. . (=, .): « . . » - , 1914, 18 . 2. , : . », ., 1914. 7. , : « »  , ., 191, , cτp. 14-23. 8. , .: « « »» , ., 1917, N I, cτp. 1-17. 329. , .: « τ», ., 1923. . , .: « », ., 197. 33. , . ( . ): «. », ., 1971. 2. , : ,    - , ., 1919, 4, . 1. . , . , .: «», , 1917. 34. , .: « » ( . . - ), , ., 1914, 23 . . , . « . » , ., 1969, κ. 7, 201-203. . , .: « » , M., 1970, N 6, cτp. 44-47. . . 37. , .: « . », ., 191. 8. « . . , ., ., 191-1914. 339. «3 ». . 1-3, ., 1912-1913. 340. «». , . 1, ., 1915; . 2, Π., 1916; κ. 3, 6., 1922. 34. , , .: «15 », ., 1928. 42. « .» . , ., 915. 343. , .: «. », ., 1956. . , . . » , ., 191, 8, . 71-73. . , «   » , ., 1913, 11, . 153-160. . . . « . , ., 1. . , . , . . 47. , : « » ( . ), ., 1915. 48. , : « »  . , ., 1940, . 337-400. 49. , .: « . . » , ., 1968 ( 5, 1963-1964), . 306-318. 5. , . , : « », M., 1970. 51. , . , .: « », ., 1913 ( . ). 52. , «. , ., 1914 ( . ). . , .: « », ., 1914 ( . . R354. , M.: «. » — Πp, M., 1969, . 144-201. 5. , .: , ., 1913. . , . ( , .): « - », M., 1913. 57. , . « »   , , 192, No 7, cτp. 39-40. ## . .

: - , 5, .) . « » ( ). , ., 1919. 59. , .: « » , , 1972, 2910 τ. 9. . , .: «. : . - » — , ., 1921, . 2, . 211-212. 361. , .: «», ., 1913. 362. «». . , ., 1916. 63. , . « » , , ., 1916, . 16-18. . « , .. , ., 1915. 5. , .: « » , , 192, , . 36-38. . -, .: . . . , ., 1929. ## . .

## . 67. , .: « », ., 1918. . , .: «τ »   - τνpα, M., 1918, N 2, cτp. 23. . , .: «. «»» - τ, M., 1971, N 1, τ. 14-15. ## . 7. , : « , 1917-19», ., 196. . - - . . , ., 197. 372. , ., , , , ., .: « ». , , 1922. 73. , : « » , M., 1922. κ. 7, τ. 140-146. 374. , .: »   , M., 1922, Nº 1, cτp. 10-11. 75. , .: « » . ., 1922, . 1, . 65-75. 376. , .: « », .-., 1923. 377. , .: «τ ?» , ., 1924, 4, . 16-21. 378. , .: « »    , M., 1920, No 1, τp. 6-9. 79. , .: ««» «» » , ., 1921, N 4/6, . 8-14. . , «   » - , ., 1966, 11, . 5-9. . , . . (.): « .  - , M., 1926. 82. , .: « » , , 192, 2, cτp. 33-34. 8. , : « »   , Πr., 1919, Ng 1, cτp. 25-26. 84. , . . (.): «- - , ., 19. R385. ΓAXH Or4eτ 1921-1925, M., 1926. 86. . (1-21). , .. 1918-1921. 87. , : «- - », ., 1930. . , . « 5 », ., 1932. 8. « ». - , ., 1918, 1. 9. , .: « »   , M., 1970, N 11, cτp. 36-43. 91. , : « , ., 1928. 9. , « , M., 1920, N 2, . 18-20. 9. , .: « », , ., 1920, N 3, τ. 2-4. 94. , .: « », ., 1923. 395. , .: « 3, 1924-1926 .», ., 1928. . , . « . , , r., 1917. 97. , . .: « .  , , 1922. 98. , .: « (1918-1920)» , ., 97, 1, . 5- .

. , « 1917 ». , ., 1969, 4, . 32-42. . «. . ». (. . . . . . ), ., 1967. . , .: « .  - , , 19. 40. , .: « », ., 196- 1967 (. . .). 403. , .: « », . 1-2, ., 1967. 0. , .: « »   - , , 1928, 11, . 311-2. ( .). 0. , .: . », .-., 1932. . , . ( ): « , ., 1918. , , .

407. , .: « », ., 1924. . , . . . - , 1919-1920», , . 1970, No 9, cτp. 32-40. 0. , . », , 920. 1. , . , : « , ., 1918. . , : « , .-., 1925. 412. , .: « » , ., 1919, , 5 . 413. , : « »   , , 1918, 2, 15 ., . 2–3. 414. , .: « »   , ., 1919, 5, 5 ., . 1. 415. , : « » , ., 1919, 19, 13 , . 1. 1. , : « »   - τ, Π., 1919, N 1, τ. 8-24. 417. , .: « , 1917-1922», ., 1922. 418. , .: « » y , .-., 1923, . 17-23. 19. , .: «. »  , 1970, Nº 12, cp. 7-8. 420. . C 3. . . p., ., 1920. 421. , . , .: « » , ., 1924, N 1 (5), cτp. 155-159. 422. , .: « », ., 1918. 42. , .: « », ., 19. 424. , .: « , 1917-1927», ., 1967. 425. , .: « 20- » — , ., 1968, 5, . 29-30. 42. , .: « 1917 » , ., 1972, N 4, τ. 62-67. 27. , . « » Γopí, M., 1923, Nº 8, cτp. 111-118. 28. , . « ?» ( ) , M., 1923, N 1, cτp. 192-203. . , «     , ., 1926, κ. 8, cτ. 56-74. 430. , .: « », , 192. 43. , : « » , ., 1971, . 80, . 704-719. 432. , .: « », , 192. . , «    , , 1970, N 3, cτp. 4-12. 434. «. . . ». , ., 1927. ## -, -. 434. , . , . (.): «. . ». ., 1982. 2 TT. . , «    . , 1982. 3i. , «  ». ., 1976. 434. , : « 1917». r., M., 1983. 434v. « ». . , ., 1978. 434. , . (.): «. . . ». ., 1976. R434vi. , . (.): «1917-1932. - . ». ., 1984. 2 . 434. , .: « 1917-1923». M., 1983. 434. « , 1881-1948». , , 1978. 434. , .: « ». ., 1977. R434x. , .: «», ., 1980. ## . .

## . 43. , .: « - , , 972 ( .). .  ( , .): « - » — , ., 1923, 3, . 53-56. 437. , : « » , ., 192, . 16-119. 438. , .: «τ ?» , ., 1928, 3, . 79. 439. , ., « », ., 1924. 4. , .: « - », . , ., 1927, 6, . 160-166. . , . .  (.): « . - (...), ., 9. R442. , .: « » — , ., 1971, 8, . 40-47. . «» ( ). , M., 1919, 1920, 1921, 1923. . , .: « .  . », ., 1920. 445. , .: « ( )», ., 192. 446. «5 × 5 = 25». , ., 1921. 4. , : « », ., 1915. 448. , .: «» , , 1923, 1-2, . 44. 49. , . « », . , ., 92, Nº 1, τ. 4–5. 45. , .: « - », , 92. 5. , .: « .» — . ., 1973, p. 409-52. .   
. . R451. , A.: «A. . » τ, ., 1966, I1, . 51-59. 452. , .: « »  - . . 1, .-, 192, . 31-37. 45. « ». , ., 196. 454. , .: « », ., 971. . 455. , .: « »  , ., 1923, 8, τ. 119. . , : « »   , ., 1925, cτp. 75-82. 57. , . , .-., 1926, 1, . 83-89. 458. , .: « - », ., 1930. 59. , .: α 1929, M., 1929, cτp. 428-471. 460. , .: « !» — , ., 1923, 1, . 105-108. 46. , «τ »   , ., 1928, 3, . 29-33. . -, .: , 1918-21», M., 1960. 6. (= , .): « » — eφ, M., 1923, N 2, τp. 65-68. 464. -, .: «. , , », M., 1968. R465. Γ. A.: « —  3» — . M.. 1927, N 3, cτp. 81. 466. , .: « »  , ., 1927, 3, . 104-106. 67. , .: « », M., 1930. 468. , .: «», ., 1960. 69. , : « ( 20- 30- )», ., 1972. 7. , . » ( , 30- , 1922) — φ, M., 1923, 3, . 97-103. 47. , .: « »   , ., 1923, Nº 4, cp. 8–12. 472. , .: « 1917-1932», ., 1972 ( , ). 473. ., . (= , .?): « »   - τ, ., 1922, N 5, . 25-26. 474. , .: « » , ., 1972, 7, . 31-36. 475. , T.: «3 », ., 1972. 476. , .: « » , ., 1972, 6, . 40-43. 477. , .: « », ., 1923. 478. , .: « », ., 1923. 479. , .: « », ., 1925. 480. , .: « », ., 1926. 48. , .: « , ., 1925. 482. -, .: «. . », ., 1972. 483. , . « », ., 193. ( . 1931). R484. , .: «», ., 193. ( . - , « », , 1927). 485. , .: « », ., 193. 486. , .: « », ., 1970. . 8. , . « . , , 92. . , . « -» Ip, M., 1966, N . 387-417. 489. , . .: « », ., 921. 489. « ». , ., 1983. 8. . (.): - . ». ., 1981. 489ii. , . . (.): « ». ., 1983, 41. . , 192- . 489. , . « 1920- . . 1985. 8. , «    . , 1978. 489vi. , . . (.): «. . ». ., 1982. 489v. -, .: « ». ., 1983. 489vi. , .: « ». ., 1970. ## . -, - 5- , , «» [., 1933- ] «» [., 1934- ]. 3 - - ., , - - . . 5, . 2.) 9. , .: « » M., 1927, No 1, cτp. 38-41. 491. , .: « », ., 1933. . , : « »   , , 1968, . 108-136. 9. , . , . (.): « - , ., 97. . 9. , . , . (.) « - . . », . 7, ., 1972. 495. , .: « , 1917-1941», ., 1951. R496. K3a, B.: «AXPP», ., 1967. 497. , .: « ». - , ., . . , ., , . , . (.): « - 9. », ., 1934. 49. , .: « , ., 1967. . , . (): «. - . , «», .-., 1931. . , : - - . , ., 1931, . 117-130 (131-151). 502. , .: « », ., 1927. . , . . , ., 19. 04. , . «» , 1927, . 7, cτp. 158-182. . -, : » , ., 1924, (2), cτp. 329-348. . -, : « », - 3, 1925. 07. . . . », , 19. . , .: « »   , M., 1923, N 20, cτp. 13. (nepeney. B y. Výtvarné uměni, rague, 1967, No. 3) . 509. , : « »  υ , g, 1967, No. 3. 1. , « . ». , , 197 (2 ). . , . . « », ., 1928. .   ( ): «», 19 ( . , .). 513. , .: « . », ., 1926. . , . , . (.): « - . , ., 193. 15. , .: », ., 197. 515. , . , . (.): « - . ., 197. 515. , . . (.): « 1917-1945». M., 1984. R515iii. K, B.: «T». ., 1976. 515. , .: « 1920-30- ». M., 1982. Abramtsevo, xxi, xxii, xxvii,41 Academy of Artistic Sciences (Moscow). See Moscow, RAKhN Academy of Fine Arts (St. Petersburg). See Leningrad Affirmers of the New Art. See Unovis Agarykh. See Stepanova, Varvara Fedorovna Aivazovsky, Ivan Konstantinovich (1817- 1900), I1 Akhmatova, Anna Andreeva, pseudonym of Anna Andreevna Gorenko (1889–1966), 170 AKhR (Assotsiatsiya khudozhnikov revolyutsii) [Association of Artists of the Revolution],265,271–72,274,282,285 AKhRR (Assotsiatsiya khudozhnikov revolyutsionnoi Rossii) [Association of Artists of Revolutionary Russia], xxviii, xxxix,251,265,266–71,280,282,290 Aksenov, Ivan Aleksandrovich (1884-1935), xxix,60-69,173 Alcaeus (ca. 620 B.C.-ca. 58o B.C.), 68 Aleksandrov, Grigorii Grigorevich (b. 1897), 243 Alekseev, Aleksandr Gavrilovich (1911-41), 273 All-Russian Convention of Artists, St. Petersburg, 1911-12. See Second All-Russian Convention of Artists, St. Petersburg, 1911-12 All-Russian Co-operative of Artists. See Vsekokhudozhnik All-Union Association of Associations of Proletarian Writers. See VOAPP All-Union Association of Proletarian Architects. See VOPRA Altman, Natan Isaevich (1889–1970), xxxi, xxxiii, xxxiv,xxxv,xl,161–64,165,166 Annenkov, Yurii Pavlovich (1889–1973), 279 Apollinaire, Guillaume (1880–1918), 60, 92, 96,186 Apollon (Apollo), 17, 170 Aragon, Louis (1897–1966), 292 Arapova, Yuliya Grigorevna (1890–1976), 285 Archipenko, Alexander (Aleksandr Porfirevich Arkhipenko)(1887-1964), 208 Argonauts, 6 Argus, 79 Arkhangelsky, 249 Arkhipov, Abram Efimovich, pseudonym of Abram Efimovich Pyrikov (1862–1930), 265,291 Art of the Commune. See Iskusstvo kommuny Art to the Masses. See Iskusstvo v massy Artists' Brigade. See Brigada khudozhnikov Arvatov, Boris Ignatevich (1896–1940), xxxv, 171,197,199,215,225–30 Aseev, Nikolai Nikolaevich (1899–1963), 250 Asnova (Assotsiatsiya novykh arkhitektorov) [Association of New Architects], 256 Association of Actors, Artists, Writers and Musicians in Terioki, 13 Association of AKhR Youth. See OMAKhR Association of Artists of Revolutionary Russia. See AKhRR Association of Artists of the Revolution. See AKhR Association of Artists Studying Revolutionary Life, 265 Association of Contemporary Architects. See OSA Association of New Architects. See Asnova Association of Three, 238 Aurevilly, Jules Barbey de (1808–89), 65 Avvakum, Petrovich (1620–82), 301 Babel, Isaak Emmanuilovich (1894-1941), 292 Babichev, Aleksei Vasilevich (1887-1963), XXXV Bacon, Robert (ca. 1220–ca. 1292), 15 Bakst, Lev Samoilovich, pseudonym of Lev Samoilovich Rozenberg (1866–1924), xxii, 3, 4, 41 Balmont, Konstantin Dmitrievich (1867- 1942), 3 Barkhin, Grigorii Borisovich (188o-1969), xxxviii Barnet, Boris Vasilevich (1902–65), 238 Barr, Alfred Hamilton, Jr. (1902–81), xxix, 150,204,275 Bauhaus, 17, 116, 197 Beardsley, Aubrey (1872–98), 63 Bednyi, Demyan, pseudonym of Efim Alekseevich Pridvorov (1883–1945), 292 Bely, Andrei, pseudonym of Boris Nikolaevich Bugaev (1880–1934), 3,6 Bergson, Henri (1859–1941), 304 Benois (Benua), Aleksandr Nikolaevich (1870–1960), xxii, xxiv, xxix, xxxiii, xl, 3–6,41,69,75,103,107,111 Bilibin, Ivan Yakovlevich (1872–1942), 306 Black Hundreds (Chernosotentsy), 163 Blaue Reiter, Der (The Blue Rider), 12, 17, 18 Blok, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich (1880–1921), 194 Blue Rose (Golubaya roza), xxiii, xxiv, xxv, xxvi,xxx,2,3,6,7,10,11,282 Blue Rider, The See Blaue Reiter, Der Blyumenfeld, Veniamin Matveevich (b 1889),300 Bobrov, Sergei Pavlovich (1889–1971), 60 Bogdanov, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich, pseudonym of Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Malinovsky (1873-1928), xxxiv, 176–82, 197 Bogomazov, Aleksandr Konstantinovich (1880–1930),10,87 Bogomazov, Timofei N., 87 Boguslavskaya, Kseniya Leonidovna (Bogouslavskaya, Xana)(1892–1972), xxxii, 110, 111. 112,135,209 Bolshakov Art College, Moscow. See Moscow Borisov, Grigorii Ilich (b. 1899), 238 Borisov-Musatov, Viktor Elpidiforovich (1870–1905),xxiv,xxv Borisyak, Aleksei Alekseevich (1872–1944), 12 Braque, Georges (1882–1963), 95 Brigada khudozhnikov (Artists' Brigade), 308 Brik, Lilya Yurevna (1891–1978), 244 Brik, Osip Maksimovich (1888–1945), xxxv, 161,164, 166,171, 199, 215,230, 244–49, 250 Brodsky, Isaak Izrailevich (1884-1939), 265, 267 Bruni, Lev Aleksandrovich (1894-1948) xxxiii,281,282 Bryusov, Valerii Yakovlevich (1873–1924), 2 Bryusova, Nadezhda Yakovlevna (1881- 1951), xxxv Bubnova, Varvara Dimitrievna (1896–1983), 23 Bugaev, Boris Nikolaevich. See Bely, Andrei Bundist Party, 186 Burliuk, David Davidovich (1882–1967), xxv, xxvi,xxix, xxx, xxxi,3,8-11, 12, 18,61, 69–77,78,79,87,112, 171, 205, 216 Burliuk, Nikolai Davidovich (1890–1920), 11, 12, 69, 112, 205 Burliuk, Vladimir Davidovich (1886–1917), xxxi,11,18,70,71,77,112,205 Café Pittoresque. See Moscow Café Rotonde (Paris), 186 Carrà, Carlo (1891–1966), 226 Carrière, Eugène (1849–1906), 251 Carrière, Eugène (1849–1906), 251 Catherine II (empress of Russia) (1729–96), I I See Glavpolitprosvet Central Institute of Labor. See Moscow, TsIT Centrifuge. See Tsentrifuga Cézanne, Paul (1839–1906), xxvii, 11, 43, 44, 47,50,53,74,98,99,108,226,235,268 Chagall, Marc (Mark Zakharovich Shagal) (1887–1985), xxx, xxxi, xxxiv, 116 Chaikov, Iosif Moiseevich (1888–1979), 238 Chamber Theater, Moscow. See Moscow, Kamernyi Theater Chashnik, Ilya Grigorevich (1902–29), xxxvi, 307 Chekhov, Anton Pavlovich (1860–1904), 16 Chekrygin, Vasilii Nikolaevich (1897–1922), xxxix Chernikhov, Yakov Georgievich (1889–1951), xxxviii, 230, 254–61 Chernosotentsy. See Black Hundreds Chernyshevsky, Nikolai Gavrilovich (1828– 89), xx Chichagova, Galina Dmitrievna (1891-1967), 239,243 Chichagova, Olga Dmitrievna (1892–1956), 239,243 Chief Administration for Professional Education. See Glavprofobr Chukovsky, Kornei Ivanovich (1882-1969), 292 Chuzhak, Nikolai Fedorovich, pseudonym of Nikolai Fedorovich Nasimovich (1876- 1939), 199 Čiurlionis, Mikalojaus Konstantinas (1875- 1911), 25 Claudel, Paul (1868–1955), 141 Collective of Painting-Sculpture-Architecture Synthesis. See Zhivskulptarkh Color Dynamics and Tectonic Primitivism, 43 Columbus, Christopher (1451-1506), 151 Comintern (Third Communist International), xxxviii,205, 206 Committee for Art Affairs Attached to the Council of USSR Ministers, 288 Communist Futurism. See Komfut Concretists, 238, 240 Constructivists, 238 Contemporary Architecture. See SA "Contemporary Trends in Art," St. Petersburg,1908,9,10,12 Courbet, Gustav (1819–77), xxli, 270 "Crimson Rose,"Saratov, 1904, xxiv Crommelynck, Fernand (1888–1970), 146 ## Darmstadt Technische Hochschule, 151 Daumier, Honoré Victorin (18o8–79), xx Davydova, Natalya Mikhailovna, 138 Degas, Edgar (1834–1912), xxiii Deineka, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich (1899 1969),xli,238,273,279,280 Delacroix, Eugène (1798–1863), 228 Delaunay, Robert (1885–1941), 60, 95 Denis, Maurice (1870–1943), xxiv Derain, André (1880–1954), xxvii, 61, 268 Diaghilev (Dyagilev), Sergei Pavlovich (1872–1929), xxi, xxii, xxiii, xxvi, 3, 54, 79,208,209 Dix, Otto (1891–1969), 279, 280 Dmitriev-Kavkazsky, Lev Evgrafovich (1849 1916),284 Dobrokovsky, Mecheslav Vasilevich (1895- 1937), 273 Dobuzhinsky, Mstislav Valerianovich (1875– 1957),18 Donkey's Tail, xxviii, xxx, xxxi, 23, 25, 41, 54,70,78,79,87,91,93,116,205 Drevin, Aleksandr Davidovich (1889–1938), 304 Duchamp, Marcel (1887-1968), 210 Dyakonitsyn, Lev Fedorovich (b. 1931), 298, 299 Efros, Abram Markovich (1888–1954), 299 Eganbyuri, Eli. See Zdanevich, Ilya Egorev,Vyacheslav Aleksandrovich (1874- 19??), 23 Ehrenburg (Erenburg), Ilya Grigorevich (1891–1967),151,152,292 “Eighth State Exhibition", Moscow, 1919, 14 Eisenstein (Eisenshtein), Sergei Mikhailovich (1898–1948), 250, 273 Elkin, Vasilii Nikolaevich (b. 1897), 273 Ender, Boris Vladimirovich (1893-1960), xxxvi Ender, Mariya Vladimirovna (1897-1942), xxxvi Engels, Friedrich (1820–95), 293 "Erste Russische Kunstausstellung, Die,"' Berlin, 1922,xxxvi, xxxviii, 186 Evergood, Philip (1901–73), 291 Evreinov, Nikolai Nikolaevich (1879–1953), 12,13 "Exhibition of Painting 1915," Moscow, xxxi, xxxii, 8,54, 79, 161 Exter (Ekster), Aleksandra Aleksandrovna (1884-1949), xxxvii, xxxviii, xxxix, 10, 60,61,62,68,69,70,73,206,244 Fabri, Morits, 87 Falk, Robert Rafailovich (1886–1958), xxvii, 61,67,68 Favorsky, Vladimir Andreevich (1886–1964), 281,283 Federation of the Association of Soviet Workers in the Spatial Arts. See FOSKh Fedin, Konstantin Aleksandrovich (b. 1892), 292 Fedorov-Davydov, Aleksei Aleksandrovich (1900–69),300 Feininger, Lyonel (1871-1956), 92 Feofilaktov, Nikolai Petrovich (1878-1941), 282 Filonov, Pavel Nikolaevich (1883-1941), xxvi,xxx,xl, 12,284–87,291 Firsov, Ivan M., 93 “First Agricultural and Handicraft-Industrial Exhibition," Moscow, 1923, 206 . First All-Russian Conference of Proletarian and Educational Organizations, Moscow, 1918,177 First All-Union Congress of Soviet Writers, Moscow, 1934, xl, 288,290–97 "First Discussional Exhibition of Associations of Active Revolutionary Art," Moscow, 1924, xxxviii,230,237–43,279 First State Textile Print Factory, Moscow. See Moscow First Working Group of Constructivists, 215, 238,239,241-43 First Working Organization of Artists, 238, 243 “5 × 5 = 25,"Moscow, 1921, xxxvii, 139, 204 Folkwang Museum, Hagen, 60 Fomin, Ivan Aleksandrovich (1872-1936), 306 For Proletarian Art. See Za proletarskoe iskusstvo 41°, 79 Forward. See Vpered FOSKh (Federatsiya obedineniya sovetskikh rabotnikov prostranstvennykh iskusstv) [Federation of the Association of Soviet Workers in the Spatial Arts], 288 Four Arts, x1, 114, 281–84 Free State Art Studios, Moscow. See Moscow, Svomas Free State Art Studios, Petrograd. See Leningrad, Svomas Freiberg, Paula Fritsovna (b. 189o), 273 Friche, Vladimir Maksimovich (1870–1929) 196 Fry, Roger Eliot (1866–1934), 301 Gabo, Sir Naum (Pevzner, Naum Neemia, (1890-1977), xxxiv, xxxvii, 152, 208– 214 GAKhN. See Moscow Gan, Aleksei Mikhailovich (1889-1942), xxxviii, 214-25, 230, 238, 239, 243, 273 Castev, Aleksei Kapitonovich (1882-1938) 307 Cuguin, Paul (1848–1903), xxvii, 11, 53, 58 General Military Instruction. See Vsevobuch Gerasimov, Aleksandr Mikhailovich (1881- 1963),265,289 Gessner, Robert (b. 1907), 292 Ginzburg, Moisei Yakovlevich (1892–1946), 273 Giotto di Bondone (1266?–1337), 15, 16 Gippius, Zinaida Nikolaevna (1869–1945), 3 Gladkov, Fedor Vasilevich (1883–1958), 292 Glavpolitprosvet (Glavnyi politiko-provetitelnyi komitet) [Central Committee of Political Enlightenment], 185, 226 Glavprofobr (Glavnoe upravlenie professionalnogo obrazovaniya) [Chief Administration for Professional Education], 186 Gleizes, Albert (1881–1953), 95, 103 Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749–1832), 15 Golden Fleece. See Zolotoe runo Gollerbakh, Erik Fedorovich (1895-1942), 255 Goltsev, Viktor Viktorovich (1901–55), 308 Goncharov, Andrei Dmitrievich (1903–79), 238 Goncharova, Natalya Sergeevna (1881–1962), xxv, xxvi, xxvii, xxviii, xxix, xxx, xxxi, 10,54–60,77–78,79,87–91,92, 95, 100 Gorky, Maxim, pseudonym of Aleksei Maksimovich Peshkov (1868–1936), 176, 182, 290, 292, 294–95 Grabar, Igor Emmanuilovich (1871–1960), 10, 111,291,295-96 Gray (Gray-Prokofieva), Camilla (1936–72), 209 Grinbaum, A. See Grünbaum, Anton Abraham Grigorev, Aleksandr Vladimirovich (1891- 1961),265,268 Grishchenko, Aleksei Vasilevich (1883- 1977),43, 61,205 Grossman, Leonid Petrovich (1888–1965), 18 Grosz, George (1893–1959), 279 Grünbaum, Anton Abraham (b. 1885), 18 Guillaume, Paul (1893-1934), 100 Guro, Elena Genrikhovna, pseudonym of Eleonora Genrikhovna Notenberg (1877– 1913), 23 Hermitage, Leningrad. See Leningrad Higher State Art-Technical Institute. See Moscow, Vkhutein Higher State Art-Technical Studios. See Moscow,-Vkhutemas Hodler, Ferdinand (1853–1918), 280 Hoffman, Ernst Theodor Amadeus (1776- 1822), 33 Holbein, Hans (the elder) (1460–1524), 72, 74 IKhK. See Leningrad Imperial Academy of Fine Arts (St. Petersburg). See Leningrad, Academy of Fine Arts Impressionists, xxv, xxx, 10, 11, 12, 13, 18, 25 Inber, Vera Mikhailovna (1890–1972), 292 Inkhuk. See Moscow Institute of Archaeology, Moscow. See MoscOW Institute of Artistic Culture, Moscow. See Moscow, Inkhuk Institute of Artistic Culture, Leningrad. See Leningrad, IKhK Institute of Blood Transfusion, Moscow. See Moscow InternAKhR (Internatsionalnaya Assotsiatsiya khudozhnikov revolyutsii) [International Association of Artists of the Revolution], 272 Ioganson, Boris Vladimirovich (1893-1973), 265 Ioganson, Karel (Karl Valdemarovich, ca. 1890–1924), 248 Irbit,Paul Yanovich (1890–1940), 273 Isakov, Sergei Konstantinovich (1875-1953), 285 Iskusstvo kommuny (Art of the Commune), xxxvi, 161,164, 165,166,167,170 Iskusstvo v massy (Art to the Masses), 265 Ivan IV (the Terrible) (tsar of Russia) (1530-84),130 Izdebsky, Vladimir Alekseevich (1882–1965), 17,18,20,23,25 IZO Narkomproş (Otdel izobrazitelnykh iskusstv pri Narodnom komissariate prosveshcheniya) [Department of Visual Arts in the People's Commissariat for Enlightenment], xxxiv, 102, 139, 151, 161,170,182,183,184,186–90,205, 244 Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo (Visual Art), xxxvi, 170 Jack of Diamonds. See Knave of Diamonds Jawlensky, Alexei von (Yavlensky, Aleksei Georgievich, 1864-1941),xxiii, 17, 18 Kamensky, Vasilii Vasilevich (1864-1961) xxxi Kamernyi Theater. See Moscow Kandinsky, Vasilii Vasilevich (1866–1944), xxvi, xxxi, xxxii, xxxiv, xxxv, xxxvi, 12, 17–23, 24,43, 69, 70,77,103,196–98 Karatygin, Vyacheslav Gavrilovich (1875- 1926), 298 Kasatkin, Nikolai Alekseevich (1859–1930), 265, 291 Katsman, Evgenii Aleksandrovich (189o-1976), 265, 266 Kazan Art School, 139, 148 Kerensky, Aleksandr Fedorovich (1881- 1970),187 Kharkov University, 176 Khlebnikov, Velimir (Viktor) Vladimirovich (1885-1922),xxxvi,12,69,77 Kiev Art School, 208 Klutsis, Gustav Gustavovich (1895-1944) 248,273,274 Klyun, Ivan Vasilevich (1873-1942), xxxii, xxxiii, xxxiv, xl, 110, 114, 115, 135, 136–38,142-43,279,282 Knave of Diamonds, xxvii, xxviii, xxix, xxx, xxxi, 8, 12, 17, 40, 54, 60–69, 70, 77, 78, 79,87,89,102,114,116,161 Kogan, Petr Semenovich (1872–1932), 196 Komfut (Kommunisticheskii futurizm) [Communist Futurism], xxxiv, 161, 164- 66,170,186,244 Konchalovsky, Petr Petrovich (1876-1956), xxviii, 61, 66, 67,70,73,77 Korin, Ogata (1658–1716), 63 Korolev, Ivan Pavlovich (1899–1942), 243 Korovin, Konstantin Alekseevich (1861- 1939), 10 Kovalenko, Petr Timofeevich (b. 1888), 12 Kozlinsky, Vladimir Ivanovich (1891-1967), 160 Kramskoi, Ivan Nikolaevich (1837-87), xx, 270 Kreichik, Alois Vikentevich (1893-1937), 273 Krinsky, Vladimir Fedorovich (1890–1971), 43 Kruchenykh, Aleksei (Aleksandr) Eliseevich, (1886–1969), 12, 69, 79, 102, 115, 116, 136,149,216 Kulbin, Nikolai Ivanovich (1868–1917), xxv, xxvi, xxx, 9, 10, 11–17, 18, 19, 23, 24, 25,70,77,103,116,285 Kuleshov, Lev Vladimirovich (1899–1970), 250 Kuprin, Aleksandr Vasilevich (188o-1960), xxviii, 61, 64, 65 Kurella, Alfred (1895–1975), 273 Kursk Gymnasium, 208 Kushner, Boris Anisimovich (1888-1937), xxxv,161,164,166–70,199,250 Kustodiev, Boris Mikhailovich (1878–1927), 125 Kuznetsov, Pavel Varfomoleevich (1878- 1968), xxiii, xxiv,6,7, 281, 282 L'Académie Russe (Paris), 161 Ladovsky, Nikolai Aleksandrovich (1881- 1941),43, 255 Lancéray (Lansere), Evgenii Evgenevich (1875-1946),7 Lapin, Nikolai Fedorovich (1891–1960), 273 Larionov, Ivan Fedorovich (1884–1919), 87 Larionov, Mikhail Fedorovich (1881-1964), xxiii, xxiv, xxv, xxvi, xxvii, xxviii, xxix, xxx,xxxi,10,18,41,54,58,70,72,77. 78,79–83,87–91, 91–100, 100–102, 205, 209 Lavinsky, Anton Mikhailovich (1893-1968) 248 Lebedev, Vladimir Vasilevich (1891-1967), 160,281 Le-Dantiyu, Mikhail Vasilevich (1891-1917), 79,87,92,205 Lef (Levyi front iskusstv) {Left Front of the Arts], xxxviii, 139, 149, 166, 171, 199–202,225,242,244,291 Le Fauconnier, Henri Victor Gabriel (1881–1946),23,60,61,95,146 Left Front of the Arts. See Lef Léger, Fernand (1881–1955), 60, 95 Lenin, Vladimir Ilich, pseudonym of Vladimir Ilich Ulyanov (1870–1924), xxxiv, 161, 164,177,182,184,190,252,253,271, 272,291,293,294,296 Lenin Library. Moscow. See Moscow Leningrad Leningrad Academy of Fine Arts, xix, xxxiv, 208, 254, 284 Academy of Transport, 255 Hermitage,3, 165,188 IKhK (Institut khudozhestvennoi kultury) [Institute of Artistic Culture], xxxvi, 116, 170,197,284 Institute of Railroad Transport Engineers, 255 LOA (Leningradskoe obshchestvo arkhitektorov) [Leningrad Society of Architects], 255 Monument to the Victims of the Revolution, 195 Museum of Painterly Culture (also called Museum of Artistic Culture), xxxvi, 150,170 Pegoskuma (Petrogradskie gosudarstvennye svopodno-khudozhestvennye uchebnye masterskie) [Petrograd State Free Art Educational Studios], xxxiv, xxxv, 112, 161 Russian Museum, 42, 115, 161, 170, 284, 287 Saltykov-Shchedrin Library, 16o Society of People's Universities, 12 Svomas (Svobodnye gosudarstvennye khudozhestvennye masterskie) [Free State Art Studios], xxxiv, xxxv, 112, 161, 170, 205 Tenishev Institute, 1 10 University of St. Petersburg, 79, 170, 225 Lentulov, Aristarkh Vasilevich (1882-1943), xxvii, xxxiii, 10, 61, 65, 67 Levitan, Isaak Ilich(1861–1900), xxii, 11,208 Levkievsky, Vyacheslav Vyacheslavovich (1895-1919?),87 Lévy, Rudolf (1875-1943), 95 "L'Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs et Industriels Modernes, Paris, 1925, 149 Life (Byt), 237 "Link," Kiev, 1908, xxv, 10, 23 Lissitzky, El (Lazar Markovich, Lisitsky (1890-1941), xxvi, xxxν, xxxviii, 138, 151–58,205,207,215,230,239,255, 273.282 Literary Center of the Constructivists. See LTsK Livshits, Benedikt Konstantinovich (1886- 1939),69,71,78 LOA. See Leningrad Lobanov, Viktor Mikhailovich (1883-1970), 299,300 Loginov, Konstantin Fedorovich, 243 Lomonosov, Mikhail Vasilevich (1711–65), 75 Lozowick, Louis (1892–1973), 291 LTsK (Literaturnyi tsentr konstruktivistov) [Literary Center of the Constructivists], 307 Luchishkin, Sergei Alekseevich (b. 1902), 238,241,280 Lunacharsky,Anatolii Vasilevich (1875- 1933), xxxiii, 164, 176, 177, 182- 185,-190–96, 214, 290 Luppol, Ivan Kapitonovich (1896–1943), 292 Lvov, Petr Ivanovich (1882-1944), 282 Lyushin, Vladimir Ivanovich (1898–1970), 240 Bolshakov Art College, 102 Makovets, xxxix Makovsky, Konstantin Egorovich (1839- 1915), 11 Makovsky, Sergei Konstantinovich (1877- 1962), 298 Malevich, Kazimir Severinovich (1878–1935), xxvi, xxvii, xxix, xxx, xxxii, xxxiii, xxxiv,xxxv,xxxvi,xxxviii,xxxix,3,12, 24,71,103,104,110,111,112, 113, 114,115,116–35,136, 138, 143-45, 151,152,164,170,171,172,230,234, 255,282,291 Malinovsky, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich. See Bogdanov; Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Malkov, Pavel Vasilevich (1900–53), 296 Malraux, André (b. 1901), 292 Malyutin, Sergei Vasilevich (1859-1937), 265 Mamontov, Savva Ivanovich (1841-1918), xxi, xxii Mann, Klaus (1906–49), 292 Marc, Franz (1880–1916), 92 Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso (1876-1944), xxviii, xxx, II, 116 Markov, Vladimir Ivanovich, pseudonym of Waldemars Matvejs (1877–1914), xxv, xxx, xxxi, xxxii, II, 12, 23–38, 103, 116, 216,285 Markushev, 66 Marx, Karl (1818–83), 218, 293 Mashkov, Ilya Ivanovich (1881-1944), xxix, 61, 63, 64, 65, 70, 73, 77, 114 Masyutin, Vasilii Nikolaevich (1884-1955), 25 Matisse, Henri(1869–1954), xxvii, 58,63, 65 Matsa, Ivan Lyudvigovich (1893–1976), 239, 265,268,271,273,279,282,288 Matvejs, Waldemars. See Markov, Vladimir Ivanovich Matyushin, Mikhail Vasilevich (1861-1934), xxv, Xxx, xxxii, xxxvi, 23, 102, 1 14, 116, 197 Mayakovsky, Vladimir Vladimirovich (1893- 1930), xxxi, 61, 69, 71, 160, 161, 164, 166,194,199,230,244,250,254,284 Mazzini, Giuseppe (1805–72), 68 Medunetsky, Konstantin Konstantinovich (b. 1899), xxxviii, 238 Meerzon, Iosif Aizikovich (1900–41), 205 Meierkhold Theater. See Moscow, State Higher Theater Workshop Meierkhold, Vsevolod Emilevich (1874- 1940), 60, 139,146 Menkov, Mikhail Ivanovich, xxxii, 1 10, II I, 114, 135,145 Menshutin, Nikolai Aleksandrovich (1899- 1951), 243 Merezhkovsky, Dmitrii Sergeevich (1866– 1941), 3 Merkulov, Yurii Aleksandrovich (b. 1901) 240 Metzinger, Jean (1883–1956), 95, 103, 146 Michelangelo (Michel Angelo Buonarroti, 1475–1564),111,114, 121 Mikhailov, Aleksei Ivanovich (1904–85), 273 Miller, Grigorii Lvovich (1900–58), 239, 243 Minkov, Mikhail Ivanovich. See Menkov, Mikhail Ivanovich Mir iskusstva. See World of Art Mirolyubova, Aleksandra Alekseevna (b. 1898),239,243 Miturich, Petr Vasilevich (1887–1956), 152, 208,281 Modigliani, Amedeo (1884-1920), 208 Moholy-Nagy, László (1895–1946), 250, 274 Monet, Claude-Oscar (1840–1926), xxiii Moor, Dmitrii Stakievich, pseudonym of Dmitrii Stakievich Orlov (1883–1946), 273 Morgunov, Aleksei Alekseevich (1884–1935), xxvi Morozov, Ivan Abramovich (1871-1921), xxvii, 187 Morris, William (1834–96), xxi Café Pittoresque, 149 Central Lenin Museum, 267 Central Museum of the Soviet Army, 280 Communist Academy, 279 First State Textile Print Factory (formerly Emil Tsindel's Manufactory), 139, 146, 249 GAKhN (Gosudarstvennaya Akademiya khudozhestvennykh nauk) [State Academy of Artistic Sciences]. See RAKhN Inkhuk (Institut khudozhestvennoi kultury) [Institute of Artistic Culture], xxxv, xxxvii, xxxviii, 17, 19, 43, 114, 139, 146, 149, 151, 153, 171, 197, 205, 215, 225, 244,248,255 Institute of Archaeology, 41 Institute of Blood Transfusion, 177 Institute of Engineering Economy, 253 Institute of Painting, Sculpture and Architecture, xxxiv, 8, 41, 54, 55, 79, 116, 205 Lenin Library, 78 Moscow (continued) Kamernyi Theater (Chamber Theater), 242 Kazan Railroad Station, 306 Mossovet Building Institute (Building Institute for the Moscow Soviet of Workers' Peasants'and Soldiers' Deputies), 255 Museum of Painterly Culture (also called Museum of Artistic Culture), 143 Museum of the All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions, 269 Museum of the Red Army and Navy, 269 Palace of Labor, 195 RAKhN (Rossiiskaya Akademiya khudozhestvennykh nauk) [Russian Academy of Artistic Sciences], xxxv, 17, 19, 43,196–98,206,225 Society of Free Aesthetics, 54, 92 Society of Orchestral Musicians, 182 State Higher Theater Workshop (Meierkhold Theater), 60, 242 Stroganov Art School, xxxiv, 102, 139 Svomas (Svobodnye gosudarstvennye khudozhestvennye masterskie) [Free State Art Studios], xxxiv, 41, 114, 146, 189, 205.209 Tretyakov Gallery, 44, 64, 67, 104, 266, 280,289 TsIT (Tsentralnyi institut truda) [Central Institute of Labor], 230, 242 Vkhutein (Vysshii gosudarstvennyi khudozhestvenno-tekhnicheskii institut) [Higher State Art-Technical Institute], xxxiv,41, 149, 255 Vkhutemas (Vysshie gosudarstvennye khudozhestvenno-tekhnicheskie masterskie) [Higher State Art-Technical Studios], xxxiv,41,114,139,146,186,209,237, 255 Yaroslav Railroad Station, 206 "Moscow Association of Artists,"xxvi "Moscow Salon," 66, 139 Munch, Edvard (1863-1944), 25 Munich Polytechnicum Engineering School, 208 University, 208 Münter, Gabriele (1877–1962), 18 Museum of Artistic Culture. See Museum of Painterly Culture Museum of Painterly Culture. See Leningrad, Moscow Museum of the All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions, Moscow. See Moscow Museum of the Red Army and Navy, Moscow. See Moscow Narkompros (Narodnyi komissariat prosveshcheniya) [ People's Commissariat for Enlightenment], xxxiii, xxxiv, xxxviii, 116, 149, 182–85, 186, 187, 196, 217, 218,226,230,232 NEP (Novaya ekonomicheskaya politika) [New Economic Policy], xxxix, 194, 195, 288 Nero (emperor of Rome) (37–68), 125, 135 Neue Künstlervereinigung, Die (The New Artists Union). 17. 18.23 New Artists' Union. The. See Neue Künstlervereinigung, Die New Economic Policy. See NEP New Left Front of the Arts. See Novyi lef New Society of Painters. See NOZh Nietzsche, Friedrich (1844–1900), 304 Nikon, Patriarch (Minov, Nikita) (1605–81), 301 Nikritin. Solomon Borisovich (1898–1965). 241 "Nineteenth State Exhibition," Moscow, 1920, xxxvii, 43 Nivinsky, Ignatii Igantevich (1880–1933), 206 "No. 4,"Moscow, 1914, xxx, xxxi, 41, 54 "Non-Objective Creation and Suprematism." See "Tenth State Exhibition," Moscow, 1919 Novitsky, Pavel Ivanovich (1888–1971), 273 Novyi lef (Novyi levyi front iskusstv) [New Left Front of the Arts], 139, 149, 199, 230, 231,244,254 NOZh (Novoe obshchestvo zhivopistsev) [New Society of Painters], xxxix "0.10," Petrograd, 1915–16, xxxii, 86, 102, 110,112,114, 116,146,161,205 Obmokhu (Obshchestvo molodykh khudozhnikov) [Society of Young Artists], xxxvii, xxxviii, 238 Obolensky, Vladimir Andreevich (1890- 1954),87 October, x1,215,273-79,288 Odessa Art-School, 161, 254 OKhRR (Obshchestvo khudozhnikov revolyutsionnoi Rossii) [Society of Artists of Revolutionary Russia], 265 Okna ROSTA (Okna Rossiiskogo telegrafnogo agentstva) [Display Windows of the Russian Telegraph Agency], 160 OMAKhR (Obedinenie molodezhi AKhR) [Association of AKhR Youth]. 265. 274 Opoyaz (Obshchestvo poeticheskogo yazyka) [Society of Poetical Language]. 244 OSA (Obedinenie sovremennykh arkhitektorov) [Association of Contemporary Architects], 215 Osmerkin, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich (1890- 1953),298 OST (Obshchestvo khudozhnikov-stankovistov) [Society of Easel Artists], xxxix,238,279–81,282 Ostroukhov, Ilya Semenovich(1858–1929), 41 Pankov, Ivan (b. 1889), 237 Parkhomenko, Konstantin Kondratevich (1897-1952),238 Parkin. Varsonofi (Presumed pseudonym of I. M. Zdanevich), 299 Pasternak, Boris Leonidovich (1890-1960), 60,170,292 Pegoskhuma. See Leningrad Penza Art Institute, 205 People's Commissariat for Enlightenment. See Narkompros Perov, Vasilii Grigorevich (1833–82), xx, 270 Pertsov, Viktor Osipovich (1898-1980), 230-36 Petrograd State Free Art Educational Studios. See Leningrad, Pegoskhuma Petrov-Vodkin, Kuzma Sergeevich (1878- 1939), xxvii, 281 Petruzhkov, 243 Pevsner, Antoine (Noton Pevzner) (1886- 1962), xxxiv, xxxviii, 208-14 Pevzner, Naum Neemia. See Gabo, Sir Naum Picasso, Pablo (1881-1973), 60, 61, 62,95, 97,99,176,205,226,268 Pimenov, Yurii Ivanovich (1903-77), 238, 279,280 Pirosmanashvili, Niko (1862–1977), xxvi Plaksin, Mikhail (1898–1977), 241 Popova, Lyubov Sergeevna (1889–1924), xxxiii, xxxv, xxxvii, xxxviii, 138, 139, 146–48,171,204,205,244,248,249, 255 Poret, Àlisa Ivanovna (1902–84), 285 Pougny, Jean. See Puni, Ivan Albertovich Prakhov,Nikolai Adrianovich (1873-1957), 93 Projectionists, 238, 240–41 Proletarian Culture. See Proletarskaya kultura Proletarskaya kultura (Proletarian Culture), 177,178 Proletkult (Proletarskaya kultura) [Proletarian Culture]. wiv. viin. 102. 164. 176-82.183.225.230.273 Prusakov. Nikolai Petrovich (1900–54). 238. 243 Pudovkin, Vsevolod Illarionovich (1893- 1953), 244, 250 Puni. Ivan Albertovich (Jean Pougny) (1894-1956). xxxii, xxxv, 110. 111, 112,113,135,171,209,282 Punin. Nikolai Nikolaevich (1888–1953), xxx, xxxv. XXxvi, xxxviii, 139, 161, 164. 166, 170-76 Puvis de Chavannes. Pierre (1824-98), xxiii xxiv Rabis. See Sorabis Radakov. Aleksei Aleksandrovich (1879- 1942),160 Radek, Karl (1885–1939),292 Radimov, Pavel Aleksandrovich (1887-1967). 265 Radonezhsky, Sergii (Varfolomei Kirillovich) (d. 1391), RAKhN. See Moscow Raphael (Sanzio Raffaele) (1483-1520), 111 RAPKh (Rossiiskaya assotsiatsiya proletarskikh khudozhnikov) [Russian Association of Proletarian Artists], 273, 288 RAPM (Rossiiskaya assotsiatsiya proletarskikh muzykantov) [Russian Association of Proletarian Musicians], 289 RAPP (Rossiiskaya assotsiatsiya proletarskikh pisatelei) [Russian Association of Proletarian Writers], 199, 289 Read, Sir Herbert Edward (1893–1969), 208 Redko, Kliment Nikolaevich (1897-1956), 241 Ref (Revolyutsionnyi front) [Revolutionary Front], 199 Reger, Max (1873-1916), 298 Rembrandt, Harmenszoon van Rijn (16o6–69), 72,73,74,251 Repin, Ilya Efimovich (1844-1930), xx, xxii, 11,61,130,270 Rerberg, Fedor Ivanovich (1865–1938), 114 Rerikh (Roerich), Nikolai Konstantinovich (1874-1947),306 Revolutionary Front. See Ref Richter, Hans (1888–1976), 239 Rivera, Diego (1886–1957),273,275 Rodchenko, Aleksandr Mikhailovich (1891- 1956), xxxiii, xxxiv, xxxv, xxxvii, xxxviii, 43, 138, 139, 140, 148–51, 152, 199,200,204,215,216,230,244,248, 250–54, 255, 273 Roerich, Nikolai. See Rerikh (Roerich) Nikolai Konstantinovich Romanovich, Sergei Mikhailovich (1894- 1968),87 Roslavets, Nikolai Andreevich (1881-1944), 304 Rostislavov, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich (186o-1920), 299 Rousseau, Henri-Julien (le Douanier) (1844–1910),53,97 Rovel, Henri, 18 Rozanova, Olga Vladimirovna (1886–1918), xxx, xxxii, xxxiv, II, I2, 24, 70, 102–110,111,116,135,148,285 Rozhdestvensky, Vasilii Vasilevich (1884- 1963), xxvi, xxviii, 61, 65, 67 Rubinstein (Rubinshtein), Anton Grigorevich (1829–94),302 Rudnev, Lev Vladimirovich (1885-1956), 306 Ruisdael, Jacob Izaakszoon van (1628?–1682), 16 Russian Academy of Artistic Sciences. See Moscow, RAKhN "Russian Art Exhibition," Berlin, 1922. See \*Erste Russische Kunstausstellung, Die," Berlin, 1922 Russian Association of Proletarian Artists. See RAPKh Russian Association of Proletarian Musicians. See RAPM Russian Association of Proletarian Writers. See RAPP Russian Museum, Leningrad. See Leningrad Ryabushinsky (Shinsky), Nikolai Pavlovich (1876–1951),xxv,6–8 Ryabushinsky, Stepan Pavlovich (1874–1943), 41 SA (Sovremennaya arkhitektura) [Contemporary Architecture], 215, 273 Sabaneev, Leonid Leonidovich (1881–1967), 197 "Salon I and 2,"Odessa and other cities 1909–10, Odessa,1910–11,17, 20,23,25 "Salon d'automne," xxiii, 79, 186 "Salon des indépendants,"66, 83 Sanina, Lidiya Mikhailovna (b. 1889), 243 Sapegin, Mikhail Mikhailovich (1895-1953), 243 Sapunov, Nikolai Nikolaevich (188o-1912), xxiv, 2 Saryan, Martiros Sergeevich (188o-1972), xxiv,282 Schoenberg, Arnold (1874–1951), 12, 18 Second All-Russian Convention of Artists, St. Petersburg, 1911–12, xxvi, 19 "Second All-Russian Folk Art Exhibition," St. Petersburg, 1913, 41 "Second Post-Impressionist Exhibition," London, 1912,301 Sedelnikov, Nikolai Āleksandrovich (b. 1905), 273 Selvinsky, Ilya Lvovich (1899–1968), 307 Senkin, Sergei Yakovlevich (1894-1963), 248,273 Serov, Valentin Aleksandrovich (1865–1911), xxii, II Severyanin, Igor Vasilevich, pseudonym of Igor Vasilevich Lotarev (1887-1941), 302 Shaginyan, Marietta Sergeevna (1888— 1982), 292 Shakespeare, William (1564–1616), 15 Shapiro, Tevel Markovich (b. 1898), 205 Shchukin, Sergei Ivanovich (1854-1937), xxvii, 187 Shchusev, Aleksei Viktorovich (1873-1949), 305 Shekhtel, Fedor Osipovich (1859–1926), 306 Shevchenko, Aleksandr Vasilevich (1882- 1948), xxvi, xxx, xxxi, xxiv, xl, 41-54, 87,92,217 Shinsky, Nikolai. See Ryabushinsky (Shinsky), Nikolai Pavlovich Shklovsky, Viktor Borisovich (1893-1984), 291 Shkolnik, Iosif Solomonovich (1883-1926), 102,284 "Shop," Moscow, 1916, xxxiii, 114, 116, 146,148,205 Shpet, Gustav Gustavovich (1879–1940), 196, 197 Shterenberg, David Petrovich (1881-1948), xxxiv, xxxv,xli, 164,186–90,279 Shub, Esfir Ilinichna (1894–1959), 273 Shukov, Vładimir Grigorevich (1853-1939), Skryabin, Aleksandr Nikolaevich (1871- 1915), 12, 19 Slavinsky, Yuvenal Mitrofanovich (1887– 1936), 182–85 Smirnov，Nikolai Grigorevich(1890-1933), 239,243 Society of Artists of Revolutionary Russia. See OKhRR Society of Easel Artists. See OST Society of Free Aesthetics, Moscow. See Mos-COW Society of Orchestral Musicians, Moscow. See Moscow Society of Poetical Language. See Opoyaz Society of Wandering Exhibitions. See Wanderers Society of Young Artists. See Obmokhu Solomon (king of Israel) (ca. 986 B.C.–ca 933 B.C.), 167 Somov, Konstantin Andreevich (1869–1939) xxii, 125 Sorabis (or Rabis) (Soyuz rabotnikov iskusstv) [Union of Art Workers], 182–85 South lef. See Yugolef Sovremennaya arkhitektura (Contemporary Architecture). See SA Spandikov, Eduard Karlovich (1875–1929), 23 Stalin,Iosif Vissarionovich, pseudonym of Iosif VissarionovichDzhugashvili (1879–1953), x1, 289, 291, 293, 296 Stasov, Vladimir Vasilevich (1824–1906), xx State Academy of Artistic Sciences. See Moscow,GAKhN State Higher Theater Workshop. See Moscow Steiner, Rudolf (1861–1925), 304 Stelletsky, Dmitrii Semenovich (1875-1947), 48 Stenberg, Georgii Avgustovich (1900–33), xxxviii, 237, 238 Stenberg, Vladimir Avgustovich (1899- 1982), xxxviii, 237, 238 Stepanova, Varvara Fedorovna (also known by the pseudonyms Agarykh and Varst) (1894-1958), xxxv, xxxvii, xxxviii, 138, 139–42,148,204,215,244,248,249, 250,273 Stirner, Max, pseudonym of Joseph Kaspar Schmidt (1806–56), 149 "Store." See "Shop" Stroganov Art School, Moscow. See Moscow Suetin, Nikolai Mikhailovich (1897-1954), xxxvi, 307 Sukhovo-Kobylin, Aleksandr Vasilevich (1817-1903),139 Supremus, 148 Surikov, Vasilii Ivanovich (1850-1921), xx, 270 Svomas, Moscow. See Moscow Svomas, Petrograd. See Leningrad Tairov, Aleksandr Yakovlevich, pseudonym of AleksandrYakovlevich Kornblit (1885-1950), 292 Talashkino, xxi, xxii, xxvii, 41 Tarabukin, Nikolai Mikhailovich (1899- 1956),xxxv, 171, 215 "Target,"Moscow, 1913, xxx, xxxi, 41, 79, 87,91,116 Tatlin, Vladimir Evgrafovich (1885-1953), xxvi, xxxi, xxxii, xxxiii, xxxiv, xxxv, xxxvi, xxxviii, xxxix, xl, 18, 110, 146, 149,152,171,205–208,226,230,234, 291 Telingater, Solomon Benediktovich (1903- 69), 273 Tenishev Institute, St. Petersburg. See Leningrad Tenisheva, Princess Mariya Klavdievna (1867-1928),xxi "Tenth State Exhibition"' (Non-Objective Creation and Suprematism), Moscow, 1919, xxxvii, 102, 114, 138–51 TEO Narkompros (Teatralnyi otdel pri Narodnom komissariate prosveshcheniya) [Department of Theater in the People's Commissariat for Enlightenment], 214 Terentev, Igor Gerasimovich, 79 Theater Section of Narkompros. See TEO Narkompros Third (Communist) International. See Comintern Titian (Tiziano Vecellini) (1477–1576), 11I Titov, Boris Borisovich (1897–1951), 264 Toller, Ernst (1893–1939), 292 Tolstoi, Lev Nikolaevich (1828–1910), 16 Toot (Tott or Tuot), Viktor Sigizmundovich (1893-1963),273 "Tramway V," Petrograd, 1915, xxxii, 86, 102,112,114,116,146,205 Trapani, A., 93 Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow. See Moscow Tretyakov, Pavel Mikhailovich (1832–98), xx Tretyakov, Sergei Mikhailovich (1892–1939), 199, 250, 291 Troitse-Sergieva Lavra, Zagorsk. See Zagorsk Trubetskoi, Prince Paolo Petrovich (1867- 1938), 54 Tryaskin, Nikolai Andrianovich (b. 1902), 241 Tsentrifuga (Centrifuge), 60 Tsindel's Textile Factory or Manufactory. See Moscow, First State Textile Print Factory Tsionglinsky, Yan Frantsevich (1858–1912), 23 TsIT. See Moscow Tugendkhold, Yakov Aleksandrovich (1882- 1928), xxviii, xxxix Tyrsa, Nikolai Adrianovich (1887–1942), 282 Tyshler, Aleksandr Grigorevich (1898– 1980), xxxix, 238, 241, 279, 280 Udaltsova, Nadezhda Andreevna (1885- 1961), xxxiii, xxxiv, 146, 205 Uitz, Béla (1887–1969), 273 Union of Art Workers. See Sorabis Union of the New Art. See Unovis "Union of New Trends in Art," Petrograd, 1922, xxxvi "Union of Russian Artists,"108 Union of Soviet Artists, 288 Union of Soviet Writers, 290, 296 Union of Youth, xxv, xxix, xxx, 8, II, 12,23, 24,25,69,79, 89, 102,107, 110, 112, 114,116,161,205,284 University of St. Petersburg. See Leningrad Unkovskaya (Zakharina-Unkovskaya), Aleksandra Vasilevna.(1859–19??), 12 Unovis (Uniya novogo iskusstva OR Utverditeli novogo iskusstva) [Union of the New Art OR Affirmers of the New Art], 116,152 Uspensky, Petr Demyanovich (1878–1947), 103 Utamaro, Kenkyūkai (1753?-1806), 63, 94 Utkin, Petr Savvich (1877–1934), 18 Van Dongen, Kees (1877–1968), 65 Vanetsian, Aram Vramshapu (1901-71), 243 Van Gogh, Vincent (1853–90), xxix, 11, 65, 108 Varst. See Stepanova, Varvara Fedorovna Vasileva, Mariya Ivanovna (1884–1957), 161 Vasnetsov, Viktor Mikhailovich (1848–1926), xxi, xxii Vertov, Dziga, pseudonym of Denis Arkadevich Kaufman (1896–1954), 250 Veshch/Gegenstand/Objet, xxxv, 151 Vesnin, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich (1883- 1959), xxxvii, xxxix, 138, 146, 152, 205,248,255,273 Vesnin, Viktor Aleksandrovich (1882–1950), 273 Viiralt (Wiiralt), Eduard (1898–1954), 25 Viktorov, 249 Vilyams, Petr Vladimirovich (1902–47), 238, 240, 279 Vinci, Leonardo da (1452–1519), 15, 236 Vinogradov, Pavel Mikhailovich, 205 Visual Art. See Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo Visual Arts Section of Narkompros. See IZO Narkompros Vitebsk Art School, 116, 151 Vkhutein. See Moscow Vkhutemas. See Moscow VOAPP (Vsesoyuznoe obedinenie assotsiatsii proletarskikh pisatelei) [All-Union Association of Associations of Proletarian Writers], 289 Volkov, Boris Ivanovich (1900–70), 240 VOPRA (Vsesoyuznoe obedinenie proletarskikh arkhitektorov) [All-Union Association of Proletarian Architects], 308 Voroshilov, Kliment Efremovich (1881- 1969),289,291 Vpered (Forward), 176, 182 Vrubel, Mikhail Aleksandrovich (1856–1910), xxi,xxii, 10, II, 93, 208 Vsekokhudozhnik (Vserossiiskii kooperativ khudozhnikov) [All-Russian Co-operative of Artists], 182, 288 Vsevobuch (Vseobshchee voennoe obuchenie) [General Military Instruction], 192 Vyalov, Konstantin Aleksandrovich (19o0- 76), 238, 240 Wanderers,xx,xxi, xxiv,10,11,61, 108, 132, 265,270 Watteau, Antoine (1684–1721), 94 Weininger, Otto (1880–1903), 149 Werefkin, Marianne von (Marianna Vladimirovna Verevkina (1860–1938), 18 Whitman, Walt (1819–92), 91, 93, 94, 149 Wiiralt, Eduard. See Virralt, Eduard Wilde, Oscar (1854–1900), 47 Williams-Ellis, Amabel (1894–1984), 292 World of Art (Mir iskusstva), xxi, xxii, xxiii, xxiv,xxv,3,4,11,18,41,61,66,108,291 Worringer, Wilhelm (1881–1965),23, 24 "Wreath,"12 Yakovlev, Ivan Pavlovich, 243 Yakulov, Georgii Bogdanovich (1884-1928), xxvi, 66, 67, 149 Yaremich, Stepan Petrovich (1869–1939), 298 Yaroshenko, Nikolai Aleksandrovich (1846- 98), 61 Young October, 274 Yugolef (South lef), 199 Yuon, Konstantin Fedorovich (1875-1958), 139,265 Za proletarskoe iskusstvo (For Proletarian Art), 273 Zagorsk. Troitse-Sergieva Lavra, 300 Zdanevich, Ilya (Ilyazde) Mikhailovich (also known by the pseudonyms Eli Eganbyuri and Varsonofi Parkin) (1984- 1975),78,79–83,87 Zdanevich, Kirill Mikhailovich (1892- 1970),79,87 Zelinsky, Kornelii Lyutsianovich (1896- 1970),307 Zhdanov, Andrei Aleksandrovich (1896- 1948), 290,291,292-94 Zhivskulptarkh(Kollektiv zhivopisnoskulpturno-arkhitekturnogo sinteza) [CollectiveofPainting-Sculpture-Architecture Synthesis], 43, 255 Zhukovsky, Stanislav Yulianovich (1873- 1944), 146 Zimin, Sergei Ivanovich (1875–1942), 302 Zolotoe runo (Golden Fleece), xxv, xxvii, 3, 10,11,61 Zurich University, 182 ## RUSSIANART OF THE AVANTGARDEI THEORY AND CRITICISM 1902-1934 ## EDITED AND TRANSLATED BY JOHN E. BOWLT REVISED AND ENLARGED EDITION During the first third of the twentieth century, Russian art went through a series of dramatic changes, reflecting the political and social upheavals of the country and producing – for a brief, exciting period – a body of avant-garde work whose influence would eventually be felt throughout the rest of the world. A new generation of young artists arose. Eagerly breaking with the past and absorbing the innovations of Europe – Fauvism, Cubism and Futurism – they developed a host of fresh ideas and original styles, such as Neoprimitivism, Rayonism, Suprematism and Constructivism. Although the revolutionary years saw much support of the new art and its application to graphic and industrial design, many artists felt the increasingly oppressive attitudes of political officials and left for Western Europe, taking their ideas with them. Kandinsky, Malevich, Gabo, Pevsner and others are well known for their important contribution to the history of modern Western art, but there were many lesser-known artists whose individual and group statements have never been read outside their own country. This stimulating anthology will be indispensable for everyone interested in contemporary Russian art. John Bowlt has collected and translated manifestos, articles and declarations by the principal artists and critics of the Russian avant-garde-including Kandinsky, Lissitsky, Malevich, Goncharova and Rodchenko, to name only a few. Illustrated with more than 100 rare photographs and facsimiles and supplemented by clear introductory essays, up-to-date bibliographical information and copious notes, this is the essential sourcebook for a clear understanding of the motivations and struggles that produced an extraordinary, seminal epoch in Russian art. John Bowlt is internationally renowned for his extensive publications on Russian art and culture of this period. He is Professor of Russian Language and Literature and Director of the Institute of Modern Russian Culture at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles. With 105 illustrations ## Thames and Hudson 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, New York 10110 ISBN 0-500-61011-8