Poster promoting the candidacy of Victor Hugo in the elections of January 7, 1871. He advocates amnesty, the abolition of the death penalty, the dissolution of Parliament, the return of the government to Paris, and an immediate end to the state of siege. Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale. # ÉLECTIONS DU 7 JANVIER Le COMITÉ ÉLECTORAL DE LA RUE BRÉA, le COMITÉ ÉLECTORAL DES TRAVAILLEURS, le COMITÉ RÉPUBLICAIN RADICAL, le COMITÉ DE LA LIGUE D'UNION RÉPUBLICAINE DES DROITS DE PARIS, de FUNION et de l'ALLIANCE RÉPUBLICAINES. de l'ASSOCIATION DES TRAVAILLEURS et leS COMITÉS RADICAUX DES ARRONDISSEMENTS DE PARIS Ont choisi pour candidat aux élections du 7 janvier le citoyen # VICTOR HUGO Ce nom est pour eux l'affirmation le plus nette des principes républicains. Dans les circonstances actuelles, ce nom signifio particuliérement: AMNISTIE ABOLITION DE LA PEINE DE MORT DISSOLUTION DE L'ASSEMBLEE RENTRÉE DU GOUVERNEMENT A PARIS LEVÉE IMMÉDIATE DE L'ÉTAT DE SIÉGE the Social Democratic party, formed in Germany in 1869, won 12 seats in the 1877 national elections. Strong workers' organizations sprang up in England. By the 1890's there were socialist parties in most European countries. As a result, the political awareness of the growing working class heightened. In France during the last years of the reign of Napoleon Ill, there were a number of particularly violent strikes, many of which included clashes with the army. But the most violent outbreak of all, the establishment of the Paris Commune, followed the destruction of the Second Empire in the Franco-Prussian War. In January, 1871, France elected a National Assembly that favored peace with Germany. The people of Paris, however, having just endured a long siege, regarded peace as a humiliating capitulation. In Opposite: poster by which the Paris Commune informed the citizens of its formation after the vote of March 26, 1871. Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale. March, 1871, they rebelled against the national government at Versailles and set up a communal government. Once more the walls of Paris were covered with proclamations, with words echoing those of 1793 and 1848. The Communards wanted both political reforms (they wanted communes to replace the state as the primary unit of government) and economic reforms. The ensuing fight was violent, passionate, even savage, and it left no room for compromise or conciliation. The legitimate government at Versailles sent troops to quell the rebellion. While these troops were besieging the city, the Commune came under the control of extremists. Hostages—prominent citizens and clergymen—were killed, public buildings destroyed. After the troops entered the city, they launched their own orgy of slaughter in reprisal. During so-called Bloody Week (May 21-28, 1871), they killed more than fifteen thousand Parisians. While it left a legacy that still affects French politics, the pitiless repression of the left by the right did not manage to stamp out the workers' movement. On the contrary, the Commune, like the Revolution of 1789, became a legend and as such a milestone. Marx saw it as the first effort at proletarian dictatorship. And in France the cruelty of the Versailles troops persuaded a part of the workers' movement there that only force could bring about the victory of socialism. In Germany and England negotiation and reform were still believed to be more effective means. Slowly but surely, however, the ideas of Marx were everywhere winning adherents in the trade unions and in the workers' parties. In 1889 in Paris, while a world's fair was presenting the latest discoveries of science and industry, the Second International Congress met, bringing together the socialist parties of Europe. With the Marxists in the majority, it was decided to make the first of May a day of international workers' demonstrations, “so that in all countries and all cities the workers give formal notice to the public authorities that their working day