## BRIEF BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF THE RESPONDENTS WHO WERE INTERVIEWED FOR THIS STUDY Adler, Mortimer J. Male. b. 12/28/02. Philosopher, author. American. Recipient, Aquinas Medal, American Catholic Philosophical Association (1976). Honorary Trustee, Aspen Institute for Humanistic Studies (1973-). Author, How to Read a Book (with Charles Van Doren, 1940); Six Great Ideas (1981); The Paideia Program (1984). Chairman of the board of editors, Encyclopædia Britannica (1974-). Associate editor, Great Books of the Western World (1945-; editor in chief, 2d ed., 1990), Syntopicon (1952, 1990); editor in chief, The Annals of America (21 vols., 1968). See his Mortimer J. Adler: Philosopher at Large (1977). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (1/17/91). Age 88. Anderson, Jack. Male. b. 10/19/22. Journalist, author, writer. American. Recipient, Pulitzer Prize for national reporting (1972). Author, The Anderson Papers (with George Clifford, 1973); Fiasco (with James Boyd, 1983); others. See his Confessions of a Muckraker (with James Boyd, 1979). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (5/6/91). Age 68. Asner, Edward. Male. b. 11/15/29. Actor. American. Recipient, five Golden Globe awards; seven Emmy awards. President, Screen Actors Guild (1981-1985). Roles in theater, motion pictures, and television, including The Mary Tyler Moore Show (TV series, 1970-1977); Roots (TV miniseries, 1977); Lou Grant (TV series, 1977-1982). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (4/30/91). Age 61. Bardeen, John. Male. b. 5/23/08; d. 1/30/91. Physicist, teacher. American. Recipient, Nobel Prize in physics (1956; with Walter Brattain and William Shockley) for research in semiconductors and the discovery of the transistor effect; Nobel Prize in physics (1972; with Leon Cooper and J. Robert Schrieffer) for their jointly developed theory of superconductivity. Author of many scientific papers. Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, with Kevin Rathunde (6/14/90). Age 82. Baskin, Leonard. Male. b. 8/15/22. Sculptor, graphic artist (printmaker, painter). American. Recipient, medal of merit for graphic arts, National Institute of Arts and Letters (1969). Represented in the permanent collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art; Museum of Modern Art; Library of Congress; National Gallery of Art; others. Founder, Gehenna Press. Author, Iconologia (1988); others. See Baskin: Sculpture Drawings & Prints, by George Braziller (1970). Interviewed by Sean Kelley and Grant Rich (4/8/95). Age 72. Bethe, Hans. Male. b. 7/2/06. Physicist, teacher. American (b. Germany). Recipient, Nobel Prize in physics (1967) for his work on stellar energy; National Medal of Science (1976); Albert Einstein Peace Prize (1992). Author, Basic Bethe: Seminal Articles on Nuclear Physics 1936-1937 (with Robert F. Bacher and M. Stanley Livingston—the “Bethe Bible” to generations of nuclear physicists, 1986); others. See Hans Bethe, Prophet of Energy, by Jeremy Bernstein (1980). Interviewed by Jeanne Nakamura (3/29/93). Age 86. Blackwood, Easley. Male. b. 4/21/33. Composer, eductor. American. Appeared as soloist with the Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra at age 14; studied with Oliver Messiaen, Berkshire Music Center (1949); Paul Hindemith, Yale (1950-54); and Nadia Boulanger, Paris (1954-1957); Appointed to faculty of University of Chicago (1958). Recipient: Fulbright Fellowship (1954); first prize, Koussevitzky Music Foundation (1958, for Symphony No. 1); Brandeis Creative Arts Award (1968); commissions from the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and the Library of Congress. Composer: four symphonies; Symphonic Fantasy (1965); 3 Short Fantasies for Piano (1965); Un Voyage à Cythère for Soprano and 10 Players (1966); 12 Micro-tonal Etudes for Synthesizer (1982). Interviewed by Grant Rich (5/23/95). Age 62. Booth, Wayne. Male. b. 2/22/21. Literary critic, teacher. American. Recipient, Christian Gauss Prize, Phi Beta Kappa (1962); David H. Russell Award, National Council of Teachers of English (1966). President, Modern Language Association (1981-1982). Author, The Rhetoric of Fiction (1961); The Company We Keep: An Ethics of Fiction (1988); others. See his The Vocation of a Teacher (1988). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Kevin Rathunde (6/7/90). Age 69. Boulding, Elise. Female. b. 7/6/20. Sociologist, activist, teacher. American (b. Norway). Recipient, Ted Lentz Peace Prize (1977); National Woman of Conscience Award (1980); Jessie Bernard Award, American Sociological Association (1981). Author, The Underside of History (1976); Building a Global Civic Culture: Education for an Interdependent World (1988); others. Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (8/1/91). Age 71. Boulding, Kenneth. Male. b. 1/18/10; d. 3/19/93. Economist, philosopher, teacher, writer (poet). American (b. England). Recipient, John Bates Clark Medal, American Economic Association (1949); Ted Lentz International Peace Research Award (1976). President, American Economic Association (1968); Peace Research Society (1969-1970); others. Founder (with others), Journal of Conflict Resolution (1957). Author, The Economics of Peace (1945); The Image (1956); Beyond Economics: Essays on Society, Religion, and Ethics (1968); others. See Creative Tension, by Cynthia Kerman (1974). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (8/1/91). Age 81. Burbidge, Margaret. Female. b. 8/12/19. Observational astronomer, professor. American (b. England). Research on physical properties, energy sources, and radiation mechanisms of quasistellar objects and active galaxies. Director, the Center of Astrophysics and Space Sciences (1978-1984). Recipient, numerous prizes and awards, including the Helen B. Warner Prize (1959); Bruce Gold Medal, Astronomical Society of the Pacific (1982); Russell Lectureship Award (1984); National Medal of Science (1984); Albert Einstein Medal (1988). Author, Quasi-Stellar Objects (with G. Burbidge, 1967); also more than 300 research articles. Interviewed by Carol A. Mockros (10/3/95). Age 76. Butler, Margaret. Female. b. 3/27/24. Mathematician, computer scientist. American. As staff mathematician in the early 1950s, she assisted in the development of one of the first digital computers. First woman elected a fellow of the American Nuclear Society. Executive Board, Association of Women in Science. Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Carol A. Mockros, and R. Keith Sawyer. Age 77. Campbell, Donald. Male. b. 11/20/16. Psychologist, teacher. American. Recipient, Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award, American Psychological Association (1970); award for distinguished contribution to research in education, American Educational Research Association (1980). President, American Psychological Association (1975). Author, Methodology and Epistemology for Social Science: Selected Papers (1988); Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Designs for Research (with Julian C. Stanley, 1966); others. Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (4/21/91). Age 77. Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan. Male. b. 10/19/10; d. 8/21/95. Astrophysicist, author, teacher. American (b. India). Recipient, Nobel Prize in physics (1983; with William A. Fowler); Royal Astronomical Society Gold Medal (Great Britain, 1953); National Medal of Science (1966). Author, An Introduction to the Study of Stellar Structure (1939); Radiative Transfer (1950); The Mathematical Theory of Black Holes (1983); others. Author (general science), Truth and Beauty: Aesthetics and Motivations in Science (1987); others. See Chandra, by Kameshwar C. Wali (1991). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (3/26/91). Age 80. Coleman, James. Male. b. 5/12/26; d. 3/25/95. Sociologist, teacher. American. Recipient, Paul Lazarsfeld Award for Research, American Evaluation Association (1983); American Sociological Association Publication Award (1992). Author, Introduction to Mathematical Sociology (1964); Equality and Achievement in Education (1990; includes a summary of the 1966 “Coleman Report” on equality of educational opportunity); Foundations of Social Theory (1990); others. See his “Columbia in the 1950s” in Authors of Their Own Lives: Intellectual Autobiographies of Twenty American Sociologists, edited by Bennett M. Berger (1990, pp. 75-103). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (4/20/90). Age 63. Commoner, Barry. Male. b. 5/28/17. Biologist, teacher, activist. American. Recipient, Newcomb Cleveland Prize, American Association for the Advancement of Science (1953); Phi Beta Kappa Award (1972). Author, The Closing Circle (1971); The Politics of Energy (1979); Making Peace with the Planet (1990); others. Presidential candidate, Citizens Party (1980). See “Barry Commoner: The Scientist as Agitator” in Philosophers of the Earth, by Shirley Chisolm (1972, pp. 122-39). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (5/7/91). Age 73. Davies, Robertson. Male. b. 8/28/13; d. 12/03/95. Writer, journalist. Canadian. Recipient, Louis Jouvet Prize for directing, Dominion Drama Festival (1949); Lorne Pierce Medal, Royal Society of Canada (1961); Governor-General’s Award for Fiction (Canada, 1973). Editor and publisher, Peterborough (Ontario) Examiner (1942-1962). Author, Deptford Trilogy (1970, 1972, 1975); What’s Bred in the Bone (1985); others. See Robertson Davies: An Appreciation, edited by Elspeth Cameron (1991). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (5/11/94). Age 80. Davis, Natalie. Female. b. 11/8/28. Historian, teacher. American. Decorated chevalier, l’Ordre des Palmes Académiques (France, 1976). President, American Historical Association (1987). Author, Society and Culture in Early Modern France (1975); The Return of Martin Guerre (1983); Fiction in the Archives (1987). See her interview in Visions of History, edited by Henry Abelove (1983, pp. 99-122). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (6/28/91). Age 62. Domin, Hilde. Female, b. 7/27/12. Poet, essayist, translator. German. Recipient, Rilke-Preis (Germany 1976); Bundesverdienstkreuz (1983). Author (poetry), Nur eine Rose als Stutze (1959); Ich will dich (1970); others. See her Von der Natur nicht vorgesehen (1974). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (9/9/90). Age 78. Dyson, Freeman. Male. b. 12/15/23. Physicist, teacher, author. American (b. England). Recipient, Max Planck Medal (Germany, 1969); Enrico Fermi Award (1994); National Book Critics Circle Award (1984). Author of many scientific papers. Author (general science), Weapons and Hope (1984); From Eros to Gaia (1992); others. See his Disturbing the Universe (1979). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (9/1/91). Age 67. Eigen, Manfred. Male. b. 5/9/27. Chemist. German. Recipient, Nobel Prize in chemistry (1967; with Ronald Norrish and George Porter) for work on rapid chemical reactions; Otto Hahn Prize (Germany, 1962). Author, Laws of the Game (with Ruthild Winkler, 1981); Steps Towards Life (with Ruthild Winkler-Oswatitsch, 1992); others. Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (9/17/90). Age 62. Faludy, György. Male. b. 9/22/10. Poet, translator. Canadian (b. Hungary). Recipient, honorary doctorate, University of Toronto (1978). Author (in English translation), Selected Poems (1985), others; (in Hungarian) Villon Ballads (1937, burned by the Nazis in 1944; 1947 edition pulped by the Communists in 1948); A Keepsake Book of Red Byzantium (1961); others. See his My Happy Days in Hell (1962). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (6/5/91). Age 80. Franklin, John Hope. Male. b. 1/2/15. Historian, teacher. American. Recipient, Clarence L. Holte Literary Prize (1986); Sidney Hook Award, Phi Beta Kappa (1994). Author, From Slavery to Freedom: A History of Negro Americans (1947; 7th ed., 1994); George Washington Williams: A Biography (1985); Race and History: Selected Essays 1938-1988 (1990); others. See his “John Hope Franklin: A Life of Learning” in Race and History (pp. 277-91). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (11/7/90). Age 75. Galvin, Robert. Male. b. 10/9/22. Electronics executive. American. Recipient, Golden Omega award, Electronic Industries Association (1981); National Medal of Technology (1991); Bower Award for Business, Franklin Institute (1993). With Motorola, Inc. 1940-present (president, 1956-1990; CEO, 1964-1986). Motorola, Inc. received the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award (1989 [the first year awarded]). Author, The Idea of Ideas (1991). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Kevin Rathunde (9/10/91). Age 68. Gardner, John W. Male. b. 10/8/12. Psychologist, writer, teacher. American. Recipient, honorary degrees from various colleges and universities; USAF Exceptional Services Award (1956); Presidential Medal of Freedom (1964); National Academy of Sciences Public Welfare Medal (1966); U.A.W. Social Justice Award (1968); AFL-CIO Murray Green Medal (1970); Christopher Award (1971). Chairman, Urban Coalition (1968-1970). Founder and chairman, Common Cause (1970-1977). Member, Task Forces on Education under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson. Director, Time, Inc. (1968-1972). Author, Excellence (1961, 1984); Self-Renewal (1964, 1981); On Leadership (1990). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (8/18/91). Age 78. Gordimer, Nadine. Female. b. 11/20/23. Writer. South African. Recipient, Nobel Prize for literature (1991); Booker Prize (England, 1974); Grand Aigle d’Or (France, 1975). Author, The Conservationist (1974); Burger’s Daughter (1979); Something Out There (1984); others. See Nadine Gordimer, by Judie Newman (1988). Interviewed by Jeanne Nakamura (11/21/94). Age 71. Gould, Stephen Jay. Male. b. 9/10/41. Paleontologist, geologist, science historian, author, teacher. American. Recipient, close to twenty honorary degrees; Medal of Excellence, Columbia University (1982); Silver medal, Zoological Society London (1984); Edinburgh medal, City of Edinburgh (1990); Britannica award and gold medal (1990). MacArthur Foundation prize fellow (1981-1986). Named Humanist Laureate, Academy of Humanism (1983). Author, Ontogeny and Phylogeny (1977); The Panda’s Thumb (1980, award-winning); The Mismeasure of Man (1981, award-winning); Hen’s Teeth and Horse’s Toes (1983, award-winning); Bully for Brontosaurus (1991); others. Interviewed by Grant Rich (4/10/95). Age 53. Gruenenberg, Nina. Female. b. 10/7/36. Journalist, editor. German. Columnist, political reporter, associate editor, Die Zeit (Hamburg). Listed as the 41st most influential woman in Germany. Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (9/18/90). Age 56. Harris, Irving Brooks. Male. b. 8/4/10. Business executive, philanthropist. American. Recipient, several honorary degrees; Chicago UNICEF World of Children award (1985); honorary membership award, Chicago Pediatric Society (1986). Director, Gillette Safety Razor Co. (1948-1960); chairman of the board, Science Research Associates (1953- 1958); president, Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center (1958- 1961); president emeritus, Erikson Institute; president and cofounder, The Ounce of Prevention Fund (1982-). Clifford Beers lecturer, Yale University (1987). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (5/21/91). Age 80. Hart, Kitty Carlisle. Female. b. 9/3/15. Arts administrator, actress, singer. American. Recipient, National Medal of Arts (1991). Appointments, Special Consultant to the Governor on Women’s Opportunities (1966); Independent Commission to review the National Endowment for the Arts (1990); vice chairman (1971) and chairman (1976-present), New York State Council on the Arts. More than twentyfive principal stage credits (musical comedy, opera, operetta, and drama), including: Champagne Sec (1933); The Rape of Lucretia (1948); Die Fledermaus (1966-1967); On Your Toes (1984). Principal film credits: She Loves Me Not (1934); Here Is MyHeart (1934); A Night at the Opera (1935). Principal television credits: Who Said That? (1948-1955); I’ve Got a Secret (1952-1953); What’s Going On? (1954) To Tell the Truth (1956-1967). See her Kitty: An Autobiography (1988). Interviewed by Nicole Brodsky (2/8/95). Age 79. Hecht, Anthony. Male. b. 1/16/23. Poet, critic, teacher. American. U.S. Consultant in Poetry, Library of Congress (1982-1984). Recipient, Pulitzer Prize for poetry (1968); Bollingen Prize in Poetry (1983); Ruth B. Lilly Poetry Prize (1988). Author, The Hard Hours (1968); The Venetian Vespers (1977); others. See Anthony Hecht, by Norman German (1989). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (12/10/93). Age 70. Henderson, Hazel. Female. b. 3/27/33. Economist, author. American (b. England). Named Citizen of the Year by the New York Medical Society (1967) for her role in founding Citizens for Clean Air. Author, Creating Alternative Futures: The End of Economics (1978); The Politics of the Solar Age: Alternatives to Economics (1981); Paradigms in Progress: Life Beyond Economics (1991); others. Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (6/19/90). Age 57. Holton, Gerald. Male. b. 5/23/22. Physicist, historian of science, teacher. American (b. Germany). Recipient, Oersted Medal, American Association of Physics Teachers (1980); George Sarton Medal, History of Science Society (1989); Andrew Gemant Award, American Institute of Physics (1989). Author, Thematic Origins of Scientific Thought: Kepler to Einstein (1973, 2d ed., 1988); The Advancement of Science, and Its Burdens (1986); others. Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (2/25/91). Age 68. Holton, Nina. Female. b. 1924. Sculptor. American (b. Austria). Studied and apprenticed with Mirko Basadella at Harvard’s Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts, and with Dmitri Hadzi in Rome. About thirty group and one-person exhibitions in Boston, San Francisco, Washington, DC. Works in the Fogg Art Museum, the Van Leer Jerusalem Foundation collection; others. Articles published in Leonardo. Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (2/25/91). Age 66. Honig, William. Male. b. 4/23/37. Educational administrator, lawyer. American. Clerk, California Supreme Court; superintendent of public instruction for the State of California. Regent, University of California. Author, Last Chance for Our Children (1985); others. Interviewed by Keith Sawyer (9/29/92). Age 55. Johnson, J. Seward, Jr. Male. b. 4/16/30. Sculptor, businessperson. American. Collections and public placements throughout the United States (more than twenty-five states), Bermuda, Canada, West Germany. Sculptures are generally life-size, cast in bronze, and follow the genre of hyperrealism. Founder of foundry (Johnson Atelier). See his The Sculpture of J. Seward Johnson, Jr.: Celebrating the Familiar (1987). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (8/13/90). Age 60. Karle, Isabella. Female. b. 12/2/21. Experimental chemist, crystallographer. American. Recipient, Superior Civilian Award USN (1964); Annual Achievement Award, Society of Women Engineers (1967); Chemical Pioneer Award (1984); Lifetime Achievement Award Women in Science and Engineering (1986); The University of Michigan (1987); award for distinguished past president, American Crystallographic Association (1987); Gregori Aminoff Prize, Swedish Royal Academy of Sciences (1988); Bijvoet Medal (1990). Author, more than 250 scientific articles, book chapters, and reviews. Interviewed by Carol A. Mockros (5/8/92). Age 70. Karle, Jerome. Male. b. 6/18/18. Theoretical chemist, crystallographer. American. Head, laboratory for structure matter, Naval Research Laboratory. Research associate, Manhattan Project (1943- 1944); president, International Union of Chrystallography (1981-1984); Nobel Prize in chemistry (1985). For nineteen years, member, National Research Council. Chair, chemistry section of the National Academy of Sciences (1988-). Author, numerous scholarly articles. Interviewed by Carol A. Mockros (5/8/92). Age 73. Klein, George. Male. b. 7/28/25. Biologist, author. Swedish (b. Hungary). Recipient, Prix Griffuel, Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancre (France, 1974); Harvey Prize, Technion—Israel Institute of Technology (1975); Dobloug Prize, Swedish Academy of Literature (1990). Author, more than 800 scientific papers. Author (philosophy), Pieta (1992 in English; original work published 1989). See his The Atheist in the Holy City (1990 in English; original work published 1987). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (5/9/90). Age 64. Konner, Joan Weiner. Female. b. 2/24/31. University administrator, broadcasting executive, television producer. American. Professor and dean, Graduate School of Journalism, Columbia University. Executive producer, Bill Moyers’Journal (1978-1981). Recipient, twelve Emmy Awards; Edward A. Murrow Award; others. Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (5/19/92). Age 61. Kurokawa, Kisho. Male. b. 4/8/34. Architect, author, town planner. Japanese. Recipient, Gold Medal, French Academy of Architecture; Japan Grand Prize of Literature (1993). Architect, Nakagin Capsule Tower (1972); Hiroshima City Museum of Contemporary Art (1986); others. Author, Metabolism ’60 (with others, Tokyo, 1960); The Philosophy of Symbiosis (London, 1994); others. See his Kisho Kurokawa—From Metabolism to Symbiosis (London, 1992). Interviewed by Jeanne Nakamura (10/12/94). Age 60. Lanyon, Ellen. Female. b. 12/21/26. Artist, professor. Founder, Chicago Graphics Workshop (1952-1955). Recipient, F. H. Armstrong Prize (1946, 1955, 1977); Fulbright Fellowship (1950); M. Cahn Award (1961); Casandra Foundation Grant (1971); National Endowment for the Arts grant (1974, 1987); Herwood Lester Cook Foundation (1981). More than ten retrospective shows. More than forty one-woman exhibitions. Numerous group shows. Represented in many permanent collections, some of which include The Art Institute of Chicago, The Museum of Contemporary Art; the Library of Congress, Denver Art Museum. See Art: A Woman’s Sensibility, by A. Adrian. Interviewed by Carol A. Mockros (3/19/93). Age 66. Lederberg, Joshua. Male. b. 5/23/25. Biologist, teacher. American. Recipient, Nobel Prize in physiology and medicine (1958) for research in the genetics of bacteria; National Medal of Science (1989). President, Rockefeller University (1978-1990). Author of many scientific papers. See his “Genetic Recombination in Bacteria: A Discovery Account”(Annual Review of Genetics, 1987, vol. 21, pp. 23-46). Interviewed by Keith Sawyer (6/15/92). Age 67. L’Engle, Madeleine. Female. b. 11/29/18. Writer. American. Recipient, Newbery Medal (1963); Sequoya Award (1965); Regina Medal (1985); Alan Award, National Council of Teachers of English (1986); Kerlan Award (1990). Author of more than forty works, including: A Wrinkle in Time (1962); The Arm of the Starfish (1965); A Wind in the Door (1973); The Irrational Season (1977); A Swiftly Tilting Planet (1978); A Severed Wasp (1982); An Acceptable Time (1989); Certain Women (1992); Troubling a Star (1994). See her A Circle of Quiet (1972), The Summer of the Great-grandmother (1974), and The Irrational Season (1977) for autobiographical information. Interviewed by Nicole Brodsky (5/19/94). Age 75. Levertov, Denise. Female. b. 10/24/23. Writer. American (b. England). Recipient, Harriet Monroe Memorial Prize (1964); Lenore Marshall Poetry Prize (1975); Lannan Literary Award (1993). Author, Here and Now (1956); The Freeing of the Dust (1975); others. See Understanding Denise Levertov, by Harry Marten (1988). Interviewed by Jeanne Nakamura (2/27/95). Age 71. LeVine, Robert A. Male. b. 3/27/32. Anthropologist, teacher. American. Fellow, American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Recipient, Research Career Scientist Award, National Institute of Mental Health (1972-1976). Author, Culture, Behavior, and Personality (1973); Child Care and Culture: Lessons from Africa (with others, 1994); others. Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (2/22/91). Age 58. LeVine, Sarah. Female. b. 8/14/40. Author, anthropologist. American (b. England). Currently working on a doctorate in Sanskrit and Pali. Author, Mothers and Wives: Gusii Women of West Africa (1979); Dolor y Alegria: Women and Social Change in Urban Mexico (1993). Novels under the name of Louisa Dawkins: Natives and Strangers (1985); Chasing Shadows (1988). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (2/22/91). Age 51. Livi, Grazia. Female. b. 1932. Writer, journalist. Italian. Recipient, Premio Viareggio for the Essay (1991). Author of several novels and books of essays, including La distanza e l’amore (1978); L’approdo invisibile (1980); Le lettere del mio nome (1991); others. Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (5/15/91). Age 58. Loevinger, Jane. Female. b. 2/6/18. Research psychologist, professor. American. Professor, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri. Created an influential theory of personality development. Author of numerous books and scholarly articles, including Ego Development (1976); “On the Self and Predicting Behavior,” in R. Zucker, J. Arnoff, and A. Rabin, editors, Personality and the Prediction of Behavior (1984). Interviewed by Carol A. Mockros (11/6/92). MacCready, Paul. Male. b. 9/29/25. Aeronautical engineer. American. Recipient, Edward Longstreth Medal, Franklin Institute (1979); Reed Aeronautics Award, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (1979). Engineer of the Century, American Society of Mechanical Engineers (1980). Leader of the team that won the Kremer Prize (1977) for human-powered flight. Author, scientific papers. Interviewed by Jeanne Nakamura (6/13/93). Age 67. Mahfouz, Naguib. Male. b. 12/11/11. Writer. Egyptian. Recipient, Nobel Prize in literature (1988); State Prize for Literature (Egypt, 1957). Author, Cairo Trilogy (1956, 1957); Zuqaq al Midaqq (1947; translated as Midaq Alley, 1981); Miramar (1967). See Naguib Mahfouz: From Regional Fame to Global Recognition, edited by Michael Beard and Adnan Haydar (1993). Interviewed by Sherafoudin Malik (6/94). Age 82. Mahoney, Margaret. Female. b. 10/24/24. American. Foundation president, Commonwealth Fund. Formerly executive associate, Carnegie Corporation. Trustee, John D. & Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation (1983-); Dole Foundation (1984-). Board of directors for Alliance for Aging Research (1987-). Overseas Development Council (1988-). Recipient, Alpha Omega Alpha Award (1985); Women’s Forum Award (1989); Frank H. Lahey Award (1992); Walsh McDermott Award (1992). Author, numerous professional articles. Interviewed by Carol A. Mockros (4/13/94). Age 69. Maier-Leibnitz, Heinz. Male. b. 3/28/11. Physicist, teacher, author. German. Director of first European research reactor, in Grenoble, France. Recipient, Otto Hahn Prize; Grosses Verdienstkreuz mit Stern; Pour le Merit. Author of many scientific publications. Author, Zwischen Wissenschaft und Politik (1979); others. See Wie Kommt man auf einfaches Neues? der Forscher, Lehrer, Wissenschaftspolitiker und Hobbykoch Heinz Maier-Leibnitz, edited by Paul Kienle (1991). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (8/29/90). Age 79. Mayr, Ernst. Male. b. 7/5/04. Zoologist, curator, teacher, writer. American (b. Germany). Recipient, honorary degrees from several universities (ten) in various countries (seven); Leidy Medal (1946); Wallace Darwin Medal (1958); National Medal of Science (1970); Gregor Mendel Medal (1980); Darwin Medal, Royal Society (1987). Member of Rothschild expedition to Dutch New Guinea (1928). Jesup lecturer, Columbia University (1941). Curator, American Museum of Natural History (1944-1953); Alexander Agassiz professor of zoology, Harvard University (1953-1975); director, Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University (1961-1970). Author, Systematics and the Origin of Species (1942); Animal Species and Evolution (1963); Principles of Systematic Zoology (1969); One Long Argument (1991). Interviewed by Grant Rich (10/21/94). Age 90. McCarthy, Eugene. Male. b. 3/29/16. Politician, author, writer. American. U.S. Congressman (1949-1959). U.S. Senator (1959-1970). Democratic presidential candidate (1972). Independent presidential candidate (1976). Author, The Limits of Power (1967); The Ultimate Tyranny (1980); others. See his Up ’Til Now (1987). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (11/16/90). Age 74. McNeill, William. Male. b. 10/31/17. Historian, teacher. American (b. Canada). Professor, University of Chicago (1947-1987). Fellowships from the Fulbright, Rockefeller, and Guggenheim foundations. President, Demos Foundation (1968-1980); American Historical Association (1985). Recipient, National Book Award (1964). Author, The Rise of the West (1963); Plagues and Peoples (1976); The Pursuit of Power (1982). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (8/10/90). Age 72. Milner, Brenda. Female. b. 7/15/18. Neuropsychologist. Candian (b. England). Research contributions on temporal-lobe function and memory disorders and the effects of unilateral brain lesions on cerebral organization. Recipient, Izaak Walton Killam Prize (1983); Hermann von Helmholtz Prize (1984); Ralph Gerard Prize (1987); Grand Dame of Merit, Order of Malta (1985). Author of numerous scholarly articles. Interviewed by Carol A. Mockros (1/5/94). Age 75. Murphy, Franklin. Male. b. 1/29/16; d. 6/16/94. Media, university, and arts administrator. American. Dean of the School of Medicine, University of Kansas (1948-1951); chancellor, University of Kansas (1951-1960); chancellor, UCLA (1960-1968); chairman of the Board and CEO, Times Mirror Company (1968-1981); chairman of the Board of Trustees, National Gallery of Art, Los Angeles County Museum of Art; Carnegie Foundaton for the Advancement of Teaching. Recipient, the First Class of the Order of the Sacred Treasure (Japan, 1982); Officer’s Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany (1983); Officer of the National Order of the Legion of Honor (France, 1985); Andrew W. Mellon Medal, National Gallery of Art (1991). Interviewed by Keith Sawyer (9/24/92). Age 76. Neugarten, Bernice. Female. b. 2/11/16. Social scientist, professor. American. Pioneer in the field of adult development and aging. Member of various advisory boards; Fellow, American Council on Education (1939-1941); past president, Gerontological Society. Recipient, International Association of Gerontology Kleemier Award (1972); Brookdale Award (1980); Sandoz International Prize (1987); American Psychological Association Lifetime Contribution Award (1994). Coauthor or editor, Society and Education (1957); Personality in Middle and Late Life (1964); Middle Age and Aging (1968); Adjustment to Retirement (1969); Social Status in the City (1971); Age or Need? Public Policies for Older People (1982); others. Interviewed by Carol A. Mockros (1/20/93). Age 76. Noelle-Neumann, Elisabeth. Female. b. 12/19/16. Communications researcher, businessperson, teacher. German. Recipient, Grosses Bundesverdienstkreuz (Germany, 1976); Helen S. Dinerman Award, World Association for Public Opinion Research (1990). Professor of journalism, University of Mainz. Founder and director of the first German survey research institute, Institut fur Demoskopie Allensbach (1947-). Author, The Germans: Public Opinion Polls, 1967-1980 (1981); Die Schweigespirale: Offentliche Meinung—unsere soziale Haut (1980; translated as The Spiral of Silence: Public Opinion—Our Social Skin, 1984); others. Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (4/28/90). Age 73. Norman, Donald A. Male. b. 12/25/35. Cognitive scientist, author. American. Recipient, Excellence in Research award, University of California (1984). Professor of Psychology, University of California, San Diego (1966-); professor and founding chair, Department of Cognitive Science, UCSD (1988-). Chairman and founding member, Cognitive Science Society. Author, Learning and Memory (1982); Human Information Processing (2d ed., 1977); The Design of Everyday Things (1989); Turn Signals Are the Facial Expressions of Automobiles (1992). Editor, Cognitive Science Series (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1979-); Cognitive Science Journal (1981-1985). Interviewed by Keith Sawyer (9/25/92). Age 56. Offner, Frank. Male. b. 4/8/11. Electrical engineer, inventor, businessman. American. Accomplishments include applications of transistorized measuring devices and the development of differential amplifier; medical instrumentation that made possible the measurements of the electrocardiogram, the electroencephalogram, and the electromyogram. Developed the only successful heat-homing missiles produced during World War II. Recipient, Professional Achievement Citation Award (1991). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Carol A. Mockros, and R. Keith Sawyer (2/19/92). Age 81. Pais, Abraham. Male. b. 5/19/18. Physicist, professor. American (b. Holland). One of the founders of particle physics. Recipient, Oppenheimer Prize (1979); Physics Prize of the Netherlands (1992); Andrew Gemant Award (1993); Science Medal of the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences (1993). Author of numerous scholarly articles as well as scientific biographies of Bohr and Einstein. His books include Inward Bound (1986); Niels Bohr’s Times (1991); Subtle Is the Lord (1983), and Einstein Lived Here (1994). Interviewed Carol A. Mockros (4/13/94). Age 75. Pauling, Linus. Male. b. 2/28/01; d. 8/19/94. Chemist, activist, teacher. American. Recipient, Nobel Prize in chemistry (1954) for research on the nature of the chemical bond and its application to the structure of complex substances; Nobel Prize in peace (1962). Author, The Nature of the Chemical Bond and the Structure of Molecules and Crystals (1939); Vitamin C and the Common Cold (1971); No More War! (1958). See Linus Pauling: A Man and His Science, by Anthony Serafini (1989). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (11/20/90). Age 89. Peterson, Oscar. Male. b. 8/15/25. Jazz pianist, composer. Canadian. Founder of Advanced School of Contemporary Music; chancellor, York University (1991-). Played in Johnny Holmes Orchestra (1944-1949); appeared with Jazz at the Philharmonic, Carnegie Hall (1949); toured United States and Europe (1950-); toured Soviet Union (1974). Recipient, several honorary degrees; award for piano, Down Beat magazine (thirteen times); Metronome magazine Award (1953-1954); Edison Award (1962); Order of Canada (1974); Diplome d’honneur Canadian Conference of the Arts (1975); Grammy Award, four times. Founded Oscar Peterson Scholarship, Berklee School of Music, Boston (1982). Composer, Canadiana Suite, Hymn to Freedom, Fields of Endless Day, City Lights. Author, Jazz Exercises and Pieces: Oscar Peterson New Piano Solos. Interviewed by Grant Rich (9/20/94). Age 69. Prigogine, Ilya. Male. b. 1/25/17. Chemist. Belgian (b. Russia). Recipient, Nobel Prize in chemistry (1977) for his contributions to nonequillibrium thermodynamics; Rumford gold medal, Royal Society of London (1976). Decorated commander, Order of Arts and Letters (France, 1984). Author of many technical books and articles. Author (general science), From Being to Becoming (1980); Order Out of Chaos (with Isabelle Stengers, 1984). Interviewed by Jeanne Nakamura (10/29/95). Age 78. Rabinow, Jacob. Male. b. 1/8/10. Electrical engineer, inventor. American (b. Russia). Recipient, Edward Longstreth Medal, Franklin Institute (1959); Harry Diamond Award, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (1977). Holder of more than 200 patents in diverse fields, including optical character recognition technology, mail-sorting machinery, automatic regulators, and motors. See his Inventing for Fun and Profit (1990). Interviewed by Jeanne Nakamura (5/16/93). Age 83. Randone, Enrico. Male. b. 12/21/10. Lawyer, insurance executive. Italian. Worked at the Assicurazioni Generali (1937-); president and chairman of the Board since 1979. See Il Leone di Trieste, by C. Lindner and G. Mazzuca (1990). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (5/13/91). Age 80. Reed, John. Male. b. 2/7/39. Banker, philanthropist. American. CEO, Citicorp. Member of the Board, Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center; MIT; Spencer Foundation; Russell Sage Foundation; Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. Interviewed by Keith Sawyer (4/15/92). Age 53. Riesman, David. Male. b. 9/22/09. Social scientist, lawyer, teacher. American. Recipient, Tocqueville Prize, French Academy (1980). Professor of Sociology, Harvard University. Author, The Lonely Crowd (in collaboration with Reuel Denney and Nathan Glazer, 1950); The Academic Revolution (with Christopher Jencks, 1968); The Perpetual Dream (with Gerald Grant, 1978); others. See his “Becoming an Academic Man” in Authors of Their Own Lives: Intellectual Autobiographies of Twenty American Sociologists, edited by Bennett M. Berger (1990, pp. 22-74). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (6/20/90). Age 80. Rubin, Vera. Female. b. 7/23/28. Observational astronomer. American. Known for her work in determining that visible matter provides only a fraction of the overall mass of the universe. Member, National Academy of Sciences; Council of American Astronomical Society (1977-1980); editorial board of Science magazine (1979-). Recipient, National Medal of Science (1993). Past president, Committee on Galaxies, International Astronomical Union. Associate editor, Astronomical Journal (1972-1977); Astrophysical Journal of Letters (1977-1982). Author of more than 125 scientific papers published in specialist journals and books on the dynamics of galaxies. Interviewed by Carol A. Mockros (10/10/92). Age 64. Salk, Jonas. Male. b. 10/28/14; d. 6/23/95. Biologist, philosopher, author. American. Recipient, Congressional Gold Medal (1955); Presidential Medal of Freedom (1977). Developer of the first successful vaccine against poliomyelitis (1955). Author of many scientific papers. Author (philosophy), The Survival of the Wisest (1973); Anatomy of Reality (1983); others. See Breakthrough: The Saga of Jonas Salk, by Richard Carter (1965). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (5/1/91). Age 76. Sarton, May. Female. b. 5/3/12; d. 7/16/95. Writer. American (b. Belgium). Recipient, Golden Rose Award for poetry (1945); Levinson Prize for Poetry (1993). Author, Selected Poems of May Sarton (1978); Mrs. Stevens Hears the Mermaids Singing (1965); others. See her Plant Dreaming Deep (1967); Journal of a Solitude (1973); others. Interviewed by Jeanne Nakamura (4/25/94 and 4/26/94). Age 81. Schuler, Gunther. Male. b. 11/22/25. Composer, conductor, author, educator. American. Teacher at Manhattan School of Music (1950-1963); head of composition department, Tanglewood; president, New England Conservatory of Music (1967-1977); founder of two music labels. Composer, Quartet for Four Double Basses (1947); Seven Studies on Themes of Paul Klee (1959); Spectra (1960); The Visitation (opera, 1966); Horn Concerto No. 2 (1976); On Light Wings (piano quartet, 1984); A Bouquet for Collage for Clarinet, Flute, Violin, Cello, Piano, and Percussion (1988). Recipient, several honorary degrees; Creative Arts Award, Brandeis University (1960); Guggenheim grant (1962, 1963); Rodgers and Hammerstein Award (1971); Friedman Award (1988); Pulitzer Prize in music (1994). Author, Musings: The Musical Worlds of Gunther Schuller (1985); The Swing Era: The Development of Jazz, 1930-1945 (1989). Interviewed by Grant Rich (11/17/94). Age 68. Sebeok, Thomas. Male. b. 11/9/20. Linguist, teacher. American (b. Hungary). Professor of linguistics, Indiana University. Recipient, Distinguished Service Award, American Anthropological Association (1984). President, Linguistic Society of America (1975); Semiotic Society of America (1984). Author, Perspectives in Zoosemiotics (1972); Structure and Texture: Selected Essays in Cheremis Verbal Art (1974); The Play of Musement (1981); others. Editor, Style in Language (1960); others. Interviewed by Keith Sawyer (8/28/92). Age 71. Shankar, Ravi. Male. b. 4/7/20. Sitar player, composer. Indian. Director of All-India Radio’s instrumental ensemble (1949-1956); toured extensively around the world; founder of Kinnara School of Indian Music, Los Angeles. Recipient, honorary degrees from the University of California and Indira Kala Sangeet University; Indian National Academy of Music, Dance, and Drama (1962); National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences (1966); UNICEF; the Presidential Padma Bhushan Award. Composer, two concertos for sitar and orchestra (1970, 1976). Several ballet and film scores. See Raga (full-length film on his life and music, 1972); My Life, My Times (autobiography, 1978); The Great Shankars: Uday, Ravi (1983). Interviewed by Grant Rich (5/2/94). Age 73. Smith, Bradley. Male. b. 6/30/10. Photojournalist, author. American. Exhibitions of his photographs by the Museum of Modern Art; others. Freelance photographer for Life, Paris Match, Time, and other magazines (1942-1965). Author, Japan: A History in Art (1964); Erotic Art of the Masters (1974); France: A History in Art (1984); others. Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (4/17/91). Age 83. Snow, Michael. Male. b. 10/10/29. Artist, jazz musician, cinematographer. Canadian. Professor of advanced film at Yale University (1970). Recipient, Guggenheim fellowship (1972); honorary degrees from Brock University, Ontario (1976), and Nova Scotia College of Art and Design (1987); Order of Canada (1983). Paintings exhibited at the World Exposition of 1967, The Ontario Gallery of Art, The National Gallery of Art; others. Piano solos and band performance recorded on CCMC label, others. See The Michael Snow Project (1993); Presence and Absence: The Films of Michael Snow, from 1956 to 1991 (1995). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (5/11/94). Age 64. Spock, Benjamin. Male. b. 5/2/03. Pediatrician, psychiatrist, author, activist. American. Recipient, Gold medal (crew) 1924 Olympic Games; Family Life Book Award (1963); Thomas Paine Award, National Emergency Civil Liberties Committee (1968). Author, The Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care (1946; 6th rev. ed., 1992 [with Michael Rothenberg]); A Better World for Our Children (1994); others. Presidential candidate, Peoples Party (1972). See his Spock on Spock: A Memoir of Growing Up with the Century (with Mary Morgan Spock, 1989). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (7/13/91). Age 88. Spock, Mary Morgan. Female. b. 11/27/43. Author, activist. American. Author, Stepparenting (1986); Spock on Spock: A Memoir of Growing Up with the Century (with Benjamin Spock, 1989). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (7/13/91). Age 47. Stern, Richard. Male. b. 2/25/28. Writer, teacher. American. Recipient, National Institute of Arts and Letters Fiction Award (1968); American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters Medal of Merit for the Novel (1985). Author, Golk (1960); Natural Shocks (1978); Noble Rot (1990); others. See Richard Stern, by James Schiffer (1993). Interviewed by Nicole Brodsky, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, and Sean Kelley (2/11/94). Age 65. Stigler, George. Male. b. 1/17/11; d. 12/1/91. Economist, teacher. American. Professor of economics, University of Chicago. Recipient, Nobel Prize in economics (1982) for work on the economic theory of information and theory of public regulation; National Medal of Science (1987). Author, The Organization of Industry (1968); Essays in the History of Economics (1965); others. See his Memoirs of an Unregulated Economist (1988). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Kevin Rathunde (6/7/90). Age 79. Strand, Mark. Male. b. 4/11/34. Writer. American (b. Canada). U.S. Poet Laureate, Library of Congress (1990-1991). Recipient, Edgar Allan Poe Award, Academy of American Poets (1974); Bollingen Prize in Poetry (1993). Author, Sleeping With One Eye Open (1964); The Continuous Life (1990); others. Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (7/4/91). Age 57. Trachinger, Robert. Male. b. 11/26/23. Broadcast executive, educator. American. Vice president, ABC-TV (1978-1985). Winner of Emmy Awards for documentaries (1966-1968). Responsible for the development and first broadcast use of slow-motion videotape, handheld and underwater cameras. Professor of communications at UCLA for twenty-three years. International lecturer and consultant. Fulbright scholar (1985-1986). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (11/20/90). Age 67. Weisskopf, Viktor. Male. b. 9/19/08. Physicist, author, teacher. American (b. Austria). Recipient, Max Planck Medal (Germany, 1956); National Medal of Science (1980); Enrico Fermi Award (1988). Director General, European Organization for Nuclear Research (1961-1966). Author of many scientific publications. Author (general science), Knowledge and Wonder (1962); others. See his The Joy of Insight (1991). Interviewed by Kevin Rathunde (2/22/91). Age 82. Wheeler, John A. Male. b. 7/9/11. Physicist, professor. American. Known for his work on black holes. Guggenheim Fellow (1949-1950). Recipient of the Morrison Prize (1947); Albert Einstein Prize (1965); Enrico Fermi Award (1968); Franklin Medal (1969); National Medal of Science (1971); Herzfeld Award (1975); Niels Bohr International Award (1982); Oersted Medal (1983); Oppenheimer Memorial Prize (1984). In addition to numerous professional papers, some of his publications include: Geometrodynamics (1962); Spacetime Physics (1966); Gravitation (with C. Misner and K. Thorne, 1972); Frontiers of Time (with W. Zurek, 1979); and Quantum Theory and Measurement (1983). Interviewed by Carol A. Mockros (11/17/92). Age 81. Whitman, Marina. Female. b. 3/6/35. Economist, teacher. American. Vice president and chief economist (1979-1985) and vice president and group executive (1985-1992), General Motors Corporation. Recipient, Catalyst Award (1976); Columbia University Award for Excellence (1984). Member, Council of Economic Advisers (1972-1973). Author, Government Risk-Sharing in Foreign Investment (1965); Reflections of Interdependence: Issues for Economic Theory and U.S. Policy (1979); others. Interviewed by Jeanne Nakamura (5/25/94). Age 59. Wilson, Edward O. Male. b. 6/10/29. Biologist, teacher. American. Recipient, National Medal of Science (1976); Crafoord Prize, Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (1990); Gold Medal, World Wide Fund for Nature (1990); Pulitzer Prize for general nonfiction (1979 and 1991). Author, Sociobiology: The New Synthesis (1975); On Human Nature (1978); The Ants (with Bert Hölldobler, 1990); others. See his Naturalist (1994). Interviewed by Grant Rich (12/2/94). Age 65. Woodward, Comer Vann. Male. b. 11/13/08. Historian, writer, professor. American. Leading historian of the American South. Recipient, the Bancroft Prize (1951); National Academy Institute Arts and Letters Literature Award (1954); Pulitzer Prize (1982); Life Work Award, The American Historical Society (1986); Gold Medal for History (1990). Member, the American Academy of Arts and Letters. Author of numerous scholarly articles and eleven books, including, Tom Watson, Agrarian Rebel (1938); Originsof the New South (1951); The Strange Career of Jim Crow (1955). Editor, Mary Chestnut’s Civil War (1981). Also see M. O’Brien, “C. Vann Woodward and the Burden of Southern Liberalism,”The American Historical Review (1973). Interviewed by Carol A. Mockros (3/15/93). Age 84. Yalow, Rosalyn. Female. b. 7/19/21. Medical physicist. American. Recipient, Nobel Prize in physiology and medicine (1977, with Roger Guillemin and Andrew Schally) for contributions to the discovery and the development of the radioimmunoassay procedure; National Medal of Science (1988). President, Endocrine Society (1978-1979). Author of many scientific publications. Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (3/14/92). Age 70. Zeisel, Eva. Female. b. 11/11/06. Ceramic designer. American (b. Hungary). Recipient, NEA senior fellowship (1983); The Order of the Star Award (Hungarian People’s Republic, 1987). Traveling retrospective exhibition through the United States and Canada organized by Le Château Dufresne and the Smithsonian Institution (1984). Castleton dinnerware set exhibited by MoMA (1946). Ceramic design instructor, Pratt Institute (1939-1953); artistic director, A. T. Heisey [glass factory] (1953); industrial design instructor, Rhode Island School of Design (1959-1960). See Eva Zeisel: Designer for Industry, by Martin P. Eidelberg (1984). Interviewed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Kevin Rathunde (1/28/91). Age 84. ## SUMMARY OF INTERVIEWEES (Several persons could have been listed under more than one heading) ## Arts and Humanities Historians Davis, Franklin, McNeill, Woodward Media Anderson, Gruenenberg, Konner, Noelle-Neumann, Trachinger Performers and Composers Asner, Blackwood, Hart, Peterson, Schuler, Shankar Philosophers and Critics Adler, Booth, Sebeok ## Poets Domin, Faludy, Hecht, Strand ## Visual Artists and Architects Baskin, N. Holton, Johnson, Kurokawa, Lanyon, Smith, Snow, Zeisel ## Writers Davies, Gordimer<sup>\*</sup>, L’Engle, Levertov, S. LeVine, Livi, Mahfouz<sup>\*</sup>, Sarton, Stern ## Sciences ## Biologists and Physicians Commoner, Gould, Klein, Lederberg<sup>\*</sup>, Mayr, Salk, B. Spock, Wilson, Yalow<sup>\*</sup> ## Chemists Eigen<sup>\*</sup>, I. Karle, J. Karle<sup>\*</sup>, Pauling<sup>\*\*</sup>, Prigogine Economists K. Boulding, Stigler<sup>\*</sup>, Whitman Physicists and Astronomers Bardeen<sup>\*\*</sup>, Bethe<sup>\*</sup>, Burbidge, Butler, Chandrasekhar<sup>\*</sup>, Dyson, G. Holton, Maier-Leibnitz, Pais, Rubin, Weisskopf, Wheeler Psychologists and Social Scientists Campbell, Coleman, R. LeVine, Loevinger, Milner, Neugarten, Norman, Riesman Business and Politics Activists E. Boulding, Henderson, Honig, M. Spock Business and Philanthropy Galvin, Harris, Mahoney, Murphy, Randone, Reed Inventors MacCready, Offner, Rabinow Politics Gardner, McCarthy \*Denotes recipient of Nobel Prize.