# INTERVIEW PROTOCOL USED IN THE STUDY ## PART A: CAREER AND LIFE PRIORITIES 1. Of the things you have done in life, of what are you most proud? a. To what do you attribute your success in this endeavor? Any personal qualities? 2. Of all the obstacles you have encountered in your life, which was the hardest to overcome? a. How did you do it? b. Any that you did not overcome? 3. Has there been a particular project or event that has significantly influenced the direction of your career? If so, could you talk a little about it? a. How did it stimulate your interest? b. How did it develop over time? c. How important was this project/event to your creative accomplishments? d. Do you still have interesting, stimulating experiences like this? 4. What advice would you give to a young person starting out in [subject’s area]? a. Is that how you did it? If not how is your current perspective different from the way you started? b. Would you advise [concerning importance of field]: few social contacts or many? Mentors, peers, colleagues? establish your own identity early or late? work with leading organizations? c. Would you advise [concerning importance of domain]: specialize early or late? focus on leading ideas or work on periphery? d. Would you advise [concerning importance of person]: intrinsic versus extrinsic reasons? tie work to personal values or separate? 5. How would you advise a young person on why it is important to get involved in [subject’s area]? a. Is that why it was important to you? If not, how is your current perspective different? 6. How did you initially become involved or interested in [subject’s area]? What has kept you involved for so long? 7. Have there been points when what you were doing became less intensely involving—seemed less interesting or important to you? Can you describe a time that stands out? a. What were the circumstances? b. What did you do? ## PART B: RELATIONSHIPS 1. If there has been a significant person (or persons) in your life who has influenced or stimulated your thinking and attitudes about your work… a. When did you know them? b. How did you become interested in them (e.g., did you actively pursue them)? c. How did they influence your work and/or attitudes (e.g., motivation, personal or professional values)? d. In what ways was he/she a good and/or bad teacher? e. What kinds of things did you talk to this person about (e.g., personal, general career-related, specific problems)? f. What did you learn from them? How to choose what problems to pursue? Field politics and marketing yourself? 2. Is it important for you to teach and work with young people? a. Why? b. What are you interested in trying to convey to them? Why? c. How do you do this? 3. When you interact or work with a young student, can you assess whether they will be likely to leave the field or become successful in the field? a. Do you recognize people who are likely to be creative in their future work? How? What characteristics do they have? 4. Do you notice differences between men and women students/young people and male and female colleagues in the field? If so, in interests? in ability? creativity? in the way they approach learning? in the way they interact with other people/colleagues? in how they define success and achievement? in their personal goals and values? in their professional goals and values? 5. What advice would you give a young person on how to balance their private life (i.e., family, other concerns not related to work) with [subject’s area]? a. Is that how you did it? If not, how is your current perspective different? importance of other kinds of life skills? relative importance of career in early or later life? ## Peers and Colleagues 1. At any time in your life, have your peers been particularly influential in shaping your personal and professional identity? 2. In what way(s) have colleagues been important for your personal and professional identity and success? ## Family 1. In what way(s) do you think your family background was special in helping you to become the person you are? 2. How did you spend most of your free time as a child? What kinds of activities did you like to do? With peers? parents? siblings? alone? 3. In what way(s) have your spouse and children influenced your goals and career? PART C: WORKING HABITS/INSIGHTS 1. Where do the ideas for your work generally come from? a. From: ## reading? others? your own previous work? life experiences? b. What determines (how do you decide) what project or problem you turn to when one is completed? c. Have there been times when it’s been difficult to decide what to do next? What do you do? 2. How important is rationality versus intuition in your work? Describe. a. Are there two different styles in your work (e.g., one more “rational” and the other more “intuitive”)? b. Do you think it’s important to “go with your hunches” or “trust your instincts”? Or are these usually wrong/misleading? c. Do you have better success with a methodical, rigorous approach to your work? d. Do you think about work during leisure time? e.g., did you ever have any important insights during this “off” time? e. How many hours of sleep do you usually get? Do you tend to do your best work early in the morning or late at night? f. Have you ever had a useful idea while lying in bed, or in a dream? ## 3. How do you go about developing an idea/project? a. Do you write rough drafts? Outlines? How often do you rewrite? b. Do you publish your work right away or wait awhile? 4. Can you describe your working methods? a. How do you decide what mail to answer, interviews to do, etc.? b. Do you prefer to work alone or in a team? 5. Overall, how is the way you go about your work different now from the way you worked twenty years ago? a. What if any changes have there been over the years in the intensity of your involvement in [subject’s area]? b. What about changes in the way you think and feel about it? 6. Have you experienced a paradigm change in your work? Describe. ## PART D: ATTENTIONAL STRUCTURES AND DYNAMICS 1. At present, what task or challenge do you see as the most important for you? a. Is that what takes up most of your time and energy? If not, what does? 2. What do you do about this? [probe for field/domain/reflection] 3. Do you do this primarily because of a sense of responsibility, or because you enjoy doing this? Describe. a. How has this changed over the years? 4. Are you planning to make any changes in how actively you work in [subject’s area]? 5. If we had spoken to you thirty years ago, what different views of the world and yourself would you have had? 6. Have there been some personal goals that have been especially meaningful to you over your career? If yes, could we talk about some of the most significant? a. How did your interest in this goal begin? b. How did it develop over time? (Now?) c. How important was this goal to your creative accomplishments?