# NOTES ## CHAPTER 1 This book is in many respects a sequel to two previous ones: Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience, a study of the conditions that make life enjoyable and meaningful, and The Evolving Self, which deals with the evolutionary implications of human life and experience. The present volume describes and interprets the lives of a number of exceptional individuals who have found ways to make flow a permanent feature of their lives, and at the same time contribute to the evolution of culture. This book also takes its place within the contemporary literature on creativity. I would like to mention here some of the work of colleagues that has influenced me, to set the context in which the present contribution belongs, and to provide a brief glimpse of the “state of the art” in the field of creativity research. I should make clear that this is not intended as a review of the by now immense literature in the field, but simply as an introduction to those active scholars and centers of scholarship that have, one way or the other, contributed to my thinking on the subject. To make this picture as vivid as possible in my mind—and, hopefully, in the reader’s—I will start with a mental map of the locations where research on creativity is currently vigorous, starting with the northwest corner of the United States and proceeding south, and then east and north, before moving to centers outside the United States. I shall begin with Dean Keith Simonton at the University of California, Davis, who has pursued for several decades his historiometric studies of creativity. More than any single scholar, Simonton has written extensively about the quantitative trends correlated over time with creative achievements (e.g., Simonton 1984, 1990a). Some of the earliest studies of the personality of creative people— mostly architects and artists—was done at the University of California, Berkeley, by D.W. McKinnon and his students. This line of work was continued by Frank Barron, and then by David Harrington at the University of California, Santa Cruz (MacKinnon 1962; Barron 1969; Harrington 1990). At the Claremont Colleges in Southern California, Robert Albert and Mark Runco have been doing longitudinal studies of students presumed to be creative. Runco is also the founding editor of The Creativity Research Journal, one of the two journals that define the field (Albert 1983; Runco 1994). At the University of New Mexico, Vera John-Steiner has followed the development of creative ideas by analyzing scientific notebooks, and has focused on the collaboration in groups that achieve breakthroughs (John-Steiner 1985). Moving now to the Midwest, the University of Chicago has also had a long tradition of studying creativity in schools (Getzels and Jackson 1962), among artists (Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi 1976), and currently in a variety of different fields, as the present volume attests. At Michigan State University, Robert Root-Bernstein and his team continue to mine the interviews with eminent scientists that Bernice Eiduson started collecting in 1958 (Eiduson 1962; Root-Bernstein 1989). At Carnegie-Mellon University, Herbert Simon and his colleagues have experimented with computer programs that are supposed to reproduce the mental processes involved in creative discoveries (Langley, Simon, Bradshaw, and Zytkow 1987; Simon 1988). Paul Torrance at the University of Georgia has been running a very productive laboratory for the study of creativity in children (Torrance 1962, 1988). In North Carolina, the Center for Creative Leadership has been applying knowledge to stimulate creativity in businesses and organizations. At Columbia University in New York, Howard Gruber and his associates continue doing careful analyses of the lifelong creative work of single individuals (Gruber 1981; Gruber and Davis 1988). Further north in Buffalo, New York, The Center for Creative Studies supports research, consults with businesses, and publishes the other journal of the field, The Journal of Creative Behavior (Isaksen, Dorval, and Treffinger 1994; Parnes 1967). Robert J. Sternberg at Yale University is one of the most influential and prolific theorists and researchers on human cognition, including creativity (e.g., Sternberg 1986, 1988). As one would expect, the Boston area is rife with scholars involved in creativity research. First and foremost is Howard Gardner at Harvard, whose long-standing presence in the field was recently crowned with a masterful study of seven outstanding geniuses of our century (Gardner 1988, 1993). David Perkins at Project Zero has studied for a long time the cognitive processes involved in creative thinking (Perkins 1981; Weber and Perkins 1992). Also at Harvard is Teresa Amabile, who has studied extensively creativity in children and has begun to study creativity in businesses and organizations (Amabile 1983, 1990). Next is David Feldman at Tufts University, who pioneered the study of prodigies and has developed the concept of domains in the study of cognitive development (Feldman 1980, 1994). And finally, closing the circle of this imaginary map of the United States, at the University of Maine in Orono, psychologist Colin Martindale applies historiographical methods to the waxing and waning of creativity in the arts; his work is similar to Simonton’s in California (Martindale 1989, 1990). Of researchers outside the United States, I have had the good fortune of exchanging many ideas with István Magyari-Beck from Budapest, who has argued for some time that we need a new discipline of “creatology” to avoid the current, often parochial, one-dimensional approaches to the topic (Magyari-Beck 1988, 1994). The perspectives of Fausto Massimini of the University of Milan have had a deep influence on my understanding of cultural evolution (Massimini 1993; Massimini, Csikszentmihalyi, and Delle Fave 1988), as well as many other issues. In Israel, Roberta Milgram continues the psychometric tradition of creativity testing developed by Torrance (Milgram 1990). Of course, I must repeat that these references are only the tip of the iceberg and include only those investigators who are active in the field and whose work I know firsthand. We share 98 percent of our genetic makeup with chimpanzees. The estimates of how much of our genetic makeup we share with the chimps varies from 94 to 99 percent (Dozier 1992, Diamond 1992). Creativity in history. Although people have been creative all through history, they seldom realized it. For instance, for many centuries Egyptian civilization continued to lead in the arts and in technology, yet their ideology stressed extreme faithfulness to tradition. In medieval Europe many saints and philosophers broke new ground in lifestyle and in ways of thinking, yet they tended to attribute their inventions to having rediscovered God’s will, rather than to their own ingenuity. According to traditional Christian thought, only God was creative; men were created but could not create. Creativity was a very minor concern of psychology until very recently. In 1950, when J. P. Guilford became president of the American Psychological Association, he gave his inaugural lecture on the importance of studying creativity in addition to intelligence. Ironically, Guilford’s involvement with the subject came as a result of funding from the Department of Defense. During World War II the air force decided that intelligence tests were not sufficient to select the best pilots, those who could respond innovatively to emergency situations. Thus the needs of warfare spurred Guilford’s research in originality and flexibility, which in turn stimulated decades of study in creativity (Feldman 1994, pp. 4-7). Thirty years of research. I first started studying creativity in 1962, with my doctoral dissertation on the creative process in a group of art students. Many journal articles resulted, and the book The Creative Vision, which introduced new concepts and methods to the study of creativity, especially the focus on “problem finding” (Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi 1976). The “systems view” of creativity is something I developed much later, in 1988, and have elaborated since with the cooperation of students and colleagues, especially David Feldman of Tufts University and Howard Gardner of Harvard (Csikszentmihalyi 1988; Feldman, Csikszentmihalyi, and Gardner 1994; Gardner 1994). Cultural evolution. That creativity is to cultural evolution as genetic mutation is to biological evolution is an idea I first encountered in reading Donald T. Campbell’s essay on the evolution of knowledge(Campbell 1960). An earlier introduction to this way of thinking came from Teilhard de Chardin’s speculative but stimulating epic, The Phenomenon of Man (Teilhard 1965). The concept of a meme, analogous at the cultural level to a gene on the biological level, was adopted from Richard Dawkins (1976). These issues are further discussed in Csikszentmihalyi (1993, 1994). Creativity with a small c. Just at the present time, a debate rages in the field concerning the definition of creativity—see the last 1995issue of the Creativity Research Journal. At question is whether an idea or product needs social validation to be called creative, or whether it is enough for the person who has the idea to feel that it is creative. This is an old conundrum, which almost half a century ago Morris Stein (1953) tried to resolve by dividing the phenomenon into subjective and objective phases. Despite its antiquity, the question is still unresolved, and strong arguments have been advanced on both sides. My preference would be to approach creativity as a subjective phenomenon, but unfortunately I see no realistic way of doing so. No matter how much we admire the personal insight, the subjective illumination, we cannot tell whether it is a delusion or a creative thought unless we adopt some criterion—of logic, beauty, or usefulness—and the moment we do so, we introduce a social or cultural evaluation. Hence I was led to develop the systemic perspective on creativity, which relocates the creative process outside the individual mind. I realize that to do so goes against a powerful axiom of the times. These days we take it for granted that every person has a right to be creative, and that if an idea seems surprising and fresh to you, it should be counted as creative even if nobody else thinks so. With apologies to the Zeitgeist, I will try to demonstrate why this is not a very useful assumption. Attention is a limited resource. Many psychologists have remarked on the fact that every intentional act must be attended to, and that the capacity to pay attention is limited (e.g., Hasher and Zacks 1979; Kahneman 1973; Simon 1969; Treisman and Gelade 1980). In my opinion, this fact is one of the most fundamental constraints on human behavior, which explains a great variety of phenomena ranging from why we strive so hard to acquire labor-saving devices to why we become resentful if we feel our friends don’t pay enough attention to us (Csikszentmihalyi 1978, 1990; Csikszentmihalyi and Csikszentmihalyi 1988). Creative people are often considered odd. Studies of the traits widely ascribed to creative people include “impulsive,”“nonconformist,”“makes up the rules as he or she goes along,”“likes to be alone,” and “tends not to know own limitations.” The least typical traits of creative people include “is practical,”“is dependable,”“is responsible,”“is logical,”“is sincere” (MacKinnon 1963; Sternberg 1985; Westby and Dawson 1995). Two contradictory sets of instructions. Until about thirty-five years ago, the leading psychological theories, such as behaviorism and psychoanalytic theory, assumed that human behavior was directed exclusively by “deficit needs,” such as the desire to feed, have sex, and so on. More recently, under the influence of “humanistic” psychologists like Abraham Maslow and Carl Rogers, the importance of positive drives for self-esteem and self-actualization began to be taken more seriously (e.g., Maslow 1971; Rogers 1951). It is interesting to note that this shift was greatly helped by studies of laboratory monkeys and rats, who turned out to be as motivated to do work by the chance to explore and experience novelty as they were by the opportunity of getting food. These findings suggested the existence of “exploratory drives” and a “need for competence,” which changed forever the deficit-driven picture of human behavior (White 1959). See also Csikszentmihalyi (1975, 1990, 1993). Creativity in danger of being stifled. A good short summary of this problem was given by Gerhardt Casper, president of Stanford University, in a speech given at the Industry Summit of the World Economic Forum at Stanford, on September 18, 1994: “Government and industry seem to be increasingly preoccupied with the search for technology transfer shortcuts,” he said, instead of “support of original investigations of the first rank and the investment in education and training that goes with it…. We can readily purchase mediocrity, which will lead to nothing other than more mediocrity.” Extracurricular activities. The importance of activities outside the classroom in stimulating talented teenagers, and in keeping their motivation focused, was apparent in a recent longitudinal study (Csikszentmihalyi, Rathunde, and Whalen 1993). Inner-city youth depend even more on “nurturing settings” outside the school where they can experience a sense of responsibility together with freedom (Heath and McLaughlin 1993). Recently, Root-Bernstein, Bernstein, and Garnier (1995) have shown that creative scientists report significantly wider interests and more physical and artistic activities (painting, drawing, writing poetry, walking, surfing, sailing, etc.) than their less creative peers. Exceptional individuals. Given the advanced age of some of the respondents, a few have passed away between the time of the interview and the present writing. John Bardeen, Kenneth Boulding, James Coleman, Robertson Davies, Linus Pauling, and Jonas Salk are no longer with us. In the text I write about all respondents as if in an extended present, which is of course appropriate considering that the impact of these individuals’ lives will continue in the memory of the culture for a long time to come. The selection process. One limitation of this study is that most of the respondents are Caucasian Americans, Canadians, or Europeans, and few members of other ethnic groups or cultures ended up in the sample. For instance, only two African-Americans and a sprinkling of Asians were represented. This would be a problem if the creative process varied fundamentally by ethnicity. My impression is that it does not, except that access to fields and domains, and the ways fields and domains operate, will vary by culture just as it varies in time and by social class within the same culture. This would be in accord with the conclusions of the Japanese psychologist Maruyama (e.g., 1980), according to which the variation in originality within cultures is much greater than the variation across them. In terms of the systems model to be introduced in chapter 2, I would say that the original contribution made by the person is likely to be similar across cultures, while the contributions of the field and the domain will bear the distinctive stamp of the culture in which the creative process takes place. The same is true of gender differences: Within any given discipline women will use mental processes similar to those men use to reach creative results, but the differences in socialization, training, and opportunities available to men and women in a given social system may impact on the frequency and kind of creative contributions made by the two genders. The strategy of disproof. The example of the single white raven and its implications for scientific epistemology obviously derive from Karl Popper’s arguments, which although discredited as a history of science (which Popper never claimed to be doing anyway), are still unsurpassed as the logical foundations of it (Popper 1959). I accept stories at face value. Acceptance of respondents’ reports— qualified by the usual skepticism a scientist must bring to the object of study—is the particular prejudice I bring to the interpretation of the data. Prejudice, which generally has pejorative connotations, is used here in the sense developed by the philosopher Jurgen Habermas, who argued that none of us could avoid being prejudiced. But by being reflective, we can to a certain extent overcome the biases that otherwise would follow from our prejudices (Habermas 1970; Robinson 1988). During the heyday of Victorian optimism in the nineteenth century, it became a widely shared tacit assumption—or prejudice—that humankind, if not perfect, was well on its way to perfection. The great contribution of critical thinkers such as Marx or Freud has been to show that, on the contrary, human action was rife with selfishness, irrationality, and denial. Their insights have been expanded upon and refined by the perspectives of behaviorism, sociobiology, and countless other “isms.” The pessimism implied in these theories has further gained credibility as a result of the senseless evil that wars and ideologies have wrought in the last hundred years. So the new prejudice permeating our culture is now 180 degrees removed from the previous one, and holds that every human action is self-seeking, irrational, and not to be trusted. In my opinion, neither of these extreme positions is very useful. To reconcile the opposite poles of the dialectic, we must recognize that our behavior is largely determined by ancient genetic instructions designed for self-protection and self-replication, and by more recent cultural instructions we have learned uncritically from the cultural milieu. At the same time, it makes no sense to deny that new memes, or ideas that have emerged through time—such as the concepts of humanity, of democracy, of nonviolence—can and do direct behavior toward new goals. My own prejudice is that this relative flexibility of human adaptation, or creativity, makes it possible to avoid the backward-looking pessimism of the currently accepted reductionistic explanations of behavior, and to entertain the hope for a genuine evolution of humankind. The tendency of the social sciences to de-bunk human motivations (together with many other wise observations), is discussed by Hannah Arendt (1956). ## CHAPTER 2 Creative insight. A recent collection of papers that pretty much covers the subject of what insight consists of—but restricted to psychological, “inside the head” approaches—is the volume edited by Robert Sternberg (1995); see, e.g., Csikszentmihalyi and Sawyer (1995) on specifically creative insights. The systems model (sometimes called DIFI—for Domain, Individual, Field, Interaction framework) was originally developed by Csikszentmihalyi (1988a, 1990) and further elaborated in Feldman, Csikszentmihalyi, and Gardner (1994). Brilliant. One of the prejudices of our times is that a person who acts in unusual ways or who is involved in the arts must be creative. For instance, in advertising companies the department in charge of designing and producing the ads is usually called creative, and those who work in it are known as the creatives. While certainly there are many advertising artists who are genuinely creative, their frequency is not necessarily greater than that of creative accountants, technicians, or librarians working in the same companies. They might, however, be more brilliant, in the sense used here. Personal creativity. In psychological and educational circles, what is referred to as creativity is almost always of this kind. Tests that measure fluency or flexibility of thought, or teachers’ rating of the originality of children’s drawings, do not measure creativity as I use the term in this book, but only the tendency to produce unusual responses, which may or may not lead to what I call here genuine creativity. Among psychologists, Howard Gruber has argued often and eloquently that we just confuse matters by applying the term “creative” to clever children and to glib test-takers (e.g., Gruber and Davis 1988). Leonardo’s character has been often dissected (e.g., Reti 1974); for Newton’s see Westfall (1980) and Stayer (1988), and for Thomas Edison, Wachorst (1981). It is not that these and other great geniuses were tragically flawed; rather, outside their particular range of accomplishments they were just ordinary—in other words, outside of their work they failed to display that brilliance which popular opinion is so anxious to attribute to them. Genius. Among scientists of this century, a few—for instance Richard Feynman and John von Neumann—have gained a reputation among their peers as being geniuses. This reputation seems to be based not so much on the importance of their contributions, as on the exceptional facility with which they could see and solve problems that their peers had a much more difficult time comprehending. Usually individuals who are thought to be geniuses also have unusual, sometimes photographic memory. It is probable that such persons have rare neurological talents. Nevertheless, such talents alone do not guarantee creativity. Geniuses also often cultivate personal mannerisms that set them apart from their peers, and that impress their audience as being signs of uniqueness (e.g., Feynman playing the bongo drums, or Picasso earnestly endeavoring to play out in his own life the erotic fantasies of the bourgeoisie). Fluctuations in the attribution of creativity. Brannigan (1981) was one of the first sociologists who explored systematically the way in which a new discovery or invention had to be legitimized by recognized authorities before it could be seen as valid. He argues, for instance, that Columbus’s discovery of America would have remained a relatively trivial event, and not even counted as a “discovery,” except for the official recognition bestowed on it by the administrators of the Spanish king, by cartographers, by the Church, by scholars, and so on. Kosoff (1995) develops the same idea even farther—perhaps too far, inasmuch as he views creativity exclusively as a process of attribution and impression management, neglecting entirely the substantive contribution of the person. Golden years of the Renaissance. For the list of artworks completed in Florence during the first quarter of the fifteenth century and an evaluation of their quality, see, for example, Burckhardt (1926). The discussion that follows relies heavily on the remarks on the period found in Hauser (1951) and Heydenreich (1974). Hauser. The quote is from Hauser (1951, p. 41). A similar conclusion is reached by Heydenreich, who writes about the same historical period (1974, p. 13): “the patron begins to assume a very important role: in practice, artistic production arises in large measure from his collaboration.” The same argument holds for creative production in other domains as well. Extrasomatic instructions. I am basing my ideas here mostly on the work of Fausto Massimini. An example of extrasomatic instructions are the laws contained in the various political constitutions that the two hundred or so sovereign nations of the world have adopted. Massimini and Calegari (1979) analyzed these constitutions as if they were chromosomes containing a great number of genetic instructions; specific laws are nested in the constitutions as genes are in the chromosome. They also show that it is possible to trace groups of laws to their original “ancestral strains” in the Magna Charta, and more recent documents like the U.S. Constitution. In other words, information coded in memes rather than genes has begun to direct human behavior (see also Massimini 1979, 1993; Csikszentmihalyi and Massimini, 1985). Creativity and age. The relationship between age and creative achievements in various domains was first studied by Lehman (1953) and Dennis (1966). For more recent studies, see Over (1989) and Simonton (1988, 1990c). Morality as a domain. Whether it will ever be a tightly structured domain or not, morality at long last is receiving the attention it deserves from psychologists. Until recently, under the influence of Jean Piaget and Lawrence Kohlberg, most scholars confined themselves to studying moral judgments, and how children learned to make them. The newly developing domain attempts to study actual moral behavior(e.g., Damon 1995; Gilligan, Ward, and Taylor 1988). Scarcity of attention. The argument suggests that, contrary to general belief, what limits creativity is not the lack of good new memes (i.e., ideas, products, works of art), but the lack of interest in them. The constraint is not in the supply but in the demand. This again is one of the consequences of the aforementioned limits on attention. Unfortunately, most attempts to enhance creativity are focused on the supply side, which may not only not work but is likely to make life more miserable for a greater number of neglected geniuses. We still have very little formal knowledge about how to enhance the demand side of creativity, although obviously entrepreneurs and philanthropists have always had good practical knowledge in this matter. A creative person must convince the field. Everyone who studies creativity has remarked on this requirement (e.g., Simonton refers to it as persuasion [1988, p. 417]). But usually the necessity of “selling” one’s ideas is seen as something that comes after the creative process ends and is separate from it. In the systems model, the acceptance of a new meme by the field is seen as an essential part of the creative process. For a recent set of papers that take seriously the importance of the social context, see Ford and Gioia (1995). The number of students in theoretical physics at the University of Rome. These are the numbers I remember mentioned by my friend Nicola Cabibbo, who took over the chair of physics in Rome around that time. A similar fate awaited the field of sociology in the late 1960s and early 1970s, when in the aftermath of the student unrests and the Vietnam War huge numbers of students in the United States decided to major in sociology. I was then teaching in the department of sociology and anthropology at Lake Forest College, and in a few years the number of majors increased from less than ten to over a hundred. Other institutions experienced similar bursts of interest in the domain. One consequence was that in order to accommodate the tenfold increase in students, colleges hired teachers who were often not well trained and had only a faint grasp of the domain. This, in turn, resulted in a chaotic confusion that almost wrecked the field. A similar point was made by Robert LeVine concerning child development research, where in the same period the expansion of the field brought in a great number of poorly trained academics who embraced uncritically the then fashionable cognitivist theories of Piaget and Chomsky (LeVine 1991). Unassimilated novelty can be as dangerous for the survival of a domain as no novelty at all. The Romanian government. A former student who spent several months in Transylvania collecting ethnographic material in the 1980shas described the efforts of the Romanian Ministry of Culture, whose representatives tried to retrain Hungarian, Szekler, Moldavian, and German villagers to weave, decorate, and sing songs according to Romanian patterns instead of using their traditional forms of artistic expression. Such policies are the cultural equivalent of “ethnic cleansing”; here it is not the phenotype of the genes that is being killed but only the foreign memes. ## CHAPTER 3 Or for artists. A good example are two Renaissance painters who worked for the Medicis, Filippo Lippi (1406-1469) and Giovanni Angelico (1400-1455). They both started out as friars and became famous for their exquisitely spiritual paintings of saints and Madonnas. Lippi, however, abandoned the monastery and became a riotous drunkard and libertine—he eventually eloped with a nun and had a child with her. At one point his patron, Cosimo de’Medici, decided to lock him up in his studio to make sure he finished a canvas he had been paid to do, but Filippo escaped anyway at night by knotting bed sheets together and lowering himself from the window to join a party. But no matter how dissolute his behavior, he continued all his life to paint sweet religious pictures. Giovanni, on the other hand, remained a meek monk who prayed devotedly for divine inspiration every time he took up the brush. After he died, people started referring to him as Beato Angelico, although he was never officially canonized by the Church. From the work the two men left behind one might have surmised they were identical twins, rather than persons with diametrically opposite temperaments. Temperamental differences may be responsible, however, for why two persons exposed to the same domain will choose different aspects of it to work in, or why one will approach it in a reductionistic mode, while the other will have a more holistic approach. Pierre Bourdieu. The influential notion of “cultural capital” was developed by this French sociologist (Bourdieu 1980). In the 1960s. The changes in the kind of personality that art teachers thought was appropriate for art students, and the effect this had on art students, are described in Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi (1976). The personality of artists (and creative individuals in general). Scholars (including the present one) have tried to describe the personality traits peculiar to creative people, and some of their conclusions are to a certain extent valid, at least within our particular historical context. It is likely that such traits as sensitivity, openness to experience, self-sufficiency, lack of interest in social norms and social acceptance, and—for artists— a tendency toward manic depression might be useful in increasing the likelihood that the person will try to innovate in his or her domain (e.g., Albert and Runco 1986; Andreasen 1987; Barron 1969, 1988; Cattell and Drevdahl 1955; Cross, Cattell, and Butcher 1967; Csikszentmihalyi and Getzels 1973; Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi 1968, 1976; MacKinnon 1964; Piechowski and Cunningham 1985; Roe 1946, 1952). However, I am now convinced that such unipolar traits are less accurate in describing the personality of creative individuals than the dialectical notion of complexity. Complexity. The concept of complexity is central to many of my previous writings, especially The Evolving Self (Csikszentmihalyi 1993). In this context I am using the term in a similar but much more restricted sense, without the extensive theoretical implications I usually intend it to convey. The flexible, adaptive personality style it describes shares similarities with other traits described by psychologists, but it is not identical with any of them. For example, Jack Block’s concept of ego resiliency (Block 1971, 1981), which includes a tendency toward adaptability and resourcefulness, could be seen as very similar; however, ego-resilient people are strong on one-dimensional traits such as integrity, dominance, and self-acceptance, which might not be the best way to describe creative individuals who are also prone at times to insecurity and self-doubt. Previous researchers have often attributed seemingly contradictory traits to creative people, such as “openness to experience” and “preference for challenge and complexity” (e.g., Russ 1993, p. 12). But these traits are seen as separate, or orthogonal to each other, instead of representing variations along a continuum. Closer to my notion of complexity is Dennett’s (1991) view of consciousness, and Ornstein’s (1986) concept of “multimind,” or the brain’s tendency to integrate separate and often conflicting neural sequences, thus often producing incongruent or contradictory thoughts and actions within the same person. Perhaps creative individuals, for whatever reason, are more prone to accept and to leverage this feature of the mind. Carl Gustav Jung. See, for instance, Jung (1969, 1973). Longitudinal studies. The first longitudinal study of exceptionally gifted children was conducted by Lewis M. Terman at Stanford University, who followed the vicissitudes of one thousand children with very high IQs throughout their lives, a study that is still being continued. See, for instance, Terman (1925), Oden (1968), and Sears (1980) for the outcomes of these investigations. Later studies. Jacob W. Getzels and Philip Jackson (1962) were the first to compare children who scored high on IQ tests but not on creativity tests with children who scored high on creativity tests but not on IQ tests; they found that the two groups were quite different. For example, the high IQ children were more conventional and extrinsically motivated, while the highly creative ones were more rebellious and intrinsically motivated. As one might expect, teachers preferred the first kind. More recent work on this topic is summarized by Westby and Dawson (1995). Howard Gardner (1993) studied seven exemplary creative geniuses of this century. The distinction between convergent and divergent thinking was first made by J. P. Guilford, the pioneer in the modern psychological study of creativity, who claimed that divergent thinking was peculiar to creativity, and who developed the first tests to measure it, which are still being used (Guilford 1950, 1967). Paul Torrance subsequently contributed greatly to the measurement of divergent thinking (Torrance 1988); for recent reviews of the relationship between divergent thinking and creativity, see Baer (1993) and Runco (1991). Vasari. The first set of biographical sketches of artists was written by this Florentine historian (who was also a decent artist himself). One strength of his work is that Vasari (1550) knew personally many of the Renaissance artists whose lives he chronicled. A recent issue of Newsweek. For the article on John Reed, see Levinson (1994). Extroversion and introversion. This polarity is one of the oldest in personality psychology. It was initially adopted by C. G. Jung, and is now considered one of the five basic traits along which individuals differ. The major work on this concept was done by the German-British psychologist Hans J. Eysenck (1952, 1973), and current systematic studies of extroversion and introversion have been influenced by the research of Costa and McCrae (1978, 1984). Teens who can tolerate being alone. For a recent account of the difference it makes to the development of talented teenagers whether they can stand solitude, see Csikszentmihalyi, Rathunde, and Whalen (1993). Androgyny. There is ample evidence that talented and creative individuals show traits usually associated with the opposite sex, and express the traits of their own sex less strongly than the average person. In my own work, such findings were reported in Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi (1976) and in Csikszentmihalyi, Rathunde, and Whalen (1993). See also Spence and Helmreich (1978). It is likely that this tendency is responsible for the currency of rumors about the homosexuality of creative individuals like Leonardo and Michelangelo. Such attributions are always difficult, because they rely heavily on interpretation and often project current meanings on behaviors that in the past had a very different significance. Although there might be a tendency toward homosexuality for creative persons in some fields under certain sociocultural conditions, the currently widespread belief that the two are linked is probably exaggerated. Psychopathology and addictions in artists and writers. See, for instance, the recent reports by Andreasen (1987), Claridge (1992), Cropley (1990), Jamison (1989), and Rothenberg (1990). Despite the clear relationship one finds nowadays between some forms of creativity and some forms of pathology, I am convinced that this is an accidental rather than an essential connection. In other words, if creative musicians are often addicted to drugs and playwrights tend to get clinically depressed, this is more a reflection of the historical conditions in which they have to work than of the work itself. This was, to a certain extent, also the argument of the psychoanalysts Ernst Kris (1952) and John Gedo (1990). Certainly many great artists seem to have avoided psychopathology, and even enjoyed superior mental health: for instance, writers Chekhov, Goethe, and Manzoni; composers Bach, Handel, and Verdi; and visual artists Monet, Raphael, and Rodin. ## CHAPTER 4 The creative process. As the statement by Galvin illustrates, the way in which creative results come about can be approached from two main directions. The first asks the “how” question (in this case, anticipation), which focuses on the mental, or cognitive, steps that lead to novel outcomes through the framing of new questions. Most research on creativity takes this approach. The second direction asks the “why” question (in Galvin’s terms, commitment), which deals with the affect and the motivation that drives a person to innovate. Outside of psychoanalytic writers, few scholars have taken this approach, even though everyone agrees about its importance. I feel uneasy about drawing too sharp a distinction between the cognitive and the motivational aspects of creativity (or any other mental process). It seems to me that the two are so closely intertwined that to separate them sharply interferes with a real understanding of what is going on. This was the crux of my disagreement with Herbert Simon, who believes that a rational, computer-modeled sequence of thought adequately represents actual historical creative processes, which, in my opinion, are largely arational (e.g., Csikszentmihalyi 1988b; Simon 1988). The steps of the creative process. The demarcation of the cognitive steps involved in the production of novelty (i.e., the “how” of creativity) was first clearly formulated by Wallas (1926). Some scholars recognize three steps (i.e., preparation, incubation, insight), while others mention as many as five (i.e., preparation, incubation, insight, evaluation, elaboration). Another relevant concept is that of intuition, or the “vague anticipatory perception that orients creative work in a promising direction” (Policastro 1995, p. 99), a process that presumably takes place between the phases of incubation and insight. 1 percent inspiration. European colleagues tell me that the quip about creativity being 99 percent perspiration was first made by the German poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, who died fifteen years before Thomas Edison was born. I could not substantiate this claim, but even though Goethe has said many insightful things about creativity, it seems to me that this particular aphorism fits Edison’s mentality better. Darwin. Howard Gruber has written the classic account of the psychology of Darwin’s creative process, based on a close analysis of the notebooks in which Darwin recorded his thoughts as they unfolded throughout his active life (Gruber 1981). Dyson’s role in the development of quantum electrodynamics is discussed in the recent book by Schweber (1994), who argues that Dyson should have shared the Nobel Prize awarded to Tomonaga, Schwinger, and Feynman in 1965. Notebooks. It is not only writers who keep diaries and notebooks of daily experiences. Scientists also keep lab notes or other records that will help them to think through their findings and ideas. A perhaps extreme example is the virologist D. Carleton Gajdusek, who was awarded the 1976 Nobel Prize in physiology and medicine, whose notebooks cover about 600,000 single-spaced typewritten pages, a third of which has already been published (Gajdusek 1995). “Do you know a novel about happiness?” There is a good short story by Italo Calvino, “The Adventure of a Poet,” on the theme of how difficult it is to write about happiness (Calvino 1985). It is true that the world literature is filled with tragedies, while the opposite of tragedy— i.e., the story of a deserving person getting his or her just dues—exists only in Horatio Alger-type narratives that fail to make the grade as great literature. (There are, however, great comedies.) My impression for why this is so is that the situation might be the opposite of what Tolstoy said, that happiness is repetitive and unhappiness unique. Happiness is such a private and idiosyncratic experience that it is almost impossible to communicate it, and the writer must resort to trite clichés to describe it. On the other hand, unhappiness is so pervasive and uniform that everyone can immediately recognize it, so the writer is freed up to use style and imagination to embroider on unhappy themes, confident that the reader will be able to empathize with the subject. Studies of creative scientists. Ann Roe (1951, 1953) was among the first psychologists to study creative scientists, mostly from a motivational perspective (the “why” question). Another classic investigator in the same vein has been Bernice Eiduson (Eiduson 1962). The French mathematician Jacques Hadamard wrote a classic account of the cognitive aspects of creativity in his domain (Hadamard 1949), and the biochemist Hans Adolf Krebs, whose research explained how living organisms produce energy, described the creative process in physiology and medicine (Krebs and Shelly 1975). Several scientists have left excellent accounts of their working methods, including some of those who took part in this study; for example, Freeman Dyson, Gerald Holton, John Wheeler, and E. O. Wilson. Wars are notorious for affecting the direction of science. Dean Keith Simonton is the psychologist who has done the most extensive surveys of the relationship between historical conditions, such as wars and other forms of conflict, and creativity. His historiographical methods are based on the secondary analysis and compilation of thousands of historical facts on the one hand, and frequencies of creative productivity (e.g., books, musical compositions, inventions) on the other. See, for instance, Simonton (1990b). For a slightly different approach, which looks at the relation between forms of political power and creativity, see Therivel (1995). Twentieth century. The history of creativity in the twentieth century is well illustrated by Howard Gardner’s biographical account of seven representative geniuses of our times (Gardner 1993). Presented and discovered problems. The psychologist Jacob W. Getzels, my mentor in graduate school, became impressed by the many accounts of creative individuals that emphasized the importance of problem finding—as opposed to problem solving—in the creative process. He then developed a model of problem formulation based on the distinction between discovered and presented problems (Getzels 1964). The model was further elaborated and applied to research with creative artists (e.g., Getzels 1975, 1982; Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi 1976). This perspective has become a useful one for studying creativity; see, for instance, the recent collection of studies edited by Runco(1994). The functions of idle time. That incubation helps to make a connection between a highly salient but repressed experience and its expression in a form acceptable by the superego was developed by Freud in his essays on Leonardo da Vinci’s childhood and Michelangelo’s sculpture of Moses (Freud 1947, 1955). These essays spawned a large literature (e.g., Kris 1952; Rothenberg 1979). The classic treatment of creativity by Arthur Koestler (1964) is also heavily influenced by this perspective. In a similar vein, the more creative scientists interviewed by Eiduson and Root-Bernstein differed from the less creative ones in that they reported more often that their ideas arose while dreaming, or while working on a different but related problem (Root-Bernstein, Bernstein, and Garnier 1995). It is difficult to know, however, to what extent such reports are shaped by received notions about how the creative process “should” unfold; a difficulty that obviously applies to my study as well. The alternative explanation of why idle time is necessary is based on a model of mental processing that stresses random associations of ideas that may take a great deal of time to result in useful combinations (e.g., Campbell 1960, 1974; Johnson-Laird 1988; Simonton 1988)—somewhat akin to the millions of monkeys typing at random needed to produce a Shakespearean masterpiece by chance—or it involves connections that while unconscious are still based on logical associations (e.g., Dreistadt 1969; Barsalou 1982). Serial and parallel processing of information. For a basic introduction to this topic, see Rumelhart et al. (1986). ## CHAPTER 5 Programmed for creativity. That people prefer to describe what they enjoy doing most with the phrase “designing or discovering something new” was a result of the first study of optimal experience I conducted (Csikszentmihalyi 1975). The dual motivational system, programmed for survival on the one hand and for evolution on the other, is discussed in Csikszentmihalyi (1985, 1993). Entropy. Here I am using the term in its more usual meaning, as the inability of a system to do work. It is different from psychic entropy, which is the state of consciousness characterized by inner disorder, negative emotions, or simply the inability to engage in purposeful action. Its opposite is psychic negentropy, or flow, which describes an ordered state of consciousness, positive emotions, and the ability to engage in intentional action (see Csikszentmihalyi 1978, 1982). The flow experience. The description of the common experiential state reported by people who enjoyed various activities such as rock climbing, chess, dancing, and so on was first provided in Csikszentmihalyi (1975). A wide range of subsequent studies on flow conducted by researchers in many different cultures was reported in Csikszentmihalyi and Csikszentmihalyi (1988). See also Csikszentmihalyi (1993), Csikszentmihalyi and Rathunde (1993), Massimini and Inghilleri(1986, 1993), and Inghilleri (1995). George Klein (1990) collected a number of enlightening essays from artists and scientists describing the flow they experienced in their creative work. Separating bad ideas from good ones. Sir Peter Medawar, the British virologist who was such a keen reporter of the creative process in his field, held that the central skill involved in creativity was to grasp which were the soluble problems (Medawar 1967). Several respondents in our study mentioned the same thing, sometimes referring back to Medawar’s idea, thereby demonstrating how difficult it is to separate a direct experience from a received opinion. The barrier of entropy. Professor Frank Lambert, a chemist, has suggested to me that the difficulty in entering flow bears an interesting resemblance to the activation energy that certain metastable physical systems require in order to mantain a higher internal energy state. For instance, iron tends to corrode into iron oxide, or rust, when exposed to air or water, thereby losing some of its internal energy. But it will maintain its higher-energy, metastable condition if external energy is added prior to its degrading; for example, if the iron is painted or turned into steel (Lambert 1995). The phenomenological parallel is that without psychic energy expended in learning to control consciousness, the mind tends to fall into random, low-energy states. While one must make an effort to focus attention to enter the flow state, as soon as one is in it, external distractions are much less likely to disrupt concentration, and even great expenditures of physical and mental energy are experienced as if they were effortless. It remains to be seen whether there is more to the similarity between these two entirely different processes than superficial appearance. Intrinsic motivation. The importance of intrinsic rewards has been realized relatively recently by psychologists, who until the 1960s considered only the satisfaction of genetically programmed needs to be rewarding. Currently among the leading researchers in this area are Amabile (1990) and Deci and Ryan (1985). See also Csikszentmihalyi and Rathunde (1993). The more flow, the more happiness. See, for instance, Csikszentmihalyi and Nakamura (1989), Csikszentmihalyi and Wong (1991), Wells (1988), Adlai-Gail (1994), and Moneta and Csikszentmihalyi(1995). But if a person experiences flow in activities that are destructive or lack complexity, or if one becomes addicted to a single flow activity at the expense of a balanced life, flow might have negative consequences; see Csikszentmihalyi and Larson (1978) and Csikszentmihalyi (1985b). Children grow up believing. In a current research of young people’s transition from school to work, we find that of a national cross-section of more than four thousand teenagers 15 percent would like to become professional athletes (the number one choice), 4 percent would like to become musicians, and 6 percent actors. In other words, if we consider professional athletes as being primarily entertainers, at least one out of four adolescents aspires to a career in entertainment (Bidwell, Csikszentmihalyi, Hedges, and Schneider 1995). ## CHAPTER 6 Being in the right place. For some of the effects of the physical environment on psychological functioning, see Gallagher (1993). Bellagio. The history of this Italian town in Lombardy and its many creative visitors is in Gilardoni (1988). The macroenvironment. One approach to the relationship between social structural variables and creativity is the series of historiometric analyses by Simonton (e.g., 1975, 1984). Another is the qualitative analysis of the relationship between artistic creativity and sociocultural factors in contemporary America by Freeman (1993). Pekka. Juhani Kirjonen, a colleague from the University of Jyväskyläin Finland, told me about Pekka, whom I didn’t have the good fortune to meet personally. Joe M. was one of the subjects of my earliest studies of flow conducted twenty-five years ago (see Csikszentmihalyi 1975). Symbolic ecology in the home. The study of more than one hundred households and the objects in them that were special to their owners is described in Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton(1981). The car as a “thinking machine.” This and other conclusions about the place of cars in our symbolic ecology are based on a study I conducted for Nissan U.S.A. in 1991. Career change every ten years. In his analysis of the biographies of great geniuses, Howard Gardner (1993) concluded that major breakthroughs in their work occurred once every ten years. Presumably these two observations—career change and timing of new masterpieces —reflect the same cycle of creative work. ## CHAPTER 7 Childhood and creativity. Of the many studies concerned with the early experiences of creative individuals—most of which, by necessity, use biographical accounts of long-dead individuals and hence are often of dubious authenticity—one might mention Freud’s reconstruction of Leonardo’s infancy and childhood (Freud 1947); and the summary of the biographical evidence on the childhoods of three hundred eminent persons by Goertzel and Goertzel (1962). Some of the analyses of the sibling position of creative individuals are by Zajonc (1976), Albert (1983), and Albert and Runco (1989). Giotto’s childhood. The biographical note on Giotto is from Semenzato (1964, p. 7). Interest. As mentioned earlier, until recently psychologists were not very interested in the topic of interest. This has changed, however; see, for instance, Renninger, Hidi, and Krapp (1992) and Schiefele (1991). We still know next to nothing about individual differences in interest, that is, whether some children are more interested than others in general, or why some become interested in one topic and others in another topic. The influence of parents. See, for example, Harrington, Block, and Block (1992) and Csikszentmihalyi and Csikszentmihalyi (1993). Despite the fact that recent scholarship in family studies has abandoned the notion that the parents’ effects on children are primary in favor of a systemic perspective that sees the family interaction as having the most important effect (Grotevant 1991), I still believe that parents influence children more than the other way around, and largely independently of any interaction effects. Missing fathers. The essay from which the quotation is taken is in Klein (1992). Jean-Paul Sartre’s aphorism about a father’s gift to his son is in Les Mots and is quoted in Klein (1992, p. 162). The Mirror of Retrospection. Many of the surveys conducted by Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann (e.g., 1985) show that adults who are satisfied with their present condition report having had more idyllic childhoods. The successful young artist who revised his past was first described in the volume by Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi (1976), when his childhood was still unproblematic. The influence of a teacher. The importance of single individuals— parents, teachers, peers, mentors, spouses, students—in helping along the career of creative individuals is examined in Mockros (1995) and Mockros and Csikszentmihalyi (1995). Eugene Wigner’s recollections of his high school math teacher are found in his autobiography (Wigner 1992). The influence of teachers in the Lutheran high school in Budapest has also been described by Hersh and John-Steiner (1993). For the conflicts peculiar to talented teenagers, see Csikszentmihalyi, Rathunde, and Whalen (1993). Artists uninterested in academic subjects. A thorough description of the values held by artists in general and as they relate to academics can be found in Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi (1976). ## CHAPTER 8 Recent studies. I am referring here in particular to the survey studies of sexual behavior completed by colleagues at the University of Chicago (Laumann et al. 1994). Erik Erikson. Erikson’s classic description of his eight psychosocial stages of development is in Erikson (1950). Wigner. The quote is from Wigner (1992, p. 254) “Life theme.” The concept of life themes, or the cognitive representations we develop of our goals and of the narrative of our lives, was first developed in Csikszentmihalyi and Beattie (1979). See also Csikszentmihalyi (1990, pp. 230-40). ## CHAPTER 9 Creativity peaks in the third decade of life. The early studies of age changes in creativity were by Lehman (1953) and Dennis (1966). See also Simonton (1990c) and the brief summary in Rybash, Roodin, and Hoyer (1995). Quantity and quality. What older individuals accomplish is not determined only—or even primarily—by the limitations of biological aging, but also by the personal attitudes and social opportunities concerning old age. There is accumulating evidence that longevity, health, physical performance, and social achievements in old age can be greatly improved by adopting appropriate values and behaviors; see, for instance, the conclusions of Dr. Walter Bortz (1991). The distinction between fluid and crystallized intelligence was introduced by Horn (1970). Some of the most careful investigations of changes in mental performance with age were done by K. Warner Schaie and his associates (e.g., Schaie 1990, 1994). See also Labouvie-Vief (1985). Risk taking in later life. It has been suggested that riskier problems in science are more typically addressed either by established scientists who can afford to do so, or by those not established at all who have very little to lose (Zuckerman and Lederberg 1986; Zuckerman and Cole 1994), a propensity that fits Sternberg and Lubart’s (1991) economic investment theory of creativity. Integrity. The quotation is from Erikson (1968, p. 140). The psychiatrist George Vaillant has recently suggested that an important developmental stage between generativity and integrity is the one he calls “Keeper of the meaning,” a task that confronts a person after midlife and that involves selecting and passing on to the next generation the wisdom one has learned (Vaillant 1993). This stage is one that the people in this book seem well prepared to meet. Anthropic principle. For an introduction to the concept see Barrow and Tipler (1986) and Gribbin and Rees (1989). ## CHAPTER 10 Why are we interested in literature? I heartily agree with Umberto Eco on this matter: “…it is easy to see why fiction fascinates us. It offers us the opportunity to employ limitlessly our faculties for perceiving the world and reconstructing the past…it is through fiction that we adults train our ability to structure our past and present experience” (Eco 1994, p. 131). In their cross-cultural interviews, the team of investigators led by Fausto Massimini found that reading was one of the most often mentioned sources of flow worldwide—often the main source (e.g., Massimini, Csikszentmihalyi, and Delle Fave 1988). Problem-finding process. One of the most pronounced differences between artists whose work was judged to be creative by expert judges and those whose work was deemed not creative is that the former approached an experimental drawing task not knowing what they wanted to draw, whereas the less creative artists started with a clear idea of what they wanted to do from the beginning (Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi 1976). The former “discovered” their problem in the process of drawing, in interaction with the medium and the developing image; the latter toiled on a problem that could already be visualized before the creative process started. This kind of open-ended process that leads to discovery was typical of the working methods of the group reported on in this study, and is well described here by Mark Strand. For a recent update on studies of the relationship between problem finding and creativity, see Runco (1994). “I could never stay in that frame of mind.…” In fact, staying in the flow state for long periods is almost impossible. People who are fortunate to have a vocation or a hobby that is enjoyable and allinvolving may experience flow every day, and sometimes for long periods. But even the most adept must take occasional breaks because of hunger, sleep, fatigue, or the sheer exhaustion that follows from the extreme concentration of the flow experience. Struggles with the field. It is probable that the less binding the rules of a domain are, the more free the field is to exploit young people who want to be recognized and advance in it. For this reason, an actress is more likely to be expected to sleep with a producer in order to get ahead than a young scientist is, because in science the value of a person’s contribution can be more clearly established with references to the rules of the domain. But of course this does not mean that even the most rigorously organized domains, such as mathematics, can keep the field entirely free of exploitation, politics, and personal vendettas. Assimilating the style of predecessors. There is a story about Pablo Picasso, who in his maturity was asked by an interviewer why he had spent so much time as a young man imitating the style of the great masters of painting. “If I had not imitated them,” Picasso is supposed to have answered, “I would have had to spend the rest of my life imitating myself.” Certainly Picasso cannot be accused of being a traditionalist, but even he recognized that without mastering the best achievements of a domain, one is left only with one’s naked talents, having to reinvent the wheel without tools. Too much encouragement. L’Engle’s contention that too much parental encouragement can be an obstacle to the development of a child’s talent makes sense on two counts: In the first place, praise tends to heighten self-consciousness, which in turns interrupts the flow experience; thus it is important to reserve whatever praise one wants to give until the child’s episode of involvement with the talent area is over. Second, and more important, is the fact that parental encouragement often takes the form of heightening the child’s awareness of extrinsic rewards, thereby undermining the intrinsic rewards of the activity. For instance, if the parents keep stressing “You have to keep practicing that piano or you will never play in Carnegie Hall,” the child learns that the reason for playing is to get future recognition and success, not the present enjoyment of music. Unfortunately, indiscriminate praise is often advised as a parental technique that will raise children’s self-esteem (e.g., McKay and Fanning 1988), as if a self-esteem based on spurious praise was worth having. See also Damon (1995, chapter 4) for a similar argument. But feedback—including praise—that is directed at concrete details of the performance can be very useful; see Dweck’s (1986) distinction between “learning” and “performance” goals, and Deci and Ryan’s (1985) distinction between “informational” and “controlling” feedback. Owning Your Own Shadow. L’Engle is referring here to an aspect of the recent revival of interest in Carl Gustav Jung’s thought, which includes the concept of the “shadow,” or the dialectical opposite of the traits a person usually acknowledges and displays (Jung 1946, 1968). This dark side of the personality can cause severe inner conflict if it remains repressed. For a contemporary interpretation of the influence of the shadow on consciousness and behavior, see the edited volume by Abrams and Zweig (1991) and O’Neil (1993). “I would say that the chief obstacle is—oneself.” The quote by Stern in which he describes vanity, pride—the rubbishy parts of oneself—as being the greatest obstacles in one’s life is a good illustration of what it means to “own one’s shadow,” as referred to in the preceding note. ## CHAPTER 11 Alexander von Humboldt (1769-1859). His five-volume description of the cosmos was translated from German into English in the last decade of the last century (von Humboldt 1891-93). Some people claim that our understanding of nature took a wrong turn when Darwin’s vision of natural selection, which was very compatible with the competitive capitalistic ideology of late Victorian England, prevailed over Humboldt’s more systemic vision. Whether this is true or not, the issue suggests how social systems might influence fields in the shaping of domains; in this case, the competitive Victorian social milieu might have recognized itself in Darwin’s theory, and encouraged naturalists to adopt it as the dogma of biology. Sociobiology. This perspective for explaining human behavior, based on an elaboration of Darwinian principles, has been perhaps the most momentous paradigm shift affecting the social sciences in the second half of this century. While Freudians explain our actions with reference to repressed sexual desire, Marxists in terms of conflicts brought about by unequal control of the means of production, Skinnerians in terms of learned responses to pleasant stimuli, sociobiologists explain them in terms of the reproductive advantages that different actions give. In other words, other things being equal, we choose to do things that give us a greater chance to leave offspring who, in their turn, will grow up to leave offspring. Simple as this assumption sounds, it can be applied to a very wide range of actions, and with a certain amount of mathematical precision. The widespread impact of this concept is in large part due to the work of E. O. Wilson (1975). Ernst Mayr. Some of the relevant references are to Mayr (1947), James Watson (1980), Konrad Lorenz (1966), Ellsworth Huntington (1945), and William Hamilton (1964). Thomas Kuhn. The seminal description of the sudden changes that transform domains, namely “paradigm shifts,” is in Kuhn (1970). Before it was thought that science proceeded slowly by logical steps based on prior knowledge rather than radical reformulations. “I still remember…” The quote is from the Kleins’ autobiographical essay (Klein and Klein 1989, p. 7). “My own boss…”Ibid., p. 14. Responsibility to the living world. This attitude is well expressed in the concept of “biophilia” (Wilson 1984), as well as in the writings of the other life scientists discussed in this chapter, e.g., Salk (1983) and Klein (1992). ## CHAPTER 12 “Most people in the university work for the admiration of their peers.” Commoner here puts his finger on a problem that is typical of the history of fields in general. At first, they are constituted to solve a genuine problem: The priesthood exists for the sake of providing meaning to people’s lives, doctors for the sake of curing disease, the army to protect us from enemies, the universities to teach specialized knowledge…but as time passes, each institution unconsciously changes its priorities to that of aggrandizing and preserving itself. This is the kind of “mimetic exploitation” I discuss in Csikszentmihalyi (1993, pp. 109- 14) and which we have to learn to avoid lest the culture become stagnant. Those who are not properly socialized. One of the paradoxes of creativity is that a person must be socialized to a field, that is, learn its rules and expectations, yet at the same time remain to a certain extent aloof from it. A person who identifies too strongly with the field and its problems has no incentives to break into new territory, and is not interested in exploring knowledge that lies outside the boundaries of the domain. This is why creative persons are so often marginal, with one foot in the field and one outside of it (compare Therivel 1993). C. S. Peirce. According to the pragmatic philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce, an act of recognition is one in which the object is simply assimilated to previous conceptual schemas, and nothing new happens in the mind; whereas an act of perception is one in which the object stimulates new thoughts or feelings that result in the expansion of consciousness (Peirce 1931). This distinction is echoed in the teachings of the Yaqui Indian sorcerer Don Juan, described by Carlos Castaneda, one of whose basic techniques involved breaking down the conventional conceptual categories of experience (Castaneda 1971). Lack of formal education. Dean Simonton’s research into the background of recent historical figures suggests that the most creative ones reached the sophomore year of a college education. More education than that seems to be as detrimental as less (Simonton 1990a). Of course, in some domains it is impossible to get started, let alone make a creative contribution, without advanced degrees. “I learned through the school of hard knocks.…” The quote by Henderson gives a very good prescription of how one can build flow and intrinsic rewards into the plan of an organization, an important topic about which we unfortunately know very little as yet. Simple cultures’ views of the cosmos. See, for example, Massimini and Delle Fave (1991). Myth of Gaia. A review of how the idea that the Earth is a selfcorrecting organism developed can be found in Joseph (1990). The original Gaia hypothesis, stating that the temperature of the planet and the chemistry of the gases surrounding it are produced and maintained by the sum of living organisms, was developed by James E. Lovelock(1979). ## CHAPTER 13 The axemaker’s gift. See Burke and Ornstein (1995) and also Csikszentmihalyi (1993, chapter 5). The reasons for the decline of the Maya civilization were discussed at a recent archaeological meeting reported in the San Francisco Chronicle of April 12, 1995, p. A7. Géza Róheim. Róheim was a psychoanalytically trained ethnographer who studied, among other native cultures, that of the Australian aborigine. He became convinced that the ideal condition of existence was that of inorganic matter, and that life forms, including human life, were transient forms of irritation or disease (Róheim 1945). In this sense, his views are diametrically opposed to those expressed by Wilson (1984). Such conflicting ways of interpreting the same phenomena are a good example of the sort of differences based on conflicting metaphysical assumptions that Popper (1959) claimed could not be resolved scientifically. Standards for the arts. For an overview of one of these approaches see Smith (1989) and Dobbs (1993). Supportive families. While there is no direct evidence about the relationship between family practices and creativity, the retrospective interviews collected by Benjamin Bloom (1985) with scientists and artists reveal an enormous amount of parental investment in their gifted children. See also Harrington, Block, and Block (1992). In general, a combination of parental love and discipline seems to work best in nurturing the development of talent in children (e.g., Baumrind 1989; Rathunde and Csikszentmihalyi 1993). Self-esteem of Asian and African-American students. The popular belief is that disadvantaged minorities suffer from low self-esteem, and if only their self-esteem could be raised, their academic performance and success in general would improve. But the facts seem to be different. For instance, the self-esteem of African-American students tends to be higher than that of Caucasians, which in turn is higher than Asian students’—in inverse proportion to their academic achievement (Bidwell, Csikszentmihalyi, Hedges, and Schneider, still in press). The reasons for this are not so difficult to understand, if one keeps in mind William James’s (1890) formula for self-esteem: the ratio of achievements over expectations. If expectations are very high, as they usually are among Asian-Americans, one would expect their self-esteem to be low, even when their achievements are relatively high. Expectations of American and Asian parents. How Asian-American families communicate high expectations for academic achievement is described in Sue and Okazaki (1990), Schneider et al. (1992), Stevenson and Stigler (1992), and Asakawa and Csikszentmihalyi (1995). 10 percent of thirteen-year-olds wanted to be architects. This is one of the findings of a cross-national sample of American adolescents (Bidwell, Csikszentmihalyi, Hedges, and Schneider, still in press). Benvenuto Cellini (1500-1571). One English translation of the autobiography of this exemplar of a Renaissance artist is in Cellini (1952). Getty Center for Education in the Arts. Discipline-Based Arts Education, or DBAE for short, is the method for teaching art in schools that was developed under the auspices of the Getty Center. See, for instance, Alexander and Day (1991) and Dobbs (1993). Four-year-olds who learn calculus. An example of a child with extremely precocious mathematical gifts is described in Feldman(1986). Creativity and material advantages. Occasionally it is claimed that creative persons have no interest in material success; this, in my opinion, is a romanticized exaggeration of the obviously strong intrinsic motivation such people possess. In line with the complexity of their personality, one should not expect that the strong intrinsic motivation of creative individuals needs to exclude an interest in fame and fortune. Recently Sternberg and Lubart (1991) have proposed an “economic” theory of creativity, based on the maxim “buy low, sell high”; in other words, the notion that creativity involves, at least in part, interest in developing unpopular ideas that might eventually catch on. Science students see only the drudgery of the discipline. Whereas students talented in music and the arts report a much more positive quality of experience than average when engaged in music and art, students talented in math and science report a much lower than normal quality of experience when they are doing math and science. In other words, they are less happy, less motivated, and have a less positive selfesteem when working on their talent than when doing other things (Csikszentmihalyi and Schiefele 1992; Csikszentmihalyi, Rathunde, and Whalen 1993). The reason for this is partly that art and music are more immediately enjoyable than math and science; but in large part it is due to our attitudes toward “hard” academic subjects, and the way we teach them. ## CHAPTER 14 Obstacles are internal. Many of these internal obstacles are the result of the fact that our nervous system cannot handle more than a limited amount of information in consciousness at the same time, and so we cannot attend to more than a few things at a time (see Csikszentmihalyi 1978, 1990; Hasher and Zacks 1979; Kahneman 1973; Simon 1969; Treisman and Gelade 1980). Try to be surprised. As we know, creative individuals tend to face experience with openness, bordering on what Goethe called “naïveté.” This suggestion is similar to the one Don Juan gave to his apprentices, a practice he called “stopping the world” (Castaneda 1971). It consists in registering sensory stimuli without labeling them according to culturally defined conventions; for instance, looking at a tree without thinking of it as a “tree,” or letting any previous knowledge about trees enter into consciousness. It turns out that this exercise is extremely difficult, if not impossible to carry out (compare Peirce’s concept of perception). The suggestion to be surprised by what one encounters during the day is a less radical version of “stopping the world.” Try to surprise at least one person. Of course, I am not advocating that one should become obnoxious or pushy. Some individuals need so much attention to confirm their importance—or even existence—that they will do anything to get it: talking loudly, acting flamboyantly, defying conventions, getting involved in risky behavior. The difference between such behavior and what I am suggesting is that the latter is a tool for learning about oneself and the world, a way of broadening one’s repertoire of experiences, a means for generating novelty. When there is nothing specific to do, our thoughts soon return to the most predictable state. The conclusion that the natural state of the mind is chaos is based on my studies with the Experience Sampling Method, which show that when people are alone with nothing to do, their thoughts tend to become disordered and their moods negative (e.g., Csikszentmihalyi 1992; Csikszentmihalyi and Larson 1984; Kubey and Csikszentmihalyi 1990). As the neuropsychologist George Miller said, “The mind survives by ingesting information” (Miller 1983, p. 111); when there is no information to keep it in an ordered state, the mind begins to lose control of attention, at least temporarily. As with most such generalizations, this rule does not apply to everyone: Individuals who have learned to control their minds even in the absence of external inputs of information—by learning a symbolic system and its operations, such as prayer, meditation, mathematics, poetry—can avoid the entropy of solitude, and even enjoy it. The most mundane activities. On the average, we spend almost 40 percent of our waking life doing “maintenance” activities, such as washing, dressing, eating, and cleaning (e.g., Kubey and Csikszentmihalyi 1990). These are not productive activities that generate income or some tangible product, nor are they leisure activities we do because they are inherently enjoyable. Maintenance activities involve routines we must do repeatedly just to survive (e.g., eat) and to get along with others (e.g., wash and dress). Many people feel that this part of life is “wasted” because it is neither fun nor productive. Thus it would improve the quality of life greatly if one were able to transform even a small portion of this wasted time into enjoyable experience. Gardening. A good example of how gardening produces flow is described in a research report of a study conducted in Germany by Dieter Reigber (1995). Relinquishing control over attention. One of the most often heard comments on my concept of psychic energy is that it applies only to Western cultures, and that the highest achievements of Eastern religions and philosophies depend not on the control of attention, but on the contrary—its surrender. I think this objection is based on a misunderstanding of what the process of “surrendering” or “relinquishing” control of attention entails. In my opinion, these processes of surrender are among the most difficult acts of control that consciousness can accomplish. Given the naturally chaotic state of the mind, to achieve the affectless, unfocused consciousness of the mystic requires enormous effort and long training. Therefore, I believe that at least in this respect East and West are similar: In both cultures, the highest psychic accomplishments depend on the control of attention. Microenvironments. How the personal space one creates and the objects one surrounds oneself with affect a person’s self is discussed in Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton (1981) and Rudmin (1991). Learning the dynamics of one’s emotions. The therapeutic use of the Experience Sampling Method to record one’s activities and experiences is described in Delespaul (1995), Delle Fave and Massimini (1992), and deVries (1992). The ESM makes it possible for the psychiatrist or therapist (and, by extension, for the patient also) to assess the patient’s quality of life, and to propose changes in activities and habits that might improve it. The creativity of artists in this century. The argument that modern artists express the lack of trust in values and beliefs previously taken for granted is certainly not a new one; my own small addition to this argument is in Csikszentmihalyi (1992b). Prodigies. The best account of exceptionally gifted children is by Feldman (1986). A recent book by Ellen Winner (1996) summarizes the truths and the myths about the development of gifted children.