## REFERENCES Abrams, J., and C. Zweig, eds. 1991. Meeting the shadow. Los Angeles: St. Martin’s Press. Adlai-Gail, W. 1994. The flow personality and its correlates. Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago. Albert, R. S., ed. 1983. Genius and eminence. New York: Oxford University Press. Albert, R. S., and M. A. Runco. 1986. The achievement of eminence: A model based on a longitudinal study of exceptionally gifted boys and their families. In Conceptions of giftedness, edited by R. J. Sternberg and J. E. Davidson. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 332-60. Alexander, K., and M. Day. 1991. Discipline-based art education: A curriculum sampler. Santa Monica, Calif.: Getty Center for Education in the Arts. Amabile, T M. 1983. The social psychology of creativity. New York: Springer Verlag. .1990. Within you, without you: The social psychology of creativity, and beyond. In Theories of creativity, edited by M. A. Runco and R. S. Albert. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage Publications, pp. 61-91. Andreasen, N. C. 1987. Creativity and mental illness: Prevalence rates in writers and their first-degree relatives. American Journal of Psychiatry 144:1288-92. Arendt, H. 1956. The human condition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Asakawa, K., and M. Csikszentmihalyi. 1995. Quality of experience and internalization of values in Asian American adolescents: An exploration of educational achievements. Submitted for publication. Baer, J. 1993. Creativity and divergent thinking. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum. Barron, F. 1969. Creative person and creative process. New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston. ——. 1988. Putting creativity to work. In The nature of creativity, edited by R. J. Sternberg. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 76-98. Barrow, J. D., and F. J. Tipler. 1986. The anthropic cosmological principle. New York: Oxford University Press. Barsalou, L. W. 1982. Context independent and context dependent information in concepts. Memory and Cognition 10:82-93. Baumrind, D. 1989. Rearing competent children. In Child development today and tomorrow, edited by W. Damon. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, pp. 349-78. Bidwell, C., M. Csikszentmihalyi, L. Hedges, and B. Schneider. Images and experiences of work in adolescence. In press. Block, J. 1971. Lives through time. Berkeley, Calif.: Bancroft Books. —. 1981. Some enduring and consequential structures of personality. In Further explorations in personality, edited by A. I. Rabin, J. Aronoff, A. M. Barclay, and R. A. Zucker. New York: John Wiley and Sons, pp. 27-43. Bloom, B. 1985. Developing talent in young people. New York: Ballantine Books. Bortz, W. M. 1991. We live too short and die too long. New York: Bantam Books. Bourdieu, P. 1980. La capital social. Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Sociales 31:2-4. Brannigan, A. 1981. The social basis of scientific discoveries. New York: Cambridge University Press. Burke, J., and R. Ornstein. 1995. The axemaker’s gift. New York: Putnam. Burckhardt, J. 1926. Die Kultur der Renaissance in Italien. Leipzig. Calvino, I. 1985. Difficult loves. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich. Campbell, D. T. 1960. Blind variation and selective retention in creative thought as in other knowledge processes. Psychological Review 67:380-400. —. 1974. Evolutionary epistemology. In The philosophy of Karl Popper, edited by P. A. Schlipp. La Salle, III.: Open Court, pp. 413-63. . 1995. In what sense does a selectionist model provide epistemological “justification” for scientific belief? Paper presented at The Epistemology Group meeting, The Evolution of Knowledge and Invention, Royal Society of Arts, London, United Kingdom, May 24. Castaneda, C. 1971. A separate reality. New York: Simon & Schuster. Cattell, R. B., and J. E. Drevdahl. 1955. A comparison of the personality profile (16PF) of eminent researchers with that of eminent teachers and administrators. British Journal of Psychology 46:248-61. Cellini, B. 1952. The autobiography of Benvenuto Cellini. Translated by D. B. Guralnik. Cleveland, Ohio: Fine Editions Press. Claridge, G. 1992. Great wits and madness. In Genius and eminence. 2d ed. Edited by R. S. Albert. New York: Pergamon Press, pp. 329-50. Costa, P. T, Jr., and R. R. McCrae. 1978. Objective personality assessment. In The clinical psychology of aging, edited by M. Storandt, I. C. Siegler, and M. F. Elias. New York: Plenum. —. 1984. Personality as a lifelong determinant of well-being. In Emotion in adult development, edited by C. Z. Malatesta and C. E. Izard. Beverly Hills, Calif: Sage, pp. 141-58. Cropley, A. 1990. Creativity and mental health in everyday life. Creativity Research Journal 3:167-78. Cross, P. G., R. B. Cattell, and H. J. Butcher. 1967. The personality pattern of creative artists. British Journal of Educational Psychology 37:292-99. Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1975. Beyond boredom and anxiety. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. —. 1978. Attention and the wholistic approach to behavior. In The stream of consciousness, edited by K. S. Pope and J. L. Singer. New York: Plenum, pp. 335-58. . 1982. Towards a psychology of optimal experience. In Review of personality and social psychology: 3, edited by L. Wheeler. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications, pp. 13-36. —. 1985a. Emergent motivation and the evolution of the self. In Motivation in adulthood, edited by D. Kleiber and M. H. Maehr. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press, pp. 93-113. ——. 1985b. Reflections on enjoyment. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 28:469-97. . 1988a. Society, culture, person: A systems view of creativity. In The nature of creativity, edited by R. J. Sternberg. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 325-39. —. 1988b. Motivation and creativity: Towards a synthesis of structural and energistic approaches to cognition. New Ideas in Psychology 6:159-76. ——. 1990. Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: HarperCollins. —. 1992a. Öffentliche meinung und die psychologie der einsamkeit. In Öffentliche meinung: Theorie, methode, befunde, edited by J. Wilke. Freiburg: Verlag Karl Alber, pp. 31-40. ——. 1992b. Imagining the self: An evolutionary excursion. Poetics 21:153-67. . 1993. The evolving self: A psychology for the third millennium. New York: HarperCollins. . 1994. Memes vs. genes: Notes from the culture wars. In Changing the world, edited by D. H. Feldman, M. Csikszentmihalyi, and H. Gardner. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, pp. 159-72. Csikszentmihalyi, M., and O. Beattie. 1979. Life themes: A theoretical and empirical investigation of their origins and effects. Journal of Humanistic Psychology 19:45-63. Csikszentmihalyi, M., and I. Selega Csikszentmihalyi, eds. 1988. Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness. New York: Cambridge University Press. —. 1993. Family influences on the development of giftedness. In The origins and development of high ability. Chichester, UK: Wiley (Ciba Foundation Symposium 178), pp. 187-206. Csikszentmihalyi, M., and J. W. Getzels. 1973. The personality of young artists: A theoretical and empirical exploration. British Journal of Psychology 64:91-104. Csikszentmihalyi, M., and R. Larson. 1978. Intrinsic rewards in school crime. Crime and Delinquency 24:322-25. ——. 1984. Being adolescent: Conflict and growth in the teenage years. New York: Basic Books. Csikszentmihalyi, M., and F. Massimini. 1985. On the psychological selection of biocultural information. New Ideas in Psychology 3:115-38. Csikszentmihalyi, M., and J. Nakamura. 1989. The dynamics of intrinsic motivation. In Handbook of motivation theory and research. Vol. 3, Goals and Cognitions, edited by R. Ames and C. Ames. New York: Academic Press, pp. 45-71. Csikszentmihalyi, M., and K. Rathunde. 1993. The measurement of flow in everyday life. Nebraska Symposium on Motivation 40:58-97. Csikszentmihalyi, M., and E. Rochberg-Halton. 1981. The meaning of things. New York: Cambridge University Press. Csikszentmihalyi, M., and K. Sawyer. 1995. Creative insight: The social nature of a solitary moment. In The nature of insight, edited by R. J. Sternberg and J. E. Stevenson. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 329-64. Csikszentmihalyi, M., and U. Schiefele. 1992. Arts education, human development, and the quality of experience. In Arts in education. The ninety-first yearbook of the Society for the Study of Education, edited by G. Reimer and R. A. Smith. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 169-91. Csikszentmihalyi, M., and M. Wong. 1991. The situational and personal correlates of happiness: A cross-national comparison. In The social psychology of subjective well-being, edited by F. Strack, M. Argyle, and N. Schwartz. London: Pergamon Press, pp. 193-212. Csikszentmihalyi, M., K. Rathunde, and S. Whalen. 1993. Talented teenagers. New York: Cambridge University Press. Damon, W. 1995. Greater expectations: Overcoming the culture of indulgence in America’s homes and schools. New York: The Free Press. Dawkins, R. 1976. The selfish gene. New York: Oxford University Press. Deci, E. L., and M. Ryan. 1985. Intrinsic motivation and selfdetermination in human behavior. New York: Plenum. Delespaul, P. A., and E. G. 1995. Assessing schizophrenia in daily life. The experience sampling method. Maastricht: UPM. Delle Fave, A., and F. Massimini. 1992. The ESM and the measurement of clinical change: A case of anxiety disorder. In The experience of psychopathology: Investigating mental disorders in natural settings, edited by M. W. de Vries. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 280-99. Dennett, D. C. 1991. Consciousness explained. Boston: Little, Brown. Dennis, W. 1966. Creative productivity between the ages of twenty and eighty years. Journal of Gerontology 21:1-18. deVries, M. W., ed. 1992. The experience of psychopathology: Investigating mental disorders in natural settings. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Diamond, J. 1992. The third chimpanzee. New York: HarperCollins. Dobbs, S. M. 1993. The DBAE handbook. Santa Monica, Calif: The J. P. Getty Trust. Dozier, R. W., Jr. 1992. Codes of evolution. New York: Crown. Dreistadt, R. 1969. The use of analogies in incubation in obtaining insight in creative problem solving. Journal of Psychology 71:158-75. Dweck, C. S. 1986. Motivational processes affecting learning. American Psychologist 41: 1040-48. Eco, U. 1994. Six walks in the fictional woods. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Eiduson, B. T. 1962. Scientists: Their psychological world. New York: Basic Books. Erikson, E. H. 1950. Childhood and society. New York: Norton. ——. 1968. Identity: Youth and crisis. New York: Norton. Eysenck, H. J. 1952. The scientific study of personality. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. ——. 1973. Eysenck on extroversion. New York: John Wiley and Sons. Feldman, D. H. 1980. Beyond universals in cognitive development. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex. ——. 1986. Nature’s gambit. New York: Basic Books. . 1994. Creativity: Proof that development occurs. In Changing the world: A framework for the study of creativity, by D. H. Feldman, M. Csikszentmihalyi, and H. Gardner. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, pp. 85-102. Feldman, D. H., M. Csikszentmihalyi, and H. Gardner. 1994. Changing the world: A framework for the study of creativity. Westport, Conn.: Praeger. Ford, C. M., and D. A. Gioia, eds. 1995. Creative action in organizations. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage Publications. Freeman, M. 1993. Finding the muse: A sociopsychological inquiry into the conditions of artistic creativity. New York: Cambridge University Press. Freud, S. 1947. Leonardo da Vinci: A study in psychosexuality. New York: Random House. —. [1908] 1955. The Moses of Michelangelo. Edited and translated by J. Strachey. The Standard Edition 8:211-38. Gajdusek, D. C. 1995. Early inspiration. Creativity Research Journal 7:341-49. Gallagher, W. 1993. The power of place: How our surroundings shape our thoughts, emotions, and actions. New York: HarperPerennial. Gardner, H. 1988. Creativity: An interdisciplinary perspective. Creativity Research Journal 1:8-26. ——. 1993. Creating minds. New York: Basic Books. ——. 1994. More on private intuitions and public symbol systems. Creativity Research Journal 7:265-75. Gedo, J. 1990. More on creativity and its vicissitudes. In Theories of creativity, edited by M. Runco and R. Albert. Newbury Park, Calif: Sage Publications, pp. 35-45. Getzels, J. W. 1964. Creative thinking, problem-solving, and instruction. In Theories of learning and instruction (63rd yearbook of the National Society for Education), edited by E. R. Hilgard. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 240-67. —. 1975. Problem finding and the inventiveness of solution. Journal of Creative Behavior 9:12-118. —. 1982. The problem of the problem. In Question-forming and response consistency, edited by R. M. Hogarth. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, pp. 37-44. Getzels, J. W., and M. Csikszentmihalyi. 1968. On the roles, values, and performance of future artists: A conceptual and empirical exploration. Sociological Quarterly 9:516-50. ——. 1976. The creative vision. New York: Wiley Interscience. Getzels, J. W., and P. Jackson. 1962. Creativity and intelligence: Explorations with gifted students. New York: J. Wiley and Sons. Gilardoni, L. 1988. Bellagio: An historical perspective. Milan: A. Pizzi Editore. Gilligan, C, J. V Ward, and J. M. Taylor. 1988. Mapping the moral domain: A contribution of women’s thinking to psychological theory and education. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Goertzel, V., and M. G. Goertzel. 1962. Cradles of eminence. Boston: Little, Brown. Gribbin, J., and M, Rees. 1989. Cosmic coincidences: Dark matter, mankind, and anthropic cosmology. New York: Bantam. Grotevant, H. D. 1991. Child development within the family context. In Child development today and tomorrow, edited by W. Damon. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, pp. 34-51. Gruber, H. 1981. Darwin on man. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Gruber, H., and S. N. Davis. 1988. Inching our way up Mount Olympus: The evolving systems approach to creative thinking. In The nature of creativity, edited by R. J. Sternberg. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 243-70. Guilford, J. P. 1950. Creativity. American Psychologist 14:205-8. ——. 1967. The nature of human intelligence. New York: McGraw-Hill. Habermas, J. 1970. On systematically distorted communication. Inquiry 13:360-75. Hadamard, J. 1949. The psychology of invention in the mathematical field. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Hamilton, W. D. 1964. The genetic evolution of social behavior. Journal of Theoretical Biology 7:1-52. Harrington, D. M. 1990. The ecology of human creativity: A psychological perspective. In Theories of creativity, edited by M. Runco and R. S. Albert. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage Publications, pp. 143-69. Harrington, D. M., J. H. Block, and J. Block. 1992. Testing aspects of Carl Rogers’s theory of creative environments: Child-rearing antecedents of creative potential in young adults. In Genius and eminence, edited by R. S. Albert. New York: Pergamon Press, pp. 195-208. Hasher, L., and R. T. Zacks. 1979. Automatic and effortful processes in memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology 108:356-88. Hauser, A. 1951. The social history of art. New York: Vintage. Heath, S. B., and M. W. McLaughlin, eds. 1993. Identity and inner city youth: Beyond ethnicity and gender. New York: Teacher’s College. Hersh, R. and V. John-Steiner. 1993. A visitor to Hungarian mathmatics. Mathmatical Intelligencer 19, no. 2:13-26. Heydenreich, L. H. 1974. Il Primo Rinascimento. Milano: Rizzoli. Hidi, S. 1990. Interest and its contribution as a mental resource for learning. Review of Educational Research 60:549-71. Horn, J. L. 1970. Organization of data on life-span development of human abilities. In Life-span developmental psychology: Research and theory, edited by L. R. Goulet and P. B. Baltes. New York: Academic Press, pp. 423-66. Humboldt, A. von. 1891-93. Cosmos: A sketch of the physical description of the universe. Translated by E. C. Otte. London: George Bell & Sons. Huntington, E. 1945. Mainsprings of civilization. New York: J. Wiley and Sons. Inghilleri, P. 1995. Esperienza soggettiva, personalità, evoluzione culturale. Torino: UTET. Isaksen, S. G., K. B. Dorval, and D. J. Treffinger. 1994. Creative approaches to problem solving. Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall-Hunt. James, W. 1890. Principles of psychology. Vol. 1. New York: Henry Holt. Jamison, K. R. 1989. Mood disorder and patterns of creativity in British writers and artists. Psychiatry 52:125-34. John-Steiner, V. 1985. Notebooks of the mind. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. Johnson-Laird, P. N. 1988. Freedom and constraint in creativity. In The nature of creativity, edited by R. Sternberg. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 202-19. Joseph, L. E. 1990. Gaia: The growth of an idea. New York: St. Martin’s Press. Jung, C. G. 1946. The fight with the shadow. Listener, Nov. 7. —. 1968. Analytical psychology: Its theory and practice. New York: Vintage. ——. 1969. On the nature of the psyche. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. ——. 1973. Memories, dreams, reflections. New York: Pantheon. Kahneman, D. 1973. Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. Klein, G. 1992. Pietà. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. Klein, G., and E. Klein. 1989. How one thing has led to another. Annual Review of Immunology 7:1-33. Klein, G., ed. 1990. Om Kreativitet och Flow. Stockholm: Brombergs. Koestler, A. 1964. The Act of creation. New York: Macmillan. Kosoff, J. 1995. Explaining creativity: The attributional perspective. Creativity Research Journal 8:311-66. Krebs, H. A., and J. H. Shelly. 1975. The creative process in science and medicine. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Kris, E. 1952. Psychoanalytic explorations in art. New York: International Universities Press. Kubey, R., and M. Csikszentmihalyi. 1990. Television and the quality of life. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum. Kuhn, T. S. 1970. The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Labouvie-Vief, G. 1985. Intelligence and cognition. In Handbook of the psychology of aging. 2d ed. Edited by J. E. Birren and K. W. Schaie. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold. Lambert, F. L. 1995. Thermodynamics can be obstructed, the Second Law be damned. Los Angeles, California. Langley, P., H. A. Simon, G. L. Bradshaw, and J. M. Zytkow. 1987. Scientific discovery: Computational exploration of the creative process. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Laumann, E. O., J. H. Gagnon, R. T. Michael, and S. Michaels. 1994. The social organization of sexuality: Sexual practices in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Lehman, H. C. 1953. Age and achievement. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. LeVine, R. 1991. Cultural environments in child development. In Child development today and tomorrow, edited by W. Damon. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, pp. 52-68. Levinson, M. 1994. Citi comes in from the cold. Newsweek, September 26, p. 50. Lorenz, K. 1966. On aggression. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World. Lovelock, J. E. 1979. Gaia: A new look at life on earth. New York: Oxford University Press. MacKinnon, D. W. 1962. The nature and nurture of creative talent. American Psychologist 20:484-95. ——. 1963. Creativity and images of the self. In The study of lives, edited by R. W. White. New York: Atherton, pp. 251-78. —. 1964. The creativity of architects. In Widening horizons in creativity, edited by C. W. Taylor. New York: J. Wiley and Sons. Magyari-Beck, I. 1988. New concepts about personal creativity. Creativity and Innovation Yearbook, 1, Manchester, England: Manchester Business School, pp. 121-26. ——. 1994. Múzsák a Piacon. Budapest: Aula Kiadó. Martindale, C. 1989. Personality, situation, and creativity. In Handbook of Creativity, edited by J. Glover, R. Ronning, and C. R. Reynolds. New York: Plenum, pp. 211-32. —. 1990. The clockwork muse: The predictability of artistic change. New York: Basic Books. Maruyama, M. 1980. Mindscapes and science theories. Current Anthropology 21 (5):589-600. Maslow, A. 1971. The farther reaches of human nature. New York: Viking. Massimini, F. 1979. I Presupposti teoretici e osservativi del paradigma della selezione culturale. Primo contributo: Il doppio sistema ereditario. Milan: Ghedini. —. 1993. I presupposti teoretici del paradigma della selezione culturale umana. In La selezione psicologica umana: Teoria e metodo di analisi, edited by F. Massimini and P. Inghilleri. Milano: Cooperativa Libraria Iulm. Massimini, F., and C. Calegari. 1979. Il contesto normativo sociale. Milano: F. Angeli. Massimini, F., and A. Delle Fave. 1991. Religion and cultural evolution. Zygon 26:27-48. Massimini, F., and P. Inghilleri. 1986. L’Esperienza quotidiana: Teoria e metodo di analisi. Milano: Angeli. ——. 1993. La Selezione psicologica umana: Teoria e metodo di analisi. Milano: Cooperativa Libraria Iulm. Massimini, F., M. Csikszentmihalyi, and A. Delle Fave. 1988. Flow and biocultural evolution. In Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness, edited by M. Csikszentmihalyi and I. Selega Csikszentmihalyi. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 60-84. Mayr, E. 1947. Systematics and the origin of species. New York: Columbia University Press. McKay, M., and P. Fanning. 1988. Self-esteem. New York: St. Martin’s Press. Medawar, P. 1967. The Art of the soluble. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Milgram, R. 1990. Creativity: An idea whose time has come and gone? In Theories of creativity, edited by M. A. Runco and R. S. Albert. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage, pp. 215-33. Miller, G. A. 1983. Informavore. In The study of information, edited by F. Machlup and U. Mansfield. New York: J. Wiley and Sons. Mockros, C. 1995. The social construction of extraordinary selves: A lifespan study of creative individuals. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, The University of Chicago. Mockros, C, and M. Csikszentmihalyi. 1995 (in press). The social construction of creative lives. In Social creativity. Vol. I. Edited by R. Purser and A. Montuori. Creskill, N.Y.: Hampton Press. Moneta, G., and M. Csikszentmihalyi. 1995 (in press). The effect of perceived challenges and skills on the quality of subjective experience. The Journal of Personality. Noelle-Neumann, E. 1985. Identifying opinion leaders. Paper presented at 38th ESOMAR Conference, Wiesbaden, Germany. Oden, M. H. 1968. The fulfillment of promise: 40-year follow-up of the Terman gifted group. Genetic Psychology Monographs 77:3-93. O’Neil, J. 1993. The paradox of success. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons. Ornstein, R. 1986. Multimind: A new way of looking at human behavior. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Over, R. 1989. Age and scholar impact. Psychology of Aging 4:222- 25. Parnes, S. J. 1967. Creative behavior guidebook. New York: Scribners. Peirce, C. S. 1931-35. The collected works of Charles Sanders Peirce. Vols. 1-6. Edited by C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Perkins, D. N. 1981. The mind’s best work. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Piechowski, M., and K. Cunningham. 1985. Patterns of overexcitability in a group of artists. Journal of Creative Behavior 19:153-74. Policastro, E. 1995. Creative intuition: An integrative review. Creativity Research Journal 8:99-113. Popper, K. 1959. The logic of scientific discovery. New York: Basic. Rathunde, K. (in press). Family context and talented adolescents’ optimal experience in school-related activities. Journal of Research in Adolescence. Rathunde, K., and M. Csikszentmihalyi. 1993. Undivided interest and the growth of talent: A longitudinal study of adolescents. Journal of Youth and Adolescence 22:1-21. Reigber, D. 1995. Glück im Garten—Erfolg in Markt. Offenburg: Burda. Renninger, K. A., S. Hidi, and A. Krapp, eds. 1992. The role of interest in learning and development. Hillside, N.J.: Erlbaum. Reti, L., ed. 1974. The unknown Leonardo. New York: McGraw-Hill. Robinson, R. 1988. Project and prejudice: Past, present, and future in human development. Human Development 31:158-72. Roe, A. 1946. The personality of artists. Educational and Psychological Measurement 6:401-8. ——. 1951. A psychological study of physical scientists. Genetic Psychology Monographs 43:123-235. ——. 1952. The making of a scientist. New York: Dodd, Mead. Rogers, C. 1951. Client-centered therapy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Róheim, G. 1945. The eternal ones of the dream: A psychoanalytic interpretation of Australian myth and ritual. New York: International Universities Press. Root-Bernstein, R. S. 1989. Discovering, inventing, and solving problems at the frontiers of science. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Root-Bernstein, R. S., M. Bernstein, and H. C. Gamier. 1995. Correlations between avocations, scientific style, work habits, and professional impact of scientists. Creativity Research Journal 8:115-37. Rothenberg, A. 1979. The emerging goddess: The creative process in art, science, and other fields. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. —. Creativity, mental health, and alcoholism. Creativity Research Journal 3:179-201. Rudmin, F. W., ed. 1991. To have possessions. Corte Madera, Calif: Select Press. Rumelhart, D. E., J. L. McClelland, and the PDP Research Group, eds. 1986. Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Vol. 1, Foundations. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Runco, M. A. 1991. Divergent thinking. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex. Runco, M. A., ed. 1994. Problem finding, problem solving, and creativity. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex. Russ, S. W. 1993. Affect & creativity. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum. Ryback, J. M., P. A. Roodin, and W. J. Hoyer. 1995. Adult development and aging. 3d ed. Dubuque, Iowa: Brown & Benchmark. Salk, J. 1983. Anatomy of reality: Merging intuition and reason. New York: Columbia University Press. Schaie, K. W. 1990. The optimization of cognitive functioning in old age: Prediction based on cohort-sequential and longitudinal data. In Longitudinal research and the study of successful (optimal) aging, edited by P. B. Baltes and M. Baltes. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 94-117. ——. 1994. The course of adult intellectual development. American Psychologist 49:304-13. Schiefele, U. 1991. Interest, learning, and motivation. Educational Psychologist 26:299-323. Schiefele, U., and M. Csikszentmihalyi. 1994. Interest and the quality of experience in classrooms. European Journal of Psychology of Education 9(3):251-70. Schneider, B., J. A. Hieschima, S. Lee, and S. Plank. 1992. East Asian academic success in the United States: Family, school, and community explanation. In Cross-cultural roots of minority child development, edited by P. M. Greenfield and R. R. Cocking. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, pp. 323-50. Schweber, S. S. 1994. QED and the men who made it: Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Sears, P., and R. R. 1980. 1,528 little geniuses and how they grew. Psychology Today, Feb., pp. 29-43. Semenzato, C. 1964. Giotto. New York: Barnes & Noble. Simon, H. A. 1969. Sciences of the artificial Boston: MIT Press. —. 1988. Creativity and motivation: A response to Csikszentmihalyi. New Ideas in Psychology 6:177-81. Simonton, D. K. 1975. Sociocultural context and individual creativity: A transhistorical time-series analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 32:1119-33. ——. 1984. Genius, creativity, and leadership: Historiometric inquiries. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. —. 1988. Age and outstanding achievement: What do we know after a century of research? Psychological Bulletin 104:163-80. —. 1990a. Scientific genius: A psychology of science. New York: Cambridge University Press. ——. 1990b. Political pathology and societal creativity. Creativity Research Journal 3:85-99. . 1990c. Creativity and wisdom in aging. In Handbook of the psychology of aging. 3d ed. Edited by J. E. Birren and K. W. Schaie. San Diego, Calif: Academic Press, pp. 320-29. Smith, R. A., ed. 1989. Discipline-based art education. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. Spence, J. T., and R. L. Helmreich. 1978. Masculinity and Femininity. Austin: University of Texas Press. Stayer, M. S., ed. 1988. Newton’s dream. Kingston, Ont.: McGill-Queen’s University Press. Stein, M. 1953. Creativity and culture. Journal of Psychology 36:311-22. Sternberg, R. J. 1985. Implicit theories of intelligence, creativity, and wisdom. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 49:607-27. —. 1986. A triarchic theory of intellectual giftedness. In Conceptions of giftedness, edited by R. J. Sternberg and J. E. Davidson. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 223-43. Sternberg, R. J., ed. 1988. The nature of creativity. New York: Cambridge University Press. Sternberg, R. J., and J. E. Davidson, eds. 1995. The nature of insight. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Sternberg, R. J., and T. I. Lubart. 1991. An investment theory of creativity and human development. Human Development 34:1-31. Stevenson, H. W., and J. W. Stigler. 1992. The learning gap: Why our schools are failing. New York: Touchstone. Sue, S., and S. Okazaki. 1990. Asian-American educational achievements: A phenomenon in search of an explanation. American Psychologist 45:913-20. Teilhard de Chardin, P. 1965. The phenomenon of man. New York: Harper & Row. Terman, L. M. 1925. Genetic studies of genius. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press. Therivel, W. A. 1993. The challenged personality as a precondition for) sustained creativity. Creativity Research Journal 6:413-24. ——. 1995. Long-term effect of power on creativity. Creativity Research Journal 8:173-92. Torrance, E. P. 1962. Guiding creative talent. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. . 1988. Creativity as manifested in testing. In The nature of creativity, edited by R. J. Sternberg. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp.43-75. Treisman, A. M., and G. Gelade. 1980. A feature integration theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology 12:97-136. Vaillant, G. E. 1993. The wisdom of the ego. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Vasari, G. [1550] 1959. Lives of the most eminent painters, sculptors, and architects. New York: The Modern Library. Wachhorst, W. 1981. Thomas Alva Edison: An American myth. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Wallas, G. 1926. The art of thought. New York: Harcourt-Brace. Watson, J. 1980. The double helix: A personal account of the discovery of the structure of DNA. New York: Norton. Weber, R. J., and D. N. Perkins. 1992. Inventive minds. New York: Oxford University Press. Wells, A. 1988. Self-esteem and optimal experience. In Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness, edited by M. Csikszentmihalyi and I. Selega Csikszentmihalyi. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 327-41. Westby, E. L., and V. L. Dawson. 1995. Creativity: Asset or burden in the classroom? Creativity Research Journal 8:1-10. Westfall, R. S. 1980. Never at rest: A biography of Sir Isaac Newton. New York: Cambridge University Press. White, R. W. 1959. Motivation reconsidered: The concept of competence. Psychological Review 66:297-333. Wigner, E. 1992. The recollections of Eugene P. Wigner. New York: Plenum Press. Wilson, E. O. 1975. Sociobiology: The new synthesis. Boston: Belknap Press. —. 1984. Biophilia: The human bond with other species. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Winner, E. 1996. Gifted children: Myths and realities. New York: Basic Books. Zajonc, R. B. 1976. Family configuration and intelligence. Science 192:227-35. Zuckerman, H., and J. R. Cole. 1994. Research strategy in science: A preliminary inquiry. Creativity Research Journal 7: 391-405. Zuckerman, H., and J. Lederberg. 1986. Forty years of genetic recombination with bacteria: A post-mature discovery. Nature 324:629- 31.