Appendix B # The National Accounting Framework he essential national account is a series of definitions about how national income is constituted and how it is spent. It is a simple and useful method available for describing the structure of an economy. For colonial India, the basic national accounts needs slight modifications. In this appendix, this modified accounting system is explained first. Next, it is shown how the analytical arguments of Chapter 7 can be simply stated in accounting language. The national accounts deal with a set of 'flow' variables. That is, these variables are measured over a period of time, for example, income per year or saving per year. Five main definitions constitute the system. These are about (a) how national product is constituted, (b) how income is spent, (c) balance between saving and investment, (d) balance between government income and expenditure, and (d) balance between inflow and outflow in transactions with the rest of the world. By convention, national accounts are developed in such a way that every flow appears twice in the system, once showing where it arises from, and once describing how it is used. Whether this convention has been followed, that is, whether the complete system has explained every variable's origin and destination, is tested simply by adding up the definitional equations, which must add to zero. ## (a) National Product Goods and services produced in the economy, excluding goods and services used up as raw material in the production of other goods, form the Gross Domestic Product or GDP at market prices. It is made up of 'GDP at factor cost' (Y) plus the various direct and indirect taxes paid to the government (T). GDP is the most important component of the income of a nation. GDP consists of four main types of goods and services. These go to meet consumption (C), investment (I), government demand (G1), and export (X). If the country receives foreign investment, we can write total investment as $( \mathrm { I } + \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { i n } } )$ , where I stands for investment goods demanded by domestic producers, and $\mathrm { N _ { i n } }$ goods demanded by foreign investors. Finally, consumption, investment, government expenditure or export can not only be met from output of the nation, but also fròm goods and services imported (M). Combining these definitions we can write: $$
\mathrm { ( Y + T ) + M = C + ( I + N _ { i n } ) + G 1 + X }\tag{B.1}
$$ $$
\mathrm { o r }
$$ $$
\Upsilon = \mathsf C + ( \mathrm { I } + \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { i n } } ) + ( \mathrm { G 1 - T } ) + ( \mathsf X - \mathrm { M } )\tag{B.2}
$$ The second expression shows government budget and foreign transactions separately. ## (b) National Income Expenditure must be equal to income. GDP net of taxes is the main component of national income. Apart from that, citizens can also receive income from abroad $( \mathrm { F _ { i n } } )$ , or have to make payments to foreigners for various services $( \mathrm { F _ { o u t } } )$ The net factor income from abroad is $( \mathrm { F _ { i n } - F _ { o u t } } )$ . Added to the GDP net of taxes, the total gives us disposable national income. This income can be either consumed (C), or saved in the form of different financial assets. Four types of financial asset have been historically relevant for India: government securities sold at home (B1), net import of gold and silver $( \mathrm { M } _ { \mathrm { g o l d } } - \mathrm { X } _ { \mathrm { g o l d } } )$ , deposits or securities with the private sector (S), and foreign investment abroad $\left( \Nu _ { \mathrm { o u t } } \right)$ .We can write the income-expenditure balance as: $$
\mathbf { C } + \mathbf { S } + \mathbf { N } _ { \mathrm { o u t } } + \mathbf { B } \mathbf { 1 } + ( \mathbf { M } _ { \mathbf { g o l d } } - \mathbf { X } _ { \mathbf { g o l d } } ) = \mathbf { Y } + ( \mathbf { F } _ { \mathrm { i n } } - \mathbf { F } _ { \mathrm { o u t } } )\tag{B.3}
$$ ## (c) Saving-Investment Investment by domestic investors must be equal to deposits or securities left with the private sector (S), that is, $$
\mathrm { I } = \mathrm { S }\tag{B.4}
$$ ## (d) Public Finance Government expenditure must equal government receipts. There were two main types of government expenditure in British India: expenditure in India (G1) and expenditure abroad (G2). The two most important types of government expenditure abroad were pensions paid in sterling to retired employees, and interest on public debt raised in London. The government can finance its expenditure by three means: current revenues (the bulk of which are raised in taxes (T)) borrowings from abroad (B2), and borrowings at home (B1). We can write: $$
\mathbf { G } \mathbf { 1 } + \mathbf { G } \mathbf { 2 } = \mathbf { T } + \mathbf { B } \mathbf { 1 } + \mathbf { B } \mathbf { 2 }\tag{B.5}
$$ ## (e) External Transactions or Balance of Payments Receipts in foreign currency must equal payments in foreign currency. There were four main heads of external transactions in British India, (a) net export, (b) net capital movement, (c) net export of gold, and (d) net factor receipts from abroad. The symbol for each one of these elements has already been introduced. We can write the balance of payments as: $$
[ \mathrm { X - M } ] + [ ( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { i n } } - \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { o u t } } ) + \mathrm { B } 2 ] + [ \mathrm { X } _ { \mathrm { g o l d } } - \mathrm { M } _ { \mathrm { g o l d } } ] + [ ( \mathrm { F } _ { \mathrm { i n } } - \mathrm { F } _ { \mathrm { o u t } } ) - \mathrm { G } 2 ] = 0\tag{B.6}
$$ The four items under square brackets are, respectively, commodity trade balance, net capital movement, net gold export, and net receipts on account of services. In British India, the first two items were usually positive, and the second two were usually negative. These five definitional statements complete the system. Let us write them together. $$
\bf \cdot Y = c + ( I + N _ { i n } ) + ( G 1 - T ) + ( X - M )\tag{B.2}
$$ $$
\mathbf { C } + \mathbf { S } + \mathbf { N } _ { \mathrm { o u t } } + \mathbf { B } \mathbf { 1 } + ( \mathbf { M } _ { \mathrm { g o l d } } - \mathbf { X } _ { \mathrm { g o l d } } ) = \mathbf { Y } + ( \mathbf { F } _ { \mathrm { i n } } - \mathbf { F } _ { \mathrm { o u t } } )\tag{B.3}
$$ $$
{ \bf I } = { \bf S }\tag{B.4}
$$ $$
\mathrm { G 1 } + \mathrm { G 2 } = \mathrm { T } + \mathrm { B 1 } + \mathrm { B 2 }\tag{B.5}
$$ $$
[ \mathrm { X - M } ] + [ ( \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { i n } } - \mathrm { N } _ { \mathrm { o u t } } ) + \mathrm { B } 2 ] + [ \mathrm { X } _ { \mathrm { g o l d } } - \mathrm { M } _ { \mathrm { g o l d } } ] + [ ( \mathrm { F } _ { \mathrm { i n } } - \mathrm { F } _ { \mathrm { o u t } } ) - \mathrm { G } 2 ] = 0\tag{B.6}
$$ It can be checked that this account is 'balanced', that is, if the left-hand and right-hand sides are added up, all items cancel out. The correspondence between the text in Chapter 7 and the system described here can be shown simply by means of Table B.1. TABLE B.1
<table><tr><td colspan="2">The National Accounts</td></tr><tr><td>National account</td><td>Text section in Chapter 7</td></tr><tr><td>National Product</td><td>&#x27;National income&#x27; and &#x27;Composition of national income: By type of product&#x27;</td></tr><tr><td>Income-expenditure Saving-investment Government account</td><td>as above &#x27;Saving and investment</td></tr><tr><td>Balance of payments</td><td>Public finance&#x27; &#x27;Balance of payments&#x27;</td></tr></table> Most of the arguments about growth and stagnation in Chapter 7 can be simply illustrated using the national accounts system. For example, the Story 1, that colonial policy was responsible for low levels of income and investment, boils down to three short statements. First, given total government receipts, a larger G2 must lead to a lower G1, or government expenditure in India. Second, for a given net receipt of sterling from abroad, a larger G2 implies lower M or lower capacity to import. Third, in the 1920s, overvalued exchange might have depressed export (X) and encouraged import (M), which would mean a smaller Y than that under a flexible exchange rate regime. One of the hypotheses stated under Story 2 is that, other things remaining the same, if $\mathbf { M } _ { \mathrm { g o l d } }$ becomes larger, two effects can follow. First, savings usable for productive investment (S) can fall. And second, import (M), a large component of which were machinery, can fall. Both are adverse for investment and economic growth. ## READINGS This topic was dealt with in Chapter 7. See the readings list of Chapter 7.