## PART 2

# FROM STYLE TO TASTE

# Transitions to the Bourgeois Stylistic Regime

The laws of taste have this fortunate quality—they accommodate themselves perfectly to the diverse états and they are applicable to all degrees of fortune.¹

The duration of a national taste is that of a phase of a civilization.²

In the history of art, each century or each reign has its style.3

These three citations summarize the complicated relation between style and taste that arose following the Revolution. Taste came to be understood simultaneously as defined by class and wealth, and as linked to the nation as a whole, at least as long as its whole mode of life held. Style was regime-bound (in a monarchical system) or time-bound (in a republican system). The complex and varied positions on taste and style resulted from the rich and productive chaos nineteenth-century France inherited from the Revolution concerning the fundamental concepts of representation, nation, and state. With the destruction of absolute monarchy came the end of a system of social representation and economic organization as well as a political order. The nation and the state were no longer to be embodied in the king; the ruler, the state, and the nation could no longer be represented by the king's things. After 1789 people would no longer bow to the king's knife and fork but would come instead to pay homage to the flag, a much more abstract symbol of the nation and the state. And, as the abbé Sièyes put it at the beginning of the century, ‘in the social state [l’état social] all is representation. It is to be found everywhere' rather than concentrated in the person of the king.⁴

Determining what it meant to be represented politically and socially and what nurtured the welfare of the nation, given the overthrow of the old system, became dominant problems of the century. The king as father had held the responsibility for the provisioning of his nation-children, but in the year III or 1794, Sièyes argued, "representation is the mother of manufacture and commerce as it is of economic and political progress [progrès libéraux]."5 What was that to mean concretely? The problem of representation might also be understood as a problem of mediation—what or who was to mediate between the individual, the state, and the society? The mode of mediation that rapidly came to replace corporations and orders as the vehicle for the social (and sometimes political and juridical) representation of the individual was class. Classes were defined not only, and perhaps not even largely, by relation to the means of production, but also by knowledge and taste. With the shift from a society of orders to a society of classes, from an absolute monarchy to a constitutional monarch, came a shift from style as constitutive of political power to taste as constitutive of social place, leaving unresolved the relation of style, taste, and the nation.

In the first half of the nineteenth century, styles continued to be made by the interaction between the court and networks of production and distribution no longer tied to the court. The creation of a putatively free market in goods and in labor, the political weakness of the crown, the development of the bourgeoisie as a political and social force, and transformations in training meant that the system of production no longer produced a hegemony of one style. It was the very multiplicity of styles that created the possibility of taste as a means of constructing social meaning. It now appeared possible for all classes to be represented by their taste, rather than having their place in a society of orders and their relation to the king revealed by their style.

Thus, the French Revolution, while not eradicating monarchical regimes in France for all time, eliminated the possibility of absolute monarchy and broke the dynamic of the absolutist stylistic regime. With the destruction of the corporate system, the closing of the royal workshops, and the elaboration of the mythic goal of a ‘free'market in labor and goods, the state's relation to objects, to style, and to the aesthetic was necessarily transformed. Imbricated within this aesthetic transformation—if not caused by it—were new dynamics of how social and political power were constituted and deployed.

Successive imperial and monarchical governments tried, of course, with varying degrees of success to sustain a relation to style like that of the absolutist monarchies of the Old Regime. Napoleon was able to patronize a distinctively First Empire style along the lines of the courtly stylistic regime, but his was also the last regime to do so. The styles associated with the subsequent restoration monarchies did not dominate the market but competed with other styles. After the First Empire, styles were plural rather than singular, and the end of unitary style was itself indicative of the distance of nineteenth-century monarchies and empires from the absolutism of the Old Regime. Postrevolutionary monarchies and empires could not use style to signify their own power as had been possible before 1789; the styles they patronized were simulacra of a more regal era. For these were anachronistic monarchies coexisting with a society and polity dominated by the bourgeoisie (rather than by the court and aristocracy), challenged periodically by revolutions, and interspersed among republican regimes. Thus, the period from the First to the Third Republic, a transitional one between absolutism and republicanism, was characterized by the waning importance of the direct political usages of furniture and design and the onset of their social use.

Transforming the social as well as the ideological basis for political hegemony, the Revolution brought to political and social prominence for the duration of the century the elite group most commonly called the bourgeoisie. Its members did not work with their hands, work for hourly or piece wages, or have particles before their names. The bourgeoisie had no single political, religious, and philosophical outlook, yet within the bourgeoisie from the 183os onward were identifiable, if conflicting, bourgeois positions on the newly framed ‘social question,’ by which members distinguished themselves first from the aristocracy and later in the century from the working class.

The ´social question emerged from the visible hardships, glaring inequities, and urban growth accompanying industrial capitalism, in tandem with the breakdown of earlier understandings of responsibility for the poor. The bourgeoisie's search for a solution to the ‘social" problem entailed the elaboration of three—at times incompatible—theories: social economy with its rationalist vision of the household; moral economy with its hope of creating social peace through the universal imposition of bourgeois norms of family behavior; and political economy with its philosophy of noninterventionism. Out of these competing philosophies emerged a complicated and contradictory web of discourses.

These discourses were not born ex nihilo; indeed, the seeds of all may be found in texts dating from the ancien régime. Yet they were distinctively postrevolutionary. The intellectual roots of political, social, and moral economy were deep; the dynamic of their development into social and political movements, policies, and practices came in the revolutionary rupture and transformations of the first thirty years of the nineteenth century. And throughout the century these discourses were critical in framing interventions by philanthropists and the state, on the one hand, and, on the other, artisanal and working-class interventions into the domain of the aesthetic and the everyday.

The notions of social utility and of a social domain were also results of the Revolution, which ended absolutism's paternalist metaphor (although not, of course, paternalism itself) for social and political relations. The regicide in 1793—which was also a parricide—forced a reconceptualization of the metaphorical apparatus of the state. The culture of production based on a metaphor of masculine kinship could not survive the beheading of the father, and much of the century was marked by the quest to replace that system with some other. The task required new means of training both artisans and consumers, a task complicated by a liberal state that frowned on state intervention. Recourse to the conception of ‘the social" marked off a space from the political—neither public nor private—to assure the reproduction and stability of the state and allow it to intervene, although only in carefully mediated ways.

The innovators in the construction of the social were private philanthropists, intellectuals, and individuals I call the "taste professionals." They worked through universal expositions, schools, and libraries in their attempts tomake" the working class. New institutions were to replace the culture of production, creating a specifically working-class repertoire that differentiated the producers according to the technical skills they possessed. Limitations on working-class knowledge and the invention and the imposition of an ostensibly working-class style were to make the class itself.

The bourgeois making of the working class had, however, some unexpected outcomes, including stimulating a sense of shared working-class interests in opposition to the bourgeoisie. Artisans used the universal expositions of the Second Empire to express their desire to create beauty and their right to creative labor as well as authorship. In so doing, they kept the culture of production briefly alive. The other major (and more enduring) site of artisanal expression was trade union activity, where through the languages of their mobilization, working-class men participated in the destruction of the culture of production and in a definition of working-class manhood that excluded fine aesthetic training and creative labor. Paradoxically, perhaps, in the context of unions working-class men set the stage for their social participation and representation as consumers rather than producers. That is, their focus on increased wages and shorter hours and the abdication of creativity and knowledge left them dependent on leisure and consumption for self-expression and satisfaction.

Meanwhile, the ideological move toward a free market in goods and services would eventually transform relations of production and distribution fundamentally. Both the division of labor and the specialization of manufacturing gradually increased early in the century, and the expansion of production and distribution already appeared to promise democratized access to goods. The ending of sumptuary legislation together with the prospect of an abundance of goods appeared both exciting and threatening to contemporaries. Capitalist organization of production and distribution meant that the bourgeoisie could envision representing themselves, claiming a collective identity, through goods. And indeed, by the 182os, bourgeois women were already being cast in the role of domestic decorators whose interiors were to be carefully differentiated from the classes above and those below.

Embedded in all these changes——and contradictions—were the seeds of the bourgeois stylistic regime that would develop in the last decades of the century. That development had to wait on the consolidation of the economic and political power of the bourgeoisie, the definitive establishment of a republican regime, the development of marketing and the expansion of production. There was nonetheless—even in this earlier period—a perception of danger in this possibility of an increased availability ofthings." Just as ´inappropriate" knowledge could cause working-class producers to have ′inappropriate' aspirations, the logic ran, so the possession of the wrong things could cause working-class consumers to step out of their place. The taste professionals conjured a working-class style to compensate for the working class's ‘lack of taste" in consumption, just as they imagined a working-class curriculum to compensate for the artisans' ‘lack of taste in production. By the last twenty years of the century, the simultaneous paradoxes of, on the one hand, universal manhood suffrage and the need to educate the working class to responsible citizenship and, on the other, expanding productive capacity and the need to create an adequate domestic market would pose problems for this system. But for this, transitional, moment the focus was on keeping people in their places through knowledge and taste.