# PART 3

# THE BOURGEOIS STYLISTIC REGIME

Representation, Nation, State, and the Everyday

Yes, things animated by an artistic spark are gifted with a personal existence.... They live ... but they ... also imprint us with their spirit. They are ours, but we are also theirs.... A desk understood in that way is more than a comrade, a companion of every day; it is a real friend, and perhaps even a literary friend, a collaborator.1

This animist spirit expressed by Rioux de Maillou in the 188os marked part of the new place of objects in the constitution of the world in the late nineteenth century. If they contained ‘an artistic spark,’ domestic objects were alive, shaping how their owners (rather than their makers) lived. Furniture could now be one's friend, represent one's position in the social world, keep one's family safe, assure one's heritage, and help constitute the nation itself. Much was being asked of ‘things." Yet this was still not a world of mass consumption, in part because it is doubtful that the masses, in France at least, had the means with which to constitute meaning through the acquisition and deployment of things. Equally salient was the role still attributed to labor—"the artistic spark we saw above. In a world of mass consumption, the labor that produced such an object would become invisible, and the object's meaning would be divorced from that of labor. That world would not arrive in France until at least the interwar years, if not the 1950s.

I mark the period from the 188os until at least the First World War as the bourgeois stylistic regime to differentiate it from earlier courtly and transitional eras and the world of mass consumption that followed. The period was one of representative government elected by universal manhood suffrage, and the dominant social group behind and within the regime was the bourgeoisie. Individuals of noble lineage were still of social and political import, but they functioned within a laissez-faire republic of industrial capitalism. Individuals who worked with their hands could participate in this system and at times move it to their will, albeit as an opposition force.

As we noted in part 2, fear that the lower classes could acquire furniture too much like that of the bourgeoisie had been prevalent since the 185os. But in the early and middle years of the nineteenth century, the vast majority of Parisians did not have enough disposable income to justify that fear. The taste professionals were responding less to a reality of emulation than to its awful possibility. Had that situation changed in the late nineteenth century? Was the late nineteenth to early twentieth century period in France one of mass consumption? I would argue, insofar as mass consumption involves not just the acquisition of goods but their frequent replacement, as well as shopping as a leisure-time identity and group-forming activity, that—at least as far as expensive items like furniture were concerned—the turn of the century was not a period of mass, but of bourgeois, consumption.

The ideological investments, intellectual difficulties, and resulting irresolution of the standard-of-living debate keep us from determining whether capitalism and industrialization improved the material means of the majority of the population. Even the more modest task of assessing the popular classes' ability to buy furniture is daunting, but some parameters may be established. It is difficult to estimate the real incomes of working-class people and determine how consumers spent their money. On the one hand, a pair of studies published in 1898 and 191o by Lucien March stated that the standard of living had indeed improved and that more people had more disposable income with which to enjoy the fruits of the expanding economy.² On the other hand, an investigation in 1907 demonstrated that families headed by unskilled and service workers spent more than 8o percent of their yearly income on food and rent, and that artisans in the same period spent about 65 percent of their income on perishable necessities. Another study from the same year gave an even bleaker image of the disposable income of a Parisian menuisier-ébéniste's family: they were in debt at the end of the year without buying any durables at all. Adeline Daumard confirms this pessimistic image of Parisians' poverty with an example: ‘the room of the silk salesman in the rue Montmartre was furnished with only the indispensable pieces of furniture, lacking even an armchair. 'The retired shopkeeper, if he had a little margin, would add to his armoire, bed, and chest of drawers—the basic furnishings—armchairs, secrétaire, and sometimes a 'room set,'that is to say a sofa with matching armchairs and chairs, that allowed him to receive intimate friends.'3

Working-class families did invest once in a lifetime in furnishings—at the moment of marriage—or again perhaps, if their fortunes considerably improved. The last decade of the century saw the opening of a significant number of stores catering to a working-class public.4 Whatever their dreams, few laborers could afford the frequent refurbishing that characterized bourgeois households. Lenard Berlanstein agrees and notes that those wage earners buying durable goods were more inclined to spend their money on clothing and on food and drink in bars and cafés than on furniture and other decorations for the home.5 This perception mirrors bourgeois conceptions of the period, but its validity remains uncertain.

Further complicating our view of economic possibility and aspiration is the fact that average household incomes among the petite bourgeoisie in this period were no higher than among those in artisanal occupations, yet petit-bourgeois households spent their money very differently. Unlike couples in the working class, Berlanstein states, they augmented their relative disposable income by marrying later and having fewer children. They did not invest heavily in their children's futures and spent most of what they earned on rent, furnishings, clothing, and leisure.6 The petit bourgeois were interlopers in the bourgeois world of representation. Thus one of the strengths of this bourgeois regime was persuading those who aspired to its ranks to consume in a bourgeois fashion, while excluding those who did not do so.

Introducing a moment of bourgeois hegemony, the 188os led to the consolidation of the French nation, French state, and French empire; the establishment of the Third Republic in 1871 and the strengthening of French republicanism during the next decade marked a new step in this story. The 188os saw the development of a new logic of consumption and its relation to social and political representation. To talk about a ‘logic of consumption is not, however, to imply a functionalist explanation.7 Consumption's simultaneous location in economic, political, and social worlds necessarily produced historically specific contradictions and paradoxes— within as well as between each of these domains. In the world of the economy the capitalist ideal sometimes required maximum consumer expenditure so as to stimulate production, and sometimes limited consumer spending so as to liberate capital for investment or taxation. In the political world the stability of the state depended on both a universalized Frenchness and strong class differentiation through goods. In the social world, women's and men's different forms of simultaneous dependence and independence produced conflicting goals for, and patterns of, consumption. Bourgeois women were to consume appropriately for their family, class, and nation yet, by the end of the century, were to do so through the expression of their individuality. Bourgeois men were supposed to marry and have children, to reach immortality through their name and their lineage. Yet that was not enough; they were also supposed to be innovative and creative, to achieve immortality through the work they did. They were to represent their families in the outside world and yet inhabit a domestic space that they paid for but did not directly manage. These tensions, contradictions, and paradoxes grew from efforts to negotiate the complex relations of state, nation, and capitalism under a democratic republican regime.

Paradoxically, the furniture that embodied the dominant style of this republican period was historicist pastiche—that is, new versions of ancien régime-style furniture. While historicist pastiche was also popular in England, Germany, and the United States, styles of past epochs did not constitute a repertoire out of which the bourgeoisie could effect subtle distinctions within their class or from other classes, or make bourgeois history as they did in late nineteenth-century France.8 Industrial capitalism evoked in French, English, and German consumers a similar fascination with the styles of a pre-industrial age, yet the French experience of the Revolution was unique. The dramatic end of the ancien régime in France, combined with the particular course of history in the first seventy years of the century, made the French manifestation of the general stylistic phenomenon of historicist pastiche distinctive.

Analysis of this phenomenon—the dominance of historicist pastiche as bourgeois style in France—offers a privileged point of access to the restructuring of relations between nation and state, the social and the political, the bourgeoisie and the other classes, and men and women during the Third Republic. The popularity of historicist pastiche cannot be explained by the incompetence or the cowardice of the consumers, as some contemporaries claimed.9 Consumers, distributors, and many taste professionals held historicist pastiche to be the appropriate bourgeois style. That consensus resulted from the fact that this particular form of historicist furniture was a uniquely appropriate response to the dilemmas facing French bourgeois society as a result of the complex interaction of the process of legitimizing the Third Republic, the revolutionary legacy, the development of industrial capitalism, and the particular problem of bourgeois class formation in the last years of the nineteenth century.