# Preface

No More Rules has its starting point in a close engagement with graphic design of the postmodern era that began, for me, in the early 198os. It deals with recent events in design history, but it is not a history as such. It doesn't set out to argue that there shouldn't be any more rules in graphic design, only that during this period many designers, including some influential ones, have proceeded as though this were the case. Contemplating the mass of material and reviewing how it has been treated in other accounts, often by individual designer and by stylistic tendency, it seemed most useful to identify some key themes in design's rule-defying relationship with postmodernism - origins, deconstruction, appropriation, technology, authorship and opposition - and organize the book on this basis. Some of the examples shown and considered here, and some of the ideas and arguments discussed, were selected because they played a central role in design thinking during this period. Any critical survey that did not include them would be making a serious oversight. Others feature because they are representative of approaches that became typical.

What made these years so stimulating for someone observing and writing about graphic design was the high level of discussion that the work generated, particularly in the late 198os and early 199os when many of these ideas were novel and unfamiliar in design circles and the technology was changing rapidly. I am especially indebted to a number of designers and design writers who, in different ways, have played a significant role in the development of my own thinking about this material: Ellen Lupton, J.Abbott Miller, Robin Kinross, Neville Brody, Peter Saville, Rudy VanderLans, Michael Rock, Steven Heller,

Katherine McCoy, Edward Fella and Jeffery Keedy. It would amaze me if I have said nothing in these pages with which they want to disagree strenuously. My thanks to these colleagues and my thanks also to all the individuals and organizations that have shown their support for the fundamental principle of free discussion by permitting their work to be reproduced in this book.

Warm thanks must also go to Laurence King and Jo Lightfoot at Laurence King Publishing; to Nell Webb, the book's tirelessly conscientious editor; and to Amelia Noble and Frith Kerr, its designers, who kept faith with the project from the start.

Rick Poynor