## 参考⽂献 Acemoglu ， Daron. Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong States.Journal of Monetary Economics ，52（7），2005，pp.1199-1226. Acemoglu ， Daron and Robinson ， James A. Economic Origins ofDictatorship and Democracy . New York ： Cambridge UniversityPress，2005. Acemoglu，Daron and Robinson，James. Why Nations Fail ：The Originsof Power ，Prosperity ，and Poverty . New York：Crown Business，2012. Agence France-Presse . China Drives Growth in Patent Applications Worldwide. Industry Week ， December 16 2014.http://www.industryweek.com/global-economy/china-drivesgrowth-patent-applications-worldwide. Albert ， William. The Turnpike road system in England ： 1663-1840.Cambridge：Cambridge University Press，1972. Allen，Robert C. The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective . Cambridge：Cambridge University Press，2009. Arrow ， Kenneth J.“The organization of economic activity ： issuespertinent to the choice of market versus non-market allocations ， ”in The analysis and evaluation of public expenditures ：the PPB system；a compendium of papers submitted to the Subcommittee on Economyin Government of the Joint Economic Committee ， Congress of theUnited States . Washington ， D.C. ： Government Printing Office ，1969，pp.47-64. Ashton，Thomas S. The Industrial Revolution ，1760-1830. Volume 38.CUP Archive，1970. Azariadis ， Costas；Kaas ， Leo and Wen ， Yi.“Self-Fulfilling CreditCycles ， ”Working Paper ， Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis andUniversity of Konstanz.2015. Beckert ， Sven. Empire of Cotton ： A Global History . New York ：Knopf，2014. Bell，Daniel A. The China Model ：Political Meritocracy and the Limits of Democracy . Princeton：Princeton University Press.2015. Benhibab ， Jess；Wang ， Pengfei and Wen ， Yi.“Sentiments andAggregate Demand Fluctuations.”Econometrica （ forthcoming ） ，Working Paper No.2012-039B，Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis，2014. Berlinger，Joshua.“The 50 Most Dangerous Cities in the World.”Business Insider ， October 9 ， 2012.http://www.businessinsider.com/mostdangerous-cities-in-the-world-2012-10. Bernstein，William J. A splendid exchange ：How trade shaped the world. New York：Grove Press，2008.（中⽂译本：威廉·伯恩斯坦，《贸易改变世界》） Boldrin ， Michele and David K. Levine. Against Intellectual Monopoly . Cambridge：Cambridge University Press.2008. Boldrin，Michele，David Levine，and Salvatore Modica.“A Review of Acemoglu and Robinson’s Why Nations Fail .”Unpublished Manuscript.2014. Bown，Stephen R. Merchant Kings ：When Companies Ruled the World，1600-1900. New York：Macmillan，2010. Brandt，Loren；Ma，Debin and Rawski，Thomas G.“From Divergenceto Convergence ： Reevaluating the History behind China's EconomicBoom.”Working Paper No.158/12 ， London School of Economics ，2012. Brandt，Loren，and Thomas G. Rawski，eds. China's Great Economic Transformation . Cambridge：Cambridge University Press，2008. Breslin，Shaun.“State Led Development in Historical Perspective：From Friedrich List to a Chinese Mode of Governance?”Presented at Beijing University，The Beijing Forum ，Beijing，November 2009. Broadberry，Stephen and Gupta，Bishnupriya. Lancashire，India，and Shifting Competitive Advantage in Cotton Textiles，1700-1850：The Neglected Role of Factor Prices. The Economic History Review ，May 2009，62（2），pp.279-305. Byrne ， Eileen.“Tunisia Becomes Breeding Ground for Islamic State Fighters.”The Guardian ， October 13 ， 2014.http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/13/tunisia-breedingground-islamic-state-fighters. Caves，Douglas W.，and Laurits R. Christensen. The relative efficiency of public and private firms in a competitive environment ： the case of Canadian railroads. The Journal of Political Economy （1980）：958- 976. Cipolla，Carlo M.，Before the Industrial Revolution ：European Societyand Economy ， 1000-1700. New York ： W.W. Norton&Company ，1994. Chandler，Alfred D. Jr.，The Visible Hand：The Managerial Revolutionin American Business，Cambridge：Harvard University Press，1977.（中⽂翻译版，《看得⻅的⼿：美国企业的管理⾰命》，商务印书馆，2013） Chang，Gordon G. The Coming Collapse of China . New York：Random House，2001. Chang，Ha-Joon. Kicking Away the Ladder ：Development Strategies inHistorical Perspective . London：Anthem Press，2003.（张夏准，2003，《富国的陷阱》） Chang，Ha-Joon，and Ajit Singh. Policy Arena：Can Large Firms be Run Efficiently Without being Bureaucratic ？ Journal of International Development 9.6（1997）：865-875. Chen ， Ping. The Symmetry Assumption in Transaction Costs Approach. （2007）. Chen，Ping，ed. Economic complexity and equilibrium illusion ：essays on market instability and macro vitality . London：Routledge，2010. Chow，Gregory C. China's Economic Transformation . New York：John Wiley&Sons，2015. Clark，Gregory. Why isn't the whole world developed？Lessons from the cotton mills. Journal of Economic History ，1987，47（1），pp.141- 173. Clark ， Gregory ， The Agricultural Revolution and the IndustrialRevolution ： England ， 1500-1912. Working Paper ， Davis ：University of California，2002. Clark ， Gregory. A Farewell to Alms ： A Brief Economic History of theWorld ：A Brief Economic History of the World . Princeton：PrincetonUniversity Press，2008. Clark ， Gregory. A Review Essay on the Enlightened Economy ： AnEconomic History of Britain 1700-1850 by Joel Mokyr. Journal ofEconomic Literature ，2012，50（1），pp.85-95. Clarkson ， Leslie A. Proto-Industrialization ： The First Phase ofIndustrialization ？London：Macmillan，1985. Clarkson ， Leslie A.6 Ireland 1841 ： Pre-industrial or Proto-industrial；Industrializing or De-industrializing?. European Proto-Industrialization：An Introductory Handbook （1996）：67. Coase ， Ronald and Wang ， Ning. How China Became Capitalist . NewYork：Palgrave Macmillan，2013. Coase ， Ronald H. The Nature of the Firm. Economica ， November1937，4（16），pp.386-405. Coury，Tarek and Wen，Yi. Global Indeterminacy in Locally DeterminateReal Business Cycle Models. International Journal of EconomicTheory ，March 2009，5（1），pp.49-60. Dahl ， Robert A. Polyarchy ： Participation and Opposition . NewHaven，CT：Yale University Press.1971. Dang ， Jianwei ， and Kazuyuki Motohashi. Patent statistics ： A good indicator for innovation in China？Patent subsidy program impacts on patent quality. China Economic Review 35，September 2015，pp.137- 155. Davis ， Ralph. The Rise of Protection in England ， 1689-1786. TheEconomic History Review 19.2（1966）：306-317. Deane ， Phyllis M. The First Industrial Revolution . Cambridge ：Cambridge University Press，1979. Defoe，Daniel，et al. A Tour through the Whole Island of Great Britain . New Haven，CT：Yale University Press，1991. Desmet，Klaus，and Stephen L. Parente. The evolution of markets and therevolution of industry ： a unified theory of growth. Journal ofEconomic Growth 17（3），2012，pp.205-234. Diamond ， Jared M. Guns ， Germs and Steel ： A Short History ofEverybody for the Last 13000 Years . New York ： Random House ，1998. Diaz Frers ， Luciana.“Why did the Washington Consensus Policies Fail?”Presented at the Center for the International Private Enterprise ，2014. Encyclopedia.com. Putting-Out System. International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences ， 2008. Retrieved from http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1G2-3045302138.html. Engels ， Friedrich ， and John Burdon Sanderson Haldane. Dialectics ofNature . Ed. Clemens Palme Dutt. New York ： Internationalpublishers，1940. 费孝通．江村经济（1938）［M］．南京：江苏⼈⺠出版社，1986. Finer，S.E.，The History of Government ，Volume Ⅲ. Oxford：OxfordUniversity Press，1999. Freeland ， Chrystia. Sale of the Century ： Russia's Wild Ride fromCommunism to Capitalism . Crown，2000. Fukuyama ， Francis. Political Order and Political Decay ： From theIndustrial Revolution to the Globalization of Democracy . New York：Farrar，Strauss and Giroux，2014. Fytrou，Natali.“World Food Crisis and the Arab Spring.”2014. Available at http://www.academia.edu/5743155/World\_food\_crisis\_and\_the\_Arab\_S pring. Gallagher，Kevin.“The End of the Washington Consensus.”The Guardian ， March 7 ， 2011.http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/mar/ 07/china-usa. Gates ， Bill.“A Stunning Statistic About China and Concrete.”GatesNotes ， June 25 ， 2014.http://www.gatesnotes.com/About-Bill-Gates/Concrete-in-China. Gerschenkron ， Alexander. Economic Backwardness in HistoricalPerspective . Cambridge，MA：Belknap Press of Harvard UniversityPress，1962. Gorrie ， James R. The China Crisis ： How China's Economic CollapseWill Lead to a Global Depression . New York：John Wiley&Sons，2013. Grandin，Greg. Empire's Workshop ：Latin America ，the United States，and the Rise of the New Imperialism . Macmillan，2006. Greenfeld，Liah. Nationalism ：Five Roads to Modernity . Cambridge， MA：Harvard University Press，1992. Greenfeld ， Liah. The Spirit of Capitalism ： Nationalism and EconomicGrowth . Cambridge，MA：Harvard University Press，2009.（中⽂译本：［美］格林菲尔德，《资本主义精神：⺠族主义与经济增⻓》，2009） Gupta ， Bishnupriya and Ma ， Debin“Europe in an Asian Mirror ： TheGreat Divergence，”in Broadberry，Stephen and O'Rourke，Kevin，eds. ， The Cambridge economic history of modern Europe . NewYork：Cambridge University Press，2010，pp.264-284. Hafeez ， Seema.“The efficacy of regulation in developing countries.”United Nations，2003. Hansen，Gary D.，and Edward C. Prescott.“Malthus to solow.”Americaneconomic review （2002）：1205-1217. Harner，Stephen.“Dealing With the Scourge of‘Schadendreude’ in Foreign Reporting on China.”China-U.S. Focus ， October 3 ， 2014.http://www.chinausfocus.com/culture-history/dealing-with-thescourge-of-schadenfreude-in-foreign-reporting-on-china/. Harrigan ， Jane.“Did Food Prices Plant the Seeds of the ArabSpring?”SOAS Inaugural Lecture series ，2011. Harrigan ， Jane.“The Political Economy of Aid Flows to NorthAfrica.”WIDER Working Paper No.72 ， World Institute forDevelopment Economic Research，2011. Hegel ， Georg Wilhelm Friedrich.“Phenomenology of Spirit.1807.”Trans.AV Miller. Oxford：Oxford UP（1977）. Hoppit ， Julian.“Patterns of Parliamentary Legislation ， 1660-1800.”History Journal ，March 1996，39（1），pp.109-131. Hua Sheng，“On Private Land Property Rights，”2014.（in Chinese，available athttp://www.360doc.com/content/14/1210/21/14561708\_431886261.shtml） Huntington ， Samuel P. The Third Wave ： Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century . Norman OK：University of Oklahoma Press.1991. Jacques，Martin. When China Rules the World ：The Rise of the Middle Kingdom and the End of the Western World . London：Penguin Press， 2009. Jacques，Martin. When China Rules the World ：The Rise of the Middle Kingdom and the Birth of a New Global Order . Second Edition. London：Penguin Press，2012. Jiang，Kun and Susheng Wang，“A Contractual Analysis of State versus Private Ownership.”Working Paper，2015，Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Keynes ， John M. The General Theory of Employment ， Interest ， andMoney . New York：Harcourt，Brace&World，［1936］1964. Kole ， Stacey R. ， and J. Harold Mulherin.“The government as ashareholder：a case from the United States 1.”The Journal of Law andEconomics 40.1（1997）：1-22. Kriedte ， Peter ， Hass Medick ， and Jurgen Schlumbohm ，Industrialization before Industrialization ： Rural Industry in theGenesis of Capitalism ， translated by Beate Schmpp ， withcontributions from Herbert Kisch and Franklin F. Mendels ， 1977 ，Cambridge：Cambridge University Press. Kynge ， James.“Uganda turns east ： Chinese money will buildinfrastructure says Museveni.”Financial Times ， October 21 ，2014.http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/ab12d8da-5936-11e4-9546-00144feab7de.html. Landes，David S. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations ：Why Some Are So Rich and Some So Poor . New York：W.W. Norton&Company，Inc.， 1999. Lau ， Lawrence J. ， Yingyi Qian ， and Gerard Roland.“Reform withoutlosers ： An interpretation of China's dual-track approach totransition.”Journal of Political Economy 108.1（2000）：120-143. Law，Marc T.，and Sukkoo Kim.“The Rise of the American Regulatory State：A View from the Progressive Era.”Handbook on the Politics of Regulation （2011）：113. Lewis ， Arthur.“Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies ofLabour.”The Manchester School .1954，22（2），pp.139-191. 李克强．论我国经济的三元结构［J］．中国社会科学，1991，（3）. Li ， Eric Xi.“A Tale of Two Systems ， ”Presented at TEDGlobal2013.http://blog.ted.com/2013/06/13/a-tale-of-two-systems-eric-x-li-at-tedglobal-2013/. 李晓鹏．这个国家会好吗？中国崛起的经济学分析［M］．北京：中国发展出版社，2012. Li ， Xi ， Xuewen Liu and Yong Wang.“A Model of China’s StateCapitalism.”Unpublished Working Paper ， Hong Kong University ofScience and Technology，2014. Lin ， Justin Y. Economic Development and Transition ： Thought ，Strategy ，and Viability . Cambridge：Cambridge University Press，2009. Lin ， Justin Y. Demystifying the Chinese Economy . Cambridge ：Cambridge University Press，2011. Lin，Justin Y. New Structural Economics ：A Framework for Rethinking Development and Policy. 2012. World Bank Publications. Lin，Justin Y. The Quest for Prosperity ：How Developing Economies canTake Off . Princeton：Princeton University Press，2013. Lin ， Justin Y. ， Cai ， Fang and Li ， Zhou. The China Miracle . HongKong：The Chinese University of Hong Kong，1996. Lipset ， Seymour M.“Some Social Requisites of Democracy ： EconomicDevelopment and Political Legitimacy.”American Political ScienceReview ，1959，53（1）：69-105. Lipton，Michael. Why Poor People Stay Poor ：Urban Bias in DevelopingCountries . London，Temple Smith，1977. List ， Friedrich. The Natural System of Political Economy . London ：Longmans，Green，and Co，［1841］1909. Long ， Cheryl and Zhang ， Xiaobo. Cluster-Based Industrialization inFinancing and Performance. Journal of International Economics ，84（1），2011，pp.112-123. Long ， Cheryl and Zhang Xiaobo. Patterns of China's Industrialization ：Concentration ， Specialization ， and Clustering. China EconomicReview ，23（3），2012，pp.593-612. Lucas ， Robert E. The Industrial Revolution ： Past and Future. FederalReserve Bank of Minneapolis，2003. Luo ， Jinfeng and Wen ， Yi. Institutions Do Not Rule ： Reassessing theDriving Forces of Economic Development. Working Paper No.2015-001A，Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis，2015. Martin ， Stephen ， and David Parker. Privatization and economicperformance throughout the UK business cycle. Managerial andDecision Economics 16.3（1995）：225-237. Marx ， Karl. Capital ， Vol. 1 ： A Critique of Political Economy . NewYork：Vintage（1867）. Marx ， Karl and Engels ， Friedrich. Manifesto of the Communist Party .Chapter 1.1848. Mas-Colell ， Andreu ， Michael Dennis Whinston ， and Jerry R. Green.Microeconomic Theory . New York：Oxford university press，1995. McCloskey ， Deirdre N. Bourgeois Dignity ： Why Economics Can'tExplain the Modern World. Chicago ： University of Chicago Press ，2010. McKendrick ， Neil；Brewer ， John and Plumb John H. The birth of aconsumer society ： The commercialization of eighteenth-centuryEngland. Bloomington，IN：Indiana University Press，1982. Mendels ， Franklin F.“Proto-industrialization ： The First Phase of theIndustrialization Process.”The Journal of Economic History ， March1972，32（1），pp.241-261. Mendels ， Franklin F. Industrialization and Population Pressure inEighteenth-Century Flanders . New York：Arno Press，1981. Mokyr ， Joel. Industrialization in the Low Countries ， 1795-1850. NewHaven：Yale University Press，1976. Mokyr ， Joel. Why Ireland Starved ： A Quantitative and AnalyticalHistory of the Irish Economy ，1800-1850. New York：Routledge，2013. Mokyr ， Joel. The Institutional Origins of the Industrial Revolution.Unpublished Manuscript，Northwestern University，2008. Mokyr，Joel. The Enlightened Economy ：An Economic History of Britain，1700-1850. New York：Yale University Press，2009. Morris ， Charles R. The Dawn of Innovation ： The First AmericanIndustrial Revolution . New York：Public Affairs，2012. Morris ， Ian. Why the west rules-for now ： The patterns of history andwhat they reveal about the future . Profile books，2010. Murphy ， Kevin M.；Shleifer ， Andrei and Vishny ， Robert W.Industrialization and the Big Push. Journal of Political Economy ，October 1989，97（5）. Naughton，Barry. Growing Out of the Plan ：Chinese Economic Reform，1978-1993. Cambridge：Cambridge University Press，1995. Naughton ， Barry. The Chinese Economy ： Transitions and Growth .Cambridge，MA：MIT press，2007. Navarro ， Peter ， and Greg Autry. Death by China ： Confronting theDragon-A Global Call to Action . New York：Pearson Prentice Hall，2011. Navy News. “Dragons be here as largest Chinese Navy visit to U.K. begins.”January 12 2015.https：//www.navynews.co.uk/archive/news/item/12225. North ， Douglass C. Structure and Change in Economic History . NewYork：W.W. Norton，1981. North ， Douglass C. Institutions ， Institutional Change and EconomicPerformance. New York：Cambridge University Press，1990.（中⽂译本：《制度、制度变迁与经济绩效》，杭⾏译，格致出版社出版） North ， Douglass C.and Robert Paul Thomas. The Rise of the WesternWorld ：A New Economic History . New York：Cambridge UniversityPress，1973. North ， Douglass C. ， and Barry R. Weingast. Constitutions andcommitment：the evolution of institutions governing public choice inseventeenth-century England. The Journal of Economic History ， 49（04），1989，pp.803-832. North，Douglass C.and John Joseph Wallis. Violence and Social Orders ： A Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History . Cambridge：Cambridge University Press，2009. Ogilvie，Sheilagh，and Markus Cerman. European proto-industrialization： an introductory handbook . Cambridge ： Cambridge UniversityPress，1996. Oi ， Jean C. Fiscal reform and the economic foundations of local statecorporatism in China. World Politics 45（1），pp.99-126，1992. O'brien，Patrick，Trevor Griffiths，and Philip Hunt. Political components of the industrial revolution：Parliament and the English cotton textile industry，1660-1774. The Economic History Review 44.3（1991）： 395-423. O’Malley ， Eoin. The Decline of Irish Industry in the 19th-Century. TheEconomic and Social Review ，13（1981）. Paulson Papers on Investment. California Dreaming ： How a Chinese Battery Firm Began Making Electric Busses in America. Paulson Institute. Case Study Series，June 2015. Pintus ， Patrick A.and Wen ， Yi. Leveraged Borrowing and Boom-BustCycles. Review of Economic Dynamics ，October 2013，16（4），pp.617-633. Polanyi ， Karl. The Great Transformation ： The Political and EconomicOrigins of Our Time . Boston：Beacon Press，1944. Pomeranz，Kenneth. The Great Divergence ：China ，Europe ，and theMaking of the Modern World Economy . Princeton ： PrincetonUniversity Press，2001. Pomeranz，Kenneth，and Steven Topik. The World That Trade Created . ME Sharpe，3<sup>rd</sup> edition.2013. Pritchett，Lant and Summers，Lawrence H. Asiaphoria Meets Regression to the Mean. NBER Working Paper No.20573 ， National Bureau of Economic Research，October 2014. Rueschemeyer ， Dietrich ， Evelyne Huber Stephens ， and John D.Stephens. Capitalist Development and Democracy .Chicago ：University of Chicago Press.1992. Qiu ， Larry D. ， China's Textile and Clothing Industry. Mimeo ， HongKong University of Science and Technology，2005. Ramirez ，Carlos D. Ramirez. Is corruption in China“out of control” ？A comparison with the US in historical perspective. Journal of Comparative Economics ，February 2014，42（1），pp.76-91. Rodrik ， Dani. Goodbye Washington Consensus ， Hello WashingtonConfusion ？ A Review of the World Bank's“Economic Growth in the 1990s ： Learning from a Decade of Reform.”Journal of EconomicLiterature ，December 2006，44（4），pp.973-987. Rodrik ， Dani. One Economics ， Many Recipes ： Globalization ，Institutions ，and Economic Growth . Princeton：Princeton UniversityPress.2008. Roll ， Eric. An Early Experiment in Industrial Organization ： Being aHistory of the Firm of Boulton&Watt ， 1775-1805. Frank Cass andCompany，1968. Roosevelt，Theodore.“Speech By Gov. Roosevelt：Famous Leader of the Rough Riders‘Addresses the Assemblage on The Strenuous Life.’”Chicago Tribune ，Chicago：April 11，1899；（1849-1985）. Rosenstein-Rodan ， Paul. Problems of Industrialization of Eastern andSouth-Eastern Europe. Economic Journal ，1943，53（210/211），pp.202-211. Rostow ， Walt W. The Stages of Economic Growth ： A Non-communistManifesto . Cambridge：Cambridge University Press，1960. Rowland ， Henry Augustus. A Plea for Pure Science. Science ， Vol.2 ，No.29 （ Aug.24 ， 1883 ） ， pp.242-250. Published by ： AmericanAssociation for the Advancement of Science Stable URL ：http://www.jstor.org/stable/1758976. Schell ， Orville ， and John Delury. Wealth and Power ： China's LongMarch to the Twenty-First Century . Hachette UK，2013. Shammas，Carole. The Pre-Industrial Consumer in England and America . Oxford：Clarendon Press，1990. Shimposha，Toyo K. The Industrialization and Global Integration of Meiji Japan ， in Globalization of Developing Countries ： Is Autonomous Development Possible ？Chapter 5.2000，pp.37-59. Smith，Adam. The Wealth of Nations ［1776］.na，1937. Stiglitz ， Joseph. Challenging the Washington Consensus An InterviewWith Lindsey Schoenfelder. The Brown Journal of World Affairs ，May2002，9（2），pp.33-40. Stokey ， Nancy L. A quantitative model of the British industrialrevolution ， 1780-1850. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series onPublic Policy . Vol.55.No.1.North-Holland，2001. Studwell，Joe. How Asia Works ：Success and Failure in the World's Most Dynamic Region . New York：Grove Press，2013. The Economist .“Tethered by History.”July 5 2014.http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21606286-failures-arabspring-were-long-time-making-tethered-history. Vernon-Wortzel，Heidi，and Lawrence H. Wortzel. Privatization：Not the only answer. World Development 17.5（1989）：633-641. Vogel ， Ezra F. Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China .Cambridge，MA：Belknap Press of Harvard University Press，2013. Vries，Peer. State ，Economy and the Great Divergence ：Great Britainand China ，1680s -1850s . London：Bloomsbury Publishing，2015. Wallace，Anthony FC. Rockdale ：The Growth of an American Village inthe Early Industrial Revolution . University of Nebraska Press，1978. Weatherill ， Lorna. Consumer Behavior and Material Culture ， 1660-1760. London：Routledge，1988. 温铁军．解读苏南［M］．苏州：苏州⼤学出版社.2011. Wen ， Yi and Wu ， Jing. Withstanding the Great Recession like China.Working paper No.2014-007 ， Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis ，2014. Wheeler，John，and George Burton Hotchkiss. A Treatise of Commerce .The Lawbook Exchange，Ltd.，2004. Williams，Eric. Capitalism and Slavery . UNC Press Books，1994. The World Bank. Connecting to Compete 2014 ： Trade Logistics in the Global Economy-TheLogistics Performance Index and Its Indicators. （2014）. Wrigley ， Edward A. Energy and the English Industrial Revolution . Cambridge：Cambridge University Press 2010. Wu，Jinglian. Understanding and Interpreting Chinese Economic Reform . Texere.2005. 新望．村庄发育、村庄⼯业的发⽣与发展：苏南永联村记事（1970—2002）［M］．北京：⽣活·读书·新知三联书店，2004. Xu ， Chengang and Zhang Xiaobo. The Evolution of Chinese Entrepreneurial Firms：Township-Village Enterprises Revisited. IFPRI Discussion Paper 00854，2009. Yang ， Dennis Tao ， Vivian Weijia Chen ， and Ryan Monarch. RisingWages ： Has China Lost Its Global Labor Advantage ？ Pacific Economic Review 15（4），2010，pp.482-504. Yang，Dennis Tao and Zhu，Xiaodong. Modernization of Agriculture andLong-Term Growth. Journal of Monetary Economics ， 60 （ 3 ） ，2013，pp.367-382. Yang ， Yufan. Industrial Cluster and Regional Brand ： A Study of GuZhen's Light-Fixture Industrial Cluster. Guangzhou GuangdongPeople Press House 2010. 张纯如，《南京暴⾏：被遗忘的⼤屠杀》.（Chang，Iris. The Rape ofNanking ：The Forgotten Holocaust of World War Ⅱ . Basic Books ，2012.） Zhang，Taisu，Property Rights in Land，Agricultural Capitalism ，and the Relative Decline of Pre-Industrial China，Yale Law School，2011. Zhang ， Weiwei. The China Wave ： Rise of a Civilizational State .Hackensack，NJ：World Century Publishing Corporation，2012. 张⽂⽊．⻓江与国防［J］．世界经济与政治，2015年第10期，http://www.guancha.cn/ZhangWenMu/2015\_12\_13\_344505\_s.shtml. 张毅，张颂颂．中国乡镇企业简史［M］．北京：中国农业出版社，2001. Zhou ， Li. The Origin and Development of Rural Industrialization in China：A Case Study of Yong Village（1978-2004）.2005. Zhu ， Tian ， Does China Lack Innovation ？ 2013 ，http://www.ftchinese.com/story/001059724. Zhu ， Tian. Will China Fall into the Middle-Income Trap ？ 2013 ，http://www.guancha.cn/ZhuTian/2014\_10\_17\_274362.shtml. Zhu ， Xiaodong. Understanding China's Growth ： Past ， Present ， andFuture（Digest Summary）. Journal of Economic Perspectives，26，no.4（2012）：103-124.