# Introduction Physicists cite the Big Bang theory to explain the origin of the universe. Likewise, we believe there are at least 100 big bangs in the history of graphic art that help explain why examples of graphic design look and feel the way they do. We call this the big idea theory. So what's the big idea? Let's begin with the big idea for this book. Our aim is to determine, define, discuss and illustrate the big ideas that created the critical mass that produced the art and craft of contemporary graphic design. Some of these big ideas derive from past centuries; others are situated squarely in the early to mid-twentieth; and still others were conceived during the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. We have attempted to position these ideas in chronological order, for some of them, like body painting, started centuries ago. Nonetheless, some of the moments of creation are fuzzy, so the chronology is approximate. Now, what are big ideas? They are the notions, conceptions, inventions and inspirations - formal pragmatic and conceptual - that have been employed by graphic designers to enhance all genres of visual communication. These ideas have become, through synthesis and continual application, the ambient language(s) of design. They constitute the technological, philosophical, formal and aesthetic constructs of graphic design. One of the key criteria for a big idea is what we call 'legs'. If an idea can be shown to have influenced the practice and theory of graphic design over time, then an argument can be made for its importance. Moreover, if the artefacts that embody the idea are numerous or recurrent, then arguably the idea is also significant. This volume is not an anthology of 'isms' (that has been done many times before), since we consider them as umbrellas for various big (and small) ideas. Under the 'great' historical isms, there can be numerous big ideas, such as asymmetric or discordant typography or vibrating colour, which are characteristic traits in one or more particular movements or schools. Rather than skim the surface using the shorthand of isms, this book unpacks those art historical categories and pulls out the individual big ideas within them. A big idea can be situated in one time or span different time periods. It might go out of currency and be revived later. This book attempts to locate approximately when a big idea was invented (if possible) but examines its respective applications in whatever form it is best expressed. Where we can, we show a contemporary example that reveals how, for instance, an idea that became passé was subsequently rediscovered. Are these 100 the only big ideas? We may have left some out or ignored others. The caveat at the beginning of this introduction that there are 'at least' 100 ideas implies that others exist. In fact, narrowing the field down to these ideas was not easy. When we began to list and annotate the ideas, separate the wheat from the chaff, and avoid those that might seem like ideas but are actually tropes or conceits - as in stylistic manifestations rather than substantive design foundations - we determined that more 'aha' moments exist than these. Yet 100 is a nice round number. And we hope that folded into these ideas are, perhaps, smaller ideas that also have resonance. Style, as noted above, is a trope or conceit (words we like a lot) that may emerge as a by-product of an idea. The psychedelic graphic style is a combination of various ideas addressed here. And before that, Art Moderne or Art Deco was the overall manifestation of different graphic ideas. How many graphic designers does it take to come up with a big idea? Breakthrough ideas might be credited to a single individual, but they are often ready for prime time, and waiting for someone to bring them forward. Still, the mystery remains: which came first, the big idea or the big change? How many Rodchenkos did it take to define the visual revolution of the Constructivist movement? Was Alexey Brodovitch a genius, or simply the product of his time? And how come no one remembers who designed the ubiquitous paper recycling symbol, while everybody knows that Paul Rand came up with the ill-fated Enron logo? You may never be credited for your contribution to graphic design, but the world might be a better place if you can help formulate a big idea. Some of our big ideas started as small inventions (as mere technical improvements) or even as gimmicks, but have carved for themselves a comfortable niche over time. They've become familiar graphic artefacts. Then there are big ideas that turned out not so big after all. Manifestos come to mind: many of them were exercises in self-aggrandizement, but they were rites of passage, and as such they were important. Are all the big ideas 'good' ideas? Alas, no. We listed quite a few big ideas that didn't improve the way we communicate graphically, but had a tremendous influence on the graphic design profession and the visual culture all the same. Pastiches? Forced obsolescence? Graffiti? You'll be the judge. We were not shy about expressing our opinion when we thought that an idea was not as brilliant as it could have been. Sometimes we even challenged the official version regarding the value of certain design practices or the outcome of an invention. In other words, we acted as critics as much as historians. Our goal is to encourage readers to do the same. Graphic design needs more critics. Are some big ideas bigger than others? While some ideas may not be 'good' ideas, they are nonetheless big in their impact. Some comparatively small ideas may have import on the field and the culture as a whole. Split fountain printing, for instance, is not an earthaltering idea, but it helped define an aesthetic that defined the visual codes of the 1960s generation. Similarly, Kodalithing does not compare with inventing the wheel, but it contributed to the design language and how designers worked within limited budgets to get their messages into the world. As George Orwell might say, some big ideas are more equal than others. What new big ideas will the future bring? As graphic design continues in the twenty-first century, and given the advances in technology and integration of different media (including motion and sound for numerous digital devices), big ideas are still essential. We hope this book is not the capstone (or tombstone) of the art and craft of graphic design. In terms of visual communication, many of the ideas in this book are still significant. Some could use a little tweaking or an overhaul. Yet others will doubtless give way to new ideas that will further define what we are and what we do.