# This book was originally published in Germany under the title “Kunst der Farbe” copyright © 1961 and 1973 by Otto Major Verlag Ravensburg, Germany Printed in Germany Color separation: Seiler & Jelile, Augsburg Composition: Buch-und Verlagsdruckerei Göppel, Ravensburg Printing: Appl, Wemding This book is printed on acid-free paper. Published in the United States of America by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published simultaneously in Canada. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750- 8400, fax (978) 750-4744. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158-0012, (212) 850-6011, fax (212) 850-6008, E-Mail: PERMREQ@WILEY.COM. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data: Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 61-11190ISBN 0-471-28928-0 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4