## POSTSCRIPT In this book I have tried to build a serviceable conveyance in which the color artist may travel a longish distance upon his way. Yet this will be no easy pilgrimage. The route is fixed by the inexorable laws of color. These laws shine forth in the rainbow, and are discernible in the artificially constructed color sphere, extending and enlarging the pure hues and their mixtures into the polar regions of black and white. Black, with its profound obscurity, is necessary in order to set the beams of colored light in a dimension suitable to them. The bright radiance of white is necessary, lending the colors its material strength. Between black and white, there throbs the universe of chromatic phenomena. So long as colors are bound to the world of objects, we can perceive them and recognize their relationships; their inner essence remains concealed from our understanding, and must be grasped intuitively. Hence rules and formulae can be no more than signposts on the way to color fulfillment in art. In his Trattato della Pittura, which sets up a formidable array of rules for painters, Leonardo remarks, “Didst thou attempt to create by rule, thou shouldst accomplish nought, but devise only confusion.” Thus he relieved his readers once more of the encumbrance of knowledge, and encouraged them to follow their intuition. It is not the means of expression and representation that count in art, but the individual in his identity and humanity. First comes the cultivation and creation of the individual; then the individual can create. The serious study of colors is an excellent means to the cultivation of human beings, for it leads to a perception of inner necessities. To grasp these is to experience the eternal law of all natural generation; to recognize necessity is to surrender self-will and serve the Creator - to become Man. In this book, I have discussed a number of masterpieces of painting and tried to discover their hidden meanings. I chose old masters chiefly, because many readers may be familiar with the originals. But the color principles they illustrate are timeless, and as valid today as they ever were. Whoever sees only the subjective and the symbolic content in the paintings of Francesca, Rembrandt, Bruegel, Cézanne, and other masters old and new, to him the gates are closed upon their artistic power and beauty. The end and aim of all artistic endeavor is liberation of the spiritual essence of form and color and its release from imprisonment in the world of object. It is from this aspiration that non-objective art has arisen. The world we live in today is unlike that known to man in 1560, or 1860. Our world is fashioned by contrivance. We build machines whose meaning lies in their function. Machines are not symbols of ideas, but embodiments of purposeful thought. Even pictures, today, are not symbolic. They have their raison d’être in themselves, in their forms and colors. The painter uses areas and colors for his own projection; the necessary life force flows from himself. He fashions his experience under the guidance of intuition, or ## inspiration. However painting may evolve, color will remain its prime material.