see you in this field of contest, brandishing your unerring lance, or quietly reposing beneath the panoply of your 'seven-bulls-hide shield!.. LysANDEr. This must be a very extraordinary champion. LisARdo. In his way' (as they call it) he hath absolutely no compeer; and Magliabecchi yields entirely to his ascendant genius—for Nennius not only loves bokes as lustily as did the librarian of the Gránd Duke of Tuscany, but he hath something more than a mere title-page acquaintance with them. His memory also is equally faithful and wellfurnished—and such a gluttonous bibliomaniacal appetite doth he possess, that even Rymer, the Gallia Christiana, and Bouquet's Recueil des Historiens des Gaules, will scarcely suffice him for a twelvemonth's victualling.’ Mabillon, Montfaucon, and Muratori are his dear delights as foreign authors; while his deal-shelves groan beneath the weight of annotation upon our home historians; such as Gildas, Jeffrey, his namesake, Ingulph, Hoveden, Malmesbury, Matthew Paris, Ralph de Diceto, and Benedictus Abbas, &c. &c.—and then for the scribbled margins' (as Warburton used to express it) of his Leland, Camden, Twysden, Gale, Sparke, Hearne, Batteley, Grose, King, and others of the like character—oh, 'twould do your heart good only to have a glimpse of them! Lorenzo. More and more wondrous! LisArpo. I have not yet done with Nennius. He hath no small knowledge of the art of design; and brandishes his pencil upon castles, cathedrals, and churches, that it were a marvel to see how his drawers and portfolios are crammed with the same. There is not a church, nor place of worship, nor castle, within the counties of Sussex, Kent,; and Bedford,