not lacking, and one such man, now forgotten, was Julian Hibbert. He was an interesting character who, besides having a hand in the social and political reforms of his day, undertook to reform the Greek fonts then used in printing. In 1827, he brought out at his private press in his house in London, The Book of the Orphic Hymns, " in uncial letters, as a typographical experiment"(fig. 332). Hibbert says of his alphabet that it “was first composed from the inspection of Inscriptions in the Musæums of London and Paris, and thus it is no wonder, if it still retains more of a sculptitory than of a scriptitory appearance." After reading Montfaucon's Palæographia Græca and examining facsimiles of the Herculanean manuscripts, he altered the forms of many of the letters. "If I had adopted the Alphabet of any one celebrated ms.," Hibbert says, “I should have had less trouble. . .. As it is, I have taken each letter separately from such mss. as I thought best represented the beau idéal of an uncial type; . . . yet as placed side by side, they look very different from a ms." But he calls it “ a Greek type, which, at the same time that it is calculated for ordinary use, approaches nearer to old mss. than types that have been hitherto used," and “represents with tolerable accuracy the forms of the letters used by the Greeks themselves, in the brightest days of their literature. . . . I do not mean," he adds, “a type like that used in Bodoni's Callimachus, .. . ornamented (or rather disfigured) by the additions of what, I believe, type-founders call syrifs, or cerefs."1 Two books were printed by this forerunner of Robert Proctor, who was indeed vox clamantis! The fonts had considerable charm, but were at the time considered —if they were considered at all — as complete failures; and were afterwards melted.