It is to Scotch founders that we must turn for the next step in the development of the modern face type-family. Alexander Wilson, who in the eighteenth century made types for the brothers Foulis, had left a foundry which was still maintaining scholarly traditions. The taste which led to the adoption of lighter type-forms had been followed consistently by his house; and, probably still further infuenced by Didot types, the Wilson foundry early in the nineteenth century produced an Fnglish version of them — the best Fnglish variant of this form of letter that we have. It is sturdier and pleasanter to read than parallel French types, and we are much more at home with it. It is not as good a type as the Caslon character, but as produced by Wilson it is a very handsome and serviceable letter, and in it we have another Fnglish type-family— the Scotch modern face. It is an English equivalent of the fonts shown in the 1819 specimen of the Didots. The fonts, practically as we have them to-day, are beautifully shown in the Specimen of Modern Printing Types cast at the Letter-Foundry of Alex. Wilson & Son, at Glasgow, 1833. This quarto specinen is in two parts. In an "Address to the Printers," which prefaces the volume, the Wilsons say : “In conformity with ancient, immemorial usage, we have, in Part I. displayed our Founts in the Roman garb—the venerable Quousque tandem; but lest it should be supposed that we had chosen the flowing drapery of Rome for the purpose of shading or concealing defeets, we have in Part II. shown offour Founts in a dress entirely English." Two pages of titling-letters are displayed before we come to the first bodly type- a spirited and fine cut of great primer. Then follow varieties of roman, from pica to diamond. A page of double pica Greek (used in the Homer printed by the Foulis brothers) is followed by Greek fonts