ples of reproduction of old types, the old-fashioned formulæ for fine book-making still survives. Entirely outside any influence of Mr. Morris, and for that reason scarcely within the limits of this chapter, some recent developments in French type-founding may be mentioned here. Of modern French foundries, that of G. Peignot & Fils, Paris, has contributed most to interesting and unusual typography. Founded by Gustave Peignot (who died in 1899), in the hands of his second son, Georges Peignot, it issued several series of type which strike a new note in French printing. The first—which appeared in 1897— was the Grasset type, followed in 1902 by the Auriol type, designed by Georges Auriol. Both of these had considerable vogue in France, but were too distinctly Gallic in flavour to commend themselves to the public of other countries. A contribution of more general application is the series called Les Cochins, based on eighteenth century engraved and typographic material, but by no means slavishly following it. About 1914, a brochure was issued describing and showing these fonts, entitled Les Cochins, Caractères & Vignettes renouvelés du XVIIIe Siècle. Of the type-designs, the first, Le Cochin, is based on engraved characters, especially in its delightful italic (fig. 365), and may be used for entire books ; Le Nicolas-Cochin (in roman only) is an exaggerated form of letter with extremely tall ascenders, more obviously based on engraving, which it recalls in its sharpness of outline. It is effective for title-pages or ephemeral printing, though too eccentric to have lasting value. Both types are admirably adapted for what are called in France travaux de ville. They have beenused with charming effect in the Gazette du Bon Ton, in Christmas numbers of L’Illustration, and in similar ephemeral publications.To them were