room, while some types of early form may be desirable, we shall find more material among those designed by Baskerville, Caslon, Didot, Bodoni, Wilson, and other eighteenth century founders, and their derivatives; to which must be added the best types of to-day. There are two preliminary statements which apply to the purchase of all types. First, that in buying a series of type, every size obtainable should be procured, so that the range shall be as great, and the gradations as slight, as possible: good typography demanding that the sizes of type used must be, not approximately, but precisely, those that suit the eye. Second, that each size must be bought in sufficient quantity to meet all probable needs; for a few complete series in large fonts are far more valuable than thrice the amount broken up into small fonts of many different series. If a printer knows how to use type, the variety of accent he can obtain from one series is almost unlimited. For instance, in a 12-point type he has roman capitals, italic capitals, roman capitals in combination with small capitals, small capitals alone, and roman and italic lower case—six variations ## CAMBRIDGE CAMBRIDGE CAMBRIDGE CAMBRIDGE Cambridge Cambridge in size, colour, or effect, which should be, and indeed are, enough for the requirements of an entire book. Multiply these six variations by the number of body-sizes in a series of type, and you have an enormous keyboard on which the typographer may play. If, with this great repertoire to choose from, a printer is obliged to resort to fanciful display letters or heavy-faced type for accent, it proves that he lacks understanding of the use of normal types.