In discussing the selection of types and decorative material I have made the following classification: 1. Types that seem indisputably standard, on which there is no possibility of going astray; or, if I may so call them, “types of obligation." 2. Types which, while standard, are not of universal utility, as they can be used appropriately only for books of a particular character. 3. Types that are based upon some historic fonts or show that their designer was a student of early type-forms; and fonts adapted for"publicity," though not usually suitable for the printing of books. 4. Types of approved utility for decorative use. 5. Initial letters and type ornaments. ## §1 In the class of types which appear to be beyond criticism from the point of view of beauty and utility, the original Caslon type stands first. This is a letter identified with old English work, and as we follow the traditions of English printing rather than those of Continental countries, Caslon's types are ours by inheritance. Enough has been said about their history to make further words here unnecessary. Caslon type should be had from the Caslon foundry; for the versions offered in various other quarters are not in all respects as good. Fonts should be as closely fitted as possible—not always the case, even in types put out by the Caslons themselves. No Caslon font—or for that matter any other —is desirable if adapted to the standard lining system by shortened descenders. The variant letters which are supplied with Caslon and with many other types in the nature of old style, are characteristic and usefulsuch as swash italic capitals, the italic