lower-case and w used to begin words, and the k for use $\boldsymbol { k }$ at the ends of words. These swash letters, as employed by thoughtless compositors or designers, have sometimes produced very absurd effects. Only certain of the swash italic capitals can be successfully placed in the middle of a word, the design of the rest suggesting their position either as initial or final letters. Used "discreetly, advisedly, soberly," swash letters give variety and movement to pages of type. Furthermore, both in roman and italic, long s and its combinations with ascending letters are interesting letter-forms.¹ Some tied letters lately supplied in thereproduction of an historical font are: as, is, us, &, fr, l, p, st, t. It is to be wished that terminal a's, e's, m's, and n's, with tails intended to fill out lines, were available. Apart from the agreeable appearance of these specially old-fashioned characters, they are useful in reprints of old books. And so, too, are superior letters, which are desirable for reprints of old work, or for modern books printed in antique style. In old style fonts, signs to indicate notes—star, dagger, double dagger, etc.—are more interesting and picturesque, typographically, than superior figures, which I prefer not to use with an old style type. They are particularly appropriate to books of an historical or genealogical nature. For liturgical books the common liturgical signs must also be supplied, and of these peculiar sorts I suggest—at the risk of repetition—that there must be enough of each of them to allow work to go on unimpeded by an inadequate supply of a kind of material that at short notice it is hard to get. Finally, the original old style arabic figures—nowadays called "non-ranging"should be used with all old style