fonts. Such figures as those in the Dutch types given by Dr. John Fell to the Oxford University printing-house are among the best of their kind; and Caslon's old style arabic numerals are lively and agreeable type-forms.¹ Of these, the numbers 1, 2, and 0 cover only the middle of the body; 6 and 8 are the ascending, and 3, 4, 5, 7, and 9 the descending figures (fig. 366). "In no characters," said Mr. Morris, "is the contrast between the ugly and vulgar illegibility of the modern type and the elegance and legibility of the ancient more striking than in the arabic numerals. In the old print each figure has its definite individuality, and one cannot be mistaken for the other; in reading the modern figures the eyes must be strained before the reader can have any reasonable assurance that he has a 5, an 8 or a 3 before him, unless the press-work is of the best." Second in the first class of types stands the modern face known in America as“Scotch." In this type the letters are more regular in design than in old style fonts. Perhaps the most beautiful form of it ever brought out was that cut by William Martin; and a very close copy if not actually the same face was produced in Scotland in the last century— notably in the “Series of Old Founts" by Messrs. Miller & Richard of Edinburgh. The Wayside Series of the American Type Founders Company—if in its original form, with long descenders—is a fairly satisfactory equivalent. Modern face types appear, at first sight, clearer to the eye and more easily read than old style, but they are really less so in the long run. Our newspapers are printed in various poor forms of “modern face," which is, therefore, familiar