to the public; so that old style types seem a little archaic to most persons. Modern face type is admirable for books of a scientific or technical character, and, as it is likely to be used for such work, the mathematical, geometric, algebraic, botanical, astronomical, and other special signs should be fully supplied with it. Very beautiful books have been made from larger sizes of this type—such as the pica—generously leaded; but smaller sizes appear monotonous if set solid, and if leaded, weak; and any size, if unskilfully used, may become very commonplace in effect. To make a distinguished use of a modern face is more difficult, it appears to me, than with old style type. None the less, it is excellently adapted for certain sorts of work which could not be executed so appropriately in an old style letter. A third type (which originated with Binny & Ronaldson of Philadelphia over a hundred years ago) is in design transitional between old style and modern face. For books where the old-fashioned air of Caslon would be too obtrusive, and yet which call for a letter more interesting in design than the somewhat bald Scotch face, there is nothing better. I should not advise the purchase of this transitional series at the expense of the first two types chosen, but it will frequently do the work of either. Some of its italic has a certain naïve quality, though that for the 11-point (No. 1) —superior to the rest—was the work of an accomplished type-cutter. This type is not obtainable above 12-point or below 9-point, although Binny & Ronaldson's specimen of 1812 shows also brevier and minion.¹ It is called “Oxford" by the American Type Founders Company, from whom it may be had. I have used it for this book. It seems to me a type of real distinction.