§2 Types of our second class, while standard, are limited in utility, because only to be used appropriately for certain kinds of printing. The type which stands first in value in this category is called in English specimen-books "revived old style face," and in this country “modernized old style." It was an intentional attempt on the part of English letter-founders to modify the rather irregular character of Caslon's letter design without copying the rigidity of the modern face. It has, in certain ways, an affinity with some of the types which were put out by Wilson, in which he modified the Caslon irregularities; and this type in turn is a modification of the more spirited designs of Wilson's fonts. It is rather a broader letter than Caslon's, with a body notably high in relation to its ascenders. This type is useful only in its best form, which appears to be that cut in England about 1850. If this best form is well composed and well printed, fine books have been and can be made from it; but it requires care in setting and printing because, like some of its precursors, its effect may be spoiled by uneven typesetting and poor presswork. While not a necessary type for an office, it is a good one. It has the advantage of giving to the repertoire of a printing-house a certain variety; for printers often become weary of using the same kind of type, even though their customers may appear to desire no change. Another type for which one has a high respect, but which can only be used for even more special occasions, is that commonly called "French Old Style" or "Elzévier." The best form of this type appears to be that brought out by Mayeur of Paris, about 1878. Although styled "Elzévier," it has a greater resemblance to the types poétiques cut by