Luce in the eighteenth century. Its italic is more useful than its roman, because it has an interesting series of swash capitals and some unusual tied lower-case letters. Extensively copied, I do not think that versions produced in this country—of which the best is called "Cadmus Old Style" —are as good as the French original. I should therefore suggest that the type be procured from French foundries. If used with a nice sense of taste, such a type is suitable for entire books and is excellent for ephemeral printing. The last fifteen years have witnessed, in architecture and decoration, an increasingly careful study of the art of historical periods, and this has had an effect upon book-making. At first, such types as were available were utilized to reconstitute books in the styles of different times and countries. Naturally enough, this soon led to the production of types inspired by certain historical type-forms, the earliest of which were privately owned fonts specially designed for a given purpose or a particular press. Later, similar fonts were put on sale by founders for whatever use a printer chose to make of them; the success of their use depending on the printer's skill. In the first of these, type-founders “improved" what they said they set out to copy, with the inevitable result of impairing the original design; but several later fonts of this class indicate a growing appreciation of the necessity of a stricter adherence to the originals. The Cloister Old Style roman was based on a study of Nicolas Jenson's long-suffering and as yet unrivalled font, and its italic is of an interesting early form. It is a practical type; not very inspired, perhaps, yet quiet and satisfactory because not attempting too much; and, just because of its unobtrusive quality, lending itself better to a good