those used by some early French printers. The Kennerley appears to me a little consciously modelled on early types more “precious" than valuable. It is a question whether it is merely an ennobled form of publicity type or a book face the value of which has yet to be proved. According to Leonardo, "Truth was the daughter of Time." So it will be more polite—and safer—to let the Lady decide. Cheltenham Old Style, designed by Mr. Goodhue, is among those types that Time and his Daughter have definitely devoted to publicity, although it has been occasionally used for books. Owing to certain eccentricities of form, it cannot be read comfortably for any length of time. Its capitals are better than its lower-case, which is too “perpendicular" in effect—a fault appropriate to so distinguished an architect of Gothic buildings! It is, however, an exceedingly handsome letter for ephemeral printing. A second type that seems to me to have found its place in the same class is Bodoni. Some people might call it an historical font; but the "Bodoni" type of commerce is a composite picture of many of Bodoni's fonts, rather than a reproduction of any one of them. None the less, it is in effect somewhat foreign, and that is its disadvantage; for a volume set in it suggests a Continental reprint of an English book—an impression by which one is perpetually, though perhaps subconsciously, teased. It can be utilized for short addresses, circulars,and advertising, with great success—as in the charming use of it by Mr. T. M. Cleland. To printerdesigners as skilful as Cleland it may be recommended. ## §4 Black-letter, though nowadays rarely used, as it originally was, for the text of entire books, has survived for ornamental purposes; especially in liturgical printing. This type is un-