readable to some people and puzzling (in mass) to most, so it must be used cautiously. It can be combined most successfully with old style types. With more “modern" faces it is out of accord. The best form of this English national letter is that cut by William Caslon in 1734. Most of the variants of Caslon's black-letter have been unsatisfactory because too thick or too thin, too modelled or not enough so. The gothic paragraph-marks that sometimes accompany black-letter types are interesting and should be had; as well as the "peculiar sorts" of these fonts—the round r (¿), old ampersand (), ligatured letters, liturgical signs, etc. The so-called black-letter arabic figures, the dollar-mark, and modern ampersand may be rejected. Roman forms of enumeration—by letters—should be used in printing numbers in black-letter type, and the word "dollars" printed in full. In many gothic fonts, the same letter-form is still used as it should be—for both capital I and J. But the capital U—anciently used for V as well—is generally supplemented by a V of modern design, which is seldom satisfactory. Other black-letters that are sometimes useful and always interesting are the Old Flemish Black, based on one of Caxton's types, cut by Vincent Figgins; and a round gothic letter called Old Tudor Black, cut by F. Tarrant and E. P. Prince for Messrs. Miller & Richard, recalling round Italian gothic types. Beautiful French batarde and civilité fonts may be secured from French foundries. A type based on eighteenth century engraved lettering, although of an entirely different kind from black-letter, may be employed in a similar way—to give here and there an ornamental touch to pages set in old style types. Its peculiarly French character limits its use, which must be sparing in any case. It is called in this country French Script,