but the series brought out by Mayeur of Paris is styled Les Batardes Coulées. For lines set in capital letters on covers and in title-pages, the Goudy Old Style roman capitals are good. In design they have an agreeable freedom, and they compose into strong lines of dignified letter. Where a more unconventional letterdesign is not unsuitable, Goudy's Forum capitals are to be recommended. ## §5 For"free" initial letters—to cover two, three, or more lines of text—fonts of capitals cast without shoulders are desirable.Complete series of these "titling -letters"¹ in both old style and modern face should be procured. With transitional types, old style initials will serve satisfactorily. French Old Style roman capitals make a distinguished initial letter, and Goudy Old Style roman capitals are also effective for this purpose. For use with black-letter, a few good alphabets of free gothic capitals—notably the series called "Missal"— are available.These plain roman or gothic letters are, as a rule, preferable to ornamented initials. For occasional use in printing of a more fanciful kind, the four sizes of Moreau-le-jeune outline roman capitals and the three sizes of Fournier-le-jeune ornamented italic capitals brought out by the Peignot foundry of Paris are very good indeed. Of decorative alphabets there are three classes: old alphabets used by famous printers such as Tory, Ratdolt, Estienne, Plantin, and others, which are handsome but somewhat hackneyed; alphabets of a much later style, some of them versions of those used by Whittingham at the Chis-