wick Press; and a few modern series. No rule can be laid down in selecting such alphabets, because it depends so much on personal taste. Nor can we tell where to find them, for they must be gathered from many different foundries. Initials of large size are comparatively rarely used; so alphabets of small-sized letter are usually the most practical, and, it may be added, are somewhat harder to get. Furthermore, if one can secure a capable designer who thoroughly understands the line required in decorations to be used with types, he may be employed to draw a special alphabet; for this is a valuable asset to a printing-office. Some volumes printed by T. & A. Constable employ an alphabet designed by Laurence Housman, intended to accompany a modified old face type, which is a good example of a fine specially drawn series of decorative letters. In some of the best old and modern printing, the only typographical ornaments used are solid black florets or “ivy leaves." These are a very early form of type ornament, and fifteenth and sixteenth century books, in which they constantly appear, show most of the best varieties.Froben's books are full of such ornaments. Those still used by' the Oxford University Press were part of Dr. Fell's gift. Florets give life to a large or solid page of type, wheré other less sedate forms of ornament would not be appropriate. Most of them accord best with sturdy old style types. Some more sharply cut designs of later date harmonize better with modern face types.¹