As early types became lighter, ornaments became more open and complicated in design, and in combination formed definite patterns. Examples have come down to us from the earliest foundries, and are seen in their specimen-sheets $\pmb { e . g . , }$ that of the sale of the Van Dyck types. Rowe Mores (in his Dissertation) says, "Metal-flowers were the first ornaments used in printed books to be set at the head of the first page and the tail of the last page, as well as the head and tail of any separate part of the whole work. And they were sometimes used as an edging to the matter according to the taste of the author or the printer. They were used but sparingly and with small variety, but in time they became more numerous, and were cut in several shapes, forms and devices, and continued in reputation till Cutters in Wood supplanted them. When Mr. Moxon wrote they were accounted old-fashioned. But the use of them was revived by the French and Germans and the variety of them considerably encreased by the Two Mr. James's in England." The older English "flowers," he continues, often“expressed some meaning and were adapted to other purposes than barely to dress and decorate a page. They were formed from real objects, natural and artificial, civil and military—as from weeds and flowers of the field and garden, leaves, branches, fruits, flower-baskets, flowerpots, urns, crosses, banners, launces, swords, and tilting spears, and other simples culled from the fields of nature and of heraldry; yet germane to the subject matter of the work. They were frequently emblematical and monitory; as cherubs' faces for the hymns of charity girls, hour-glasses for lugubrious orators, and mort-heads for the parish-clerks. They were symbolical of nations; as the crown and rose, the crown and lyz, the crown and harp; —of dignities and orders; as diadems, crowns, mitres and coronets; the red