hat called at Camb. the Cardinal's cap, where too the mitre is called the golden night-cap; the courtelass; the arms of Ulster, and the anchor of hope; the Scotch thistle and sprigs of rue; . . . of states and conditions; as the myrtle, the weeping willow, and the bugle-horn." Equivalents of many of the “flowers" described by Mores are to be found in Caslon's early specimen-sheets, which show those he designed for use with his own types, and which are carefully adapted to harmonize in colour with letter-press. Solid black masses are usually avoided, and in some designs cross-haching is employed to give variety of effect and help the presswork. Of their kind there is nothing superior to Caslon's "flowers," and the larger assortment of them one has,¹ the better. With the ebb and flow of colour and strength in types, the weight of ornaments changed. As, toward the end of the eighteenth century, type-faces became lighter,“flowers" became more delicate—or, as Mores, writing in 1778, says, "mere figures of fancy, made up of circular oval and angular turns, contrived to look light airy and unmeaning, and to try the genius or patience of a compositor." With modelled types of the early nineteenth century, ornaments became still thinner and more wiry in effect. During the reign of fat-faced types the ornaments also waxed fat. In short, there was a distinct difference between the type ornaments of 1750, 1790, and 1820, and accordingly they cannot be used interchangeably. The French ornaments, flowers, and borders in Fournier's Manuel of 1764 show that they were designed to decorate pages set in types of that time and in