those only. Employed with the types of Didot, used forty years later, they look coarse and inharmonious. We can use these “ivy leaves" or “flowers” properly, only by remembering that typographic ornament must harmonize in line and treatment with its accompanying letter-press. The supply of good florets is not as great as one would expect.To obtain them, specimen-books of different foundries must be consulted, and those selected that are modelled on the best old ones. Deficiencies may be supplied by specially designed florets, copied from those in old books. Before making a choice of "flowers," it is a good plan to study the specimen-books of Caslon, Fry, Fournier, Didot, and Bodoni, which will reveal many good designs and give hints for employing what might otherwise seem useless material. Many of the best “flowers" can still be had in their original forms, and fair equivalents of others can be picked up here and there. Good ornaments, which have been laid aside by their founders as old-fashioned, can sometimes be cast to order. In making such selections as this, if a man has knowledge and trained taste, it will show itself in a repertory of ornaments distinguished, individual, and peculiar to his own office. ## II UR composing-room has, therefore, only about seven series of standard types for book work, and in all about a score of varieties: "For what, then," the reader may ask, are all the other types in founders' specimen-books?" My answer would be,"Chiefly to avoid." We are told that if we know the truth, it will make us free; and it will. If we know the truth typographically we shall be freed from using the many poor types that are offered us. There are hun-