dreds of pages in founders' specimen-books; and yet examples of almost every type that the world ought ever to have seen could be shown in a thin pamphlet.¹ If we know anything about the history of type-forms, or have learned to distinguish what pure type-forms are, most of the types offered appear absolutely negligible. If printers had been better educated in their own trade, many of these wretched letters could never have been sold at all. Horace Walpole— who printed none too well at Strawberry Hill—said about people, that nine-tenths of them “were created to make you want to be with the other tenth." This is true of types. The types I have recommended—all of which may be had from existing foundries—are mostly standard, and all of them appear to me good. It is not, however, my purpose to choose types for a printer, but to show him how to choose types for himself. He may therefore make quite a different selection, and this is as it should be. If only the types suggested—no matter how excellent—were invariably chosen, all printing-houses would be as like as the proverbial two peas, with products as monotonous as Sahara. This can be obviated only by exercising individual taste—wisely; and the basis on which individual taste can be wisely exercised has been already pointed out. It is applicable both to old types that we may come upon, and new ones that may be offered us. There is, for instance, that large and interesting class of types transitional between old style fonts and modern face characters, shown in late eighteenth century English and French specimen-books—types like Martin's in England or Didot's early fonts in France. Such a fine transitional let-