ter will do all the work of an old style type, and has sometimes, as I have said, a distinction and delicacy which old style fonts do not possess; while it is more interesting less bleak and commonplace—than a modern face type. The two upper sections in our plate (fig. 367) are set in a transitional font, which is, both in roman and italic, a fine and workable letter. The smaller roman beneath has certain interesting peculiarities that render it unlike Caslon's ordinary fonts—or Baskerville's either—but its accompanying italic came from the Caslons when under the Baskerville influence, and is for all intents and purposes a characteristic "Baskerville" type. A man must be thoroughly grounded in his knowledge of type-forms to select these fonts; for an untrained eye may be easily deceived by some mongrel type which is not transitional at all, but merely a bad type for any period. But an eye trained to be sensitive to type-forms will be able to “spot" good types amid masses of worthless material. There is no need to limit ourselves to American or English products in searching for such types. Continental type foundries must have many agreeable types hidden away among their material, which might well be resuscitated. And what are the types we ought not to want—which have no place in any artistically respectable composingroom? They are (in my opinion) practically all types on "standard line," all condensed or expanded types, all "sansserif" or (as they are absurdly miscalled) “gothic" types, all fat-faced black-letter and fat-faced roman, all hair-line types, almost all “ornamented" types and types which imitate engraving, and, with one or two exceptions, all shaded types. To this list I would add the variant forms of many standard series of types, which make up their “families." These are principally condensations, distortions, or exag-