in France, the weight of these new type-faces was at first gained, not by a greater weight of line throughout, but by a disproportionate thickening of heavy strokes of letters, which left their hair-lines much as before. This reaction from fragile to sturdy letters was a change which, if it only had been guided by some one familiar with early type-forms, might have led to better results. But at that time materials for the comparative study of types were not readily assembled. The further development of these fashions brought about a kind of swollen type-form¹ in which all the lines of a letter were of nearly equal strength, and these were the types of which Savage says: "The founders have now introduced another change in the proportions of letters, and have gone to a barbarous extreme, from their first improvement. The rage is now, which of them can produce a type in the shape of a letter, with the thickest lines, and with the least white in the interior parts." He adds that the founders said that such types were meant for printing hand-bills, etc., and if they were introduced into book-work, that it was contrary to the original intention. Savage displays sheets in which original Caslon types are shown in contrast to the current Caslon types. If these are bad types, he says, "it may be attributed to the bad taste of others, whom the founders are desirous of obliging"but this is merely an ancient and poor excuse for not sticking to one's principles! These hideous fashions for a time drove original Caslon types to the wall. Hansard, writing in 1825, says: "Caslon's fonts rarely occur in modern use, but they have too frequently been su-