gerations of the original letter— the disreputable offspring of honest parents. To the printer the moral of all this is that studies in typeforms teach us not only how to choose, but give us courage to eliminate. There are many ways of being wrong, but only one way of being right, and it is surely better to know the one way of being right, and purchase types few but fit, than to follow the many ways of being wrong, and expend much time, labour, and money in the experience! I have called this book a study in survivals, because in it I have tried to show not only what types have survived, but what should survive through their fitness for the best typography, and in so doing to lay down those general principles which may help "the survival of the fittest" in days to come. Each year that passes, we shall be called on to judge the design of types, both old and new. We must have a trained taste and eye to make a rewarding choice. For if we do not judge types rightly, they will judge us—the penalty of foolish choice being the penalty we pay for choosing foolishly in life. We are punished by getting what we want! It is a simple matter to make lists of good types—though not as simple as it seems. It is still simpler—and much less trouble—lazily to accept other people's conclusions and think no more about it. But the ideal composing-room will never be equipped in this way. It will be made what it ought to be only by those adventurers who add to those types accepted as “standard" other interesting fonts selected from sources to which study will have furnished a clue. The field for fruitful research is still great ; and the printer who seeks will find himself the possessor, not merely of delightful, individual, and rare types, but of the ideal composing-room.