responsible for some of the harm done in this direction; and the disciples of the ideals of the one, and the imitators of the work of the other, have had time to do even more harm. There have been, indeed, many well-meaning persons some are still with us—who have written, and also talked, in a manner very near to nonsense, about the advantages of working long ago—though the precise years of these agreeable periods are usually left dans la vague. Such mistaken views have not been confined to writing and talking, but were sometimes acted upon. Theorists and sentimentalists here and there formed themselves into temporary industrial groups, fenced away from what they called the" corroding influences" of the period to which they really belonged! These men thought (or said they did) that they were reproducing that tranquil and contented industrial life under which—in some Golden Age—good work was universally done. A little study of the economic history of printing, and of the life of printers in old times, would perhaps have convinced these amiable persons that—as far as typography was concerned-no such conditions existed. The Gothic scene against which the old work was accomplished, made in some ways as little difference to it as does the shape of a room to the sense of what is said in it. W hat we think of as the printers' foreground was usually their background, and the remoteness of the period should not lead us to idealize it, or them. When we throw away all this“bric-à-brac sentimentale et moyen-âgeux" we find that the constant element was the human will struggling against human laziness; and that the victory of the one or of the other made for success or failure then, precisely as it does now. When what they did was admirable—as it sometimes, but not always, was— it was produced with travail. The pity of it is that much valuable enthusiasm, which might have been applied to present-