day needs, has come to nothing through these false conceptions. "The chains of the mind are broken by understanding," says Gilbert Murray, “and so far as men are unduly enslaved by the past, it is by understanding the past that they may hope to be freed. But it is never really the past— the true past—that enslaves us; it is always the present." ## II publishing is extremely "documented," and I write of early industrial conditions in France, because we can so readily get an idea of what they were at first in the printing industry and of what they subsequently became. To begin with, the men who copied manuscripts before printing was introduced were often extremely inaccurate transcribers. To establish some proper standard and supervision, they were placed under the control of the University of Paris. The University had the right to license proper copyists, and to approve the sale of their manuscripts—many of which were in the nature of text-books in which exactness was essential. To accomplish this, there was a great body of regulations in force. The copyists in France were an influential class—strong enough to prevent the setting up of a printing-press in Paris for fully twenty years after the invention of printing. Their opposition to the press shows us that industrial conflicts existed at the very birth of printing. Mellottée says that “documents of the period tell us of the frightful struggle of the manuscript-makers against the first printers. No improvements in our present-day machinery can be compared to the change which printing made in the production of books. And even the revolution at the beginning of the nineteenth century, brought about by the