introduction of the power-press, is as nothing really, compared with the complete overturn which took place in industries connected with the book. In ${ \bf 1 4 7 0 , }$ there were six thousand men occupied solely in transcribing manuscripts, and some years later they scarcely existed, the new process doing ten times more work than all of them together."i Rome, Venice, Milan, Nuremberg, Cologne, Augsburg, all had printing-presses before a Parisian press was set up; and when the first Paris press was established, it was in a sense a private affair and came into being only through the influence of scholars like Heynlin and Fichet of the Sorbonne. After a while the business men of that day saw the commercial advantage of such enterprises, and began to interest themselves in them. It was not, however, until about 1480 that printing was fairly established in Paris. Twenty years later, there were Parisian establishments which possessed as many as fifteen presses. If we keep steadily in mind that the making of printed books was nothing more than the reproduction of manuscripts by mechanical means, we can better understand by what insensible steps the supervision of the University was transferred from the product of the copyists-by-hand $( i . e . ,$ manuscripts) to the product of the copyists-by-machine (i.e., books). The copyists-by-hand, after printing was introduced, had still some work to do on a printed book. In many cases they illuminated the first page, just as they had decorated the first page of the manuscript; and they still filled in paragraph-marks, initials, etc., in colour. There was no abrupt transition from hand-copying to press-printing. Many men continued in the waning industry of calligraphy and illumination until they died; but their places were not filled.