Others were at once forced into other occupations, and many became writing-masters, some accountants. The same regulations that had been applied to the scribe and his manuscript were applied by Louis XI in 1474 to the printer and his book; the transition was accomplished, and the printer found himself attached to the University in place of the ancient copyist. On the other hand, the examining and licensing prerogatives of the University, vested in a theological faculty, were one by one transferred to the King, and in the end it was to the Crown that the three grades of French printers the apprentice, the journeyman, and the master-printer— had to look for such privileges as they enjoyed. The copyist having become a printer, and supervision having been slowly transferred from the University and from Parliament to the Crown—the chief result of sixteenth century legislation—we have to find out what were the conditions in the printing and publishing trade in France during this and succeeding centuries. In the early days of French printing, there were, as has been said, three classes of printers : apprentice, journeyman, and master-printer. To be a master-printer, a man had first to be a journeyman, and before being a journeyman he must have been an apprentice. Certain conditions had to be fulfilled before admission was granted to these different ranks. The rules which governed these positions descended to the printing trade from the ancient Corporation du Livre; and to this extent guild rules had some influence on printing. In the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries the guild or trade-union was really a safeguard to the artisan, we are told by Mellottée. The head of the atelier was in some sense a father; the workman lived under the same roof with him; in disputes he had a right of appeal; and he was