backed by his guild or company as the cleric was by his bishop, or the student by his college. But this healthy and true form of paternalism was on the wane when printing was invented, and by the sixteenth century, although conditions appeared to be much as in former years, the guilds and similar associations had fallen into the hands of employers and become close corporations and monopolies. The interests of the two classes became more distinct, and finally were antagonistic. Whatever the guilds may have done for manuscript-makers, as far as they influenced printing at all they were not a particularly salutary force. For printing was a trade that required capital, encouraged subdivision of labour, and, to be profitable, had to employ workers in large numbers. The first master-printers engaged their apprentices on various terms: sometimes paying in money only; sometimes undertaking to feed and lodge the apprentice, and to supply him with shoes during his stay—and at the end of his engagement to present him with an extra pair! The apprenticeship generally lasted three years. In 1571, apprenticeship became compulsory, and a master was obliged to certify that an apprentice had duly learned his trade under him, and was fitted to become a journeyman. The journeymen complained that stingy, ignorant master-printers turned out half-educated apprentices, and that thus the whole class of journeymen was discredited; and as a remedy they suggested that pressmen should serve four years' and compositors five years' apprenticeship—in any case three. Later it was insisted—what from the first would have seemed desirable—that apprentices should know how to read and write! In 1649, the lines of qualification were much more tightly drawn, and apprentices were expected to know something of Greek and to be able to read Latin. The result