was that so few apprentices applied for admission to printing-houses, that in 1654 master-printers were again allowed to engage apprentices who only knew how to read and write in the vernacular. There was also an inferior sort of apprentice called an alloué. Nothing was asked of him except hard work. He had the same obligations as other apprentices, but when he had finished his apprenticeship, he was still a mere workman and not a journeyman. Journeymen could (if fitted for it) become master-printers; but the alloués could not. They first seem to have been recruited from the ranks of little boys, hewers of wood and drawers of water, who, because they were strong and willing, were useful in printing-offices and could be profitably employed. Later they arrived at the status we have described. They were an antique form of printer's devil. Child-labour—male and female—is not new. In those days of ancient peace there was really constant war between employer and employed over the apprentices—a struggle that began with the invention of printing and is scarcely terminated yet. The master-printer, to increase the number of journeymen, wished to be free to take as many apprentices as he pleased. The journeyman, on his side, wanted to reduce the number of apprentices so that the number of journeymen should be limited. A rule issued in 1541 has a significant clause to the effect that masters may make and take as many apprentices as they choose, and that the journeymen must not beat or menace the said apprentices, but must work with them for the good of the trade, under pain of prison, banishment, and other punishments. It was this dispute that was one of the causes of industrial troubles which will be mentioned later. The earliest French printing-offices were often very small