affairs—ateliers de famille. They were conducted chiefly by foreigners, mostly Germans, whose common origin, employment in a foreign country, and the fact that books were usually in Latin, sometimes led to real community of interest and some intellectual culture among the workmen. But in the sixteenth century, men of means, principally publishers who were not themselves practical printers, organized printing-offices simply for the returns they got from them, just as we now organize manufactories and, I am sorry to say, printing-houses, which interest us only for the money they bring in. Then, as now, thę disparity between the social and financial situation of the two classes forced men into groups governed by opposing interests. As early as the year 1536, a master-printer had been sentenced for the bad food given to a journeyman, and the decree also censured him for what it styled "his unbridled avarice," which made him care for nothing but getting rich, though he was reducing his journeymen and their families to objects of charity. When establishments came into existence which employed as many as two hundred and fifty workmen, the masters tried to reduce the rate of wages. To effect this, the number of apprentices was made as great as possible, for apprentices were paid less. The type-founders' legal situation was not, “up to 1686, very clear. They were not yet recognized as exercising any special trade, and they could not, as type-founders alone, become members of the Confrérie de St. Jean l’Evangéliste (a sort of guild-trade-union), or from 1618 become one of the Community of Printers and Publishers. This difficulty they got over by taking out permits, which allowed them to open