shops and to call themselves publishers, or sometimes even paper-makers; but real publishers were not pleased at this, and instituted a suit in 1614 to forbid them to take this title."1 This quarrel lasted for a long time, and some thirty years later Richelieu's favourite, Antoine Vitré, wrote that “Letter-founders call themselves publishers, printers and binders because they cast letters for books. I tell them that the calf has about as much right to call himself a publisher because he furnishes the skin for the bindings." A decree of 1670 regulated the sale of new or secondhand typographic material, which was scrupulously looked after. No press and no font of type could be sold or exchanged without a declaration before the authorities, if it was to be used in Paris; or some special authorization, if sent into the provinces. The Crown took these measures to prevent the establishment of clandestine printing-offices, from which disquieting political pamphlets were often issued. Royal authority, enforced to the utmost through the censure, had by the end of the seventeenth century reduced the University to a negligible rôle in relation to printing. The regulation of the printing and publishing trade I shall touch upon later. ## III T may come as a surprise to the lover of ancient customs that among the picturesque habits of sixteenth century printers was that of going out on strikes. The printers'strikes and resultant disturbances at Lyons and Paris lasted from 1539 to 1572. The Lyons strike was an explosion among the rank and file of the work-people, the outcome of a series of abuses suffered at the hands of the masters; for master-printers appear to have determined to re-1Mellottée's Histoire Économique de l’Imprimerie, pp. 401, 402.