perseded by others which can claim no excellence over them. In fact, the book-printing of the present day is disgraced by a mixture of fat, lean, and heterogeneous types, which to the eye of taste is truly disgusting."1 In London, Robert Thorne, successor to Thomas Cottrell, is responsible for the vilest form of type invented—up to that time. Thorne's specimen-book of "Improved (!) Types" of 1883 should be looked at as a warning of what fashion can make men do. His “jobbing types" look as their name suggests! His black-letter is perhaps the worst that ever appeared in England. In Vincent Figgins' specimen of 1815, and in Fry's specimen of 1816, and naturally in the specimen of William Thorowgood (Thorne's successor) of 1824, 1832, and 1837, the new styles are triumphant (figs. 334 and 335). Fashions like these, as Hansard says,"have left the specimens of a British letter-founder a heterogeneous compound, made up of fat-faces and lean faces, wide-set and close-set, all at once crying Quousque tandem abutere patientia nostra?" The Caslon specimen of 1844 shows the adoption of some of the worst current fashions in types; and we exhibit a selection of the unattractive ornaments intended to accompany the “ fat-face" fonts produced by this famous house (figs. 336 and 337). A tide of bad taste had swept everything before it by 1844— the precise year of the revival of Caslon's earliest types! Much the same thing was happening on the Continent, and the curious may consult such “documents" as the Supplement to the Specimen of the Spanish founders, J. B. Clement-Sturme y Compañia, published at Valencia in 1833, which is full of types of this kind ; the Didot, Legrand et Cie.