duce their subordinates to men without powers or rights. This Lyons strike had been brewing for a long time. In the months of April and May, 1539, a number of the Lyonnese printers stopped work, and also disorganized the labour of other journeymen and apprentices, threatening them if they dared to continue in their places. The sequel was a strike so general that the printing industry was at a standstill. Armed bands of strikers marched the streets day and night and attacked masters, police, and officers of the government; but among the workmen themselves excellent discipline reigned, showing that a perfectly good understanding existed, and had existed for some time, as to what was to be done by the labour party. The outgoing men pledged themselves not to work except in a body, and punished any one refusing to submit to the rules of their organization. The number of men in the labour group was so great that it was impossible to imprison them all, though here and there some workmen were arrested. The cause of the strike, according to the workmen's complaint, was that master-printers supplied insufficient food, that wages had been reduced, and that they were not free to do their work as, and when, they chose. The masters retorted that there were certain classes of journeymen who were never contented with their food and never would be, and that there were always men who wished to take holidays on work-days and to work on holidays. But the number of holidays without pay was a positive evil then to the working-man, as they would be now, for he often needed to work at those times to support his family. On the chief festivals, naturally, no work was done, but there were multitudes of minor saints' days to be observed, leaving only about two hundred and forty working days in the year. The masters were willing to compromise on these points,