but the workmen would not accept their offers. Meanwhile the authorities of Lyons insisted upon some solution, for they had the strikers' wives and children on their hands, many of them in real destitution. To settle matters, two committees (one composed of journeymen, the other of masters) appéared before the Seneschal of Lyons, who had authority from the Crown to settle the dispute. The seneschal's decision shows on how many points the two groups differed. Journeymen were forbidden to take any pledge among themselves, to gather outside work-rooms in larger parties than five, to carry arms or sticks in printing-offices or the street, to threaten or beat apprentices or to interfere with them; they were also debarred from labour on festivals and from stopping work on the eves of festivals earlier than was customary, and were not allowed to leave work to go to a baptism or funeral unless it was in the family of their master or mistress! As to master-printers, they could take as many apprentices as they chose, but they must give the usual monthly wage to journeymen and must feed them properly, with as good food as they had customarily given five or six years before —a committee being appointed to decide wherein proper board and lodging consisted. In most of these stipulations journeymen were defeated and masters were triumphant; but the Seneschal of Lyons, in receiving a group of journeymen representing the workmen, inadvertently recognized the labour party. By this an admission was practically made that workmen had the right to act in a corporate capacity and to be represented before the authorities. The Crown, however, accepted the settlement of the dispute and made a decree which was mandatory, and the strike was ended. The government found itself face to face with organized labour, and it was so frightened thereby that the decrees which it put forth not alone regulated printing,