but were to be applied in principle to every other trade in France. The Lyons strike was a question of wages; the Paris strike concerned the conduct of employees. It was precipitated by complaints made by master-printers, who alleged that journeymen and their helpers, by private clubs and associations, had directly and indirectly stirred up dissatisfaction among apprentices, and had so influenced them as practically to destroy their usefulness. The masters drew up regulations which they wished the King to enforce, based on decisions given in the Lyons strike, and meant to forestall similar difficulties. These proposed rules debarred journeymen from forming any club or electing representatives, from assembling outside their master's house, and from being armed; forbade them to beat apprentices; made masters arbiters of what journeymen should do and how and when they should do it ; forbade assembling at dinners to celebrate the beginning or end of an apprenticeship and the asking of subscriptions for a common cause; forbade the use of the word “tric"(a signal used when work was to be stopped for a strike); forbade grumbling if work in a hurry should be distributed among a number of workmen; and prohibited them from absence on eves of festivals and from working on the feast-day itself. Masters were to give journeymen reasonable nourishment, pay them monthly, dismiss any who were mutinous or disreputable; were to insist on eight days' notice before workmen could leave them (although they were not to give notice of dismissal to workmen); were not to hire away one another's work-people, or use one another's printers' devices. They were also obliged to have proofreaders who knew how to correct proofs properly. The working day was fixed from five o'clock in the morning until eight o'clock at night. Type-foundries were