included in the preceding rules. The King approved the proposals and they became law. In Lyons, it was the journeymen who complained; in Paris, the masters saw an opportunity to secure more power by precipitating questions which forestalled like complaints. In August, 1539, when the law was promulgated, the Paris strike began. The disturbances which it caused were not settled by the Crown until thirty years later — in 1572, by a compromise which was satisfactory neither to the employers nor the employed. Meanwhile, at Lyons the printing industry was ruined. The master-printers decided to leave the city for Vienne in Dauphiny, or some other place where conditions were better. The Lyons authorities, frightened at the removal of an industry and invested capital which would hurt the prosperity of the town (for next to Paris Lyons was the great centre for printing), met themasters and endeavoured to find some way out of the difficulty. An appeal was made to the King, who finally modified the laws in effect at Lyons, in accord with rulings which had been enforced at Paris; but it was only after some years of negotiation that the matter was finally settled, and then only by royal authority. It is recorded that among the many master-printers of Lyons, Étienne Dolet, the author-printer-bookseller, alone sided with the workmen, and incurred, by so doing, the lasting hostility. of other master-printers—a hostility which had something to do with the troubles to which he later fell victim. Dolet, who had been proofreader for Gryphius, and was friend to Jean de Tournes, was hanged at Paris in 1546 for heretical opinions, and his body and books burned together. These are but two episodes in the history of the printing trade in France during the sixteenth century. Conditions were probably the same in greater or less degree in England,