financial magnates, who are in turn actuated more by vanity than by taste or intelligence. He proceeds to describe the annoyances suffered by the public, the authors, and last of all by the workmen themselves. The privileges which the king accorded for the printing of books (to the thirty-six printers fixed by law by the edict of 1686), Blondel reminds us, expressly stipulated that books should be printed on good paper and from goo type, and if they were not, the privilege became null and void. Printers and booksellers, however, now sold books of importance printed on wretched paper, from battered types, carelessly corrected—all to avoid expense. If the publie complained, it complained without redress. Moreri's historical dictionary could not be bound properly, because the ink was so poor that it offset upon opposite pages, and sone: books were so carelessly printed that whole lines of text were left out Greek characters were used which were so worn that the accents could not be distinguished. Booksellers, who had to obtain a license for each new edition of a book, evaded this requirement by omitting the number of the edition on the title-page, or by placing old dates on new editions.T’he English at that period had a method of publishing works by subscriptiona number of subseribers elubbing together to finance the expense of a book, cach subseriber receiving copies of the edition so published at a lower price than outsiders. The French publisher took up this soheme and improved upon it. He secured the subsoribers' money in advance and this furnished the chief part of the capital necessary for the enterprise; and though subsoribers got their books cheaper than outsiders, yet they paid exorbitantly for them. Nor did the publisher, having reccived the subserip-