cording to the statistics of the period, among the six hundred journeymen printers in Paris, there were very few who led loose lives; and Blondel adds sarcastically that “the extremely small wages which they received were not capable of furnishing the means for very serious dissipation!" That the labourer is worthy of his hire, Blondel reminds his readers, is a precept of the Gospel; but the Gospel did not interest Parisian booksellers—unless it was to be printed. If an author was in a hurry to get his book finished, but some new work of a more important and paying sort came to the printing-office, work-people were taken off the book the author was clamouring for, and were compelled to stay all night working on the more profitable job that had to be printed quickly. If an author complained that his book did not get on fast enough, what was the reply? It was that printers were dissipated, and that, of course, was not the fault of the publisher! Two well-known Paris publishers and printers, Barbou¹ and David,2 " as stingy as they were unprincipled," says Blondel, employed a publisher who had correspondents in various countries to secure printers from Germany, whom they would engage to pay three livres a day, together with washing, lodging, and food. Eight German workmen, on the strength of the publisher's letter (which, unfortunately for them, they left behind at Frankfort), accepted the offer. Six of them went to Barbou, two to David. They all worked exactly three days. Then Barbou said he was not satisfied, because the men were Germans and did not know French; also he alleged that they did not work in the Parisian, but