in the German method—which (at this late period) appears to us natural. He would consent to keep them, he declared, only at two livres daily to include everything and on condition they would engage to stay with him for three years. The men refused, saying that living was dear in Paris, they were accustomed to a good table, and they could not afford to stay at the wages offered. So Barbou locked them up in his printing-office without food, and there they remained until they made so much noise that he was shamed into setting them free. When the men tried to return to Germany, the masters held back their luggage. Their French comrades, angry at such scurvy treatment of strangers, made up a purse and sent them home. This the master-printers considered insulting and insupportable to the last degree, and described as an attitude of open revolt. At that day, there were six hundred printers in Paris, and great opposition was made to bringing in foreigners at all. "Why," says Blondel, "should people import labour? What injustice it is to hire abroad people who take the bread out of the hands of the French workmen." Little the masters cared whether their men were foreign or native, learned or ignorant!"They judged their qualifications by their own," he adds, “ and as many of the master-printers hardly know how to read, they are absurd enough to suppose that it is not necessary to know more, in order to be capable of correctly producing Greek, Latin, French, and scientific works. . . . If this sort of thing goes on, they will make negroes come to work at printing, as they employ them in the Indies to produce indigo and sugar." But Parisian publishers in these sad, bad old times, did not worry as to whether the books they printed were correct, or well produced, provided they could sell them at a high price. Illustrated Bibles had been printed a hundred