years earlier which were cheaply and tastefully brought out, but new editions—sold at a high price—contained plates disgraceful in their slovenly execution. Editions of poetry were issued, badly printed, wretchedly composed, with pages swarming with faults of spelling and punctuation. Absurd errors, the correction of which was absolutely essential, were passed over. In a book of prayers for the use of lay-people, a passage in St. Matthew was made to read non timebis Dominum instead of non tentabis, and in a missal, the Canon of the Mass lacked a word. "Instead," Blondel concludes, "of keeping the loyalty of their workmen by fair wages and inciting honest endeavour, the master-printers hold them only to persecute them, to decry their value, and to enviously snatch the very bread from their hands. Was there ever such terrible oppression! Slaves at Algiers do not fare worse. Is n't this precisely the way to disgust decently educated men, as journeymen ought to be, with such an ungrateful employment? . . . If matters go on in this way, and a deaf ear is persistently turned to their complaints, they will flee a country where they groan under oppression. . . . It is not to scandalize people, that this memoir is written; it is to end a violence so tyrannical that there is no way of opposing it save to cry loudly : Stop thief!" The tone of much of this is disconcertingly modern. The introduction of the ill-paid and inexperienced foreign workman, the oppression of the helpless labourer, the objection to his forming any corporate opposing body, the association of employers to determine the wages to be paid, the statement that books were dear because the workmen·received such large returns—all these things are familiar to us. Our own troubles to-day are only repetitions of these old tumults: no more bitter, but on a greater scale.