peddlers could be degraded from their trade and declared incapable of exercising it. Type-founders were not permitted to deliver fonts of types to any one except master-printers, or their widows carrying on the business; nor could they sell to any one save masters in the trade, printers, and booksellers, in large or small quantities, their punches, strikes, and matrices. The quartier de l' Université on the left bank of the Seine, in which printers were obliged to live and work, was exactly marked in its limits, and non-residence there was punished by loss of outfit and sometimes by deprivation of privilege. The oversight of all this was exercised by different classes of police inspectors. One of the eighteenth century officials, d'Hémery, who became the general inspector of the whole bookselling community, was authorized to make visits to any bookseller or printer whom he chose to see, either by night or by day, and to have an account given of anything that he happened to find, about which he wished to learn. He considered it necessary to know the precise number of presses and the amount of type in every printing-office, and to possess proofs of all vignettes and ornamental letters. Founders were not to be allowed, without his consent, to deliver fonts of type without giving him a declaration of their number, weight, and kind, and the names of those to whom they were to be sold. He even expected a list of all the apprentices in Paris, to whom he wished to furnish tickets of ingress and egress for the particular printing-office in which they were employed. The power that he asked for was not fully granted; but it indicates an agreeable conception of his own sphere of labour! It would seem logical that the author should be held responsible for his ideas rather than the printer; but in early times, the printer suffered and the author often went free.