Mellottée tells us that this was due to the theory that the printer provided the author with the means of promulgating the errors in his works, and that it was not attacks upon religion or existing institutions that were thought dangerous, but rather the popularization of such attacks; in other words, the fact that they were printed and widely distributed. In the Middle Ages, before the invention of printing, there had been many philosophers with heretical ideas, but they had been quickly stifled by the Church or the Crown. All this was quite different after the invention of printing. Such people no longer merely addressed an assembly of a few hundred individuals, but could make their appeal to an entire people, and printing being the only means which could give such power to thought, repressive legislation fell upon printers rather than upon authors. It was for this reason that such severe and rigorous penalties were inflicted in support of the censorship of the press; for the men of the sixteenth century were so frightened at what appeared to them its incalculable power, that they took extreme measures to counteract this new force. Besides confiscation and degradation, the ordinary punishments were imprisonment, whipping, or banishment, and capital punishment was not uncommon. These pains and penalties were not alone applicable to printers because they produced dangerous publications, but even to people who merely neglected to take out proper authorization for otherwise harmless work. In 1547, punishment by death was proclaimed against all printers who published a book without the imprimatur of the faculty of theology of Paris. It was not only in the sixteenth century that death was meted out to printers, but as late as 1757, the declaration was made by the civil power that all persons who were convicted of having composed or printed works tending to attack religion, to disturb the