public mind, or against royal authority, or the order and security of the government, were punishable by death. It is true that judges avoided these extreme measures as far as they could; but from 1660 to 1756, less than a century, eight hundred and ninety-six authors, printers, and sellers of books, prints, and pictures were arrested and imprisoned in the Bastille for having published works contrary to good manners, religion, or the Crown. A third of these men were printers. In addition to the more severe punishments mentioned above was the public burning of volumes at the hands of the hangman—the author himself being occasionally added as kindling to the flames, as in the case of Dolet. This charming custom was practised during the happy days of the manuscript-makers, and, as far as printing is concerned, was merely the survival of a picturesque old-world ceremony applied to a new form of industry.¹ It was much the same all over Europe. In the Netherlands, for instance, edicts were enforced by Charles V and Philip II against printers who purchased or sold books favourable to the Reformation; and in the sixteenth century, Plantin was granted the post of proto-typographer,which empowered him to examine all candidates for the printer's and engraver's trades. Among requisite letters which a printer must produce was a certificate from his diocesan authorities that he was of the orthodox faith, while the magistrate of the district bore witness to his good reputation. The number of apprentices in his employ—if he was a master-printer had to be stated. Proofreaders had to give certificates of birth, parentage, places of education and training, and good