reputation as Roman Catholics, prior to an examination of their skill. Registers were kept, in which titles of the books printed and other particulars had to be inscribed. Imported books were subject to examination, and any sold in Antwerp had to be recorded. Houses in which heretical books had been printed were abbatues et ruynées par terre!¹ quite in the modern German manner. ## VI AS to production—in 1571, three hundred to five hundred sheets a day was considered a good output, but in 1654, it was twenty-seven hundred; and in 1650, twenty-five hundred was the rule. These were for sheets printed in black, but twenty-two hundred was considered enough if red was also used. These sheets were printed by hand on a screw-press. Such requirements put to flight our pleasant idea that work in the old days had none of the rush about it that it has now. Hours of work for foremen, workers by the day, and workers by the piece, were from six o'clock in the morning until eight o'clock at night in summer; and in winter, from seven in the morning until nine o'clock. This was in the eighteenth century. But agitation by work-people about the length of the working day began as .early, as the fourteenth century, and was neither the child of the French Revolution, nor the offspring of modern socialism. In 1395, shorter hours, with the same wages given for a longer working day, was a practical question. The Lyons printers complained in 1571 that their day began at two in the morning and lasted until eight or nine in the evening; and this for print-