ers does not seem to have been unusual. Night work, as such, it is true, was forbidden,—although most persons do not much differentiate between 2 a.m. and night—not because it was bad for the workman, but, among other less creditable reasons, because the danger from fire was great and because the flickering lights of the period did not permit men to do justice to their tasks. In England, the working hours varied in different trades, and at different places and periods. Even as late as the middle of the nineteenth century, the ordinary working hours of the printer were unlimited—though nominally from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. —in such excellent London printing-houses as that of the Spottiswoodes. If economic conditions are notkept in mind, we misunderstand the significance of certain historical facts, and twist them to fit some fantastic theory. For instance, people talk loosely about great printing dynasties like the Estiennes, Elzevirs, Plantin-Moretus, etc., where generations of the same family succeeded each other as printers. This was caused to some extent, no doubt, by interest in and attachment to the work; but it was also due to an economic reason. The amount to be had by the sale of the equipment of a printing-house was, as in our time, by no means commensurate with the money value of the business if it could be carried on. That was the chief reason why large printingoffices were continued by one family, or by a long succession of partners. We know, too, that in early times the widows and daughters of master-printers were in great demand, because when a qualified journeyman married the widow or daughter of a master-printer, he acquired privileges facilitating his reception as a master. And this was another of the causes for great printing families—which we like to style “printing dynasties" if it all happened long enough