ago! It was more commonplace and simpler—more reasonable—than we think. Nor were women in the bad old times permitted to lead peaceable lives, occupied by the cradle and the distaff. From the time of St. Louis, women were employed in trades reserved for them—we find records of their names and occupations as early as 1296.Quite apart from learned ladies like Charlotte Guillard, who printed and published her famous Greek and Latin editions of the Fathers in the sixteenth century, women were very early employed in the humbler branches of typography, and women have been in our composing-rooms almost ever since. Like child-labour, it is nothing new; very few industrial“novelties" are! ## VII ditions of labour to-day are very different from those that long preceded them; and it is important to realize that these conditions were all along factors, as they are now, in the problem of turning out good printing. Types and books reflect the state of the arts around them, because on one side typography is an art; but they are influenced by trade conditions, because it is also a trade. Not to face these two facts, or to neglect either one or the other, is merely to fool one's self! To make a book which should look like a manuscript, and indeed counterfeit it, was what the first printers tried to do. They wished to reproduce the manuscript of commerce as nearly as they could, and they did it by imitating such manuscripts in type. It was an effort to make cheaply what had before been made expensively. Incidentally, they imitated beautiful written books, but there is no proof that