their printed books were always consciously intended to be beautiful. All along, the changes in books were influenced by commercial conditions. The first books were folios—large and dear. What did the printer do? He produced books which were small and cheap, and we have the Aldine 16mo volumes, printed in italic (a letter adopted chiefly because it was compact), for their period perfectly commercial though attractive editions. Again, Pigouchet and Vérard at Paris printed their Books of Hours, and they were very charming volumes. They were not as charming as the manuscripts from which they were copied, but they were far, far cheaper. By and by, when printers discovered the ignorance of the public and its willingness to buy books however badly printed, they dared to make them poorer and poorer. They printed what we call “good" books, because ours are worse; but what they thought were poor ones, because older books had been so much better. This they did because they could sell them, and because they did not even then realize what we know now—how wretchedly books can be made and still be sold! In short, the rank and file of early printers were not often actuated by conscious artistic standards, and they had trade conditions to struggle against, just as we have, and in an environment singularly like that of to-day. Yet beautiful printing was done, and fine books were made, because there were a few men among these early printers who were actuated by conscious artistic standards, and who made trade conditions helps, and not hindrances, to successful production. To print things suitably and well was the problem of the good printer then, just as it is now. The few printers and publishers who were then faithful to artistic and scholarly standards in the face of trade conditions are the men who did this, and the men we remember.