As in the Roman alphabet as opposed to other alphabets— as in certain famous types as opposed to other types—we see a survival of the fittest, so the printers whose names have survived have had a modest immortality because, though few, they were fit. Apparently it was not so much conditions as personality and education that produced the fine books of early days. Typography was good then, and has been so, under varying circumstances, and at different periods, whenever it was practised patiently by educated men of trained taste, who had convictions and the courage of them. When we think of a Jenson or an Aldine book, a Pickering or a Morris edition, a definite typographical vision passes before the eye. All the greater printers had a conception of what they wanted to do. They did not permit themselves to be overwhelmed by trade conditions, by so-called practical considerations, by“good business," or the hundred and one excuses which printers make for being too ignorant, too unimaginative, or too cowardly to do what the older men did. Nor were they pulled about by ignorant customers who wanted first this type and then that; and by obliging whom the work would have become merely a series of compromises. If they had allowed what some standardless, uneducated printers to-day allow, no individuality would have been left in their books to be remembered! In every period there have been better or worse types emploved in better or worse ways. The better types employed in better ways have been used by the educated printer acquainted with standards and history, directed by taste and a sense of the fitness of things, and facing the industrial conditions and the needs of his time. Such men have made of printing an art. The poorer types and methods have been employed by printers ignorant of standards and caring alone