## CHAPTER XXI ## REVIVALS OF CASLON AND FELL TYPES usually brought about by dissatisfaction caused by too intimate knowledge of the disadvantages of types in use, and ignorance of disadvantages which may arise in the use of types revived. In other words, one set of types falls into neglect through certain inherent drawbacks; and it is not revived until the difficulties known to those who formerly employed it are forgotten and only the advantages appear. A constant factor alsois a natural love of variety and change. The best early work of the nineteenth century was the result of a sincere effort toward the betterment of printing, according to the standards of that day; but before the midcentury, English typography, except here and there, had again fallen behind.The fine editions printed by Bulmer and Bensley were things of the past. Bulmer was dead in 1830 —Bensley in 1833. Several other publishers brought out well-printed books, but they were without the distinction of those issued some years earlier. There was, however, an exception in the work done by the two Charles Whittinghams —uncle and nephew— at the Chiswick Press, founded in 1789, though established at Chiswick in 1810. This press is famous in the annals of English typography, the soundest traditions of which it has upheld for over a century. Its best books were printed by the younger Whittingham for the publisher Pickering. In 1844, Pickering and Whittingham proposed to issue an edition of Juvenal (in contemplation since 1841), and requested the Caslon foundry to cast some of the original Caslon types which they wanted for it. This Latin edition of the Satires of Juvenal and Persius, in