quarto (a handsome book except for its red borders), was delayed, however, and not published until 1845.So the great primer “old face" Caslon font intended for it, appeared first in 1844 in The Diary of Lady Willoughby. For this fictitious journal of a seventeenth century lady of quality, old style type was thought appropriate.The Diary was a success, artistically and commercially. Though its typography does not seem much of an achievement now, it came as a novelty and relief to printers who had long since abandoned good earlier type-faces in favour of the fonts of the school of Thorne (fig. 339). This was the beginning of the revival of original Caslon fonts, and a very sound revival it was. From that time to this, Caslon type has had the popularity it merits. In fact, the chief typographic event of the mid-nineteenth century was this revival of the earliest Caslon types in the competent hands of Pickering and Whittingham. United States founders reintroduced these fonts about 1860, but they did not become popular until some thirty years later. The Aldine Poets, Walton's Complete Angler, the beautiful Latin Opera of Sallust (in the type of the Juvenal and Lady Willoughby), an octavo edition of Milton and Herbert and the famous series of folio black-letter Prayer Books are among the best of Pickering's publications. But the series of 16mo volumes, which for beauty and utility have no been surpassed in modern times, are what is particularly meant by a "Pickering edition"(fig. 340). All these were printed at the Chiswick Press, as well as many other beautiful books for publishers, book-clubs, and individuals—among them the Bannatyne Club's Breviarum Aberdonense and Henry Shaw's books on mediaeval alphabets and ornament. The Chiswick Press still holds preëminent rankthe present establishment at Tooks Court, Chancery Lane, London, being conducted by Charles Whittingham and Griggs, Ltd.