The use of the Fell types, which had lain for many years neglected at the Oxford University Press, was revived by a little press (first started at Frome in 1845, and continued at Oxford) which was a private venture of the Rev. C. H. O. Daniel, late Provost of Worcester College. Dr. Daniel had the taste to recognize the possibilities dormant in Fell's fonts, and after 1877 he used them in his rare little issues with delightful discrimination (figs. 341 and 342). The Daniel books were printed in both roman and black-letter, and in connection with the former type many pleasant old ornaments were revived. The publications of this press were continued until 1919.¹ The Fell types are now the pride— or one of the " prides"— of the Clarendon Press. Their revival was of real importance in modern printing. The Oxford Book of English Verse, the volumes in the Tudor and Stuart Library, the Trecentale Bodleianum of 1913 (fig.343), and the Catalogue of the Shakespeare Exhibition held in the Bodleian Library to commemorate the Death of Shakespeare (Oxford, 1916) are familiar examples of their admirable and effective modern use. The Ballantyne Press of Edinburgh, founded at Kelso by James Ballantyne in 1796, later, at Sir Walter Scott's suggestion, coming to Edinburgh, and known under the name of Ballantyne, Hanson & Company, has done delightful work for many years past. The business has been acquired by Messrs. Spottiswoode & Company of London, and has been removed from Edinburgh. This firm, that of Messrs. R. & R. Clark, and the establishment of T. & A. Constable of Edinburgh, have been more constant to types of Scotch