letter-founders, and for many years have successfully used “revived old style" and also characters of the modern face family.¹ Constable employed an interesting Scotch modern face for David Nutt's distinguished series of Tudor Translations. The fine revived old style or (as I should prefer to call them) modernized old style fonts were used by the same printer in the three volumes of Bibliographica (1895); and Mr. J. P. Morgan's monumental Catalogue of Manuscripts and Early Printed Books from the Libraries of Morris, Bennett, etc. (1907), is a magnificent example of the skilful use of these types by the Chiswick Press. In smaller sizes this type was delightfully employed by the same press in their reprint of Sir Henry Wotton's Elements of Architecture, issued by Longmans in 1903 (fig. 344). But the early and “classic" use of this type was in Herbert Horne's periodical, The Century Guild Hobby Horse (1886–92). Its later volumes (beginning in 1888), printed in a large size of the “modernized old style" character, with delightful decorations drawn by Mr. Horne, are most distinguished pieces of typography (fig. 345). Of The Hobby Horse not many volumes were issued, but they will always hold a place in the annals of the revival of printing at the end of the last century. In Mr. Horne's typographical venture, William Morris had a hand; but as Morris rode a very Gothic hobbyhorse of his own, and Mr. Horne's charger was much more Italian than Gothic in its behaviour, it is easy to see why Morris soon turned his attention to printing in a way more to his mind. His endeavours, their results, and the influence they have had on modern printing have now to be considered.