## CHAPTER XXII of prosperous middle-class people, who lived freely and pleasantly. He was educated at Marlborough School and Exeter College, Oxford, where heformed a lasting friendship with Burne-Jones. Originally intending to take Holy Orders, he changed his mind, and studied architecture for a year or two under Street; then, between 1857 and 1862, through Rossetti's influence, he took up painting. Meanwhile he had begun to write—his Defence of Guenevere appearing in 1858. From then until his death he wrote many volumes of poetry and prose, most of it of a very high order. Painting proved unsatisfactory, so he began about the year 1870 to work as a decorator, eventually turning his hand to illumination,—in which he was expert,—to the making of wall-papers, rugs, hangings, and stained glass, and to house decoration. It was an era of pattern, and though in Morris's hands the pattern was often magnificent, houses decorated or furnished by him would now appear rather tiresome and affected. In socialism Morris was seriously interested. It was the somewhat romantic socialism ofa well-to-do,fastidious man, which had the added attraction of placing him in the opposition; for he somewhat enjoyed "otherwise-mindedness." Morris never went into the slums and lived with the people —indeed, he gave scant attention to the particular individual in his large and roomy movements —it was not the manner of his time. He desired with great desire to see the life of workmen improved by being made more like his own, rather than to get nearer the workmen's point of view