by making his life more like theirs. Yet he was thoroughly in earnest about his socialism. That the workman's life was so sordid made him miserable. He loved mediaevalism because it appeared to him —I think rather unhistorically — a close approach to the life he wished to see commonly lived in the world. None the less, he had sometimes impossible manners, often a furious temper, always short patience with fools, and there was a bit of pose and “bow-wow about his daily walk and conversation. In his character, as in his wall-papers, oné was a little too conscious of the pattern, but the pattern was fine, and there was lots of it! Over and above all this he was an educated, cultivated man, tremendously observant and shrewd, and his driving power was enormous. Like Bodoni (whose work Morris detested), no man knew better what he wanted to do. Morris's motto was "If I can," and by hard work, enthusiasm, and —we must admit — a fixed income and a good deal of incidental prosperity, he usually “could." Morris's style of printing, therefore, may be partly explained by the interiors of his own houses or those he decorated ; and its motive by his idea of socialism, which, through a kind of Religion of Beauty, was to produce the regeneration of a work-a-day world. It was to be a wonderful world, and it was, potentially, very real to him. His printing was for it, or was to help to its realization by others. If his decorations now appear a bit mannered and excessive, and his socialism somewhat romantic and unreal, it is because Morris was very much of his period. Thus (again like Bodoni, though from diametrically opposite theories) Morris made magnificent books, but not for ordinary readers—nor, for the matter of that, for ordinary purses—but only for a certain fortunate group of his own time. To understand the work of the Kelmscott Press we must