understand this much of the environment and ways of thinking of a man as forcible and sincere as he was manysided. Some vears before Mr. Morris set up any press of his own, he had made a few essays in printing. The Roots of' the Wountains, whieh was issued in 1889, was printed fòr him at the Chiswick Press in a charaeter cut some fifty years earlier, belonging to the Whittinghams, and modelled on an old Basle font; and in 1890, the (unnlaug Saga was printed in a type copied from one of Caxton's fonts. In 1891, almost fifty years after the Whittinghams' revival of Caslon's type, and sone fifteen years after the Fell types were resuscitated, Morris established the Kelmscott Press, named after Kelmsoott Manor House (on the upper Thames, about thirty miles from Oxford), which Morris aequired in 1871. The first “Kelmseott" book that he issued was The Story «f the Glittering Pluin, and its effect upon lovers of fine books was instantaneous. Opinion was at once divided about Morris's printing. To a limited public, the Kelmscott editions opened the millenniun in book-making. Others were irritated at what they considered their affectation and faddishness, and condemned them utterly, as unreadable—which was only a half-truth. The effeet on printing in general that Morris was to have through his types and type-setting entirely eseaped most printers, as did the sources from which he derived his methods. Because they knew very little about early nanuseripts or early books, about the charaeters of the one or the types of the other, the Kelmscott books appeared to them to have fallen from the sky-either very new and wonderful or else very freakish and senseless -just as they would to anybxxdy who knew nothing whatever about it! On the great Fnglish public, or the majority of English print-