A black-letter great primer font, called the Troy Type, showing the influence of Schoeffer of Mainz, Zainer of Augsburg, and Koberger of Nuremberg, although different from any of these, and first used in the Historyes of Troye, issued the same year (fig. 347). A black-letter, called the Chaucer Type, differing from the Troy type only in size, being pica instead of great primer. This was used in some parts of the Historyes of Troye, but was first employed for an entire book in The Order of Chivalry, published in 1893 (fig. 348). Morris also designed a fourth type, based on the fonts used by Sweynheym and Pannartz in St. Augustine's De Civitate Dei, but it was never cut. All Morris's types were finally left to trustees, and their use is occasionally permitted for special books. The wood-blocks of illustrations to his editions have been placed in the British Museum. As we look at Morris's typographical achievements in perspective, they seem to be more those of a decorator applying his decorative talents to printing, than the work of a printer. His books are not always what he said books should be—easy to read, not dazzling to the eye, or troublesome to the reader by eccentricities of letter-form. He says he admired fifteenth century books because they were beautiful "by force of the mere typography, even without the added ornament, with which many of them are so lavishly supplied." But what is true of those books is only partly true about his own. He did make books which it was a pleasure to look at—as arrangements of type and fine pieces of printing — but he did not make books that it was a pleasure to read. If Morris admired Jenson's fonts, it is hard to see why he did not copy their best points more closely. One has only to take a Kelmscott book and compare it with a good