specimen of Jenson's printing to see how far away one is from the other. On the other hand, many people did not at all understand Morris's greatness —for great he was. As he was both visionary and practical, his visions bothered the practical man, while his practicality somewhat disturbed the visionary.“Perhaps this kind of character is rare in our time," says Mr. Clutton-Brock, "only because craftsmen are rare; for the craftsman, if he is to excel, must be both industrious and a visionary, as Morris was. He must have honesty and common sense as well as invention; and his work develops and harmonizes both sets of qualities. We shall understand Morris best if we think of him as a craftsman, . .. as one who could never see raw material without wishing to make something out of it, and who at last saw society itself as a very raw material which set his fingers itching."1 I doubt if Morris himself realized the enormous effeet his work would have upon typography. Neither did he know that, while his types were not particularly good types, and his decorations were often unduly heavy, by this very overstatement in the colour of the type on its paper, in making charaeters which loudly called attention to earlier ones, and in designing somewhat over-splendid decorations (which, nevertheless, were in harmony with his type), he led the printer of his particular moment to see how imposing, and even magnificent, masses of strong type, closely set and well inked, combined with fine decorations, may be. And Morris taught a lesson in the unity of effect in books for which the modern printer is deeply in his debt-a unity now infueneing volumes very far removed from those rather precious produetions in which it was first exemplified. Nowadays,