the old-fashioned method of using various fonts of type on a title-page, or an unnecessary number of sizes of type in a volume, has been given up—even in the commonest commercial work. And, too, Morris's reforms have extended to illustrations, which are at present almost always by one hand, and not, as in old-fashioned illustrated books, by half a dozen different designers and drawn without any relation to the type-page. These newer and better fashions in book-making may be directly traced to sounder conceptions of what a book ought to be; and Morris—as with the weapon of the Viking heroes he loved so well—hamered this conception into the consciousness of gentlemen who will even use Truth, if it appears to be an “asset"! For no man ever had the courage of his convictions more than Morris, or a heartier contempt for foolish opponents. When asked to hear the other side, he replied (like Garrison on the slavery question), "There is n't any!" This very intolerance made Morris a tremendous force in typography; for, in spite of certain conscious overstatements, it was a sincere intolerance, and was aimed not at people, but at their shallow views of things. In the last year of his life, when in failing health, he attended a public meeting, and returning from it with a friend, showed signs of weakness. The friend, more amiable than discreet, suggested that this was the worst time of the year. "No, it ain't," said Morris, "it's a very fine time of the year indeed. I'm getting old, that 's what it is." In short, Morris hated humbug, though he sometimes mistook for humbug, opinions with which he disagreed as 't is human to do. He was a great printer because he was a great man who printed greatly, as he did much else. When Morris began to work with types of his own in his own way, other people (most of whom knew rather less