han the Kelmscott books, and less so than those of the Doves Press. The Bibliography (the last book issued by the Vale Press, 1 1904) is printed in Vale type, and at the end a page of atin text is shown in the Vale Fount $( \mathscr { f } g ; 3 4 9 )$ ; another in he Avon Fount—a smaller roman type more successful, to ny eye, than the Vale $( \mathscr { A } g \cdot 3 5 0 )$ ; and a third in the King's ount, which is less happy through the introduction in its ower-case of some capital letter-forms (fig. 351). The first ¿ale Press book was Milton's Early Poems, issued in 1896. he Avon seems to have been first used in 1902. Unforunately, most of the wood-blocks of the ornaments were ost in a fire at the Ballantyne Press; and the punches, marices, and type were destroyed on the issue of the last of he Vale publications. The tendency in these books was cerainly toward Italian models, but so much influenced were Messrs. Hacon and Ricketts—like every one else at that oment—by Morris's work, that they did not get as far rom it as they either thought or intended. Four years after Morris's death in 1896, T. J. Cobden-Sanderson, with Emery Walker, Morris's learned associte in the work of the Kelmscott Press and a man who (as :very one but himself would admit) has been the movig spirit in most of the good and scholarly ventures in nodern English typography, founded the Doves Press. It :wes its odd name to an old riverside inn at Hammersmith :n the T'hames, familiar to rowing men, which in turn gave ts name to a cottage which Mr. Cobden-Sanderson (who nad already set up a bindery) used as a work-shop. The Doves Press was founded, says Mr. Cobden-Sanderson, in is Catalogue published in 1908, "to attack the problem f pure 'Typography, as presented by ordinary books in the various forms of prose, verse, and dialogue, and keeping