always in view the principle .. . that ‘The whole duty of Typography is to communicate to the imagination, without loss by the way, the thought or image intended to be conveyed by the Author,' to attempt its solution rather by the arrangement of the whole book, as a whole, with due regard to its parts and the emphasis of its divisions, than by the splendour of ornament, intermittent, page after page." For this press, a single roman font was cut, and the first book produced in it (in 1891) was the Agricola of Tacitus. This Doves type discarded the extreme blackness of Morris's fonts, and was more Italian in character than any which had hitherto appeared in England. It is based on Jenson's roman font, “freed from the accidental irregularities due to imperfect cutting and casting,"—perhaps a fault rather than a virtue,“and the serifs altered in some cases." It is a very beautiful type, although its regularity, and the rigidity of the descender in the y,¹ make it thin and spiky in appearance, and thus a little difficult to read; nor has it the agreeable 'opulence" of the best Italian fonts (fig. 352). The Doves Press books have been, however, among the very best of those printed under the influence of the Morris revival. The Doves Bible (1903) is a masterpiece of restrained style; and although in one or two later volumes a commonplace italic is introduced into the fine roman text, the Doves books have delightful consistency and simplicity. All ornament is eschewed in them, but fine, free initials give a decorative note to the pages here and there. Mr. Walker withdrew from the undertaking in 1909. Mr. Cobden-Sanderson has lately, with considerable elegiac ceremony, brought its work to a close.