A private venture which has produced comparatively w books, but among them some of the greatest beauty, is e Ashendene Press, established in 1895, and directed by H. St. John Hornby of London. Its first books employed e Caslon and Fell characters—up to 1902. Later, an Ital-1 semi-gothic character, closely resembling the Subiaco pe of Sweynheym and Pannartz, was designed for this ess by Mr. Walker and Mr. Cockerell (fig. 353). This pe was first used in Dante's Inferno, issued in 1902. The lendid Dante of 1909—the works entire, with illustrans by C. M. Gere; Le Morte Darthur (1913); and the :autiful Boccaccio (1913-20), with rubrication, and initials :signed by Graily Hewitt, are among its greatest achieveents. The Dante ranks with the Doves Bible and the elmscott Chaucer—described as the “three ideal books modern typography," from the three ideal presses of the evival.¹ In many books the initials are in colour, and somenes in gold. Lucien Pissarro's Eragny Press (like the Kelmscott and e Doves Press, placed at Hammersmith) took its name om Eragny, the Normandy village where Mr.Pissarro was rn, and where he studied and worked with his father. is earlier books were printed in the Vale type designed τ Ricketts. The Brook type, in which an account of the :agny Press was printed in 1903, is an agreeable roman :ter designed by Pissarro on the lines of the Vale type, ith a pleasant movement and admirable legibility (fig. 54). The superiority of its appearance to that of the Vale nts is due partly to the paper generally used, which is most elightful. Wood-blocks printed in colours are a favourite ature of the Eragny Press books, and the text is their acmpaniment. The designing, wood-engraving, and printee Peddie's Cantor Lectures on Printing. London, 1915.