ing are all the work of Pissarro and his wife, though sometimes the illustrations are by other hands. The Essex House Press, although its first issues were brought out in Caslon types, produced, in 1903, a font called the Prayer Book type— ambitious, but not entirely successful. It was designed by C. R. Ashbee, the director of this press. There are some curiously unfortunate characters in its lower-case letters — the g and $\mathbf { f } ,$ e and $\mathbf { n } ,$ for instance— which resemble pen-work, and not very pleasant pen-work at that. His Endeavour type, which in 1901 preceded the Prayer Book font— a letter smaller in size, but with many of the same eccentricities —is obscure and dazzling. And set in these types, it is not surprising that the Essex House books have no great merit. Its work in Caslon types was much the best — and was (as when combined with Edmund New's delightful illustrations in Wren's Parentalia) harmonious and simple. As for the Cambridge type of the University Press, Cambridge, it is an unattractive letter, which combines many of the defects of the fonts we owe to the modern revival. It is difficult to see why it was ever cut at all. Herbert P. Horne designed three types of importance— the Montallegro, the Florence, and the Riccardi. These may be called sister types, for they show a certain progression of idea, and all attack the problem of what a fine type for commercial printing should be—elegant, yet readable from a present day standpoint. The Montallegro type came first. This type was modelled, as were the others, on an early Florentine font, and was intended to be a good “reading type,"which should have rather more flexibility and grace than the fonts based on older Italian forms. It was first used in Condivi's Life of Michelagnolo Buonarroti by the Merrymount Press, Bos-