n, in 1905, and since in the volumes of The Humanists ibrary (fig. 355 a). This type was cut under Mr. Horne's irection by E. P. Prince of London, an English craftsian of great ability and experience, and-within a narw circle—of great reputation. The types of the Kelmscott, oves, and other English private presses were from his and, as well as the Florence and Medici fonts. The Florence type of 1909 came next. It is somewhat maller in face and simpler in form than the Montallegro; nd is perhaps the most successful of the three. It was cut or Messrs. Chatto & Windus of London (fig. 355 b). The last was the Riccardi type, also cut in 1909, based n fonts cut by Miscomini. It has been used in the "Ricardi Press" editions published by the Medici Society of ondon. A little monotonous in effect and gathering too nuch colour in printing unless carefully managed, it is so ractical that it loses the elegance of the other two fonts fig. 355 c). A smaller size of the type (11-point) has been :ut for the same series of volumes.¹ Among other interesting typographical experiments of he later nineteenth century was a Greek type designed y Selwyn Image. This was cut in two sizes, both used in Greek Testament issued in 1895 (fig. 356). It was based n the letter-forms of early Greek manuscripts, modified is little as might be by concessions to the familiar cursive Greek characters of Aldus, which have so unhappily inluenced Greek typography. These types are not particuarly successful. Robert Proctor's very fine Greek type— :he “Otter"used in the Oresteia of Aeschylus, printed n 1904, was another important essay in Greek type-forms