ordinary book-faces when used in the larger sizes. It was modelled as closely as possible upon photographs of a page of Jenson's ‘Cicero,' but partly by reason of the designing, and partly through the conventional training of the punchcutter (who was nevertheless a most admirable and skilful workman), the desired quality was only partially attained. The upper-case letters were fairly successful from the first, and required little modification; but the majority of the lowercase characters were recut several times—and were allowed to pass when the expense and the delay became prohibitive. This type is on the 16-point body." It has been delightfully used by Mr. Rogers in the Montaigne and in some other beautiful books designed by him (fig. 358). Since that time Mr. Rogers has designed another and, to my mind, finer font—the Centaur. The upper-case letters of this font have been, since 1914, in use for the work of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, and in 1916 the complete font in 14-point size was shown in Maurice de Guérin's Centaur. Mr. Rogers describes the letter as a refinement on his Montaigne type, and though—as is his wont —he sees ways in which this font could be bettered, it appears to me one of the best roman fonts yet designed in America—and, of its kind, the best anywhere (fig. 359). The type known as Merrymount was designed for the Merrymount Press about 1895 by Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue, the architect, who designed the well-known Cheltenham fonts. He, too, based the Merrymount font on the Jenson letter, but instead of having the courage of our rather wavering convictions and making a type as light as Jenson's, both he and I were seduced by Morris's unduly black types. So we merely modified the heaviness of the Morris fonts, although adopting an early form of roman letter. The result is that thetype is too black unless used on large pages,