as in The Altar Book (1896) and an edition of the Agricola of Tacitus (1904), both in folio (fig. 360). The Humanistic type was designed in Italy, and was based on a manuscript Virgil in the Laurentian Library at Florence. It was cut for the University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Extremely ingenious in its clever rendering of a written letter, it is not, as type, easy to read, and the excessive length of the descenders compels a somewhat leaded composition.It is aninteresting letter-form and shows research, but it was not a wholly fortunate experiment, because more calligraphic in effect than is comfortable to the eye. It just lacks the charm of fine writing, and yet is too like it to make a fine type; and so falls between two stools. What value have these specially designed and privately cut fonts of type? And the answer is: In themselves, very little. They are only in the nature of interesting experiments; and there is scarcely one of them that is absolutely practical. If they have failed, the causes are not far to seek. One minor reason is that most of them were not cut by the man who designed them, and the type-cutter cannot put into them as he works the touches which the designer would instinctively give, if he were a type-cutter too. Another reason is, that when a book becomes decorative at the expense of its readability, it ceases to be a book and becomes a decoration, and has then no raison dՐtre as a book. Again: being unaccustomed nowadays to the purer letterforms to whic these types usually approximate, fonts of the kinds we have been considering are for continuous reading almost always consciously trying to the eye. Last and chiefly, such types do not readily lend themselves to the literary and typographical needs of to-day; and indeed there is a great deal of printing that must to-day be done and done