well, to which these fonts are not suited at all. The convention which is properlyrequired in their employ restricts their use. For in “artistic" types, as in so much else, art to the Anglo-Saxon is thought out, not felt—consciousrather than instinctive. So-called æsthetic printing,—be it English, American, or German,—taken en bloc, is, in the long run, a bit tiresome. It is so much in earnest that it charms too wisely rather than too well, and fails in the purpose for which all types and books exist. These fonts have not, I think, directly accomplished all that the designers in their enthusiasm expected. But they are indirectly of value in making us think about earlier and purer type-forms. Students of typography must be familiar with them; and it is only the student who can place them in their proper perspective, and, because he does so, appraise them at their relative and therefore true value. And if typefounders who produce new fonts will continue to study (as they are at last beginning to do) the originals which usually inspired these modern essays, they will recognize how much men have to hark back for good models to the older types, after all. So in spite of some faults and impractical qualities, such essays stimulate the eye and remind printers of standards set by the past. It is from this point of view that they are one of the important contributions of late years to the appreciation and practice of good bookmaking. ## II UTSIDE of England, Germany was most influenced by the English revival of twenty years ago; more "popularly" influenced than England itself. Up to the time of the War there was a sort of renaissance in German type founding and printing. TheGerman books of the early nine-