teenth century were not well printed,—neither type nor paper was good,—but they were simple in their poverty, poor but honest." From 1850 to 1880, the ordinary German book was very bad indeed, because it was at once so cheap and so pretentious. But a new “secession" movement began about 1890, not only in painting but in other fields pertaining to the arts. As far as printing was concerned, the first important note of this revival was struck by George's Blätter für die Kunst; followed in 1894 by the appearance of the secessionist periodical Pan, which introduced Morris's books to the German public, and the typographical style of which greatly influenced contemporary German printers. This was followed in 1899 by the Insel, a similar review, from which grew the Insel-Verlag, Leipsic, whose entire product took on a fine and thoughtful typographical form. Some of its books were printed in modified German gothic types. Books printed in roman type show the influence of English models. Its ventures were effectively supported by the public. Private presses were also set up, and some fine special types were cut for them. Great attention was paid to good calligraphic lettering,¹ for which instructors were brought over from England by the German Government. The volumes brought out by the Hyperion-Verlag and Century Press of Munich (Hans von Weber), by the Tempel-Verlag, the Insel-Verlag, and the Janus Press at Leipsic, the " special editions" of Ernst Rowohlt (Drugulin-Drucke) of Leipsic, the books of Diederichs of Jena, and of Georg Müller of Munich show the best book-making of this modern German revival.