pes obtainable, fonts in both were specially designed and it for the work of these houses—notably the modified othic character designed by E. R. Weiss. This Weissraktur was highly considered in Germany, and was an tempt to solve the problem of a "book face" of German cript which should be agreeable and readable. The types esigned by Behrens, Koch, Tiemann, Wieynk, Kleukens, önig, Hölzl, and Ehmcke, are characteristic of the merits nd defects of this school of type-design. Of the results of all this effort, it is less easy to speak. Vhile the cheap, popular books were admirable, the more mbitious German volumes were mannered and intentional. ike most modern German work in other forms of artistic ndeavour, they produce a certain sensation, but not that f pleasure; they astonish rather than charm. To one who ossessed a modern “secession" house, with a classic-hyienic-penal looking library, I suppose such books would the only kind to have.¹ For these determined volumes, as e view them in perspective, seem to have run true to form nd to have been characteristic of the life about them—but as, that is another story! For us, German book-making closed memorably with the eautiful exhibition held at Leipsic in the summer of 1914. No doubt a certain northern quality in Morris's work ommended itself more to Teutonic than to Latin taste. So 1 Italy the"revival" showed itself chiefly in a return to d forms of roman letter. A type closely modelled on Moris's Golden type was used by the Fratelli Treves of Milan 1 an edition of D’Annunzio's Francesca da Rimini issued in 902. Since that time there have been many similar books, For illustrative material I refer the reader to the Times Printing Number, ondon, 1912 (Fine 1rinting in Germany, pp. 58 et seq.), and The Art of ie Book, Special Number of The Studio, 1914 (The Art of the Book in lermany, by 1. Deubner, with specimens of types described).