but the tendency has been toward lighter types and free and sometimes startling unconventionality in decoration. The magazine edited by the Milanese printer Bertieri Risorgimento Grafico—and printed by Bertieri and Vanzetti, employs a roman type of free design which is agreeable to the eye, though there is too much space between individual letters to make it wholly successful (fig. 361). In Holland, there is evidence of the spread of the movement toward earlier letter-forms in the Distel type designed for J. F. van Royen's Zilverdistel Press at The Hague, by Lucien Pissarro. This is intended to imitate old Netherlands writing (fig. 362). The narrowing of paragraphmarks is a clever way of subduing an obstreperous character in such fonts. The Zilver type (fig. 363), on the order of the Doves Press font, was cut for the Zilverdistel, and the historic Enschedé types have been employed for some of its work. Interest in typography is also evidenced by the existence of the Typografische Bibliotheek at Amsterdam. In Belgium, the Musée du Livre at Brussels is a somewhat similar establishment. The latter lately issued Sept Études publiées à l’occasion du Quatrième Centenaire de Christophe Plantin, printed from old types— more curious than beautiful—in the Musée Plantin at Antwerp. Although in France the Morris revival never had much vogue, it is interesting to recall that a year or two before the founding of the Kelmscott Press some delightful gothic types—a clever rendering of the best form of lettre batarde —were cut by E. Mouchon for a reproduction of Simon Vostre's Heures à l' Usage de Rome of 1498, of which a page is reproduced (fig. 364). The book was printed by O. Jouaust and published in 1890 by L. Gauthier, who was, by the way, élève and successor to Curmer of Paul et Virginie celebrity. Save for this and a few similar exam-