# Series Foreword

Patterns have taken the software community by storm. Software developers have been enthusiastic about patterns ever since the seminal work Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software by the Gang of Four. Since then, many books on sofware patterns have been published, most notably the Pattern Languages of Program Design (PLoPD) series featuring edited collections of papers from various software pattern conferences, and the Pattern-OrientedSofware Architecture series with its many general-purpose, concurrency and networking patterns.

This book is not, however,"yet another pattern book". Rather it differs from the available pattern literature significantly and in many ways. It is thus unique as well as very valuable for anybody interested in learning about and using patterns.

The most significant difference from other software pattern books is its very subject. Jan is an expert in human-computer interaction (HCI). He has an immense knowledge in designing many different types of interactive systems, such as information kiosks and systems used as interactive exhibits. A quick check reveals that only few patterns for human-computer interaction are documented in contemporary pattern literature. A Pattern Approach To Interaction Design thus fills a blank spot in the software pattern space. It also offers a framework to use HCI, software engineering, and even application domain patterns together within a software project.

Another difference is that most human-computer interaction patterns available today deal with the “technical" design of various types of user interfaces, such as the design of forms in form-based interfaces, and techniques for flashing back erroneous user input to an interface. This book,in contrast, takes the user's view: it presents patterns that help to design user-friendly human-computer interfaces.

Moreover, Jan's HCI patterns do not specify how to arrange particular types of components, classes, or objects in a software system in order to ultimately arrive at a user-friendly system interface. Instead, his patterns help shape environments in which users are invited—and then feel well and safe—to use an interactive system.

This perspective is rarely considered in systems development. Whilst much effort is put into supporting developers in designing and implementing software systems— including, but notlimited to, developer-centric patterns such as those from the Gang of Four—it is actually the end users who ultimately (must) live and work with the interactive software systems that developers build. Thus they need systems that are easy to use, as well as powerful and adaptable to their personal needs. Users want systems that support rather than hinder them in doing their job. Ideally, users need not even be aware of the fact that they are working and communicating with complex hardware and software technology.

The patterns in this book address these needs. For example, the patterns INVIsIBLE HARDWARE and DOMAIN-APPROPRIATE DEVICEStell designers why it is important to hide complex and unfamiliar hardware technologies from the users of a system, and instead allow them to communicate with that system using devices and 'abstractions' they know from their domain. Other patterns, such as FLAT AND NARROW TREE andINFORMATION JUST IN TIME, deal withfinding the fine balance between not swamping a user with too much information, and leaving him unguided by providing almost no information, or not the right kind.

Allpatterns are alsopresented so that end-users can understandand use them. These patterns enable them to talk to developers about what they expect from a human-computer interface. In addition, the patterns are interwoven into a pattern language. This provides userswith a structured and defined process to actually apply these patterns: users canspecify the human-computer interface that they like and want from a particular software system. In short,the pattern language in this book gives users a voice that allows them to communicate their needs to developers, and to actively participate in the development of a concrete system.

This is unique for software patterns, and it leads me to another key difference I found between Jan's andother software patterns: the focus on user needs, user participation, and shaping environments in which humans feel comfortable closely resembles Christopher Alexander's approach. They have less in common with the vast majority of software patterns, which typically follow engineering-oriented pattern approaches à la Gang of Four. Alexander's vision of patterns is that they should enable people to be able to actively shape the environments in which they live, step by step, so that they can feel at ease in these environments. At least they should be able to influence the construction and modification of their environments. In other words, the intention of Alexander's patterns is to shift power from master planners and architects to the many people who live andwork in our world, so that their needs can be articulatedand consideredwhen buildingtowns and houses. You cannot say analogous things about software patterns. Simply using Alexander's pattern form is not enough by far to claim that a pattern is "Alexandrian".

As you can see, there are a lot of things to explore in this book, and also to learn: new patterns as well as a new perspective on software patterns. And after reading so much "useful stuff", enjoythe little pattern language about the secrets of composing and performing blues music: it is included because it describes the application domain of the WorldBeatinteractive music system,which is the running example for many of the other patterns in this book.Therefore I would like to invite you to share the new insights and “aha"effects that I got when reading this book.

Siemens AG, Corporate Technology

FrankBuschmann

This Page Intentionally Left Blank