# The Commodity Culture of Victorian England Advertising and Spectacle, 1851-1914 THOMAS RICHARDS First Published by Stanford University Press 1990 First published in the UK by Verso 1991 © 199o by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University All rights reserved Verso UK: 6 Meard Street, London W1V 3HR USA: 29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001-2291 Verso is the imprint of New Left Books British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data Richards, Thomas The commodity culture of Victorian England: advertising & spectacle, 1851-1914. 1. Title 659.1 ISBN 0-86091-570-0 Printed in the USA For Nan Goodman Acknowledgments This book has been many books. Trace elements of the book I began to write five years ago—a literary history of English advertising—survive here and there in this book, a cultural history of the semiotic consolidation of capitalism in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. In great part I owe the restructuring of this project to the imagination of many friends, who projected possibilities beyond the horizon of what I had thought possible. Behind much of what I have written I hear the inflection of their voices, engaged, encouraging, extending, revising. Jointly and severally I thank them all: Rob Polhemus for telling me that Gerty MacDowell was a seaside girl; Mary Pratt for saying that the book I was writing must have lots and lots of pictures; Lucio Ruotolo for seeing advertising in places where I had not noticed it before; Deborah Nord and Steve Austad for reading my manuscript when it lay scattered between drafts; Jeff Knapp for helping me sort out the semiotics of the exemplary center; Walter Jackson Bate for imparting to me a keen awareness of the pleasures and pitfalls of narrating history; Robert Kiely for a sense of the book as a whole; Patrick Brantlinger and Richard Ohmann for pointing out final obstacles in the path of my narrative; Amanda Scanlan, Patrick Robbins, and Debbie Cohen for mining the labyrinth of Widener Library at Harvard; and Debbie again for preparing the index. Thanks to Helen Tartar, the best of all possible editors, and to Ellen Smith, my copy editor. Thanks to my parents and brother, who will see in this book a genealogy of America's first enclosed shopping mall, which opened in my Minnesota hometown the year I was born. Thanks to Herbie Lindenberger for making history radically new and to Gary Harrison for making history newly radical. To Will Stone, who devoted to my text what Buddhism calls bare attention, I owe the debt of a thousand conversations that pivoted on this text but also touched everything under the sun. The English departments at Stanford and Harvard provided vital logistical support through a variety of funds, a Mabelle McLeod Lewis Memorial Fellowship at Stanford, a Clark Fund and a Hyder Rollins grant at Harvard. A grant from the American Council of Learned Societies enabled me to complete the manuscript. Elizabeth Gibb at the Stanford Slide Library took many of the photographs. Early versions of Chapters 2 and 5 appeared in Victorian Studies and ELH. ## Contents Introduction1 1. The Great Exhibition of Things 17 2. The Image of Victoria in the Year of Jubilee 73 3. Selling Darkest Africa 119 4. The Patent Medicine System 168 5. Those Lovely Seaside Girls 205 Conclusion 249 Notes 263 Index 301 ## Figures 1. The commodity pilgrimage (Henry Mayhew and George Cruikshank, 1851: or, The Adventures of Mr. and Mrs. Sandboys, Their Son and Daughter, Who Came Up to London to Enjoy Themselves and See the Great Exhibition [New York: Stringer and Townsend, 1851], frontispiece). Photo: Baker Library, Harvard Business School. 2. The palace of consumption (Tallis's History and Description of the Crystal Palace and the Exhibition of the World's Industry in 1851, J. G. Strutt, ed. [London: London Printing and Publishing Co., 1851], 2: facing p. 1). Photo: Baker Library, Harvard Business School. 3. A magical object (Tallis's Illustrated London [London: John Tallis and Co., 1851], 2: frontispiece). Photo: Baker Library, Harvard Business School. 4. The world balkanized (Official Descriptive and Illustrated Catalogue [London: Spicer Brothers, Wholesale Stationers; W. Clowes and Sons, Printers, 1851], 1: 110–11). Photo: Harvard College Library. 5. The useless object (Official Descriptive and Illustrated Catalogue, 4: plate 335). Photo: Baker Library, Harvard Business School. 6. Streetbound selling (Henry Mayhew, London Labour and the London Poor [New York: Dover Publications, 1968], 37). Photo: Harvard College Library. 7. The commodity marginalized: mid-Victorian advertising (John Orlando Parry, A London Street Scene [1834]). Photo: Alfred Dunhill, Ltd., London. 8. Advertising before and after (William Smith, Advertise: How? When? Where? [London: Routledge, Warne, and Routledge, 1863], 116–17). Photo: Baker Library, Harvard Business School. 9. The vehicular hat (W. Smith, Advertise: How? When? Where?, 142). Photo: Baker Library, Harvard Business School. 10. The Jubilee Day procession of June 21, 1887 (Illustrated London News, June 25, 1887: 708). Photo: Harvard College Library. 11. The Pears' illuminations (Illustrated London News, July 2, 1887: 3). Photo: Harvard College Library. 12. A mid-Victorian purveyor to the queen (W. Smith, Advertise: How? When? Where?, 140). Photo: Baker Library, Harvard Business School. 13. Sentimental kitsch (Illustrated London News, December 10, 1887: 681). Photo: Harvard College Library. 14. The Jubilee scent bottle (Graphic, March 5, 1887: 243). Photo: Harvard College Library. 15. The consumer queen's material body (Illustrated London News, April 23, 1887: 477). Photo: Harvard College Library. 16. The consumer queen's ethereal body (Graphic, August 20, 1887: 211). Photo: Harvard College Library. 17. The Blue Room at Windsor (reproduced by permission of Her Majesty the Queen, Royal Collection, Windsor Castle). 18. Consumption as hysteria (Anthony Trollope, The Struggles of Brown, Jones, and Robinson [New York: Arno Press, 1981], 148). Photo: Stanford University. 19. The 1897 Jubilee: Victoria, Regina et Imperatrix (Graphic, June 28, 1897: 52). Photo: Stanford University. 20. "The Formula of British Conquest": the commodity (Illustrated London News, August 27, 1887: 249). Photo: Harvard College Library. 122 21. The endorsing hero (Illustrated London News, August 8, 1891: 195). Photo: Stanford University. 137 22. Stanley's African carriers (The Graphic Stanley Number, April 30, 189o: 6). Photo: Stanford University. 138 23. At Kavalli (Graphic Stanley Number: 32). Photo: Stanford University. 139 24. The liminal commodity (Graphic Stanley Number: 36). Photo: Stanford University. 141 25. The commadity militant (Graphic Stanley Number: 29). Photo: Stanford University. 143 26. The homogenizing commodity (Illustrated London News, October 9, 1897: 505). Photo: Stanford University. 145 27. The war reified (Graphic, March 2, 1901: 326). Photo: Stanford University. 157 28. The Lemco Line (Illustrated London News, April 5, 1902: 505). Photo: Stanford University. 158 29. The commodity vanguard (Graphic, May 12, 1900: 711). Photo: Stanford University. 159 30. The defeated consumer (Graphic, April 28, 19oo: 628). Photo: Stanford University. 161 31. The body's pageantry (Graphic, March 28, 1908: 453). Photo: Harvard College Library. 171 32. Compounded interest in Antipon (Illustrated London News, April 28, 19o6: 61o). Photo: Har vard College Library. 177 33. The body-building commodity (Illustrated London News, November 6, 1909: 661). Photo: Harvard College Library. 190 34. The common celebrity (Graphic, March 2, 1907: 327). Photo: Harvard College Library. 192 35. Hair-drilling (Graphic, May 23, 1908: 725). Photo: Harvard College Library. 198 36. The freestanding object (Illustrated London News, April 25, 1908: 616). Photo: Harvard College Library. 199 37. Unveiling the commodity (Illustrated London News, January 19, 1909: 112). Photo: Harvard College Library. 38. The mothering object (Illustrated London News, May 22, 1909: 758). Photo: Harvard College Library. 39. The female consumer as go-between (Thomas Smith, Successful Advertising: Its Secrets Explained [London: Smith's Advertising Agency, 1886], 30–31). Photo: Baker Library, Harvard Business School. 4o. The queen of ointments (Illustrated London News, October 12, 1895: 471). Photo: Stanford University. 41. The cheesecake pose (Diana Hindley and Geoffrey Hindley, Advertising in Victorian England, 1851–1914 [London: Wayland, 1972], plate 6.7; reprinted by permission). 42. The seaside girl (Illustrated London News, July 9, 1887: 43). Photo: Stanford University. 43. The decorative template (Poster 3.18, January 1900: 199). Photo: Department of Special Collections and University Archives, Stanford University Libraries. 44. Instant advertising (Illustrated London News, March 29, 1902: 479). Photo: Stanford University. 45. The irreferential image (Illustrated London News, July 23, 1887: 115). Photo: Harvard College Library. 46. Mock-up of incongruities (Graphic, July 21, 1888: 63). Photo: Stanford University. 47. Statistical consumers (Illustrated London News, January 26, 1907: 151). Photo: Harvard College Library. 48. Inventing adolescence (Graphic, December 19, 1903: 850). Photo: Stanford University. 49. The seaside woman (Graphic, August 6, 1898: 214). Photo: Stanford University. 50. Rewriting Dover (Illustrated London News, October 29, 1887: 524). Photo: Harvard College Library.