# The Homeric hero becomes a split-man as he assumes an individual ego. ## In his Art and Illusion, E. H. Gombrich writes (p. 116): If I had to reduce the last chapter to a brief formula it would be “making comes before matching." Before the artist ever wanted to match the sights of the visible world he wanted to create things in their own right. . . . The very violence with which Plato denounces this trickery reminds us of the momentous fact that at the time he wrote, mimesis was a recent invention. There are many critics now who share his distaste, for one reason or another, but even they would admit there are few more exciting spectacles in the whole history of art than the great awakening of Greek sculpture and painting between the sixth century and the time of Plato's youth toward the end of the fifth century B.C. Etienne Gilson makes much of the distinction between making and matching in his Painting and Reality. And whereas till Giotto a painting was a thing, from Giotto till Cézanne painting became the representation of things. See his chapter vIII on “Imitation and Creation." There was, of course, the same development towards representation and direct lineal narrative in poetry and prose, as we shall see. What is essential for understanding this process, however, is that mimesis in Plato's (not Aristotle's) sense is the necessary effect of separating out the visual mode from the ordinary enmeshment with the audile-tactile interplay of senses. It is this process, brought about by the experience of phonetic literacy, that hoicks societies of the world of “sacred" or cosmic space and time into the detribalized or “profane" space and time of civilized and pragmatic man. Such is the theme of The Sacred and The Profane: The Nature of Religion by Mircea Eliade. In The Greeks and the Irrational, E. R. Dodds discusses the emotional instability and manias of the Homeric heroes: "And we may also ask ourselves why a people so civilised, clear-headed, and rational as the Ionians did not eliminate from their national epics these links with Borneo and the primitive past, just as they eliminated the fear of the dead . . ."(p. 13) But it is his next page that is especially helpful: "His own behaviour . . . has become alien to him. He cannot understand it. It is for him no part of his Ego." This is a perfectly true observation, and its relevance to some of the phenomena we have been considering cannot, I think, be doubted. Nilsson is also, I believe, right in holding that experiences of this sort played a part—along with other elements, such as the Minoan tradition of protecting goddesses—in building up that machinery of physical intervention to which Homer resorts so constantly and, to our thinking, often so superfluously. We find it superfluous because the divine machinery seems to us in many cases to do no more than duplicate a natural psychological causation. But ought we not perhaps to say rather that the divine machinery "duplicates" a psychic intervention—that is, presents it in a concrete pictorial form? This was not superfluous; for only in this way could it be made vivid to the imagination of the hearers. The Homeric poets were without the refinements of language which would have been needed to “put across" adequately a purely psychological miracle. What more natural than that they should first supplement, and later replace, an old unexciting threadbare formula like μvos μβaλe θυμ by making the god appear as a physical presence and exhort his favourite with the spoken word? How much more vivid than a mere inward monition is the famous scene in Iliad i where Athena plucks Achilles by the hair and warns him not to strike Agamemnon! But she is visible to Achilles alone: “none of the others saw her."That is a plain hint that she is projection, the pictorial expression, of an inward monition—a monition which Achilles might have described by such a vague phrase as véπνevσe φρeσì δaμων. And I suggest that in general the inward monition, or the sudden unaccountable feeling of power, or the sudden unaccountable loss of judgement, is the germ out of which the divine machinery developed. The hero has become a split man as he moves towards the possession of an individual ego. And the "split" is manifest as pictorialized models or “machinery" of complex situations such as tribal, auditory man had made no effort to visualize. That is to say, detribalization, individualization, and pictorialization are all one. The magical mode disappears in proportion as interior events are made visually manifest. But such manifestation is also reduction and distortion of complex relations which are more fully sensed when there is full interplay of all the senses at once. Mimesis to Plato had appeared, quite understandably, as varieties of representation, especially visual. In his Poetics 4, Aristotle made mimesis central to his entire cognitive and epistemological world, not limiting it to any one sense. But the first onset of literacy, and, therefore, of visuality as abstracted from the other senses, seemed to Plato a diminution of ontological awareness, or an impoverishment of Being. Bergson somewhere asks, how should we be able to know if some agent could double the speed of all events in the world? Quite simply, he answered. We would discern a great loss of richness in experience. Such seems to have been Plato's attitude towards literacy and visual mimesis. Gombrich begins his tenth chapter of Art and Illusion with further observations on visual mimesis: The last chapter has led this inquiry back to the old truth that the discovery of appearances was not due so much to a careful observation of nature as to the invention of pictorial effects. I believe indeed that the ancient writers who were still filled with a sense of wonder at man's capacity to fool the eye came closer to an understanding of this achievement than many later critics . . . but if we discard Berkeley's theory of vision, according to which we “see" a flat field but “construct" a tactile space, we can perhaps rid art history of its obsession with space and bring other achievements into focus, the suggestion of light and of texture, for instance, or the mastery of physiognomic expression. Berkeley's New Theory of Vision (1709) is now favoured by psychologists of our sense lives. But Berkeley was concerned to refute Descartes and Newton, who had wholly abstracted the visual sense from the interaction of the other senses. On the other hand, the suppression of the visual sense in favour of the audile-tactile complex, produces the distortions of tribal society, and of the configuration of jazz and primitive art imitations which broke upon us with radio, but not just “because"of radio.11 Gombrich not only has all the most relevant information about the rise of the pictorial mode; he has all the right difficulties. He ends his Art and Illusion by commenting (pp. 117–18): There is finally the history of Greek painting as we can follow it in painted pottery, which tells of the discovery of foreshortening and the conquest of space early in the fifth century and of light in the fourth. . . . Emanuel Loewy at the turn of the century first developed his theories about the rendering of nature in Greek art that stressed the priority of conceptual modes and their gradual adjustment to natural appearances. . . . But in itself it explains very little. For why was it that this process started comparatively so late in the history of mankind? In this respect our perspective has very much changed. To the Greeks the archaic period represented the dawn of history, and classical scholarship has not always shaken off this inheritance. From this point of view it appeared quite natural that the awakening of art from primitive modes should have coincided with the rise of all those other activities, that, for the humanist, belong to civilization: the development of philosophy, of science, and of dramatic poetry. The world of the Greeks illustrates why visual appearances cannot interest a people before the interiorization of alphabetic technology. The discovery that the representation of “natural appearances"is quite abnormal and also quite unperceptible as such to non-literate peoples, has created some disturbance of mind nowadays. For the same distortions of reality that we associate with our conventions of abstractly visual perception also invaded mathematics, science and the verbal arts of logic and poetry. In the past century of non-Euclidean geometries, symbolic logics, and symbolist poetry, the same discovery has been repeated. That is to say, singleplane lineal, visual, and sequential codification of experience is quite conventional and limited. It is in danger of being brushed aside today in every area of Western experience. We have long been accustomed to praising the Greeks for the invention of visual order in sculpture, painting, science, as well as in philosophy, literature, and politics. But today, having learned how to play with each of the senses in isolation, scholars look askance at the Greeks for their pusillanimity: "Whatever else the story, as I have pieced it together, may tell, it brings out the fact that Greek art and Greek geometry were based on the same tactile-muscular sensuous intuitions, that in many ways their developments went along similar lines, and that their limitations were implicit in those intuitions."12 From the point of view of recent intense awareness of the visual components of experience, then, the Greek world looks timid and tentative. But there was nothing in the manuscript phase of alphabetic technology that was intense enough to split the visual from the tactile entirely. Not even Roman script had the power to do that. It was not until the experience of mass production of exactly uniform and repeatable type, that the fission of the senses occurred, and the visual dimension broke away from the other senses. Oswald Spengler noted in The Decline of the West (p. 89) the liquidation of the visual, Western awareness in our new physics, greeting the return to the unseen with a tribal cheer: Once the space-element or point had lost its last persistent relic of visualness and, instead of being represented to the eye as a cut in co-ordinate lines, was defined as a group of three independent numbers, there was no longer any inherent objection to replacing the number 3 by the general number n. The notion of dimension was radically changed. It was no longer a matter of treating the properties of a point metrically with reference to its position in a visible system, but of representing the entirely abstract properties of a number-group . . . "Entirely abstract" means the non-visual resonating interplay of the audile-tactile by which electricity and radio especially were to regenerate what Conrad called "the Africa within" the Western experience. It would seem that the extension of one or another of our senses by mechanical means, such as the phonetic script, can act as a sort of twist for the kaleidoscope of the entire sensorium. A new combination or ratio of the existing components occurs, and a new mosaic of possible forms presents itself. That such switch of sense ratios should occur with every instance of external technology is easy to see today. Why has it been unnoticed before? Perhaps because the shifts have in the past occurred somewhat gradually. Now we experience such a series of new technologies even in our own world and, besides, have means of observing so many other cultures that only great inattention could now conceal the role of new media of information in altering the posture and relations of our senses. Merely for the purpose of finding our bearings it may be helpful to compare and contrast a few instances of literature and art in the newly literate Greek world, on one hand, and the non-literate world, on the other. It is significant, however, that the Romans did go beyond the Greeks in the awareness of visual properties: Lucretius is neither speaking of, nor interested in, the problems of representation. His description of the purely optical phenomena does, however, go considerably beyond the cautious observations of Euclid. It is a complete description, not of the expanding visual cone, but of the apparent cone of contraction, or diminution, which is its counterpart. The ideas which Lucretius expresses a quarter of a century before the writing of "De Architectura" are the optical equivalent of the perspective system whichVitruvius describes.13 Likewise, the Romans exceeded the Greeks in their bias towards the life of action, of applied knowledge, and the lineal organization of many levels of living. In art this bias appears in the setting of flat planes, one behind the other, in order that action may appear by an oblique or diagonal shift in the planes. But there is one observation of John White's (The Birth and Rebirth of Pictorial Space, p. 237) which is especially valuable in illuminating the most striking feature of Greek narrative: “All the forms lie in a single plane. All the movement is in one direction."In a work devoted entirely to the