He generally assumes that events which are associated together are causally connected. But this is a fallacy which the majority of civilized people commit most of the time, and it has been known to happen among trained scientists! Nonliterates tend to adhere too rigidly to the rule of association as causation, but most of the time it works, and by the pragmatic rule what works is taken to be true. Nothing could be further from the truth than the idea that nonliterates are utterly credulous, superstition- and fear-ridden creatures, without any capacity or opportunity for independent and original thought. In addition to good horse sense, the nonliterate usually displays much practical sense based on an appreciation of the hard realities of life. . . . What Montagu opens up here concerning the intense practicality of the non-literate applies perfectly as gloss to Joyce's Bloom or Odysseus, the resourceful man. What could be more practical for a man caught between the Scylla of a literary culture and the Charybdis of post-literate technology to make himself a raft of ad copy? He is behaving like Poe's sailor in the Maelstrom who studied the action of the whirlpool and survives. May not it be our job in the new electronic age to study the action of the new vortex on the body of the older cultures? # The techniques of uniformity and repeatability were introduced by the Romans and the Middle Ages. Prints and Visual Communication by William Ivins is a major resource for any student of the role of books in shaping human knowledge and society. The fact that Ivins stood a bit aside from the central literary aspect of the book seems to have given him an advantage over literary men. The student of literature and philosophy is prone to be concerned with book “content" and to ignore its form. This failure is peculiar to phonetic literacy in which the visual code always has the “content" that is the speech recreated by the person engaged in reading. No Chinese scribe or reader could make the mistake of ignoring the form of writing itself, because his written character does not separate speech and visual code in our way. But in a world of phonetic literacy this compulsion to split form and content is universal, and affects non-literary people as much as the scholar. Thus the Bell Telephone Laboratories spend millions on research but have never even noticed the peculiar form that is the telephone and what it does to speech and to personal relations. As an expert in prints Ivins became aware of their difference from the printed books in which they appeared. This in turn made him aware of the great difference between printed and manuscript books. At the outset (pp. 2-3) he draws attention to the dimension of repeatability built into the phonetic written characters, in order to stress the same dimensions of repeatability as it is found in pre-Gutenberg block printing of pictures from woodcuts: Although every history of European civilization makes much of the invention in the mid-fifteenth century of ways to print words from movable types, it is customary in those histories to ignore the slightly earlier discovery of ways to print pictures and diagrams. A book, so far as it contains a text, is a container of exactly repeatable word symbols arranged in an exactly repeatable order. Men have been using such containers for at least five thousand years. Because of this it can be argued that the printing of books was no more than a way of making very old and familiar things more cheaply. It may even be said that for a while type printing was little more than a way to do with a much smaller number of proof readings. Prior to 1501 few books were printed in editions larger than that handwritten one of a thousand copies to which Pliny the Younger referred in the second century of our era. The printing of pictures, however, unlike the printing of words from movable types, brought a completely new thing into existence— it made possible for the first time pictorial statements of a kind that could be exactly repeated during the effective life of the printing surface. This exact repetition of pictorial statements has had incalculable effects upon knowledge and thought, upon science and technology, of every kind. It is hardly too much to say that since the invention of writing there has been no more important invention than that of the exactly repeatable pictorial statement. The too obvious character of exact repeatability that is inherent in typography misses the literary man. He attaches little significance to this merely technological feature and concentrates on the “content," as if he were listening to the author. As an artist aware of formal structures as complex statements in themselves, Ivins brought to prints and typography and manuscript alike, a rare mode of attention. He saw (p. 3) how technological forms can shape the sciences as much as the arts: For our great grandfathers, and for their fathers back to the Renaissance, prints were no more and no less than the only exactly repeatable pictorial statements. .. . Until a century ago, prints made in the old techniques filled all the functions that are now filled by our line cuts and half tones, by our photographs and blueprints, by our various colour processes, and by our political cartoons and pictorial advertisements. If we define prints from the functional point of view so indicated, rather than by any restriction of process or aesthetic value, it becomes obvious that without prints we should have very few of our modern sciences, technologies, archaeologies, or ethnologies—for all of these are dependent, first or last, upon information conveyed by exactly repeatable visual or pictorial statements. This means that, far from being merely minor works of art, prints are among the most important and powerful tools of modern life and thought. Certainly we cannot hope to realize their actual role unless we get away from the snobbery of modern print collecting notions and definitions and begin to think of them as exactly repeatable pictorial statements or communications, without regard to the accident of rarity or what for the moment we may regard as aesthetic merit. We must look at them from the point of view of general ideas and particular functions, and, especially, we must think about the limitations which their techniques have imposed on them as conveyors of information and on us as receivers of that information. The technology of exact repeatability was a stress that the Romans introduced into the Greek visual analysis. This stress on the continuous, uniform line with its indifference to the oral values of pluralistic organization was, in the view of Ivins (pp. 4–5) effectively transmitted to and by the Dark Ages: Historians until very recent times have been literary men and philologues. As students of the past they have rarely found anything they were not looking for. They have been so full of wonder at what the Greeks said, that they have paid little attention to what the Greeks did not do or know. They have been so full of horror at what the Dark Ages did not say, that they have paid no attention to what they did do and know. Modern research, by men who are aware of low subjects like economics and technology, is rapidly changing our ideas about these matters. In the Dark Ages to use their traditional name, there was little assured leisure for pursuit of the niceties of literature, art, philosophy, and theoretical science, but many people, nevertheless addressed their perfectly good minds to social, agricultural, and mechanical problems. Moreover, all through those academically debased centuries, so far from there having been any falling off in mechanical ability, there was an unbroken series of discoveries and inventions that gave the Dark Ages, and after them the Middle Ages, a technology, and, therefore, a logic, that in many most important respects far surpassed anything that had been known to the Greeks or to the Romans of the Western Empire. His theme is that ‘the Dark and Middle Ages in their poverty and necessity produced the first great crop of Yankee ingenuity." Perhaps Ivins overdoes this emphasis on the Dark and Middle Ages as “a culture of techniques and technologies," but it is a kind of approach which makes scholasticism understandable, and that prepares us for the great medieval invention of typography that was the “take-off" moment into the new spaces of the modern world.19 The word modern was a term of reproach used by the patristic humanists against the medieval schoolmen who developed the new logic and physics. Since then many books on medieval science have appeared which confirm the Ivins view. The Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages by Marshall Clagett is an example from which I will select a few themes that illustrate the continuous development of the visual stress which we have seen emerge in the Greek world as an effect of phonetic literacy. Thus: "It will be evident from the material I have presented in the first two chapters that medieval statics, like the other aspects of medieval mechanics, depends greatly on the mechanical concepts and their analysis given by Greek mechanicians: the Aristotelian author of the Mechanica, Archimedes, Hero, and others."(p. xxiii) In the same way "the achievements of medieval kinematics were very much more an integral part of the scholastic discussions of Aristotelian statements regarding force and motion . . . Particularly important was the development of a concept of instantaneous velocity and consequently of an analysis of various kinds of acceleration."(p. xxv) More than a century before printing, scientists at Merton College, Oxford, developed a theorem of “a uniform acceleration and a movement uniform at the speed possessed by the uniformly accelerating body at the middle instant of the time of acceleration."With the invention of uniform repeatable and movable types we enter further into this medieval world of measurable quantities. What Clagett does is to establish the lines of continuity between Greek visual analysis and medieval science, and to show how much further the scholastic mind pushed the Greek concepts. The Merton kinematics spread to Italy and France. This was an idea for translating motion into visual terms: The basic idea of the system is simple. Geometric figures, particularly areas, can be used to represent the quantity of a quality. Extension of the quality in a subject is to be represented by a horizontal line, while the qualitative intensities at different points in the subject are to be represented by perpendiculars erected on the extension or subject line. In the case of motion, the line of extension represents time, and the line of intensity, velocity. (p. 33) Clagett presents the treatise of Nicholas of Oresme “On the Configurations of Qualities" in which Oresme says: “Every measurable thing except numbers is conceived in the manner of continuous quantity." This recalls us to the Greek world in which as Tobias D. Dantzig points out in his Number: The Language of Science (pp. 141-2): The attempt to apply rational arithmetic to a problem in geometry resulted in the first crisis in the history of mathematics. The two relatively simple problems, the determination of the diagonal of a square and that of the circumference of a circle, revealed the existence of new mathematical beings for which no place could be found within the rational domain . . . A further analysis showed that the procedures of algebra were generally just as inadequate. So it became apparent that an extension of the number field was unavoidable. . . . And since the old concept failed on the terrain of geometry, we must seek in geometry a model for the new. The continuous indefinite straight line seems ideally adapted for such a model. Number is the dimension of tactility, as Ivins explained in Art and Geometry (p. 7): "In any continuous pattern the hand needs simple and static forms and it likes repeated ones. It knows objects separately, one after another, and unlike the eye it has no way of getting a practically simultaneous view or acquaintance with a group of objects as a single awareness. Unlike the eye, the unaided hand is unable to discover whether three or more objects are on a line." But what concerns us about the first crisis in mathematics is the evident fictions which must be resorted to in order to translate the visual into the tactile. But the greater fictions lay ahead in the infinitesimal calculus. As we shall see, with regard to the sixteenth century, number and visuality, or tactility and retinal experience, split quite asunder and went their divergent ways to set up the rival empires of Art and Science. This divergence, so strikingly initiated in the Greek world, was held in relative abeyance until the Gutenberg take-off. Throughout the centuries of manuscript culture it will appear that the visual did not become quite dissociated from tactility, even though it diminished the auditory empire drastically. This matter will get separate discussion apropos of medieval reading habits. The relation of tactility to the visual, so necessary to an understanding of the fortunes of the phonetic alphabet, only became starkly defined after Cézanne. Thus Gombrich makes tactility a central theme of Art and Illusion, as does Heinrich Wolfflin in his Principles of Art History. And the reason for this new stress was that in an age of photography the divorce of the visual from the interplay of the other senses was pushed all the way into reaction. Gombrich records the stages of nineteenth-century discussion and analysis of “sense data" leading to the Helmholtz case for “unconscious inference" or mental action even in the most basic sense experience. "Tactility" or interplay among all the senses was felt to be the very mode of this “inference" and led at once to the disintegration of the idea of the “imitation of nature" as a visual affair. Gombrich writes (p. 16):