Two German thinkers are prominent in this story. One is the critic Konrad Fiedler, who insisted, in opposition to the impressionists, that “even the simplest sense impression that looks like merely the raw material for the operations of the mind is already a mental fact, and what we call the external world is really the result of a complex psychological process." But it was Fiedler's friend, the neoclassical sculptor Adolf von Hildebrand, who set out to analyze this process in a little book called The Problem of Form in the Figurative Arts, which came out in 1893 and gained the ear of a whole generation. Hildebrand, too, challenged the ideals of scientific naturalism by an appeal to the psychology of perception: if we attempt to analyze our mental images to discover their primary constituents, we will find them composed of sense data derived from vision and from memories of touch and movement. A sphere, for instance, appears to the eye as a flat disk; it is touch which informs us of the properties of space and form. Any attempt on the part of the artist to eliminate this knowledge is futile, for without it he would not perceive the world at all. His task is, on the contrary, to compensate for the absence of movement in his work by clarifying his image and thus conveying not only visual sensations but also those memories of touch which enable us to reconstitute the three-dimensional form in our minds. It is hardly an accident that the period when these ideas were so eagerly debated was also the period when the history of art emancipated itself from antiquarianism, biography, and aesthetics. Issues which had been taken for granted so long suddenly looked problematic and required reassessment. When Bernard Berenson wrote his brilliant essay on the Florentine painters, which came out in 1896, he formulated his aesthetic creed in terms of Hildebrand's analysis. With his gift for the pregnant phrase, he summed up almost the whole of the sculptor's somewhat turgid book in the sentence "The painter can accomplish his task only by giving tactile value to retinal impressions." For Berenson, Giotto's or Pollaiuolo's claim on our attention is that they had done precisely this . .. # In antiquity and the Middle Ages reading was necessarily reading aloud. "It is not too much to say that with Aristotle the Greek world passed from oral instruction to the habit of reading," writes Frederic G. Kenyon in Books and Readers in Ancient Greece and Rome (p. 25). But for centuries to come "reading" meant reading aloud. In fact, it is only today that the decree nisi has been handed down by the speed-reading institutes to divorce eye and speech in the act of reading. The recognition that in reading from left to right we make incipient word formations with our throat muscles was discovered to be the principal cause of “slow" reading. But the hushing up of the reader has been a gradual process, and even the printed word did not succeed in silencing all readers. But we have tended to associate lip movements and mutterings from a reader with semi-literacy, a fact which has contributed to the American stress on a merely visual approach to reading in elementary learning. Yet Gerard Manley Hopkins was crusading for tactile stress in word use and for vigorous oral poetry exactly at the time that Cézanne was giving tactile values to the retinal impression. Referring to his poem "Spelt from Sibyl's Leaves," Hopkins wrote: Of this long sonnet above all remember what applies to all my verse, that it is, as living art should be, made for performance and that its performance is not reading with the eye but loud, leisurely, poetical (not rhetorical) recitation, with long rests, long dwells on the rhyme and other marked syllables, and so on. This sonnet should be sung: it is most carefully timed in tempo rubato.20 Again he writes: "Take breath and read it with the ears, as I always wish to be read, and my verse comes all right." And Joyce never tired of explaining how in Finnegans Wake “"the words the reader sees are not the words that he will hear." As with Hopkins, the language of Joyce only comes alive when read aloud, creating a synesthesia or interplay of the senses. But if reading aloud favours synesthesia and tactility, so did the ancient and medieval manuscript. We have already seen an example of a recent attempt to create an oral typography for modern English readers. Naturally, such a script presents the highly textural and tactile mode of an old manuscript. "Textura," the name for Gothic lettering in its own time, meant "tapestry." But the Romans had developed a much less textural and more highly visual lettering which is called "Roman" and which is the lettering we find in ordinary print, as on this page. But the early printers avoided Roman letters except to create the illusion of the fake antique, of the old Roman letters beloved of the Renaissance humanists. It is strange that modern readers have been so slow to recognize that the prose of Gertrude Stein with its lack of punctuation and other visual aids, is a carefully devised strategy to get the passive visual reader into participant, oral action. So with E. E. Cummings, or Pound, or Eliot. Vers libre is for the ear as much as for the eye. And in Finnegans Wake when Joyce wants to create "thunder," the "shout in the street" indicating a major phase of collective action, he sets up the word exactly like an ancient manuscript word: "The fall (bababadalgharaghtakamminarronnkonnbronntonnerronntuonnthunntrovarrhounawnskawntoohoohooardenenthurnuk!) of a once wallstrait oldparr is retaled early in bed and later on life down through all christian minstrelsy . . ."(p. 1) In the absence of visual aids the reader will find himself doing exactly what ancient and medieval readers did, namely reading aloud. Readers continued to read aloud after the beginning of word separation in the later Middle Ages, and even after the coming of print in the Renaissance. But all these developments fostered speed and visual stress. Today, scholars using manuscripts read them silently for the most part, and the study of reading habits in the ancient and medieval world remains to be done. The comments of Kenyon (in his Books and Readers in Ancient Greece and Rome, p. 65) are helpful: "The lack of assistance to readers, or of aids to facilitate reference, in ancient books is very remarkable. The separation of words is practically unknown, except very rarely when an inverted comma or dot is used to mark a separation where some ambiguity might exist. Punctuation is often wholly absent, and is never full and systematic."“Full and systematic"would be for the eye, whereas punctuation even in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries continued to be for the ear and not the eye.21 ## Manuscript culture is conversational if only because the writer and his audience are physically related by the form of publication as performance. There is no lack of indication that "reading"throughout ancient and medieval times meant reading aloud, or even a kind of incantation. But nobody has ever gathered adequate data on this question. I can at least give a few samples from various periods of the sort of evidence that is readily available. Thus in his Poetics (26) Aristotle points out: "That Tragedy may produce its effect even without movement or action in just the same way as Epic poetry; for from the mere reading of a play its quality may be seen." Sidelights on the above aspect of reading as recitation are available from the Roman practice of public recitation as a principal form of book publication. Such it remained until printing. Kenyon (Books and Readers, pp. 83–4) reports on the Roman practice: 21See references on this subject in my article on “The Effect of the Printed Book on Language in the Sixteenth Century,"Explorations in Communications, pp. 125-35. Tacitus describes how an author would be compelled to hire a house and chairs, and collect an audience by personal entreaty; and Juvenal complains that a rich man would lend his disused house, and send his freedmen and poor clients to form an audience, but would not bear the cost of the chairs. The whole practice finds its analogy in the modern musical world, where a singer is compelled to hire a hall and do his best to collect an audience, in order that his voice may be heard; or a patron desiring to assist him may lend his drawing-room for the purpose, and use his influence to get his friends to attend. It was not a healthy phase for literature, since it encouraged compositions which lent themselves to rhetorical declamation; and one may doubt whether it did any service to the circulation of books. Moses Hadas in his Ancilla to Classical Reading goes into the question of oral publication more thoroughly than Kenyon (p. 50): The concept of literature as something to be listened to in public rather than scanned silently in private in itself makes the notion of literary property more difficult to grasp. We ourselves are more conscious of an author's contribution when we read his book than we are of a composer's when we hear his work performed. Among the Greeks the regular method of publication was by public recitation, at first, significantly, by the author himself, and then by professional readers or actors, and public recitation continued to be the regular method of publication even after books and the art of reading had become common. How this affected the poet's livelihood we shall see in another connection; here we may pause to notice the effect of oral presentation on the character of the literature. Just as music written for a small group of instruments has a different tone and tempo from music designed for large halls, so with books. Printing has enlarged the "hall"for the author's performance until all aspects of style have been altered. Hadas is most relevant here: All classic literature, it may be said, is conceived of as conversation with, or an address to, an audience. Ancient drama is significantly different from modern because plays acted in bright sunlight before 40,000 spectators cannot be like plays acted before 400 in a darkened room. Similarly, a piece intended for declamation at a festival cannot be like a piece intended for the perusal of a cloistered student. Poetry in particular shows that all its varieties were intended for oral presentation. Even epigrams represent a vocal address to the passer-by (“Go, stranger," or the like) and sometimes, as in some of the epigrams of Callimachus and of his imitators, the stone is thought of as carrying on a brief dialogue with the passer-by. Homeric epic was of course designed for public reading, and long after private reading became common, rhapsodes made a profession of reciting epic. Pisistratus, who had something (we do not know how much) to do with regularizing the text of Homer, also instituted the public reading of his poems at the Panathenaic festival. From Diogenes Laertius (1.2.57) we learn that Solon provided that the public recitations of Homer shall follow a fixed order; thus the second reciter must begin from the place where the first left off.' Prose no less than poetry was presented orally, as we know from reports concerning Herodotus and others, and the practice of oral presentation affected the nature of prose as it did of poetry. The elaborate attention to sound which characterizes Gorgias' pioneer productions would have been meaningless unless his pieces were intended for recitation. It was the artfulness which Gorgias gave it that enabled Isocrates to maintain that prose was the legitimate successor of poetry and must replace it. Later critics like Dionysius of Halicarnassus judge historians by the same gauge as oratory and make comparisons between their works with no allowances for what we should consider necessary differences in genera. (pp. 50–1) Hadas then turns (pp. 51–2) to the well-known passage in St. Augustine's Confessions: Throughout antiquity and long thereafter even private readers regularly pronounced the words of their text aloud, in prose as well as poetry. Silent reading was such an anomaly that St. Augustine (Confessions 5, 3) finds Ambrose's habit a very remarkable thing: “But when he was reading his eye glided over the pages and his heart searched out the sense, but his voice and tongue were at rest." Visitors came to watch this prodigy, and Augustine conjectures explanations: 'Perchance he dreaded lest if the author he read should deliver anything obscurely, some attentive or perplexed hearer should desire him to expound it, or to discuss some of the harder questions; so that his time being thus spent, he could not turn over so many volumes as he desired; although the preserving of his voice (which a very little speaking would weaken) might be the truer reason for his reading to himself. But with what intent soever he did it, certainly in such a man it was good.' ## The manuscript shaped medieval literary conventions at all levels. Hadas pursues this theme elsewhere in his excellent work. And it is taken up again for the medieval period by H. J. Chaytor in From Script to Print, a book to which the present one owes a good deal of its reason for being written. No one is likely to contest the statement that the invention of printing and the development of that art mark a turning-point in the history of civilisation. Not so readily appreciated is the fact that association with printed matter has changed our views of literary art and style, has introduced ideas concerning originality and literary property of which the age of manuscript knew little or nothing, and has modified the psychological processes by which we use words for the communication of thought. The breadth of the gulf which separates the age of manuscript from the age of print is not always, nor fully, realised by those who begin to read and criticise medieval literature. When we take up a printed edition of a medieval text, provided with an introduction, a critical apparatus of variant readings, notes and glossary, we bring unconsciously to its perusal those prejudices and prepossessions which years of association with printed matter have made habitual. We are liable to forget that we are dealing with the literature of an age when orthographical standards varied and grammatical accuracy was not highly esteemed, when language was fluid and was not necessarily regarded as a mark of nationality, when style meant the observance of fixed and complicated rules of rhetoric. To copy and circulate another man's book might be regarded as a meritorious action in the age of manuscript; in the age of print, such action results in law suits and damages. Writers who wish to derive profit by amusing a public now write for the most part in prose; until the middle of the thirteenth century, only verse could obtain a hearing. Hence, if a fair judgment is to be passed upon literary works belonging to the centuries before printing was invented, some effort must be made to realise the extent of the prejudices under which we have grown up, and to resist the involuntary demand that medieval literature must conform to our standards of taste or be regarded as of interest purely antiquarian. In the words of Renan, l’essence de la critique est de savoir comprendre des états très différents de celui où nous vivons'. (p. 1) It was learning from Chaytor how literary conventions are affected by the oral, written, or the printed forms, that suggested to me the need for The Gutenberg Galaxy. Medieval language and literature were somewhat in the state of the present movie or the TV show in that, in Chaytor's words, it produced little formal criticism in our sense of the term. If an author wished to know whether his work was good or bad, he tried it on an audience; if it was approved, he was soon followed by imitators. But authors were not constrained by models or systems . . . the audience wanted a story with plenty of action and movement, the story, as a rule, showed no great command of character drawing; this was left to the reciter for portrayal by change of voice and gesture. (p. 3) The twelfth century audience took these recitals in instalments but “we can sit and read it at our leisure and turn back to previous pages at our will. In short, the history of the progress from script to print is a history of the gradual substitution of visual for auditory methods of communicating and receiving ideas." (p. 4) Chaytor quotes (p. 7) a passage from Our Spoken Language by A. Lloyd James (p. 29) which comes to grips with the alteration of our sense lives by way of literacy: "Sound and sight, speech and print, eye and ear have nothing in common. The human brain has done nothing that compares in complexity with this fusion of ideas involved in linking up the two forms of language. But the result of the fusion is that once it is achieved in our early years, we are for ever after unable to think clearly, independently and surely about any one aspect of the matter. We cannot think of sounds without thinking of letters; we believe letters have sounds. We think that the printed page is a picture of what we say, and that the mysterious thing called "spelling" is sacred. . . . The invention of printing broadcast the printed language and gave to print a degree of authority that it has never lost." Stressing the latent kinesthetic effects even in silent reading Chaytor refers to the fact that “some doctors forbid patients with severe throat affections to read, because silent reading provokes motions of the vocal organs, though the reader may not be conscious of them." He also considers (p. 6) the interplay that is between the auditory and the visual in reading: So also when we speak or write, ideas evoke acoustic combined with kinesthetic images, which are at once transformed into visual word images. The speaker or writer can now hardly conceive of language, except in printed or written form; the reflex actions by which the process of reading or writing is performed have become so instinctive' and are performed with such facile rapidity, that the change from the auditory to the visual is concealed from the reader or writer, and makes analysis of it a matter of great difficulty. It may be that acoustic and kinesthetic images are inseparable, and that ‘image' as such is an abstraction made for purposes of analysis, but which is non-existent considered in itself and as pure. But whatever account the individual may render of his own mental processes, and most of us are far from competent in this respect, the fact remains that his idea of language is irrevocably modified by his experience of printed matter. The alternating of modes or ratios between habitual patterns of sight and sound experience creates a large gap between the mental processes of the medieval and the modern reader. Chaytor writes (p. 10) : Nothing is more alien to medievalism than the modern reader, skimming the headlines of a newspaper and glancing down its columns to glean any point of interest, racing through the pages of some dissertation to discover whether it is worth his more careful consideration, and pausing to gather the argument of a page in a few swift glances. Nor is anything more alien to modernity than the capacious medieval memory which, untrammelled by the associations of print, could learn a strange language with ease and by the methods of a child, and could retain in memory and reproduce lengthy epic and elaborate lyric poems. Two points, therefore, must be emphasized at the outset. The medieval reader, with few exceptions, did not read as we do; he was in the stage of our muttering childhood learner; each word was for him a separate entity and at times a problem which he whispered to himself when he had found the solution; this fact is a matter of interest to those who edit the writings which he produced. Further, as readers were few and hearers numerous, literature in its early days was produced very largely for public recitation; hence, it was rhetorical rather than literary in character, and rules of rhetoric governed its composition. As the present book was going to press, the observations of Dom Jean Leclercq concerning reading aloud in the patristic and medieval period came most opportunely to attention. His The Love of Learning and the Desire for God (pp. 18-19) puts this neglected matter in the central position in which it belongs: If then it is necessary to know how to read, it is primarily in order to be able to participate in the lectio divina. What does this consist of? How is this reading done? To understand this, one must recall the meaning that the words legere and meditari have for St. Benedict, and which they are to keep throughout the whole of the Middle Ages; what they express will explain one of the characteristic features of monastic literature of the Middle Ages: the phenomenon of reminiscence, of which more must be said later. With regard to literature, a fundamental observation must be made here; in the Middle Ages, as in antiquity, they read usually, not as today, principally with the eyes, but with the lips, pronouncing what they saw, and with the ears, listening to the words pronounced, hearing what is called the “voices of the pages." It is a real acoustical reading; legere means at the same time audire; one understands only what one hears, as we still say: “entendre le latin," which means to “comprehend" it. No doubt, silent reading, or reading in a low voice, was not unknown; in that case it is designated by expressions like those of St. Benedict: tacite legere or legere sibi, and according to St. Augustine: legere in silentio, as opposed to the clara lectio. But most frequently, when legere and lectio are used without further explanation, they mean an activity which, like chant and writing, requires the participation of the whole body and the whole mind. Doctors of ancient times used to recommend reading to their patients as a physical exercise on an equal level with walking, running or ball-playing. The fact that the text which was being composed or copied was often written to dictation given aloud, either to oneself or to a secretary, satisfactorily explains the errors apparently due to hearing in medieval manuscripts: the use of the dictaphone today produces similar mistakes. Further on (p. 90), Leclercq discusses the ways in which the inevitable action of reading aloud entered into the whole conception of meditation, prayer, study, and memory: This results in more than a visual memory of the written words. What results is a muscular memory of the words pronounced and an aural memory of the words heard. The meditatio consists in applying oneself with attention to this exercise in total memorization; it is, therefore, inseparable from the lectio. It is what inscribes, so to speak, the sacred text in the body and in the soul. This repeated mastication of the divine words is sometimes described by use of the theme of spiritual nutrition. In this case the vocabulary is borrowed from eating, from digestion, and from the particular form of digestion belonging to ruminants. For this reason, reading and meditation are sometimes described by the very expressive word ruminatio. For example, in praising a monk who prayed constantly Peter the Venerable cried: "Without resting, his mouth ruminated the sacred words." Of John of Gorze it was claimed that the murmur of his lips pronouncing the Psalms resembled the buzzing of a bee. To meditate is to attach oneself closely to the sentence being recited and weigh all its words in order to sound the depths of their full meaning. It means assimilating the content of a text by means of a kind of mastication which releases its full flavor. It means, as St. Augustine, St. Gregory, John of Fécamp and others say in an untranslatable expression, to taste it with the palatum cordis or in ore cordis. All this activity is, necessarily, a prayer; the lectio divina is a prayerful reading. Thus, the Cistercian, Arnoul of Bohériss, will give this advice: When he reads, let him seek for savor, not science. The Holy Scripture is the well of Jacob from which the waters are drawn which will be poured out later in prayer. Thus there will be no need to go to the oratory to begin to pray; but in reading itself, means will be found for prayer and contemplation. Not only did this oral aspect of manuscript culture deeply affect the manner of composing and writing, but it meant that writing, reading, and oratory remained inseparable until well after printing. ## The traditional lore of school children points to the gap between the scribal and typographic man. In his Golden Bough (vol. I, p. xii), James Frazer points to the similar acceleration introduced into the oral world by literacy and visuality: accelerates the advance of thought at a rate which leaves the slow progress of opinion by word of mouth at an immeasurable distance behind. Two or three generations of literature may do more to change thought than two or three thousand years of traditional life. . . . and so it has come about that in Europe at the present day the superstitious beliefs and practices that have been handed down by word of mouth are generally of a far more archaic type than the religion depicted in the most ancient literature of the Aryan race . . ." Just how this comes about is the theme of Iona and Peter Opie in their Lore and Language of Schoolchildren (pp. 1–2): While a nursery rhyme passes from a mother or other adult to the small child on her knee, the school rhyme circulates simply from child to child, usually outside the home, and beyond the influence of the family circle. By its nature a nursery rhyme is a jingle preserved and propagated not by children but by adults, and in this sense it is an ‘adult' rhyme. It is a rhyme which is adult approved. The schoolchild's verses are not intended for adult ears. In fact part of their fun is the thought, usually correct, that adults know nothing about them. Grown-ups have outgrown the schoolchild's lore. If made aware of it they tend to deride it; and they actively seek to suppress its livelier manifestations. Certainly they do nothing to encourage it. And the folklorist and anthropologist can, without travelling a mile from his door, examine a thriving unselfconscious culture (the word culture' is used here deliberately) which is as unnoticed by the sophisticated world, and quite as little affected by it, as is the culture of some dwindling aboriginal tribe living out its helpless existence in the hinterland of a native reserve. Perhaps, indeed, the subject is worthy of a more formidable study than is accorded it here. As Douglas Newton has pointed out: ‘The word-wide fraternity of children is the greatest of savage tribes, and the only one which shows no sign of dying out.' In communities widely separated in space and time there is a continuity and tenacity of tradition quite unknown to written forms. No matter how uncouth schoolchildren may outwardly appear, they remain tradition's warmest friends. Like the savage, they are respecters, even venerators, of custom; and in their self-contained community their basic lore and language seems scarcely to alter from generation to generation. Boys continue to crack jokes that Swift collected from his friends in Queen Anne's time; they play tricks which lads used to play on each other in the heyday of Beau Brummel; they ask riddles which were posed when Henry VIII was a boy. Young girls continue to perform a magic feat (levitation) of which Pepys heard tell (‘One of the strangest things I ever heard'): they hoard bus tickets and milk-bottle tops in distant memory of a love-lorn girl held to ransom by a tyrannical father; they learn to cure warts (and are successful in curing them) after the manner which Francis Bacon learnt when he was young. They call after the tearful the same jeer Charles Lamb recollected: they cry Halves!' for something found as Stuart children were accustomed to do; and they rebuke one of their number who seeks back a gift with a couplet used in Shakespeare's day. They attempt, too, to learn their fortune from snails, nuts, and apple-parings—divinations which the poet Gay described nearly two and a half centuries ago; they span wrists to know if someone loves them in the way that Southey used at school to tell if a boy was a bastard; and when they confide to each other that the Lord's Prayer said backwards will make Lucifer appear, they are perpetuating a story which was gossip in Elizabethan times. ## The medieval monks' reading carrell was indeed a singing booth. Chaytor, in his From Script to Print (p. 19), was the first to tackle the problem of the medieval monk's carrell or reading-singing booth: Why this attempt to secure privacy in establishments where the inmates as a rule spent most of their time among their fellows? For the same reason that the reading-room of the British Museum is not divided into sound-proof compartments. The habit of silent reading has made such an arrangement unnecessary; but fill the reading-room with medieval readers and the buzz of whispering and muttering would be intolerable. These facts deserve greater attention from the editors of medieval texts. When the eye of a modern copyist leaves the manuscript before him in order to write, he carries in his mind a visual reminiscence of what he has seen. What the medieval scribe carried was an auditory memory, and probably in many cases, a memory of one word at a time.22 It is almost uncanny that the modern telephone booth should also reflect another aspect of the medieval book world, namely the chained work of reference. But in Russia, until recently quite oral, there are no phone books. You memorize your information—which is even more medieval than the chained book. But memorization presented little problem for the pre-print student, and much less for non-literate persons. Natives are often bewildered by their literate teachers and ask: "Why do you write things down? Can't you remember?" Chaytor was the first to explain (p. 116) why print should impair our memories so notably, and why the manuscript should not: Our memories have been impaired by print; we know that we need not 'burden our memories' with matter which we can find merely by taking a book from a shelf. When a large proportion of a population is illiterate and books are scarce, memories are often tenacious to a degree outside modern European experience. Indian students are able to learn a text-book by heart and to reproduce it word for word in an examination room; sacred texts are preserved intact by oral transmission alone. It is said that if all the written and printed copies of the Rigveda were lost, the text could be restored at once with complete accuracy.' This text is about as long as the Iliad and Odyssey combined. Russian and Jugoslav oral poetry is recited by ministrels who show great powers both of memory and improvisation. But the more fundamental reason for imperfect recall is that with print there is more complete separation of the visual sense from the audile-tactile. This involves the modern reader in total translation of sight into sound as he looks at the page. Recall of material read by the eye then is confused by the effort to recall it both visually and auditorially. People with “good memories" are the ones with “photographic memories." That is, they do not translate back and forth from eye to ear and do not have things “on the tip of the tongue," which is our state when we do not know whether to see or hear a past experience. Before turning to the oral and auditory world of the Middle Ages in its erudite and artistic aspects, there are two passages, one from the earliest and one from the latest phases of the medieval world that indicate the ordinary assumption that the act of reading was oral and even dramatic. The first passage is from The Rule of Saint Benedict, chap. 48: "After the sixth hour, having left the table let them rest on their beds in perfect silence; or if anyone wishes to read by himself, let him read so as not to disturb the others." The second passage is from a letter of St. Thomas More to Martin Dorp, reproving Dorp for his letters: "However I am certainly surprised if any person should take it into his head to be so flattering as to extol such matters even in your presence; and, as I began to say, I wish you could watch through a window and see the facial expression, the tone of voice, the emotion with which those matters are read."23 ## In the chantry schools grammar served, above all, to establish oral fidelity Once it is understood that oral culture has many features of stability, quite non-existent in a visually organized world, it is quite easy to enter the medieval situation. It is also easier to grasp some of the basic changes in twentieth century attitudes. I turn briefly now to an unusual book by Istuan Hajnal²4 about the teaching of writing in medieval universities. I had opened this book in the expectation of finding, between the lines, as it were, evidence of the ancient and medieval practice of private reading aloud. I was not prepared to discover that “writing" to a medieval student was not only profoundly oral but inseparable from what is now called oratory and what was then called pronuntiatio, which was and remained the fifth major division of standard rhetorical study. Just why delivery or pronuntiatio was taken so seriously in the ancient and medieval worlds, gets new meaning from Hajnal's work: “The art of writing was held in great esteem because they saw in it the proof of a solid oral training." The story of writing as oral training helps to explain the early age of entry to the medieval university. For the proper study of the development of writing we must consider that the students began their course at the university at the age of twelve or fourteen. "In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the necessity of knowing Latin grammar, as well as material obstacles like the rarity of parchment, could push back the age at which writing might acquire its definitive form." We have to keep in mind that there was no organized system of education outside the universities. So that after the Renaissance "we find frequent allusions to the fact at Paris in the small classes of certain colleges, teaching commenced with the alphabet." We have, moreover, data on students in the college who were under ten years of age. But, certainly, for the medieval university we have to keep in mind that it “embraced all the levels of instruction from the most elementary to the most advanced." Specialism in our sense was unknown and all levels of instruction tended to be inclusive rather than exclusive. Certainly this inclusive character applies to the art of writing at this period; for writing implied all that to the ancient and medieval world was grammatica or philologia. At the opening of the twelfth century, says Hajnal (p. 39), there had been "for some centuries an important system of teaching designed to train advanced students. This training included in addition to knowledge of the liturgy, practical skills associated with it. At the level of the choir or chantry school one learned to read Latin and thus grammar was necessary in order to recite and to copy properly the Latin texts. Grammar served above all to insure oral fidelity." This stress on oral fidelity was to the medieval man the equivalent of our own visual idea of scholarship as involving exact quotation and proofreading. But the reason for this state of affairs Hajnal clears up in his section on “methods of teaching writing at the university." By the middle of the thirteenth century the Faculty of Arts at Paris was at a crossroads as regards methods. Presumably, the growing volume of available books had made it possible for many teachers to forego the method of the dictamen or dictation, and to move at a fast pace. But the slow method of dictation was also still in vogue. According to Hajnal (pp. 64-5), "after careful consideration, [the Faculty] decided in favour of the first method; that the professor should speak fast enough to be understood, but too fast for the pen to follow him. . . . Students who in order to oppose this statute themselves, or by means of their servants and followers, should shout or whistle or stamp their feet would be excluded from the Faculty for one year." ## The medieval student had to be paleographer, editor, and publisher of the authors he read. The clash was between the old form of dictation or the new form of dialogue and oral disputation. And it was this clash which enables us to learn about the details of medieval teaching procedure. On pages 65 and 66 of Hajnal's work we learn: The mention that courses were conducted without dictation outside the Arts Faculty shows that the Arts Faculty had broken with the method in use in its courses till that time. And what is more striking the Faculty of Arts expected the opposition of the students . . . The students clung to dictation. For dictation up to that time served not only to slow down the lecture, it served not only to give students complementary texts, but it constituted the method of the principal courses: modus legendi libros. . . . Dictation was in use even in the lectures given by the candidates at their examinations when they had to offer evidence of reading the written texts. Hajnal proceeds to another basic aspect: There can be no doubt that one of the essential reasons for the custom of dictation finds its explanation in the fact that, before the era of printing, schools and scholars had no adequate supply of texts. A manuscript book cost much; the simplest way of getting them was for the teacher to dictate the texts to his pupils. It is possible that there were students who wrote by dictation texts for commercial ends. Yes, in a certain degree, dictation would have been a commercial affair, both on the part of the student who wrote and sold the book and on the part of the teacher who by this means was assured of a large audience, and, by the same token, substantial revenue. The manual was necessary to the student, not only so far as it served for his university courses, but also because it would be useful in his future career. . . . Moreover the university required that students present themselves at their courses furnished with books they had made, and if not that at least there be a book shared among every three students. . . . Finally, in presenting himself for his candidature for a degree, the candidate was required to present the books which belonged to him. In the liberal careers, it was the corps of the profession in question that examined the candidates for a post in order to see in what measure they were furnished with books.25 The separation of words and music by the print technology was no more decisive than its separation of visual and oral reading. Moreover, until printing the reader or consumer was literally involved as producer. Hajnal describes (p. 68) how: The method of la dictee'(dictamen, dictation) in medieval schools had beyond doubt the goal of producing a definitive written text, usable on the spot, suitable to be read by anybody, and being eligible for commercial sale should the occasion arise. The one dictating said the words not once or twice but several times. Indeed, even after the banning of dictation courses it was permitted that the teacher dictate certain theses to be retained. . . Quite distinct from the precise and thorough mode of dictation in the Arts courses called modus pronuntiantium, there was: “a special form of dictation that followed the modus pronuntiantium; there was this other method of doing a course, speaking in a speedier fashion, a method destined for the use of the reportateurs, advanced students, who were able to teach the others on the basis of notes they had taken." But the slow and precise mode of dictamen or dictation was not only aimed at the production of usable private editions, as it were: . . . in taking the course in this manner, they took into account the skimpy preparation of the students. . . . It is clear that the students followed these 25These considerations put Chaucer's clerk in an interesting light and offer some reason for preferring the reading “worthy" to "worldly" in the disputed text: A Clerk ther was of Oxenford also, That unto logyk hadde longe ygo. As leene was his hors as is à rake, And he nas nat right fat, I undertake, But looked holwe, and therto sobrely. Ful thredbare was his overeste courtepy; For he hadde geten hym yet no benefice, Ne was so worldly for to have office. For hym was levere have at his beddes heed Twenty bookes, clad in blak or reed, Of Aristotle and his philosophie, Than robes riche, or fithele, or gay sautrie. courses not only to procure texts but also because they were obliged to learn the texts in the process of writing them correctly and legibly. . . . The expression modus pronuntiantium was not used in the statutes simply to designate a course procedure of speaking aloud and duly articulating the words. It was a technical term. The teaching of pronuntiatio was one of the fundamental tasks of Latin grammatica; and the manuals of grammar devoted a good deal of detail to this question. It was an accepted and established method whose aim was to inculcate good pronunciation of spoken Latin, to teach the careful distinction of the letters, to separate and modulate words and phrases. Manuals of grammar took care to say clearly that all this training served the ends of teaching writing. At this time, good pronunciation was considered essential. It was indeed essential at that time and was the prerequisite for the teaching of writing. The act of writing silently without intervention of the reading the text aloud, was not yet possible at that period. The beginner did not yet see around him a world strewn with writings and printed texts. He needed clear and disciplined pronunciation of the text if he would learn to write without faults. (p. 69) A fringe benefit of the need for reading and writing aloud is noted by Hajnal (pp. 75–6): Writing in the mode of dictation did not constitute a copying exercise as simple as might at first appear. It is a curious fact but it is precisely owing to this system that studies had been able to revive and a new literature was born in the heart of these Faculties. For every professor strove to give to the matter taught a new form suited to its own assumptions and inherent conceptions; and mostly he dictated to his students the results of these personal insights. That is how the university movement, from its inception, appears to us now as really modern. ## Aquinas explains why Socrates, Christ, and Pythagoras avoided the publication of their teachings. adjusting the work to the preparation of each, they proceeded to condense and to simplify the matter taught in order to facilitate its study and to present it in a compact form. Summing up, Hajnal says the teaching of writing was a method of teaching that had multiple objectives: the scribal training, practice in composition, and at the same time the introduction of minds to awareness of new concepts and reasonings and their means of expression. It was a vital and steady movement, adding the pleasure of the practice and use of writing to the acquisition of the texts themselves. This was perhaps the original cause that university teaching in the Middle Ages was more and more characterized by the practice of writing. It is not strange that from the fourteenth century the practice of writing was considered as constituting the essence of university life at Paris. It is in the light of Hajnal's presentation of medieval writing that we can make more sense of the view of Aquinas that Socrates and Christ, being teachers, did not connect their teachings to writing. It is in question 42 of the third part of the Summa Theologica (that is, textbook of theology) that Aquinas asks: "Utrum Christus debuerit doctrinam Suam Scripto tradere?" Aquinas rejects the idea of the learner as a page that is to be written on—a tabula rasa. He says: I answer by saying that it is fitting that Christ did not commit his teaching to writing. First on account of his own dignity; for the more excellent the teacher, the more excellent his manner of teaching ought to be. And therefore it was fitting that Christ, as the most excellent of teachers, should adopt that manner of teaching whereby his doctrine would be imprinted on the hearts of his hearers. For which reason it is said in Matthew vii, 29, that 'he was teaching them as one having power'. For which reason even among the pagans Pythagoras and Socrates, who were most excellent teachers, did not want to write anything. Had not medieval writing itself been so near to the oral mode of teaching the idea of the written form as merely a gimmick and not teaching, would not have been plausible. With the splendid introduction that Hajnal provides for a unified approach to the teaching medieval writing as a branch of rhetoric, and as co-extensive with grammar and literary training, it is easy to tie the matter in for both earlier and later phases of studies. For example, in the De oratore (I, xvi) Cicero says that the poet is the rival and almost the equal of the orator. That poetry or grammatica is the handmaid of rhetoric is a commonplace in Quintilian, Augustine, and throughout the Middle Ages and the Renaissance.26 26See C. S. Baldwin, Medieval Rhetoric and Poetic, and D. L. Clark, Rhetoric and Poetry in the Renaissance. They find this Ciceronian fusion of poetic and rhetoric puzzling. But Milton accepted it. He takes the Ciceronian view in his tract On Education. After grammar, he says, just so much logic should be studied as is useful to “a The Ciceronian concept of doctus orator and of eloquence as a kind of wisdom, as knowledge in action, became the basic charter of medieval education thanks to Augustine. But Augustine, an eminent professor of rhetoric, did not deliver this Ciceronian charter to the Middle Ages as a speech program for pulpit oratory. As Marrou states the matter in his great study,27 “la culture chrétienne, augustinienne, emprunte moins à la technique du rheteur qu'à celle du grammairien." In a word, ancient grammatica and philologia were encyclopedic, linguistically oriented programs which Augustine took over for the Doctrina Christiana. It was not so much preaching as the understanding and expounding of the sacra pagina for which Augustine co-opted the world of grammatica. And just as Hajnal has shown how mere writing and the teaching of grammar could be completely one with the art of pronuntiatio or oratorical delivery,28 so Marrou shows how it could happen that ancient grammatica became the basis for the study of the Bible in the Middle Ages. We shall see how in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the ancient and medieval techniques of exegesis flourished as never before. They became the basis for the Baconian scientific program and were thoroughly sidetracked by the new mathematics and the new techniques of quantification. A brief look at the changes in the various methods of medieval exegesis will prepare the reader for some of the later effects of printing on the arts and sciences. Beryl Smalley's Study of the Bible in the Middle Ages is an admirable survey entirely suited to this purpose. For knowing the “take-off" or new dimensions for visual experience and organization which began shortly after printing, it is interesting to observe how much this visual stress was anticipated in a variety of areas quite unrelated to Gutenberg technology. The look we have just taken at the ways in which ancient grammatica persisted in oral relation to medieval writing and textual study, helps to show how little the manuscript culture was designed to intensify the visual faculty to the point of splitting it away from the other senses. Smalley observes (p. xiv): “Teachers in the middle ages regarded the Bible as a school book par excellence. The little clerk learned his letters from the Psalter, and the Bible would be used in teaching him the liberal arts. Hence Bible study is linked with the history of institutions from the very beginning." The rise of the schoolmen or moderni in the twelfth century made a sharp break with the ancients of traditional Christian scholarship. We have seen how Marrou had shown that, thanks to Augustine, Bible study incorporated the ancient egkuklios paideia or encyclopedic program of grammatica and rhetorica as it reached definition at the hands of Cicero. Thus it was scriptural exegesis that ensured the continuity of classical humanism in the monastic schools from Augustine to Erasmus. But the rise of the universities in the twelfth century constituted a radical break with the classical tradition. The program of the new universities was much centred in dialectica or scholastic method which had had a heyday at Rome as we read in S. F. Bonner's Roman Declamation (p. 43) : Under the Republic, oratory had been essential for success in public life, and the whole subject was alive and keenly debated; but under the principate it had lost much of its political value. It was not so much that the courts had lost a great deal of their power; there were still civil and criminal cases to attract the advocate. It was rather the lack of assured success in public life, which the good orator in Republican days could naturally expect. Under the principate, so much depended upon Imperial and Court patronage; and it became necessary to choose one's words rather too carefully when speaking in public for the practice to be a popular one. Writing under Tiberius (if not Caligula) the elder Seneca could look back upon the Augustan Age as a time when there was 'so much liberty of speech'; but even then that freedom which the author of the Dialogues and the philosopher in Longinus consider so essential for good oratory, was fast disappearing from Roman public life. And so oratory betook itself to the safer arena of the schools, where a man might air his Republicanism without fear of consequences, and where one might be recompensed for the loss of political prestige by the plaudits of one's fellow-citizens. The term scholastica came into vogue—a schooloration' as opposed to the genuine public speech, and the exponents of these display-speeches became known as ‘schoolmen'—scholastici. The break between political oratory and scholastic or academic disputation, then, took place long before the Middle Ages. Bonner refers to the Controversiae of the elder Seneca and notes (p. 2): “From this it appears that Seneca recognized three main stages of development: (i) the pre- Ciceronian thesis (ii) the privately rehearsed declamations of Cicero and his contemporaries, known to them as causae (iii) the declamation proper, known as controversia and subsequently also as scholastica." These scholastic exercises in ancient Rome depended on the sic et non examination of theses. And in his Topics (1, 9) Aristotle refers to such theses as an assertion or negation of some exceptional philosophical tenet, giving as examples “that everything is in a state of flux" or "that all existence is One." Moreover, "thesis" meant that the topic might not only be paradoxical but that it would be considered in abstraction from particular circumstances and from “given person place or time." Bonner adds (p. 3) : It is in the Rhetorica of Cicero, the Institutio Oratoria of Quintilian, and the later Greek and Roman rhetoricians, that specific examples of subjects of theses are found. They represent the major problems of the world and its meaning, of human life and conduct, which the Greeks debated through the ages, from the cities of Asia Minor to the groves of the Academy, from the Garden and the Porch to the villas of Italy and the colonnades of Rome. The reason for bringing up the character of scholastic form is that from the twelfth to the sixteenth centuries this kind of highly oral activity broke away from the grammatica that formed the base of monastic and later humanist procedures. For grammatica is concerned very much with particular historical circumstances and with given person, place and time. With the advent of the printed book grammatica surged back to a dominance it had enjoyed before scholasticism and the moderni and the new universities had swept it aside. Scholasticism in ancient Rome was also an oral affair, and Bonner points out Cicero's letter to Atticus in which Cicero mentions a list of theses which he himself declaimed in private: They are almost exclusively concerned with the subject of tyrants and tyranny—'Should one work for the tyrant's downfall, even though it may jeopardise the State, or merely prevent his overthrower's elevation?' . . . 'Should one attempt to help one's country, when subject to a tyrant, by opportune speech rather than by force of arms?' There are eight such subjects, which Cicero says he declaimed in Greek and Latin, both for and against, in order to take his mind off his present troubles . . .29 29Roman Declamation, p. 10. Somewhere Cicero states "Philosophy shall be the declamation of my old age." At any rate, it was the declamation of the Middle Ages. ## Scholasticism, like Senecanism, was directly related to the oral traditions of aphoristic learning. When it is understood how entirely oral these thesis defenses were, it is easier to see why the students of such arts would need to have memories furnished with a large repertory of aphorisms and sententiae. This is a factor in the prevalence of Senecan stylistic in later Roman times and for the long association of Senecan style with “scientific method" both in the middle ages and in the Renaissance. For Francis Bacon, as much as for Abelard, "writing in aphorisms"rather than in “methods" was the difference between keen analysis and mere public persuasion. In The Advancement of Learning, which is itself shaped as a public oration, Bacon prefers, on intellectual grounds, the scholastic technique of aphorism to the Ciceronian method of explicit spelling out of information in the form of continuous prose: Another diversity of Method, whereof the consequence is great, is the delivery of knowledge in Aphorisms, or in Methods; wherein we may observe that it hath been too much taken into custom, out of a few axioms or observations upon any subject, to make a solemn and formal art, filling it with some discourses, and illustrating it with examples, and digesting it into a sensible Method. But the writing in aphorisms hath many excellent virtues, whereto the writing in Method doth not approach. For first, it trieth the writer, whether he be superficial or solid: for Aphorisms, except they should be rediculous, cannot be made but of the pith and heart of sciences; for discourse of illustration is cut off: recitals of examples are cut off; discourse of connection and order is cut off; descriptions of practice are cut off. So there remaineth nothing to fill the Aphorisms but some good quantity of observation: and therefore no man can suffice, nor in reason will attempt to write Aphorisms, but he that is sound and grounded. But in Methods, Tantum series juncturaque pollet, Tantum de medio sumptis accedit honoris; as a man shall make a great shew of an art, which, if it were disjointed, would come to little. Secondly, methods are more fit to win consent or belief, but less fit to point to action; for they carry a kind of demonstration in orb or circle, one part illuminating another, and therefore satisfy; but particulars, being dispersed, do best agree with dispersed directions. And lastly, Aphorisms, representing a knowledge broken, do invite men to inquire farther; whereas Methods, carrying the show of a total, do secure men, as if they were at farthest. (p. 142) We find it hard to grasp that the Senecan Francis Bacon was in many respects a schoolman. Later, it will appear that his own "method" in science was straight out of medieval grammatica. Noting that the Roman scholastics or declaimers used sensational themes (such as the Senecan drama used in Roman and Renaissance times alike), Bonner adds (Roman Declamation, p. 65): But apart from these characteristics their diction is much the same as that of contemporary writers, and is typical of the earliest ‘Silver Latin'. In composition, the chief faults are the excessive use of short and disjointed sentences, giving an abrupt effect to the style, the rarity of well-balanced periods, and the use by some declaimers of weak and ineffective rhythms. The style of these extracts is what the Greek critics ld lld καταμμνη κρματισνη n ntd t periodic structure, this feature would have been most effective, but it is so frequently used that the mind wearies of the repeated pungency and point. But the “disjointed sentences" and endless alliterations such as Augustine used for his popular "rhymed sermons" are the necessary norm of oral prose and poetry alike. (Witness the Elizabethan Euphues.) It is easy to gauge the degree of acceptance of print culture in any time or country by its effect in eliminating pun, point, alliteration, and aphorism from literature. Thus, the Latin countries even today retain maxims, sententiae, and aphorism at a respectable level. And the symboliste revival of oral culture not only began first in Latin countries but relied much on “disjointed sentences"and aphorism. Seneca and Quintilian, like Lorca and Picasso, were Spaniards for whom auditory modes were of great authority. Bonner (p. 71) is puzzled by the favourable light in which Quintilian sets the Euphuistic devices of Latin eloquence in spite of being “distinguished by his commonsense and liberal educational outlook." Even this brief attention to Senecanism and scholasticism in ancient Rome will help to understand how oral tradition in Western literature is transmitted by the Senecan vogue, and was gradually obliterated by the printed page in the later eighteenth century. The paradox that Senecanism is both highbrow in medieval scholasticism and lowbrow in the Elizabethan popular drama will be found to be resolved by this oral factor. But for Montaigne, as for Burton, Bacon, and Browne, there was no enigma. Senecan antithesis and “amble"(as described in Senecan Amble by George Williamson) provided the authentic means of scientific observation and experience of mental process. When only the eye is engaged, the multi-levelled gestures and resonances of Senecan oral action are quite impertinent. Only two more items in this part of our mosaic of The Gutenberg Galaxy are needed. One of them is timeless, and the other is right on the focal point of the sixteenth century metamorphosis via print. First, then, the matter of the proverb, the maxim, the aphorism, as an indispensable mode of oral society. Chapter 18 of J. Huizinga's The Waning of the Middle Ages is devoted to this theme of how in an oral society, ancient or modern, . . . every event, every case, fictitious or historic, tends to crystallize, to become a parable, an example, a proof, in order to be applied as a standing instance of a general moral truth. In the same way every utterance becomes a dictum, a maxim, a text. For every question of conduct Scripture, legends, history, literature, furnish a crowd of examples or of types, together making up a sort of moral clan, to which the matter in question belongs. (p. 227) Huizinga sees clearly that even written materials are strongly urged into the oral pattern of proverb and aphorism and exemplum or instance, by the oral form of discourse. That is why: “"In the Middle Ages everyone liked to base a serious argument on a text, so as to give it a foundation." But the “text"was felt to be the immediate voice of an auctor, and was authoritative in an oral way. We shall see that with the advent of printing the feeling for authority is completely confused by the intermingling of the old oral and the new visual organization of knowledge. The second point concerning the oral bias towards Sentences and aphorisms, as both compressed and authoritative, is that this preference is rapidly altered in the sixteenth century. Walter Ong has devoted a great deal of attention to this change as it appears in the work and vogue of Peter Ramus. Saving Father Ong's important work for attention a little later, it is only necessary to cite here his article on “Ramist Method and the Commercial Mind."sò Ong stresses the change in human sensibility resulting from the rise of typography, showing "how the use of printing moved the word away from its original association with sound and treated it more as a ‘thing' in space." The implication of this visual approach for the oral aphorism, and for the compendia of sentences, adages, and maxims which had been the medieval staple of learning, was recession. As Ong puts it (p. 160), ". . . Ramus tends to regard the knowledge which he purveys in his arts as a commodity rather than as a wisdom." The printed book will naturally tend to become a work of reference rather than a speaking wisdom. ## Scribal culture and Gothic architecture were both concerned with light through, not light on. The scholastic deviation from the monastic literary humanism was soon to be confronted by the flood of ancient texts from the printing presses. Four centuries of dialectical intensity seemed to end there; but the spirit and achievement of scholastic science and abstraction was carried along, as men like Clagett have shown, into the full tide of modern science. The scholastic discovery of visual means of graphing non-visual relationships .of force and motion is quite at variance with the textual positivism of the humanist. Yet both humanist and the schoolman have been justly nominated for scientific honours. This natural confusion we shall see reaching explicit conflict in the mind of Francis Bacon. His own confusion will help to clarify many issues for us a little later on. The exegesis of the Bible had its own conflicts of method, and as Smalley indicates in her Study of the Bible in the Middle Ages they concerned the letter and the spirit, the visual and the non-visual. She cites Origen: I published three books (on Genesis) from the sayings of the Holy Fathers concerning the letter and the spirit . . . For the Word came into the world by Mary, clad in flesh; and seeing was not understanding; all saw the flesh; knowledge of the divinity was given to a chosen few. . . . The letter appears as the flesh; but the spiritual sense within is known as divinity. This is what we find in studying Leviticus . . . Blessed are the eyes which see divine spirit though the letters veil. (p. 1) The theme of the letter and the spirit, a dichotomy deriving from writing, was frequently alluded to by Our Lord in his "It is written, but I say unto you." The prophets had usually been at war with the scribes in Israel. This theme enters into the very texture of medieval thought and sensibility, as in the technique of the "gloss"to release the light from within the text, the technique of the illumination as light through not on, and the very mode of Gothic architecture itself. As Otto von Simson states in The Gothic Cathedral (pp. 3-4): In a Romanesque church, light is something distinct from and contrasting with the heavy, somber, tactile substance of the walls. The Gothic wall seems to be porous: light filters through it, permeating it, merging with it, transfiguring it. . . . Light, which is ordinarily concealed by matter, appears as the active principle; and matter is aesthetically real only insofar as it partakes of, and is defined by, the luminous quality of light. . . . In this decisive aspect, then, the Gothic may be described as transparent, diaphanous architecture. These effects of diaphanous stone are obtained by stained glass, but they are quite relevant to the medieval approach to the human senses and to the senses of scripture above all. It is interesting that Simson points out the tactile quality of stone. An oral manuscript culture had no fear of tactility, the very crux of the interplay of the senses. For it was in this interplay that all lattice or sense ratio was formed that let light through. The "literal"level which was thought to possess all the meanings was such an interplay. "We then discover that what we should now call exegesis, which is based on a study of the text and of biblical history, in its widest sense, belongs to the 'literal exposition.'" In The Study of the Bible in the Middle Ages, Smalley cites from Carolingian Art by R. Hinks: “It is as though we were invited to focus our eyes not on the physical surface of the object, but on infinity as seen through the lattice . . . ; the object . . . exists—as it were—merely to define and detach a certain portion of infinite space, and make it manageable and apprehensible." Smalley then comments (p. 2): "This description of ‘pierced technique' in early northern art is also an exact description of exegesis as understood by Claudius . . . We are invited to look not at the text but through it." Probably any medieval person would be puzzled at our idea of looking through something. He would assume that the reality looked through at us, and that by contemplation we bathed in the divine light, rather than looked at it. The quite different sensuous assumptions of manuscript culture, ancient and medieval, from anything since Gutenberg, obtrude from the ancient doctrine of the senses and the sensus communis.31 Erwin Panofsky in his study of Gothic Architecture and Scholasticism also stresses the medieval bias for light through and found it helpful to tackle the architectural problem via the schoolmen: "Sacred doctrine," says Thomas Aquinas, "makes use of human reason, not to prove faith but to make clear (manifestare) whatever else is set forth in this doctrine." This means that human reason can never hope to furnish direct proof of such articles of faith . . . but that it can, and does, elucidate or clarify these articles . . . Manifestatio, then, elucidation or clarification, is what I would call the first controlling principle of Early and High Scholasticism . . . if faith had to be "manifested" through a system of thought complete and self-sufficient within its own limits yet setting itself apart from the realm of revelation, it became necessary to "manifest" the completeness, self-sufficiency, and limitedness of the system of thought. And this could be done only by a scheme of literary presentation that would elucidate the very processes of reasoning to the reader's imagination just as reasoning was supposed to elucidate the very nature of faith to his intellect. (pp. 29–31) Panofsky then notes (p. 43) the “principle of transparency"in architecture: "It was, however, in architecture that the habit of clarification achieved its greatest triumphs. As High Scholasticism was governed by the principle of manifestatio, so was High Gothic architecture dominatedas already observed by Suger—by what may be called the “principle of transparency." Panofsky gives us (p. 38) the medieval sense doctrine as stated by Aquinas: “The senses delight in things duly proportioned as in something akin to them; for, the sense, too, is a kind of reason as is every cognitive power." Armed with this principle that there is a ratio or rationality in the senses themselves, Panofsky is able to move freely among the ratios that are between medieval scholasticism and medieval architecture. But this principle of ratio in the senses as light through Being is everywhere in study of the senses of scripture as well. But all of these matters became much confused by the growing demand for light on, rather than light through, as the later technology set the visual faculty in ever sharper separation from the other senses. The dilemma ahead is perfectly defined by Otto von Simson in The Gothic Cathedral (p. 3): "Not that Gothic interiors are particularly bright . . . in fact, the stained-glass windows were such inadequate sources of light that a subsequent and blinder age replaced many of them by grisaille or white windows that today convey a most misleading impression." After Gutenberg the new visual intensity will require light on everything. And its idea of space and time will change to regard them as containers to be filled with objects or activities. But in a manuscript age when the visual stood in closer relation to the audile-tactile, space was not a visual container. There was scarcely any furniture in a medieval room, as Siegfried Giedion explains in Mechanization Takes Command (p. 301): And yet there was a medieval comfort. But it must be sought in another dimension, for it cannot be measured on the material scale. The satisfaction and delight that were medieval comfort have their source in the configuration of space. Comfort is the atmosphere with which man surrounds himself and in which he lives. Like the medieval Kingdom of God, it is something that eludes the grasp of hands. Medieval comfort is the comfort of space. A medieval room seems finished even when it contains no furniture. It is never bare. Whether a cathedral, refectory, or a burgher chamber, it lives in its proportions, its materials, its form. This sense for the dignity of space did not end with the Middle Ages. It lasted until nineteenth-century industrialism blurred the feelings. Yet no later age so emphatically renounced bodily comfort. The ascetic ways of monasticism invisibly shaped the period to its own image. ## Medieval illumination, gloss, and sculpture alike were aspects of the art of memory, central to scribal culture. In this lengthy consideration of the oral aspects of manuscript culture, whether in the ancient or medieval phase, we gain this advantage: we shall not be inclined to look here for literary qualities that were the later product of print culture. Moreover, we begin to know what to expect of print technology in the diminution of oral qualities. And today in the electronic age we can understand why there should be a great diminishing of the special qualities of print culture, and a revival of oral and auditory values in verbal organization. For verbal organization, whether on the page or in speech, can have a visual bias such as we associate with the clipped and rapid speech of highly literate people. Again, verbal organization, even on the written page can have an oral bias, as in the scholastic philosophy. The unconscious literary bias of Rashdall is quite involuntary when he says in The University of Europe in the Middle Ages (vol. II, p. 37): "The mysteries of logic were indeed intrinsically better calculated to fascinate the intellect of the half-civilized barbarian than the elegancies of classical poetry and oratory." But Rashdall is right in considering the oral man to be a barbarian. For technically the “civilized" man is, whether crude or stupid, a man of strong visual bias in his entire culture, a bias derived from only one source, the phonetic alphabet. It is the concern of this book to discover how far the visual bias of this phonetic culture was pushed, first by the manuscript, and then by typography, or "this mechanical kind of writing," as it was early called. Scholastic philosophy was deeply oral in its procedures and organization, but so, in different ways, was scriptural exegesis. And the centuries of study of the Bible in the Middle Ages that embraced both ancient grammatica (or literature) also prepared the materials indispensable to scholastic dialectic techniques. Both grammatica and dialectica or scholastic philosophy were extremely oral in their orientation compared to the new visual orientation fostered by print. A favourite nineteenth century theme was that the medieval cathedrals were the “"books of the people."Kurt Seligman's statement of this aspect of the cathedral (The History of Magic, pp. 415–16) serves to bring out their resemblance to the page of medieval scriptural commentary: In this quality, the Tarot cards resemble the images of other arts: the paintings, sculpture, and stained glass windows of the cathedrals, which also clothed ideas in human form. Their world, however, is the one above, while the world of the Tarot is below. The trumps depict the relation of the powers and the virtues to man; the cathedrals on the other hand embody man's relation to the divine. But both images impress themselves upon the mind. They are mnemonic. They contain a wide complex of ideas that would fill volumes were they written down. They can be “read" by the illiterate and the literate alike, and they are destined for both. The Middle Ages were concerned with techniques that would enable man to remember and to compare many such areas of ideas. Under this impulse, Raymond Lully wrote his Ars Memoria, the Art of Memory. Similar preoccupations also resulted in the early block print, Ars Memorandi, printed about 1470. The author undertook the difficult task of making concrete the themes contained in the Four Gospels. For each Gospel, he created a few images, angels, bulls, lions, and eagles, emblems of the four Evangelists, upon which he imposed objects that were to suggest the stories treated in each chapter. Figure 231 shows the angel (Matthew), containing eight smaller emblems that were to recall Matthew's eight first chapters. In visualizing every figure of Ars Memorandi with all their emblems, one would remember the stories of the entire Gospel. To us, such visual memory would seem prodigious, but it was surely not unusual in times when only a few could read and write, and when images played the role of writing. Seligman has here grasped another essential feature of oral culture, the training of the memory. Just as pronuntiatio, the fifth division of classical rhetoric, was cultivated, as Hajnal has shown, for the art of writing and making books, so memoria, the fourth division of ancient oratory was a needful discipline in the manuscript age, and was served by the very arts of gloss and marginal illumination. Smalley, indeed, records (p. 53) that the marginal gloss, although of unknown origin, served among its users “as notes for the delivery of oral lecturae." In an unpublished master's thesis³2 John H. Harrington observes that in the early Christian centuries "Both the book, and the written word were identified with the message they carried. They were considered as being magically potent instruments, especially against the devil and his snares.' Harrington has many sections that bear on the oral character of “reading" and on the need for memorization as this from the rule of Pachomius: “And if he be unwilling to read, he is to be forced, so that there will never be one in a monastery who cannot read and memorize portions of Sacred Scripture." (p. 34) "Often while travelling two monks would read to one another, or recite from memory the Book of Scripture."(p. 48) ## For the oral man the literal text contains all possible levels of meaning. It will be useful now to notice a few more points in Smalley's Study of the Bible in the Middle Ages, that indicate the steady development of new visual bias in later medieval study of the Bible. There was the early scholastic drive to break away from literary contextual constraints: "Drogo, Lanfranc, and Berengar use dialectic in order to tunnel underneath their text; they attempt to reconstruct the logical process in the mind of their author. Dialectic could also be used for building up a new theological structure with the text as a base."(p. 72). To get at this process, of disengagement from the literary context, had been one of the attractions of the great collection of sentences of Peter Lombard, of the Sic et Non of Abelard, and the concordances of Discordant Canons that were great literary labours of this time: "Quaestiones were not only excerpted from their original commentary and issued separately; they were also transferred to a different kind of work. . . . Hence we are faced with the difficult problem of distinguishing between exegesis and systematic doctrinal teaching."(p. 75) The Adagia and Similia of Erasmus, excerpted from every sort of work, were later transferred into sermons, essays, plays, and sonnets in the sixteenth century. The real pressure towards visual schemes and organization came from the mounting volume of matters to be processed: This one-sided development was quite natural. The innumerable problems arising from the reception of Aristotelian logic and the study of canon and civil law, the new possibilities of reasoning, the urgent need for speculation and discussion, all these produced an atmosphere of haste and excitement which was unfavourable to biblical scholarship. The masters of the cathedral schools had neither the time nor the training to specialize in a very technical branch of Bible study. This applied to the philosophers and humanists of Chartres as much as to the theologians of Paris and Laon. Even Bec, the last of the great monastic schools, had been no exception. Lanfranc was a theologian and logician; the genius of his pupil, St. Anselm of Canterbury, took another direction. His philosophical works eclipsed his biblical, which seem to have been lost. (p. 77) And it was the same pressure of quantity that told, in the long run, in favour of typography. But the point where the visual and the oral approaches to scripture came into sharp medieval conflict was, as might have been predicted, axial or polar to the area where conflict occurred in the new visual culture of the Renaissance. Hugh of St. Victor conveys the matter clearly: The mystical sense is only gathered from what the letter says, in the first place. I wonder how people have the face to boast themselves teachers of allegory, when they do not know the primary meaning of the letter. "We read the Scriptures", they say, "but we don't read the letter. The letter does not interest us. We teach allegory."How do you read Scripture then, if you don't read the letter? Subtract the letter and what is left? "We read the letter" they say, "but not according to the letter. We read allegory, and we expound the letter not literally but allegorically . . . ; as lion, according to the historical sense means a beast, but allegorically it means Christ. Therefore the word lion means Christ."(p. 93) To the oral man the literal is inclusive, contains all possible meanings and levels. So it was for Aquinas. But the visual man of the sixteenth century is impelled to separate level from level, and function from function, in a process of specialist exclusion. The auditory field is simultaneous, the visual mode is successive. Of course, the very notion of "levels of exegesis," whether literal, figurative, topological, or anagogic, is strongly visual, a clumsy sort of metaphor. Yet: "Living over a century before St. Thomas, Hugh seems to have grasped the Thomist principle that the clue to prophecy and metaphor is the writer's intention; the literal sense includes everything which the sacred writer meant to say. But he has occasional lapses from his own standard."(p. 101) The Thomistic notion of the simultaneous interplay among the senses is as unvisualizable as analogical proportionality: "St. Thomas, perfecting the tentative efforts of his predecessors, has supplied a theory of the relations between the senses which lays the stress on the literal interpretation, now defined as the full meaning of the author."(p. 368) The sheer increase in the quantity of information movement favoured the visual organization of knowledge and the rise of perspective even before typography uniformity and repeatability of typography, quite alien to manuscript culture, is the necessary preliminary to unified or pictorial space and “perspective." Avant-garde painters like Masaccio in Italy and the Van Eycks in the North began to experiment with pictorial or perspective space early in the fifteenth century. And in 1435, a mere decade before typography, the young Leone Battista Alberti wrote a treatise on painting and perspective which was to be the most influential of the age. The other thing in Alberti's book that marked the coming of a new attitude far removed from that of the Greeks was his description of the earliest known geometrical scheme for depicting objects in a unified space, or in other words what we today call perspective. Just as it was a major event in the history of pictorial representation, so it was in the history of geometry, for in it was stated for the first time the now familiar process of central projection and section, the subsequent development of which has been the outstanding feature of modern synthetic geometry. It is an idea that was unknown to the Greeks, and it was discovered at a time so ignorant of geometry that Alberti thought it necesary to explain the words diameter and perpendicular.33 It is necessary for the understanding of the visual take-off that was to occur with Gutenberg technology, to know that such a take-off had not been possible in the manuscript ages, for such a culture retains the audile-tactile modes of human sensibility in a degree incompatible with abstract visuality or the translation of all the senses into the language of unified, continuous, pictorial space. That is why Ivins is entirely justified in maintaining in his Art and Geometry (p. 41): Perspective is something quite different from foreshortening. Technically, it is the central projection of a three-dimensional space upon a plane. Untechnically, it is the way of making a picture on a flat surface in such a manner that the various objects represented in it appear to have the same sizes, shapes, and positions, relatively to each other, that the actual objects as located in actual space would have if seen by the beholder from a single determined point of view. I have discovered nothing to justify the belief that the Greeks had any idea, either in practice or theory, at any time, of the conception contained in the italicised words in the preceding sentence. The study of the Bible in the Middle Ages achieved conflicting patterns of expression which the economic and social historian is also familiar with. The conflict was between those who said that the sacred text was a complex unified at the literal level, and those who felt that the levels of meaning should be taken one at a time in a specialist spirit. This conflict between an auditory and a visual bias seldom reached a high degree of intensity until after mechanical and typographical technology had conferred on the visual 33Ivins, Art and Geometry, p. 82. great preponderance. Prior to this ascendancy, the relative equality among the senses of sight, sound, touch, and movement in interplay in manuscript culture, had fostered the preference for light through, whether in language, art or architecture. Panofsky's view in Gothic Architecture and Scholasticism (pp. 58–60) is: A man imbued with the scholastic habit would look upon the mode of architectural presentation just as he looked upon the mode of literary presentation, from the point of view of manifestatio. He would have taken it for granted that the primary purpose of the many elements that compose a cathedral was to ensure stability, just as he took it for granted that the primary purpose of the many elements that constitute a Summa was to ensure validity. But he would not have been satisfied had not the membrification of the edifice permitted him to re-experience the very processes of cogitation. To him, the panoply of shafts, ribs, buttresses, tracery, pinnacles, and crockets was a self-analysis and self-explication of architecture much as the customary apparatus of parts, distinctions, questions, and articles was, to him, a selfanalysis and self-explication of reason. Where the humanistic mind demanded a maximum of “harmony"(impeccable diction in writing, impeccable proportion, so sorely missed in Gothic structures by Vasari, in architecture), the Scholastic mind demanded a maximum of explicitness. It accepted and insisted upon a gratuitous clarification of function through form just as it accepted and insisted upon a gratuitous clarification of thought through language. The student of medieval poetry could readily parallel these features. The dolce stil nuovo of Dante and others was achieved, as Dante explains, by looking within and following the very contours and process of passionate thought. It is in Canto xxiv of the Purgatorio that Dante says: “Count of me but as one Who am the scribe of love; that when he breathes, Take up my pen, and, as he dictates, write." To which his friend Forese replies: "Brother!" said he, "the hindrance, which once held The notary, with Guittone and myself, Short of that new and sweeter style I hear, Is now disclosed: I see how ye your plumes Stretch, as the inditer guides them;" Artistic and verbal fidelity to the very modes of experience is the secret of the sweet new style. This concern to follow the very process of intellection rather than to arrive at a private point of view, is what lends the air of "universalism" to much scholastic meditation. The same concern with the inherent modalities