of thought and being enable us to feel that “Dante is many men and suffers as many."34 Paolo Milano introducing Dante to an English public writes: The main point about Dante is this: what he says is never more, is never less, than his initial and total response to the object before him. (Art for him is the form that truth takes on when it is fully perceived.) .. . Dante never indulges in fancy; he never adorns, or magnifies. As he thinks and sees (whether with his outer, or his inner eye), so he writes. . . . His sensory apprehension is so sure, and his intellectual grasp so direct that he never doubts that he is at the very centre of perception. This is probably the secret of Dante's celebrated conciseness.35 With Dante, as with Aquinas, the literal, the surface is a profound unity, and Milano adds (p. xxxvii) : We live in an age where the split between mind, matter and soul (to use Dante's terms) has become so complete that we feel it is about to be reversed. . . . A slow dissociation of these three qualities has been at work for centuries, and we are reduced to admire, as if in separate wings of a gallery, the flesh according to Matisse, the mind according to Picasso, and the heart according to Rouault. A sculpturally contoured universalism of experience such as Dante's is quite incompatible with the unified pictorial space which houses the Gutenberg configuration ahead. For the modalities of mechanical writing and the technology of movable types were not kind to synesthesia or “the sculpture of rhyme." # The same clash between written and oral structures of knowledge occurs in medieval social life. In Henri Pirenne's Economic and Social History of Medieval Europe there are numerous structural parallels to the patterns of manuscript culture that have so far come to the attention here. The advantage in seeing the clash of forms before typography is that it enables us to see the turn to the struggle which was given by Gutenberg: It is quite plain, from such evidence as we possess, that from the end of the eighth century Western Europe had sunk back into a purely agricultural state. Land was the sole source of subsistence and the sole condition of wealth. All classes of the population, from the Emperor, who had no other revenues than those derived from his landed property, down to the humblest serf, lived directly or indirectly on the products of the soil, whether they raised them by their labour, or confined themselves to collecting and consuming them. Movable wealth no longer played any part in economic life. (p. 7) Pirenne is explaining how the feudal estate structure that grew up after the Roman collapse was that of numerous "centres without margins." By contrast, the Roman pattern had been centralist-bureaucratic, with much interplay between centre and margins. The feudal estate fits the approach to scripture that found the total wealth of meaning in the literal text as inclusive. However, the new towns and burgesses begin to approach that phase of “one level at a time" and of specialist knowledge. In the same way, as Pirenne observes, there was no nationalism until the fifteenth century: It was not until the fifteenth century that the first symptoms of protection began to reveal themselves. Before that, there is no evidence of the slightest desire to favour national trade by protecting it from foreign competition. In this respect, the internationalism which characterized medieval civilisation right into the thirteenth century was manifested with particular clarity in the conduct of the states. They made no attempt to control the movement of commerce and we should seek in vain for traces of an economic policy deserving of the name. (p.91) Just why typography should have fostered nationalism will become plainer later on. But the role of literacy and papyrus in making possible the structures of early empires is the theme of Harold Innis in Empire and Communications (p. 7): "Media which emphasize time are those which are durable in character such as parchment, clay and stone. . . . Media which emphasize space are apt to be less durable and light in character such as papyrus and paper." With the availability of quantities of manufactured paper, especially after the twelfth century, the growth of bureaucratic and centralist organization of distant areas got under way again. Pirenne writes (p. 211): One of the most striking phenomena of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries is the rapid growth of great commercial companies, each with its affiliations, correspondents and factors in different parts of the Continent. The example of the powerful Italian companies in the thirteenth century had now found followers north of the Alps. They had taught men the management of capital, bookkeeping and the various forms of credit, and though they continued to dominate the trade in money, they found themselves faced by a growing number of rivals in the trade in merchandise. The peculiar character of medieval town life was its juxtaposition of two populations. There were the burgesses or guildsmen for whom the town mainly existed, and whose effort was to fix prices and standards for goods and conditions of citizenship: The period in which the craft gilds dominated or influenced the economic regime of the towns is also that in which urban protectionism reached its height. However divergent their professional interests might be, all industrial groups were united in their determination to enforce to the utmost the monopoly which each enjoyed and to crush all scope for individual initiative and all possibility of competition. Henceforth the consumer was completely sacrificed to the producer. The great aim of workers in export industries was to raise wages, that of those engaged in supplying the local market to raise, or at least to stabilise, prices. Their vision was bounded by the town walls, and all were convinced that their prosperity could be secured by the simple expedient of shutting out all competition from outside. Their particularism became more and more rabid; never has the conception that each profession is the exclusive possession of a privileged body been pressed to such extremes as it was in these medieval crafts. (pp. 206–7) But side by side with these exclusive persons living the centre-withoutmargin life, was a growing population of second-class citizens who were engaged in international trade. They were the avant-garde of what later became the dominant middle class: But urban industry was not everywhere the same. In many towns, and precisely in those which were the most developed, there was, side by side with the craftsmen-entrepreneurs living by the local market, an entirely different group, which worked for export. Instead of producing only for the limited clientèle of the town and its environs, these were the purveyors of the wholesale merchants carrying on international commerce. From these merchants they received their raw material, for them they worked, and to them they delivered it in the form of a manufactured article. (p. 185) Paradoxically, it will be these international deviationists from medieval town and guild life who form the nationalist core in the Renaissance. It is Chaucer's Host and Wyf of Bath, among others, who are the "outsiders" of their society. They belong to the international set, as it were, who will become the middle class in the Renaissance. The term hôtes (literally “guests"), which appears more and more frequently from the beginning of the twelfth century, is characteristic of the movement which was then going on in rural society. As the name indicates the hôte was a new-comer, a stranger. He was, in short, a kind of colonist, an immigrant in search of new lands to cultivate. These colonists were undoubtedly drawn either from the vagrant population, from which at the same period the first merchants and the artisans of the towns were being recruited, or from among the inhabitants of the great estates, whose serfdom they thus shook off. (p. 69) The medieval world ended in a frenzy of applied knowledge-new medieval knowledge applied to the recreation of antiquity. The great study of The Waning of the Middle Ages by J. Huizinga is almost entirely concerned with the feudal nobility, whose tenure had been greatly modified by the medieval guildsmen, and was to be quite diminished by the middle class that later came with typography. In many ways, Huizinga is baffled by the medieval world as much as Heinrich Wolfflin was by medieval art. Both men hit upon the idea of applying to it the formulas of primitive and child art and living. And this approach works up to a point, since the tactile bounding lines of childhood visual life are not far from those of non-literate sensibility. Huizinga writes (p. 9): To the world when it was half a thousand years younger, the outlines of all things seemed more clearly marked than to us. The contrast between suffering and joy, between adversity and happiness, appeared more striking. All experience had yet to the minds of men the directness and absoluteness of the pleasure and pain of child-life. Every event, every action, was still embodied in expressive, and solemn forms, which raised them to the dignity of a ritual. For it was not merely the great facts of birth, marriage and death which, by the sacredness of the sacrament, were raised to the rank of mysteries; incidents of less importance, like a journey, a task, a visit, were equally attended by a thousand formalities: benedictions, ceremonies, formulae. Calamities and indigence were more afflicting than at present; it was more difficult to guard against them, and to find solace. Illness and health presented a more striking contrast; the cold and darkness of winter were more real evils. Honours and riches were relished with greater avidity and contrasted more vividly with surrounding misery. We, at the present day, can hardly understand the keenness with which a fur coat, a good fire on the hearth, a soft bed, a glass of wine, were formerly enjoyed. Then, again, all things in life were of a proud or cruel publicity. Lepers sounded their rattles and went about in processions, beggars exhibited their deformity and their misery in churches. Every order and estate, every rank and profession, was distinguished by its costume. The great lords never moved about without a glorious display of arms and liveries, exciting fear and envy. Executions and other public acts of justice, hawking, marriages and funerals, were all announced by cries and processions, songs and music. Associating the developments of five hundred years of Gutenberg technology with uniformity, quiet privacy, and individualism, Huizinga finds it easy to give us the pre-Gutenberg world in terms of diversity, passionate group life, and communal rituals. That is exactly what he does on page 40: "Here, then, we have attained a point of view from which we can consider the lay culture of the waning Middle Ages; aristocratic life decorated by ideal forms, gilded by chivalrous romanticism, a world disguised in the fantastic gear of the Round Table." The magnificent Hollywood sets which Huizinga provides as an image of the medieval decline blend perfectly with the evocations of the ancient world done by the Medici craftsmen. What Huizinga may have chosen to disregard was the rise of middle-class wealth and skill and organization which made possible both the splendours of the Dukes of Burgundy and of the Medicis. He says of the great Dukes (p. 41): The court was pre-eminently the field where this aestheticism flourished. Nowhere did it attain to greater development than at the court of the dukes of Burgundy, which was more pompous and better arranged than that of the kings of France. It is well known how much importance the dukes attached to the magnificence of their household. A splendid court could, better than anything else, convince rivals of the high rank the dukes claimed to occupy among the princes of Europe. “After the deeds and exploits of war, which are claims to glory," says Chastellain, "the household is the first thing that strikes the eye, and which it is, therefore, most necessary to conduct and arrange well."It was boasted that the Burgundian court was the richest and best regulated of all. Charles the Bold, especially, had the passion of magnificence. It was the new middle-class wealth and skill that translated the chivalric dream into the visual panorama. Surely we have here an early phase of "know-how" and practical applied knowledge such as in centuries to come was to create complex markets, price-systems, and commercial empires unconceivable to oral and even to manuscript cultures. The same urge to translate the tactile skills of the older crafts into the visual magnificence of the Renaissance rituals provided an esthetic medievalism in the North, and in Italy inspired the recreation of ancient art, letters and architecture. The same sensibility that led the Dukes of Burgundy and Berry to their très riches heures led the Italian merchant princes to restore ancient Rome. It was a kind of applied archeological knowledge in both cases. The same applied knowledge in the interests of new visual intensity and control inspired Gutenberg and led to two centuries of medievalism of a scope and degree unknown to the Middle Ages themselves. For until printing, very few books ancient or medieval were available at all. Those that existed were seen by few. The same situation obtained in painting until recent colour-engraving developed, as André Malraux has explained in his Museum Without Walls. Renaissance Italy became a kind of Hollywood collection of sets of antiquity, and the new visual antiquarianism of the Renaissance provided an avenue to power for men of any class. Wyndham Lewis in The Lion and the Fox (p. 86) has given a fine statement of the Italian antiquarianism: The prince or commander of the army of a state had often started as a free captain; and birth or training, in this age that has been called that of bastards and adventurers, never mattered less. Muzio Sforza started life as a field labourer: Niccolo Piccinini as a butcher: Carmagnola as a herdsman. We can agree that it must have been “singular to see these men—generally of low origin and devoid of culture—surrounded in their camps by ambassadors, poets and learned men, who read to them Livy and Cicero, and original verses, in which they were compared to Scipio and Hannibal, to Caesar and Alexander." But they were all acting on a tiny scale the past that was being unearthed, just as English statesmen were modelling themselves at the time of England's great expansion on the statesmen of Roman antiquity. With the more intelligent of them, like Cesare Borgia, this archaeological and analogic habit of mind assumed the proportion of a mania. His “Aut Caesar aut nihil" is the same type of literature as is concentrated in the small maniacal figure of Julien Sorel, Stendhal's little domestic Napoleon. Borgia's motto itself is reminiscent of the title of a book popular before the war in Germany: Wordly Power or Downfall. Lewis is right in pointing up the frequently shoddy and immature inspiration of much of this: The Republican would call himself Brutus, the littérateur would be Cicero, and so forth. They attempted to bring to life the heroes of antiquity, and recall in their own lives the events recorded in the codices, and it was this immediate application of everything to life in Italian Renaissance society (like the substitution of a cinema for a history-book in a school) that made the Italian influence so vivid in the rest of Europe. Renaissance Italy was very exactly a kind of Los Angeles, where historical scenes were tried out, antique buildings imitated and roughly run up, and dramatic crimes reconstructed. How the association of learning and political crime came about is shown by Villari as follows: "Those were days in which every Italian seemed a born diplomatist: the merchant, the man of letters, the captain of adventures, knew how to address and discourse with kings and emperors, duly observing all conventional forms, . . . The dispatches of our ambassadors were among the chief historical and literary monuments of those times . . . "It was then that adventurers, immovable by threats, prayers or pity, were sure to yield to the verses of a learned man. Lorenzo de'Medici went to Naples, and by force of argument persuaded Ferrante d'Aragona to put an end to the war and conclude an alliance with him. Alfonso the Magnanimous, a prisoner of Filippo Maria Visconti, and whom all believed dead, was instead honourably liberated because he had the skill to convince that gloomy and cruel tyrant that it would better serve his turn to have the Aragonese at Naples than the followers of Anjou. . . . In a revolution at Prato, got up by Bernardo Nardi, this leader . . . had already thrown the halter round the neck of the Florentine Podestà when the latter's fine reasoning persuaded him to spare his life . . ."(pp. 86–7) Such was also the world which Huizinga portrays in The Waning of the Middle Ages. It was medievalism plus a visual slickness and pomp and opulence made possible by the new wealth and applied knowledge of the middle class. As we move into the Renaissance it is needful to understand that the new age of applied knowledge is an age of translation not only of languages but of centuries of accumulated audile-tactile experience into visual terms. Therefore what Huizinga and Villari stress as vivid and new in the applied historical antiquarianism will be found to prove equally characteristic in mathematics and science and economics. ## Medieval idols of the king The mounting passion for visualizing knowledge and separating functions in the later Middle Ages is given extensive documentation in a major study by Ernst H. Kantorowicz. The King's Two Bodies: A Study in Mediaeval Political Theology illustrates in detail how medieval jurists were animated by the same passion that led later medieval scientists to separate kinematics and dynamics, as is described by A. C. Crombie in Medieval and Early Modern Science. Late in his great study, Kantorowicz summarizes a good deal of his theme in a way that indicates how the legal fictions clustering about the separation of the King's two bodies led to such characteristic fantasies as the danses macabres. These, indeed, made up a kind of animated cartoon world which dominated even Shakespearean imagery, and continued to flourish in the eighteenth century, as Gray's Elegy testifies. It was the English in the fourteenth century who developed the effigy in funerary rites as a visible expression of the King's two bodies. Kantorowicz writes (pp. 420–1) : No matter how we may wish to explain the introduction of the effigy in 1327, with the funeral of Edward ı there begins, to our knowledge, the custom of placing on top of the coffin the “roiall representation"or “personage", a figure or image ad similitudinem regis, which—made of wood or of leather padded with bombast and covered with plaster—was dressed in the coronation garments or, later on, in the parliamentary robe. The effigy displayed the insignia of sovereignty: on the head of the image (worked apparently since Henry vI after the death mask) there was the crown, while the artificial hands held orb and scepter. Wherever the circumstances were not to the contrary, the effigies were henceforth used at the burials of royalty: enclosed in the coffin of lead, which itself was encased in a casket of wood, there rested the corpse of the king, his mortal and normally visible—though now invisible—body natural; whereas his normally invisible body politic was on this occasion visibly displayed by the effigy in its pompous regalia: a persona ficta—the effigy—impersonating a persona ficta—the Dignitas. The division between the ruler's private and his corporate Dignity, elaborated by Italian jurists for centuries, flourished in France, also. Kantorowicz quotes (p. 422) a French lawyer, Pierre Grégoire, in the later sixteenth century, writing (as if he were commenting of King Lear): "The Majesty of God appears in the Prince externally, for the utility of the subjects; but internally there remains what is human." And the great English jurist Coke observed that the mortal king was God-made, but the immortal King man-made. Actually, the importance of the king's effigy in the funerary rites of the sixteenth century soon matched or even eclipsed that of the dead body itself. Noticeable as early as 1498, at the funeral of Charles VIII, and fully developed in 1547, at the rites held for Francis I, the display of the effigy was connected successively with the new political ideas of that age, indicating, for example, that the royal Dignity never died and that in the image of the dead king's jurisdiction continued until the day he was buried. Under the impact of those ideas—strengthened by influences deriving from the medieval tableaux vivants, the Italian trionfi, and the study as well as the application of classical texts—the ceremonial connected with the effigy began to be filled with new contents and to affect fundamentally the funerary mood itself: a new triumphal element came into the ceremony which was absent in earlier times. (p. 423) Kantorowicz here and in many other passages helps us to understand how the analytic separation of functions was steadily intensified by visual manifestation. The long passage that follows (from pages 436 and 437 of The King's Two Bodies) will reinforce the Huizinga themes and further illuminate Shakespeare's King Lear, which has a great relevance to the Gutenberg motifs of the Renaissance: Our rapid digression on funerary ceremonial, effigies, and sepulchral monuments, though not directly related to the rites observed for English kings, has nevertheless yielded at least one new aspect of the problem of the "two Bodies"—the human background. Never perhaps, except in those "late Gothic" centuries, was the Western mind so keenly conscious of the discrepancy between the transience of the flesh and the immortal splendor of a Dignity which that flesh was supposed to represent. We understand how it could happen that the juristic distinctions, though developing quite independently and in a totally different thought compartment, eventually fell in with some very general sentiments, and that the jurists' imaginative fictions met with certain feelings which in the age of the Danses macabres, where all Dignities danced with Death, must have been peculiarly close to the surface. The jurists, as it were, discovered the immortality of the Dignity; but by this very discovery they made the ephemeral nature of the mortal incumbent all the more tangible. We should not forget that the uncanny juxtaposition of a decaying corpse and an immortal Dignity as displayed by the sepulchral monuments, or the sharp dichotomy of the lugubrious funeral train surrounding the corpse and the triumphant float of an effigy-dummy wrapped in regalia, was fostered, after all, in the same ground, came from the same world of thought and sentiment, evolved in the same intellectual climate, in which the juridical tenets concerning the "King's two Bodies" achieved their final formulation. In both instances, there was a body mortal, God-made and therefore "subject to all Infirmities that come by Nature or Accident," set against another body, man-made and therefore immortal, which is “utterly void of Infancy and old Age and other Defects and Imbecilities." In short, one revelled in strong contrasts of fictitious immortality and man's genuine mortality, contrasts which the Renaissance, through its insatiable desire to immortalize the individual by any contrivable tour de force, not only failed to mitigate, but rather intensified: there was a reverse side to the proud reconquest of a terrestrial aevum. At the same time, however, immortality—the decisive mark of divinity, but vulgarized by the artifice of countless fictions—was about to lose its absolute, or even its imaginary, values: unless it manifested itself incessantly through new mortal incarnations, it practically ceased to be immortality. The King could not die, was not allowed to die, lest scores of fictions of immortality were to break down; and while kings died, they were granted the comfort of being told that at least “as King" they “never died."The jurists themselves, who had done so much to build up the myths of fictitious and immortal personalities, rationalized the weakness of their creatures, and while elaborating their surgical distinctions between the immortal Dignity and its mortal incumbent and talking about two different bodies, they had to admit that their personified immortal Dignity was unable to act, to work, to will, or to decide without the debility of mortal men who bore the Dignity and yet would return to dust. Nevertheless, since life becomes transparent only against the background of death, and death against the background of life, the bone-rattling vitality of the late Middle Ages appears not devoid of some deeper wisdom. What one did was to build up a philosophy according to which a fictitious immortality became transparent through a real mortal man as its temporary incarnation, while mortal man became transparent through that new fictitious immortality which, being man-made as immortality always, was neither that of life eternal in another world nor that of the godhead, but that of a very terrestrial political institution. The Roman jurists had also conceived an “objectivication"of the ruler's persona publica, and the Roman emperor is sometimes called “a corporation sole." But neither Greek nor Roman antecedents can explain the concept of the King's two bodies. It was the aggressive Pauline concept of the Church as corpus Christi, says Kantorowicz (pp. 505–6), that “eventually endowed the late antique “corporations" with a philosophico-theological impetus which apparently those bodies were lacking before Constantine the Great referred to the Church as a corpus and thereby introduced that philosophical and theological notion into the language of law." As with any medieval development at all, the later phases show a preference for an increasingly visual stress. And so it is with the King's two bodies. In 1542 Henry VIII addressed his council: "We be informed by our judges that we at no time stand so highly in our estate royal as in the time of Parliament, wherein we as head and you as members are conjoined and knit together in one body politic." The organological idea of mystical tribal unity was in itself only partly visual. Merely visual stress in the Renaissance "now served Henry VIII to incorporate the Anglicana Ecclesia, so to speak, the genuine corpus mysticum of his “empire, into the corpus politicum of England, of which he as king was the head." That is to say, Henry translated the non-visible into the visible exactly in keeping with the science of his age, which was giving visual form to non-visual forces. And the same transformation of the audible into the visual word was the prime effect of typography. In a very interesting passage (vol. II, pp. 103-4) of his Medieval and Early Modern Science, A. C. Crombie argues that: Many scholars now agree that 15th-century humanism, which arose in Italy and spread northwards, was an interruption in the development of science. The revival of letters' deflected interest from matter to literary style and, in turning back to classical antiquity, its devotees affected to ignore the scientific progress of the previous three centuries. The same absurd conceit that led the humanists to abuse and misrepresent their immediate predecessors for using Latin constructions unknown to Cicero and to put out the propaganda which, in varying degrees, has captivated historical opinion until quite recently, also allowed them to borrow from the scholastics