without acknowledgment. This habit affected almost all the great scientists of the 16th and 17th centuries, whether Catholic or Protestant, and it has required the labours of a Duhem or a Thorndike or a Maier to show that their statements on matters of history cannot be accepted at their face value. Crombie grants that some of the older science became more accessible via printing; but does he not simply ignore the dynamic of later medieval science towards visual formulation? For, to translate force and energy into visual graphs and experiments was, as it continued to be until the discovery of electro-magnetic waves, the heart of modern science. Today, visualization is recessive and this makes us aware of its peculiar strategies during the Renaissance. # The invention of typography confirmed and extended the new visual stress of applied knowledge, providing the first uniformly repeatable commodity, the first assembly-line, and the first mass-production. The invention of typography, as such, is an example of the application of the knowledge of traditional crafts to a special visual problem. Abbott Payson Usher devotes the tenth chapter of his History of Mechanical Inventions to "The Invention of Printing,"saying (p. 238) that more than any other single achievement, it "marks the line of division between medieval and modern technology . . . We see here the same transfer to the field of the imagination that is clearly evident in all the work of Leonardo da Vinci." From now on “imagination" will tend more and more to refer to the powers of visualization. The mechanization of the scribal art was probably the first reduction of any handicraft to mechanical terms. That is, it was the first translation of movement into a series of static shots or frames. Typography bears much resemblance to cinema, just as the reading of print puts the reader in the role of the movie projector. The reader moves the series of imprinted letters before him at a speed consistent with apprehending the motions of the author's mind. The reader of print, that is, stands in an utterly different relation to the writer from the reader of manuscript. Print gradually made reading aloud pointless, and accelerated the act of reading till the reader could feel “in the hands of" his author. We shall see that just as print was the first mass-produced thing, so it was the first uniform and repeatable “commodity." The assembly line of movable types made possible a product that was uniform and as repeatable as a scientific experiment. Such a character does not belong to the manuscript. The Chinese in printing from blocks in the eighth century, had been mainly impressed by the repetitive character of print as “magical" and had used it as an alternative form to the prayer wheel. William Ivins has made a more thorough analysis of the esthetic effects of prints and typography on our human habits of perception than anybody else. In Prints and Visual Communication (pp. 55-6) he writes: Each written or printed word is a series of conventional instructions for the making in a specified linear order of muscular movements which when fully carried out result in a succession of sounds. These sounds, like the forms of the letters, are made according to arbitrary recipes or directions, which indicate by convention certain loosely defined classes of muscular movements but not any specifically specified ones. Thus any printed set of words can actually be pronounced in an infinitely large number of ways, of which, if we leave aside purely personal peculiarities, Cockney, Lower East Side, North Shore, and Georgia, may serve as typical specimens. The result is that each sound we hear when we listen to anyone speaking is merely a representative member of a large class of sounds which we have agreed to accept as symbolically identical in spite of the actual differences between them. In this passage he not only notes the ingraining of lineal, sequential habits, but, even more important, points out the visual homogenizing of experience in print culture, and the relegation of auditory and other sensuous complexity to the background. The reduction of experience to a single sense, the visual, as a result of typography leads him to speculate that "the more closely we confine our data for reasoning about things to data that come to us through one and the same sense channel the more apt we are to be correct in our reasoning."(p. 54) However, this type of reduction or distortion of all experience to the scale of one sense only is in tendency the effect of typography on the arts and sciences as well as upon human sensibility. Thus the habit of a fixed position or “point of view" so natural to the reader of typography, gave popular extension to the avant-garde perspectivism of the fifteenth century: Perspective rapidly became an essential part of the technique of making informative pictures, and before long was demanded of pictures that were not informative. Its introduction had much to do with that western European preoccupation with verisimilitude, which is probably the distinguishing mark of subsequent European picture making. The third of these events was Nicholas of Cusa's enunciation, in 1440, of the first thorough-going doctrines of the relativity of knowledge and of the continuity, through transitions and middle terms, between extremes. This was a fundamental challenge to definitions and ideas that had tangled thought since the time of the ancient Greeks. These things, the exactly repeatable pictorial statement, a logical grammar for representation of space relationship in pictorial statements, and the concepts of relativity and continuity, were and still are superficially so unrelated that they are rarely thought of seriously in conjunction with one another. But, between them, they have revolutionized both the descriptive sciences and the mathematics on which the science of physics rests, and in addition they are essential to a great deal of modern technology. Their effects on art have been very marked. They were absolutely new things in the world. There was no precedent for them in classical practice or thought of any kind or variety. (pp. 23–4) ## A fixed point of view becomes possible with print and ends the image as a plastic organism. Ivins is right in pointing to the interplay among many factors in this way. But the technology and social effects of typography incline us to abstain from noting interplay and, as it were, "formal" causality, both in our inner and external lives. Print exists by virtue of the static separation of functions and fosters a mentality that gradually resists any but a separative and compartmentalizing or specialist outlook. As Gyorgy Kepes explains in The Language of Vision (p. 200) : Literary imitation of nature tied to a fixed point of observation had killed the image as a plastic organism. . . . Non-representational art clarified the structural laws of the plastic image. It reestablished the image in its original role as a dynamic experience based upon the properties of the senses and their plastic organization. But it threw overboard the meaningful signs of the visual relationships. That is, the explicit visual linking of components in a composition, verbal or non-verbal, began to fascinate and compel most minds in the later fifteenth century. Kepes specifies this explicit visual linking as "literary" and as the immediate occasion of the dissociation of the interplay of the various properties of all the senses. He adds (p. 200) : The image was purified'. But this purification overlooked the fact that the distortion and disintegration of the image as a plastic experience had not been due to represented meaningful signs as such but rather to the prevailing representation-concept which was static and limited, and consequently in contradiction to the dynamic plastic nature of the visual experience. The structure of meaning had been based upon the same conception which generated the fixed point of view of space representation, linear perspective and modelling by shading. The involuntary and subliminal character of this private or “fixed point of view" depends on the isolation of the visual factor in experience.36 It is upon this “fixed point of view"that the triumphs and destructions of the Gutenberg era will be made. Since there is widespread misunderstanding about the flat, two-dimensional, mosaic form in art and experience, the evidence which Kepes provides in The Language of Vision is very much needed. In fact, the two-dimensional is the opposite of inert, as Georg von Bekesy discovered in the study of hearing. For dynamic simultaneity is the effect of the twodimensional, and inert homogeneity the effect of three-dimensionality. Kepes explains (p. 96): Early medieval painters often repeated the main figure many times in the same picture. Their purpose was to represent all possible relationships that affected him, and they recognized this could be done only by a simultaneous description of various actions. This connectedness in meaning, rather than the mechanical logic of geometrical optics, is the essential task of representation. There is then this great paradox of the Gutenberg era, that its seeming activism is cinematic in the strict movie sense. It is a consistent series of static shots or “fixed points of view" in homogeneous relationship. Homogenization of men and materials will become the great program of the Gutenberg era, the source of wealth and power unknown to any other time or technology.