How the natural magic of the camera obscura anticipated Hollywood in turning the spectacle of the external world into a consumer commodity or package. A quite celebrated novelty and pastime of the Renaissance relates directly to the increasing visual stress in experience, namely the delight which was taken in the use of the camera obscura. Erik Barnouw has an excellent brief account of this form of entertainment in his Mass Communication (pp. 13-14): In the days when Johann Gutenberg's Bible, printed from movable type, was stirring wonder in Germany, another innovation was gaining a foothold in Italy. It was a kind of game, having at first no apparent relationship to the dissemination of information or ideas. The device was described in Leonardo da Vinci's unpublished notes. If on a sunny day you sit in a darkened room with only a pinhole open on one side, you see on an opposite wall or other surface images of the outside world—a tree, a man, a passing carriage. The principle was described in detail in the book, Natural Magic, by Giovanni Battista della Porta, published in 1558. A few years later it became known that a lens, in place of the pinhole, would sharpen the image. A group of people in a darkened room, watching images on a wall— thrown by a beam of light cutting through the darkness—must have resembled a group watching home movies. There was one difference: the picture was upside down. Presently the lens was being put in one side of a box instead of in the wall of a room. Through mirrors the image could be thrown on a glass screen in the box, and seen right side up. The box, still thought of as a small room, was called a “dark room" or "camera obscura". This camera could be aimed at a landscape, street, garden party. A group of people looking in amazement at the moving images in the box may well have resembled a group watching television. Magicians began using the device for mystification and delight. It became a pastime among the well-to-do throughout Europe. By the 1600's, painters in many countries were using it to solve problems of perspective. Some artists found it easier to trace the two-dimensional image of the camera obscura than to work from three-dimensional reality. The next step was obvious. Could the image be preserved, saving the artist even more work? The idea seems to have been present for two centuries, awaiting the development of chemistry—and of demand.