# St. Thomas More offers a plan for a bridge over the turbulent river of scholastic philosophy. As we stand on the frontiers between the manuscript and the typographical worlds, it is indispensable that a good deal of comparison and contrast of the traits of these two cultures be done here. Much insight into the Gutenberg era can be had from observation of the scribal era. A familiar passage from St. Thomas More's popular Utopia (pp. 39–40) will serve as a start: 'That is yt whyche I mente'(quod he), when I said phylosophye hadde no place amonge kinges.' 'In dede'(quode I) 'this schole philosophie hath not; whiche thinketh all thynges mete for euery place. But ther is an other philosophye more cyuyle, whyche knoweth as ye wolde saye her owne stage, and thereafter orderynge and behauynge herselfe in the playe that she hathe in hande, playethe her parte accordynglye wyth comlynes, vtteringe nothynge owte of dewe ordre and fassyon. Writing in 1516, More is aware that the medieval scholastic dialogue, oral and conversational, is quite unsuited to the new problems of large centralist states. A new kind of processing of problems, one thing at a time, “nothing out of due order and fashion," must succeed to the older dialogue. For the scholastic method was a simultaneous mosaic, a dealing with many aspects and levels of meaning in crisp simultaneity. This method will no longer serve in the new lineal era. A recent book, Ramus: Method and the Decay of Dialogue, by Father Ong is entirely concerned with this previously obscure subject, which he illuminates brilliantly. His investigation of the transformation of later scholasticism into visual “method," will be a major aid in the next phase of the Gutenberg configuration of events. More in the second book of his Utopia (p. 82) also shows his entire awareness of the homogenizing process of the later scholasticism of his own day. He is happy to record that Utopians are old-fashioned: “But as they in all thynges be almost equall to our olde auncyente clerkes, so our new Logiciens in subtyll inventyons have farre passed and gone beyonde them. For they have not devised one of all those rules of restryctyons, and amplyfycatyons, and supposytyons, very wittelye invented in the small Logycalles, whyche heare oure chyldren in euerye place do learne." Both L'Apparition du livre by Febvre and Martin, and Curt Buhler's The Fifteenth Century Book are extensive studies of the transition from scribal to typographical culture. Together with Ong's Ramus, it will be possible to use these three great studies to give an entirely new understanding of the events that make up the Gutenberg galaxy. As might be expected, the printed book was a long time in being recognized as anything but a typescript, a more accessible and portable kind of manuscript. It is this kind of transitional awareness that in our own century is recorded in words and phrases such as "horseless carriage,""wireless," or “"moving-pictures.""Telegraph"and "television" seem to have registered a more direct impact than mechanical forms such as typography and movies. Yet it would have been just as difficult to explain the Gutenberg innovation to a man in the sixteenth century as it is now to explain the utter diversity of TV and film images. Today we like to think that there is much in common between the mosaic image of television and the pictorial space of the photograph. In fact, they have nothing in common. Neither did the printed book and the manuscript. Yet both the producer and consumer of the printed page conceived of it as a direct continuation of the manuscript. In the same way the nineteenth century newspaper underwent complete revolution with the advent of the telegraph. The mechanical printed page was crossed with a new organic form that changed layout as it changed politics and society. Today with the arrival of automation, the ultimate extension of the electro-magnetic form to the organization of production, we are trying to cope with such new organic production as if it were mechanical massproduction. In 1500 nobody knew how to market or distribute the massproduced printed book. It was handled in the old manuscript channels. And the manuscript, like any other handicraft produce, was sold in the way in which we now handle "old masters." That is, the manuscript market was mainly a second-hand market. ## Scribal culture could have neither authors nor publics such as were created by typography. Although we have seen with Hajnal a good deal about the scribal making of books, the assumptions and attitudes of authors about books and readers has not been looked at. Since it was precisely these assumptions that were to undergo very great changes, it is necessary to specify them, however succinctly. For this purpose the work of E. P. Goldschmidt, Medieval Texts and Their First Appearance in Print, is indispensable. His study of the habits and procedures of authorship under manuscript conditions leads him to conclude (p. 116): What I have tried to demonstrate is that the Middle Ages for various reasons and from various causes did not possess the concept of ‘authorship' in exactly the same significance as we have it now. Much of the prestige and glamour with which we moderns invest the term, and which makes us look upon an author who has succeeded in getting a book published as having progressed a stage nearer to becoming a great man, must be a recent accretion. The indifference of medieval scholars to the precise identity of the authors whose books they studied is undeniable. The writers themselves, on the other hand, did not always trouble to quote' what they took from other books or to indicate where they took it from; they were diffident about signing even what was clearly their own in an unambiguous and unmistakable manner. The invention of printing did away with many of the technical causes of anonymity, while at the same time the movement of the Renaissance created new ideas of literary fame and intellectual property. It is not entirely self-evident today that typography should have been the means and occasion of individualism and self-expression in society. That it should have been the means of fostering habits of private property, privacy, and many forms of “enclosure" is, perhaps, more evident. But most obvious is the fact of printed publication as the direct means of fame and perpetual memory. For, until the modern movie, there had been in the world no means of broadcasting a private image to equal the printed book. Manuscript culture did not foster any grand ideas in this department. Print did. Most of the Renaissance megalomania from Aretino to Tamburlaine is the immediate child of typography which provided the physical means of extending the dimensions of the private author in space and time. But to the student of manuscript culture, as Goldschmidt says (p. 88): “One thing is immediately obvious: before 1500 or thereabouts people did not attach the same importance to ascertaining the precise identity of the author of a book they were reading or quoting as we do now. We very rarely find them discussing such points." Oddly enough, it is a consumer-oriented culture that is concerned about authors and labels of authenticity. Manuscript culture was producer-oriented, almost entirely a do-it-yourself culture, and naturally looked to the relevance and usability of items rather than their sources. The practice of multiplying literary texts by typography has brought about such a profound change in our attitude towards the book and in our appraisal of different literary activities, that it requires some effort of historical imagination to realize vividly the very different conditions under which books were produced, acquired, disseminated, and procured in medieval times. I must ask you to be a little patient in following some of the reflections I am about to set down which may well appear to be obvious and self-evident. But it can hardly be denied that these material conditions are much too often lost sight of in discussing literary problems of the Middle Ages, and that our mental inertia tends to make us apply criteria of value and of conduct to the writers of medieval books which have originated in our minds under totally different modern conditions. (p. 89) Not only was private authorship in the later print meanings unknown, but there was no reading public in our sense, either. This is a matter that has usually been confused with ideas about "the extent of literacy." But even if literacy were universal, under manuscript conditions an author would still have no public. An advanced scientist today has no public. He has a few friends and colleagues with whom he talks about his work. What we need to have in mind is that the manuscript book was slow to read and slow to move or be circulated. Goldschmidt asks (p. 90) us to try to visualize a medieval author at work in his study. Having conceived the plan to compose a book, he would first of all proceed to collect material and to accumulate notes. He would search for books on kindred subjects, firstly in the library of his own monastery. If he found something he could use, he would write out relevant chapters or entire pieces on sheets of vellum, which he would keep in his cell to be made use of in due course. If in the course of his reading he came upon a mention of a book which was not available in his library, he would be anxious to find out where he could obtain sight of it, not an easy matter in those days. He would write to friends in other abbeys reputed to have big libraries to inquire whether they knew of a copy, and he would have to wait a long time for their replies. A large part of the extant correspondence of medieval scholars consists of such requests for search after the whereabouts of some book, requests for copies of books which are said to exist in the place of the addressee's residence, requests for the loan of books for copying purposes . . . Authorship before print was in a large degree the building of a mosaic: Nowadays, when an author dies, we can see clearly that his own printed works standing in his bookcases are those works which he regarded as completed and finished, and that they are in the form in which he wished to transmit them to posterity; his handwritten papers', lying in his drawers, would obviously be regarded differently; they were clearly not considered by him as ultimately finished and done with. But in the days before the invention of printing this distinction would not by any means be so apparent. Nor could it be determined so easily by others whether any particular piece written in the dead author's handwriting was of his own composition or a copy made by him of somebody else's work. Here we have an obvious source of a great deal of the anonymity and ambiguity of authorship of so many of our medieval texts. (p. 92) Not only was the assembly of the parts of the book often a collective scribal affair, but librarians and users of books took a large hand in composition since small books which only took a few pages, could never be transmitted except in volumes of miscellaneous content. “These volumes comprising many pieces, which probably constituted the majority of the books in the library, were created as units not by the authors or even by the scribes but by the librarians or bookbinders (very often identical)."(p. 94) Goldschmidt then points out (pp. 96-7) many other circumstances of pre-print book-making and -using that rendered authorship very secondary: Whatever the method adopted, a volume containing twenty different pieces by ten different authors would necessarily have to be listed under one name, whatever the librarian might decide to do about the other nine names. And if the first tract in the volume was by St. Augustine, under St. Augustine it would go. If you wanted to see the volume you would have to ask for St. Augustine, even if it should be the fifth treatise in the volume you wanted to consult, which might be by Hugo de Sancto Caro. And if you asked a friend in another abbey to copy something for you which you had noted on a former visit you would have to write to him: Please copy the treatise on fols. 50 to 70 in your “Augustinus".' This would not necessarily imply that the writer was not aware that the author of this treatise was not Augustinus; whether he thought so or not, he would have to request this book ex Augustino'. In another library this same text, say the De duodecim abusivis, would be bound third in a volume beginning with something by St. Cyprian. There the same treatise would be ex Cypriano'. This is but one prolific source of ‘authorship' attributions, which cause one and the same text to be referred to by a variety of names. There is another circumstance, much too often forgotten, which greatly adds to the confusion. To the medieval scholar the question: Who wrote this book? would not necessarily or even primarily mean: Who composed this book? It might convey that the inquiry was for the identity of the scribe not of the author. And this would often be a much easier question to answer, for in any abbey the characteristic hand of a brother who wrote many fine books did remain traditionally familiar for generations. The medieval book trade was a second-hand trade even as with the dealing today in old masters. Then, from the twelfth century onwards the rise of the universities brought masters and students into the field of book production in class time, and these books found their way back to the monastic libraries when students returned after completing their studies: “A number of these standard textbooks, of which approved exemplars were kept for copying by the stationarii of the universities, naturally found their way into print quite early, for many of them continued in undiminished request in the fifteenth century as before. These official university texts offer no problems of origin or nomenclature . . ."(p. 102) Goldschmidt then adds, "Soon after 1300 the expensive vellum could be dispensed with and the cheaper paper made the accumulation of many books a matter of industry rather than of wealth." Since, however, the student went to lectures pen in hand and “it was the lecturer's task to dictate the book he was expounding to his audience," there is a great body of these reportata which constitute a very complex problem for editors.³7 Circumstances such as these described by Goldschmidt serve to illustrate the extent of the Gutenberg revolution which made possible uniform and repeatable texts: It cannot be doubted that for many medieval writers the exact point at which they ceased to be ‘scribes' and became ‘authors' was not at all clear. What amount of comportation' of acquired information entitled a man to claim the standing of an ‘author' of a new unit in the chain of transmitted knowledge? We are guilty of an anachronism if we imagine that the medieval student regarded the contents of the books he read as the expression of another man's personality and opinion. He looked upon them as part of that great and total body of knowledge, the scientia de omni scibili, which had once been the property of the ancient sages. Whatever he read in a venerable old book he would take to be not somebody's assertion but a small piece of knowledge acquired by someone long ago from someone else still more ancient. (p. 113) Not only were users of manuscripts, writes Goldschmidt, mostly indifferent to the chronology of authorship and to the “identity and personality of the author of the book he was reading, or in the exact period at which this particular piece of information was written down, equally little did he expect his future readers to be interested in himself."(p. 114) In the same way we do not concern ourselves with the authors of the multiplication table or with the personal lives of natural scientists. And so it was also when the student undertook to “imitate"the style of ancient writers. Perhaps enough has been said about the nature of manuscript culture to illuminate the drastic changes in the relation of author to author and of author to reader in the Gutenberg years ahead. When the "higher critics" began to explain the nature of manuscript culture to the Bible-reading public in the later nineteenth century, it seemed to many educated people that the Bible was finished. But these people had lived mainly with the illusions of the Bible produced by print technology. The scriptures had had none of that uniform and homogeneous character during the centuries before Gutenberg. It was, above all, the concept of homogeneity, which typography fosters in every phase of human sensibility, that began to invade the arts, the sciences, industry, and politics from the sixteenth century forward. But lest it be inferred that this effect of print culture is a "bad thing,"let us consider rather that homogeneity is quite incompatible with electronic culture. We now live in the early part of an age for which the meaning of print culture is becoming as alien as the meaning of manuscript culture was to the eighteenth century. "We are the primitives of a new culture,"said Boccioni the sculptor in 1911. Far from wishing to belittle the Gutenberg mechanical culture, it seems to me that we must now work very hard to retain its achieved values. For the electronic age, as de Chardin insisted, is not mechanical but organic, and has little sympathy with the values achieved through typography, "this mechanical way of writing"(ars artificialiter scribendi), as it was called at first. Until more than two centuries after printing nobody discovered how to maintain a single tone or attitude throughout a prose composition. in getting rid of such irrelevant assumptions. Thus the nineteenth-century editions of Shakespeare have become a sort of monument to irrelevant assumptions. Their editors had little idea that punctuation in 1623 and earlier was for the ear and not for the eye. Until Addison, as we shall see, the author felt litle pressure to maintain a single attitude to his subject or a consistent tone to the reader. In short, prose remained oral rather than visual for centuries after printing. Instead of homogeneity there was heterogeneity of tone and attitude, so that the author felt able to shift these in mid-sentence at any time, just as in poetry.38 It was disturbing to scholars to discover in recent years that Chaucer's personal pronoun or his “poetic self"as narrator was not a consistent persona. The "I" of medieval narrative did not provide a point of view so much as immediacy of effect. In the same way grammatical tenses and syntax were managed by medieval writers, not with an idea to sequence in time or in space, but to indicate importance of stress.39 E. T. Donaldson writing on "Chaucer the Pilgrim,"40 says, regarding Chaucer the Pilgrim, Chaucer the Poet, and Chaucer the Man: "The fact that there are three separate entities does not naturally exclude the probability—or rather the certainty—that they bore a closer resemblance to one another, and that, indeed, they frequently got together in the same body. But that does not excuse us from keeping them distinct from one another, difficult as their close resemblance makes our task." There simply was no available exemplar for author or man of letters in the first age of print, and Aretino, Erasmus, and More were, like Nashe, Shakespeare, and Swift later on, led to adopt in varying degrees the only available soothsayer mask, that of the medieval clown. Looking for the "point of view" of Erasmus or Machiavelli builds up a sense of their “inscrutability."Arnold's sonnet to Shakespeare is a useful point of reference for anybody who needs to observe the literary man baffled by the non-literary. It was some time after printing began that authors or readers discovered “points of view." Earlier, it was shown how Milton was the first to introduce visual perspective into poetry, and his work had to wait till the eighteenth century for acceptance. For the world of visual perspective is one of unified and homogeneous space. Such a world is alien to the resonating diversity of spoken words. So language was the last art to accept the visual logic of Gutenberg technology, and the first to rebound in the electric age. ## Later medieval visual stress muddied liturgical piety as much as electronic-field pressure has clarified it today. One massive area to which scholars have turned recently is that of history of Christian liturgy. In an article on "Liturgy and Spiritual Personalism" in Worship (October, 1960, p. 494) Thomas Merton points out: Liturgy is, in the original and classical sense of the word, a political activity. Leitourgeia was “a public work", a contribution made by a free citizen of the polis. As such, it was distinct from the economic activity or the private and more material concern of making a living and managing the productive enterprises of the “household" . . . Private life was properly the realm of those who were not fully “persons", like women, children and slaves, whose appearance in public was without significance because they had no ability to participate in the life of the city. The Liturgical Piety of Louis Bouyer considers the later Middle Ages to have been quite decadent liturgically and to have already begun the translation of corporate prayer and worship into those visual terms that are so inseparable from Gutenberg technology. On page 16, we read: Dom Herwegen's ideas on this point greatly shocked most of his early readers. But it must be admitted today that the whole tendency of contemporary research tends to bear out his conclusions, and to prove them even more convincingly than, perhaps, he himself would have expected. In the greatest scholarly work of our times on the history of the Roman Mass, Jungmann's Missarum Sollemnia, an overwhelming weight of evidence goes to show that the history of the Roman Mass during the Middle Ages is the history of how it came to be increasingly misunderstood by the clergy as well as by the Faithful, and of how it began to disintegrate through the fault of the medieval liturgists themselves. A prominent feature of that process as Father Jungmann's book shows, was the appearance, in the medieval Expositiones Missae, of those wrong conceptions we have already discussed: disproportionate emphasis on the Presence in the Holy Eucharist and a very sentimental notion of that Presence, which came to play so disastrous a part in the worship of the Romantic as well as the Baroque period. With regard only to our new electronic technology, it might baffle many to explain why there should be such a profound liturgical revival in our time, unless they were aware of the essentially oral character of the electric “field." Today there is a “"High Church" movement within Presbyterianism as well as in many other sects. The merely individual and visual aspects of worship no longer satisfy. But here our concern is to understand how before typography there was already a powerful drive towards the visual organization of the non-visual. There grew up in the Catholic world a segmenting and also sentimental approach in which, writes Bouyer (p. 16), "it was taken for granted that the Mass was meant to reproduce the Passion by a kind of mimetic reproduction, each action of the mass representing some action of the Passion itself:—for example, the priest's moving from the Epistle side of the altar to the Gospel side being a representation of Jesus' journey from Pilate to Herod . . ." It is plain that there was in liturgy precisely the same drive towards cinematic reconstruction by visual segmentation that we have seen in Huizinga's story of The Waning of the Middle Ages and in the Italian princes and their great Hollywood sets of antiquity. And segmentation equals sentimentality. The isolation of the sense of sight quickly led to the isolation of one emotion from another, which is sentimentality. "Sophistication" today is a negative version of sentimentality, in which conventionally appropriate feelings are simply anesthetized. But the due interplay of the emotions is not unrelated to synesthesia or interplay of the senses. So that Huizinga is quite justified in opening his story of the later Middle Ages as a period of emotional violence and decay, as well as a period of intense visual stress. Separation of the senses would be sensuality, as the separation of the emotions is sentimentality. Bouyer nowhere refers to the operation of typography in affecting Renaissance sensibility. But his entire book is a valid companion for the student of the Gutenberg revolution. He does note (p. 6) of this period that “it craved the super-human instead of the supernatural, as witness the paintings of Michaelangelo; and it took pleasure in the enormous rather than in the great, as witness the statues of St. John Lateran with their hysterical gesticulations, and the tomb of Alexander VII in St. Peter's." Print as an immediate technological extension of the human person gave its first age an unprecedented access of power and vehemence. Visually, print is very much more "high definition" than manuscript. Print was, that is to say, a very "hot" medium coming into a world that for thousands of years had been served by the "cool" medium of script. Thus our own "roaring twenties" were the first to feel the hot movie medium and also the hot radio medium. It was the first great consumer age. So with print Europe experienced its first consumer phase, for not only is print a consumer medium and commodity, but it taught men how to organize all other activities on a systematic lineal basis. It showed men how to create markets and national armies. For the hot medium of print enabled men to see their vernaculars for the first time, and to visualize national unity and power in terms of the vernacular bounds: "We must be free or die who speak the tongue that Shakespeare spake."Inseparable from a nationalism of homogeneous English or French speakers was individualism. We shall discuss this later. But a visually homogeneous mass consists of individuals in a new subjective sense. Bouyer cites (p. 17) the medieval turn from objective to subjective piety: “This tendency goes along with a shift of emphasis from a union of the whole church with God to an emphasis on the union of the individual soul with Him." A Catholic liturgist like Bouyer, quite unconcerned with segmental practices such as private interpretation of the Bible, sees, however, the same fragmenting tendency in "the insistence of priests on having each a separate celebration of his own, when it is not needed for the people," for this "tends only to obscure and break that unity of the Church which is not a detail of secondary importance in the Eucharist, but its own proper end." Once Catholic scholarship had transcended the idea of the Middle Ages as "the Christian era par excellence, and [the idea] that their civilization and culture provided the outstanding example of a Catholic ideal incarnated in earthly realities, it became easy to see that the medieval period in fact paved the way for the abandonment of the liturgy by Protestantism and its final disgrace and neglect in so much of post-Tridentine Catholicism."(p. 15) Examining later, how medieval piety is a progressive alienation of the people from the liturgy, in the interest of grand visual effects, Bouyer (p. 249) feels great sympathy with the Protestant reformers who missed the real opportunity for inclusive reform in favour of exclusive segmentation: This is true not only because the Reformers reacted against the extreme transformations of traditional piety which had been progressively achieved by these novelties, but also for the reason that had Protestantism been such a reaction through and through, in fact as well as in precept, it could have become a true reformation instead. But Protestantism is much more truly the product of medieval piety because it is the fruit of what lay in that piety in seed-form: a naturalistic outlook on religion, a systematic ignoring of the Mystery, a sentimental kind of religious “experience" in place of the sober mysticism, completely grounded on faith, of the great Christian tradition. It is not the aim of this book to do more than to explain the configuration or galaxy of events and actions associated with Gutenberg technology. And rather than speak of "the rise of Protestantism" as a result of typography with its innovation of the visual text—the same for allin place of the oral word, it is more helpful to note how the liturgy of the Catholic Church itself still carries deep marks of the effects of visual technology and the break-up of the unity of the senses. "The Elizabethan world picture" was to become much more visually hierarchical than anything medieval had ever been, if only because hierarchy came to be merely visual. Bouyer points (p. 155) to the inadequacy of visualizing "hierarchy": "The hierarchy is a hierarchy of ministries (services); according to Christ's word, he who is the high priest among his brethren should be the man who, like Christ himself, stands out more perfectly than anyone else, as the Lord's Servant." And as the Catholic tendency in the past had been the splitting up of sacraments and the visualizing of functions, the present liturgical revival seeks an inclusive rather than an exclusive unity (p. 253): This means that the first and fundamental condition for any liturgical revival which is truly a revival of piety must be a personal knowledge of the whole Bible and meditation on it, both to be achieved along the lines laid out for us by the liturgy; such a revival implies a full acceptance of the Bible as the Word of God, and as the framework and ever-living source of all authentic Christianity. The monks of the Middle Ages remained alive to the liturgy for so long a time only because, in spite of their own defects, they held so persistently to this biblical way of accepting Christianity, of meditating on its truths and of living in them. Allusion to the changing patterns of liturgical worship in the twentieth century will recall to some readers the parallel changes in the world of management and of industrial organization. What occurs at the opening of King Lear in regard to the delegation of the king's authority and functions is now in a reverse phase in the electronic age. Dr. B. J. Muller-Thym, leading business analyst, states:41 The older, many-layered, highly functionalized organizations were characterized by the separation of thinking from doing; thinking was generally allocated to the top rather than the bottom of the pyramid and to “staff" as against “line" components. Whatever the wishes of the company about the decentralized exercises of authority, authority inexorably gravitated toward the top of the structure. There was created a numerous middle management class, spread over an indefinite number of supervisory layers whose actual roles, as many work studies showed, was predominantly the passing of information through the system. In our electronic age the specialist and pyramidal forms of structure, which achieved vogue in the sixteenth century and later, are not any longer practical: The first thing to be discovered was that pyramidal organizational structures, with many layers of supervision, and with functional division by specialty, simply did not work. The communication chain between top scientific or engineering leadership and work centers was too long for either the scientific or managerial message to be communicated. But in these research organizations where work actually got done, when one studied them he found that whatever the organization chart prescribed, groups of researchers with different competences as required by the problem in hand were working together, cutting across organizational lines; that they were establishing most of their own design criteria for the work as well as their intended patterns of association; that the patterns of their group association at work followed the organization of their competences as human knowledges. The “simultaneous field" of electric information structures, today reconstitutes the conditions and need for dialogue and participation, rather than specialism and private initiative in all levels of social experience. Our present involvement in these new kinds of interdependence produces in many an involuntary alienation from our Renaissance heritage. But for the readers of this book it is hoped that we can deepen our understanding both of the typographic and the electronic revolutions. The interface of the Renaissance was the meeting of medieval pluralism and modern homogeneity and mechanism-a formula for blitz and metamorphosis. An age in rapid transition is one which exists on the frontier between two cultures and between conflicting technologies. Every moment of its consciousness is an act of translation of each of these cultures into the other. Today we live on the frontier between five centuries of mechanism and the new electronics, between the homogeneous and the simultaneous. It is painful but fruitful. The sixteenth century Renaissance was an age on the frontier between two thousand years of alphabetic and manuscript culture, on the one hand, and the new mechanism of repeatability and quantification, on the other. It would have been strange, indeed, if the age had not approached the new in terms of what it had learned from the old. This matter is well understood by psychologists today as can be found in such a handbook as The Psychology of Human Learning by John A. McGeoch. He says (p. 394): “The influence of prior learning (retained until the present) upon the learning of, response to, new material has traditionally been called transfer of learning." Mostly, transfer effect is quite subliminal. But overt or conscious transfer can occur. We have seen some of both kinds of transfer at the beginning of this book where the response of African natives to alphabet and film was discussed. Our own Western response to new media like film and radio and TV, has been overtly a book culture response to the “challenge." But the actual transfer of learning and change in mental process and attitude of mind that has occurred has been almost entirely subliminal. What we acquire as a system of sensibility by our mother tongue will affect our ability in learning other languages, verbal or symbolic. That is perhaps why the highly literate Westerner steeped in the lineal and homogeneous modes of print culture has much trouble with the non-visual world of modern mathematics and physics. The “backward" or audile-tactile countries have a great advantage here. Another basic advantage of cultural clash and transition is that people on the frontier between different modes of experience develop a great power of generalization. McGeoch says (p. 396): "Generalization, likewise, is a form of transfer, whether at the comparatively elementary level of conditioned responses . . . or at the complex level of abstract scientific generalization, where a single statement sums up a myriad of particulars." We can generalize this statement at once by pointing out that the mature phase of print culture which proceeds by segmenting and homogenizing situations will not favour the interplay between fields and disciplines such as characterized the first age of print. When print was new it stood as a challenge to the old world of manuscript culture. When the manuscript had faded and print was supreme, there was no more interplay or dialogue but there were many “points of view." There is, however, one massive aspect of the "transfer of training" that occurred with the Gutenberg technology that is stressed throughout the work of Febvre and Martin (L'Apparition du livre). It is that during the first two centuries of print, until the end of the seventeenth century, the great body of printed matter was of medieval origin. The sixteenth and seventeenth centuries saw more of the Middle Ages than had ever been available to anybody in the Middle Ages. Then it had been scattered and inaccessible and slow to read. Now it became privately portable and quick to read. As today, the insatiable needs of TV have brought down upon us the backlog of the old movies, so the needs of the new presses could only be met by the old manuscripts. Moreover, the reading public was atuned to this earlier culture. Not only were there no modern writers at first, but they had no public ready to accept them so Febvre and Martin say (p. 420) : “Thus print facilitated the work of scholars in some fields, but on the whole one can say that it contributed nothing to hasten the adoption of theories or new knowledge."42 This, of course, is to consider only the “content" of new theories, and to ignore the role of print in providing new models for such theories, and in processing new publics to accept them. Looked at merely from the “content" point of view the achievement of print is modest indeed: "Already in the fifteenth century fine editions of classical texts coming off the Italian presses, Venetian and Milanese in particular, . . . had begun to make better known such authors of antiquity as the Middle Ages had not forgotten . . ."(p. 400) But the tiny public for these humanist offerings should not obscure the real work of the early age of print. Febvre and Martin (p. 383) see it thus: To render the Bible directly accessible to a larger number of readers, not only in Latin but also in the vernacular, to furnish to students and teachers at the universities the major treatises in the traditional scholastic arsenal, to multiply above all the common books, breviaries, book of hours necessary for the practice of liturgical ceremonies and daily prayers, the writings of the mystical writers and books of popular piety, to render, above all, the reading of these works more easily accessible to a very large public, such was one of the principal tasks of print in its beginnings. The largest public by far was for the medieval romances of chivalry, almanacs (shepherds' calendars) and, above all, illustrated books of hours. Of the penetrating force of printing in the shaping of market and capital organization, Febvre and Martin have much to say. For the moment, it is relevant to bring out here their stress on the early effort of the printers to attain “homogenéité de la page" in spite of poor equilibrium of types, and "in spite of defective fonts and in spite of precarious lineality."It is precisely these new effects which were still insecure that would strike the age as having the utmost charge of meaning and novelty of achievement. Homogeneity and lineality are the formulas for the new science and art of the Renaissance. For the infinitesimal calculus, as a means of quantifying forces and spaces, depends as much on the fiction of homogeneous particles as perspective depends upon the illusion of the third dimension on flat surfaces. The student of the work of St. Thomas More knows how frequently More confronted the new passion for homogeneity in the sectaries of his day. We are here concerned not with theology but only the new psychic demand for homogeneity, no matter in what field. This is from “A letter of Sir Thomas More, Knight, impugning the erroneous writings of John Frith against the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar."43 If he sayd that the wordes of Chryste might beside the lyttarall sence bee vnderstanden in an allegorye, I would wel agre wyth him. For so may euery worde almost through the whole scripture, calling an allegory euerye sense, wherby the wordes be translated vnto some other spirituall vnderstanding, beside the true playne open sence that ye letter firste entended. But on the other side because yt in some wordes of scrypture is there none other thing entended but an allegorye, to goe therfore and in another place of scripture to take away wyth an allegory, the very true litteral sense as he doth here, thys is the faute that we fynde in hym. Whych if it may be suffered, must nedes make al ye scripture as touching anye poynte of oure fayth, of none effecte or force at all. I meruaile me therfore much that he is not aferde to affirme that these wordes of Christe, of his bodye and hys bloode, must needes be vnderstanden onely by way of a similitude or an allegory as ye wordes be of the vine and the dore. Now this he woteth well, yt thoughe some woordes spoken by the mouthe of Christ written in scripture, be to be vnderstanden only by way of a similitude or an allegory: it foloweth not therupõ that of necessitye euerye like woorde of Christ in other places was none other but an allegory More is saying that Frith understands the whole of Scripture to be continuous, uniform, and homogeneous space, exactly as in the new painting of the time. The new homogeneity of the printed page seemed to inspire a subliminal faith in the validity of the printed Bible as bypassing the traditional oral authority of the Church, on one hand, and the need for rational critical scholarship on the other. It was as if print, uniform and repeatable commodity that it was, had the power of creating a new hypnotic superstition of the book as independent of and uncontaminated by human agency. Nobody who had read manuscripts could achieve this state of mind concerning the nature of the written word. But the assumption of homogeneous repeatability derived from the printed page, when extended to all the other concerns of life, led gradually to all those forms of production and social organization from which the Western world derives many satisfactions and nearly all of its characteristic traits. ## Peter Ramus and John Dewey were the two educational surfers or wave-riders of antithetic periods, the Gutenberg and the Marconi or electronic. In our time John Dewey worked to restore education to its primitive, pre-print phase. He. wanted to get the student out of the passive role of consumer of uniformly packaged learning. In fact, Dewey in reacting against passive print culture was surf-boarding along on the new electronic wave. That wave has now rolled right over this age. In the sixteenth century the great figure in educational reform was Peter Ramus (1515–1572), a Frenchman who rode the Gutenberg wave. Walter Ong has finally given us adequate studies of Ramus, placing him in relation to the later scholasticism from which he came and in relation to the new print-oriented classrooms for which he devised his visual programs. The printed book was a new visual aid available to all students and it rendered the older education obsolete. The book was literally a teaching machine where the manuscript was a crude teaching tool only. Had any of our current testers of media and various educational aids been available to the harassed sixteenth century administrator they would have been asked to find out whether the new teaching machine, the printed book, could do the full educational job. Could a portable, private instrument like the new book take the place of the book one made by hand and memorized as one made it? Could a book which could be read quickly and even silently take the place of a book read slowly aloud? Could students trained by such printed books measure up to the skilled orators and disputants produced by manuscript means? Using the methods the testers now use for radio, film, and TV, our testers would have reported in due course: “Yes, strange and repugnant as it may sound to you, the new teaching machines enable students to learn as much as before. Moreover, they seem to have more confidence in the new method as giving them the means of acquiring many new kinds of knowledge." The testers, that is to say, would have entirely missed the character of the new machine. They would have offered not one clue to its effects. There is no need to speculate about this situation. There is a recent work which attempts to assess these effects: Television in the Lives of Our Children by Wilbur Schramm, Jack Lyle, and Edwin B. Parker. When we see the reason for the total failure of this book to get in touch with its announced theme, we can understand why in the sixteenth century men had no clue to the nature and effects of the printed word. Schramm and his colleagues make no analysis of the TV image. They assume that apart from the “program" or “content" TV is a "neutral" medium like any other. To know otherwise, these men would have to have a thorough knowledge of the various art forms and scientific models of the past century. In the same way nobody could discover anything about the nature or effect of print without careful study of Renaissance painting and the new scientific models. But there is one especially revealing assumption made by Schramm and his colleagues. It is one that they share with Don Quixote, and it is that print is the criterion of “reality." Schramm assumes (p. 106) that the non-print media are "fantasy"-oriented: "Looking at these children in another way, 75% of the highest socioeconomic group were high users of print. . . . whereas the lowest socioeconomic children were more likely to depend on television, and television alone." Since print is of such importance as a parameter or frame of reference to people like Schramm in their scientific testing, we had best get on with finding out what it is and does. And that is where the work of Ramus can help us a lot. For just as Dewey, in a very confused way, was trying to explain the meaning of the electronic age to educators, Ramus had a new program for all phases of education in the sixteenth century. Father Ong at the end of a recent article on "Ramist Classroom Procedure and the Nature of Reality"44 says that for Ramus and his followers, it is their version of the school curriculum which holds the world together. "Nothing is accessible for use' . . . until it has first been put through the curriculum. The schoolroom is by implication the doorway to reality, and indeed the only doorway." Now that idea, new in the sixteenth century, is the one that Schramm has been saddled with, unconsciously, in the twentieth. Dewey, on the other hand, is the perfect foil to Ramus in his striving to dislodge the school from the fantastic Ramist idea of it as immediate adjunct to the press and as the supreme processer or hopper through which the young and all their experience must pass in order to be available for "use." Ramus was entirely right in his insistence on the supremacy of the new printed book in the classroom. For only there could the homogenizing effects of the new medium be given heavy stress in young lives. Students processed by print technology in this way would be able to translate every kind of problem and experience into the new visual kind of lineal order. For a nationalist society keen on exploiting its entire manpower for the common tasks of commerce and finance, of production and marketing, it needed very little vision to see that education of this kind should be compulsory. Without universal literacy it is hard, indeed, to tap the manpower pool. Napoleon had great trouble in getting peasants and semi-literates to march and drill, and took to tying their feet with 18-inch lengths of rope to give them the necessary sense of precision, uniformity and repeatability. But the fuller development of manpower resources by literacy in the nineteenth century had to wait for the intervening commercial and industrial applications of print technology, to all phases of learning, work, and entertainment. ## Rabelais offers a vision of the future of print culture as a consumer's paradise of applied knowledge. alphabet, by King Cadmus, caused armed men to spring up is a concise and accurate oral myth. As befits the medium of print, Rabelais is a verbose mass-production entertainment. But his vision of giganticism and the consumer's paradises ahead was quite accurate. There are, indeed, four massive myths of the Gutenberg transformation of society. Besides Gargantua, they are Don Quixote, the Dunciad, and Finnegans Wake. Each of them deserves a separate volume in relation to the world of typography, but some attention will be given to each in the following pages. If we first take a moment to glance at mechanization in its advanced stages it will be easier to see what Rabelais was excited about in its earlier phase. In his study of the democratization of the privileged consumer commodities, Mechanization Takes Command, Siegfried Giedion considers the meaning of the assembly-line in its explicit later phases (p. 457): Eight years later, in 1865, Pullman's sleeping car, the Pioneer, began to democratize aristocratic luxury. Pullman possessed the same instinct as Henry Ford half a century later, for stirring the dormant fancies of the public until they grew into demands. Both careers centered round the same problem: How might the instruments of comfort, that in Europe were unquestionably reserved to the financially privileged class, become democratized? Rabelais is concerned with the democratization of knowledge by the abundance of wines from the printing press. For the press is named from the technology it borrowed from the wine-press. Applied knowledge from the press led eventually to comfort as much as to learning. If there is any doubt whether the Cadmus myth uses "dragon's teeth" as an allusion to the technology of the hieroglyph, there need be none at all about Rabelais's insistence on pantagruelion as the symbol and image of printing from movable types. For this is the name of the hemp plant from which rope was made. From the teasing and shredding and weaving of this plant there came the lineal cords and bonds of greatest social enterprises. And Rabelais had a vision of the entire "world in Pantagruel's mouth," which is quite literally the idea of the giganticism that issues from mere additive association of homogeneous parts. And again his vision was accurate as we in this century can easily testify by retrospect. It is in his letter to Pantagruel at Paris that Gargantua proclaims the praise of typography: Now is it that the minds of men are qualified with all manner of discipline, and the old sciences revived, which for many ages were extinct: now it is, that the learned languages are to their Pristine purity restored, viz. Greek, (without which a man may be ashamed to account himself a scholar) Hebrew, Arabick, Chaldean and Latine. Printing likewise is now in use, so elegant, and so correct, that better cannot be imagined, although it was found out but in my time by divine inspiration, as by a diabolical suggestion on the other side was the invention of Ordnance. All the world is full of knowing men, of most learned Schoolmasters, and vast Libraries: and it appears to me as a truth, that neither in Plato's time nor Cicero's, nor Papinian's, there was ever such conveniency for studying, as we see at this day there is. . . . I see robbers, hangmen, free-booters, tapsters, ostlers, and such like, of the very rubbish of the people, more learned now, than the doctors and the preachers were in my time. . . . What shall I say? The very women and children have aspired to this praise and celestial Manna of good learning.45 Although the main work was done by Cromwell and Napoleon, “ordnance" (or cannon) and gunpowder had at least begun the levelling of castles, classes, and feudal distinctions. So print, says Rabelais, has begun the homogenizing of individuals and of talents. Later in the same century Francis Bacon was prophesying that his scientific method would level all talents and enable a child to make scientific discoveries of consequence. And Bacon's “method" we shall see was the extension of the idea of the new printed page to the whole encyclopedia of natural phenomena. That is, Bacon's method literally puts the whole of nature in Pantagruel's mouth. Albert Guérard's comment on this aspect of Rabelais in The Life and Death of an Ideal (p. 39) is as follows: This triumphant Pantagruelism inspires the chapters, full of quaint erudition, practical knowledge and poetic enthusiasm, which, at the end of the third book, he devotes to the praise of the blessed herb Pantagruelion. Literally, Pantagruelion is mere hemp; symbolically, it is human industry. Capping the wildest achievements of his own times with wilder boast and prophecy, Rabelais first shows man, by virtue of this Pantagruelion, exploring the remotest regions of his globe, “so that Taproban hath seen the heaths of Lapland, and both the Javas, the Riphaean Mountains." Men "scoured the Atlantic Ocean, passed the tropics, pushed through the torrid zone, measured all the Zodiac, sported under the equinoctial, having both poles level with their horizon." Then, “all marine and terrestrial gods were on a sudden all afraid." What is to prevent Pantagruel and his children from discovering some still more potent herb, by means of which they shall scale the very heavens? Who knows but they may “contrive a way to pierce into the high aerian clouds, and shut and open as they please the sluices from whence proceed the floodgates of the rain . . . then, prosecuting their ethereal voyage, they may step into the lightning workhouse and shop.. . where, seizing on the magazine of heaven, they may discharge a bouncing peal or two of thundering ordnance for joy of their arrival at these new supernal places. . . . And we the Gods shall then not be able to resist the impetuosity of their intrusion, . . . whatever regions, domiciles or mansions of the spangled firmament they shall have a mind to see, to stay in, or to travel through for their recreation." 45The Works of Mr. Francis Rabelais, translated by Sir Thomas Urquhart, p. 204. The Rabelais vision of new means and patterns of human interdependence was a vista of power through applied knowledge. The price of conquering the new world of gigantic dimensions was simply to enter Pantagruel's mouth. Erich Auerbach devotes the eleventh chapter of Mimesis: The Representation of Reality in Western Literature to "The World in Pantagruel's Mouth." Auerbach notes (p. 269) some of the predecessors of Rabelais' fantasy in order to do justice to the originality of Rabelais who “maintains a constant interplay of different locales, different themes and different levels of style." Like Robert Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy later on, Rabelais follows the "principle of the promiscuous intermingling of the categories of event, experience, and knowledge, as well as of dimensions and styles." Again, Rabelais is like a medieval glossator of the Roman law in supporting his absurd opinions with a welter of learning which manifests "rapid shifts between a multiplicity of viewpoints." That is to say, Rabelais is a scholastic in his mosaic procedures, consciously juxtaposing this ancient farrago with the new individual single-point-of-view technology of print. Like the poet John Skelton at the same time in England, of whom C. S. Lewis writes, “Skelton has ceased to be a man and become a mob,"46 Rabelais is a collective rout of oral schoolmen and glossators suddenly debouched into a visual world newly set up on individualist and nationalist lines. It is just the incongruity of these two worlds as they mix and mingle in the very language of Rabelais that gives us a special feeling of his relevance for us, who also live ambivalently in divided and distinguished cultures. Two cultures or technologies can, like astronomical galaxies, pass through one another without collision; but not without change of configuration. In modern physics there is, similarly, the concept of “interface" or the meeting and metamorphosis of two structures. Such “interficiality" is the very key to the Renaissance as to our twentieth century. ## The celebrated earthy tactility of Rabelais is a massive backwash of receding manuscript culture. medievalism by consciously splattering it against tidy new visual wall of print culture. John Cowper Powys in his Rabelais puts it this way (p. 57): One exceptional characteristic of Rabelais was his power, a power possessed also by Walt Whitman, of concentrating a tremendous magnetic energy upon the enjoyment—almost as if these inanimate elements were responsive to embraces and good to eat!—of the solid substances of wood and stone, making these things actually porous, you might say, to planetary desire. This characteristic was kept in humorous and very positive control; but that when so kept it is one of the chief characteristics of a born architect I used to be always finding out from my own brother, A. R. Powys, and his ways with wood and stone. What Powys says here of tactility and affinity for wood and stone ties in with much said earlier about the audile-tactile features of scholasticism and Gothic architecture. It is in this tactile and audile, and ever so unliterary, mode that Rabelais gets his naughty, "earthy" effects. Like James Joyce, another modern master of medieval tactile mosaic, Rabelais expected the public to devote its life to study of his work. “I intend each and every reader to lay aside his business, to abandon his trade, to relinquish his profession, and to concentrate wholly upon my work." Joyce said the same thing, and like Rabelais, was free with the new medium in an especial way. For Joyce, throughout Finnegans Wake, television is "the Charge of the Light Brigade," and the whole world is comprised in a single book. In addition Rabelais gives the reader a good tactile drubbing: And therefore, to make an end of this Prologue, even as I give my selfe to an hundred Pannier-fulls of faire devils, body and soul, tripes and guts, in case that I lie so much as one single word in this History, after the like manner St. Anthonies fire burn you, Mahoom's disease whirle you, the squinance with a stitch in your side and the Wolfe in your stomack trusse you, the bloody Flux seize upon you, the curst sharp inflammations of wilde fire, as slender and thin as Cowes haire, strengthened with quick silver, enter into your Fundament, and like those of Sodom and Gomorrha, may you fall into sulphur, fire and bottomless pits in case you do not firmly beleeve all that I shall relate unto you in this present Chronicle. Typography as the first mechanization of a handicraft is itself the perfect instance not of a new knowledge, but of applied knowledge. But the amazing splitting away of the tactile quality in language appears as an extreme development of this quality in Rabelais and some Elizabethans like Nashe. Then it divides steadily from language until Hopkins and the symbolists began to work at it in the nineteenth century. The point in all this will appear more plainly when we turn to the sixteenth century obsession with quantification. For number and measure are the mode of the tactile, and they are soon to be found departing from the visual humanist camp of letters. A great divorce between number, the language of science, and letters, the language of civilization, occurred in the later Renaissance. But the earlier phase of this divorce, as we shall see, was the Ramist method for "use" and applied knowledge by means of printed literature. For it cannot be sufficiently explained that the mechanization of the ancient handicraft of the scribe was itself “applied" knowledge. And the application consisted in the visual arresting and splitting up of the scribal action. That is why, once this solution to the problem of mechanization was worked out, it could be extended to the mechanizing of many other actions. Moreover, the mere accustomation to the repetitive, lineal patterns of the printed page strongly disposed people to transfer such approaches to all kinds of problems. Febvre and Martin say in L'Apparition du livre (p. 28), for example, that a great spur was applied to paper manufacture as early as the eleventh century by the discovery of a method which transformed "le movement circulaire en movement alternatif." The change was from mill to mallets, much like the shift from periodic Ciceronian prose to Senecan “cutted period" at the same time. A change from mill to mallets implies the breaking up of continuous into segmental operations, and the authors add: "This invention had been the origin of numerous industrial upsets." And print, which was to be the mother of all the bouleversements to come, was itself a veritable cluster or galaxy of previously achieved technologies. Usher's statement in his History of Mechanical Inventions (p. 239) is masterly: The entire achievement embodied in the printed book with illustrations presents a striking example of the multiplicity of individual acts of invention that are requisite to bring about a new result. In its entirety, this accomplishment involves: the invention of paper and of inks made with an oil base; the development of engraving on wood and .. . of wood blocks; the development of the press and the special technique of press work involved in printing. The history of paper is in some ways a separate subject, but it must be evident that the generalization of printing could not have proceeded significantly with any other basic medium. Parchment is difficult to handle, costly, and narrowly limited in supply. Books would have remained an article of luxury if parchment had been the only available medium of issue. Papyrus is hard, brittle, and unsuitable for printing. The introduction of linen-paper making into Europe from China was thus an important preliminary condition. The origin of this product in the Far East and the stages of its transfer overland to Europe are now fairly well ascertained, so that the chronology of the transfers is adequately established . . . That printing from movable types was an event nearly related to the earlier technology of the phonetic alphabet is a fact that has been a main reason for studying all these centuries that preceded Gutenberg. Phonetic script was the indispensable prelude. Thus Chinese ideogrammic script proved a complete block against the development of print technology in their culture. Today when they are determined to alphabetize their writing they find that they must also break up their verbal structures polysyllabically before the phonetic alphabet will apply to them. Reflection on this situation will help us to understand why alphabetic writing at first, and print later, led to the analytic separation of interpersonal relations and inner and outer functions in the Western world. Thus everywhere in Finnegans Wake Joyce reiterates the theme of the effects of the alphabet on “abced-minded man," ever “whispering his ho (here keen again and begin again to make sound sense and sense sound kin again)"(p. 121) and urges all to "harmonize your abecedeed responses"(p. 140). The new oil base for printing came "from the painters rather than the calligraphers," and “the smaller cloth and wine presses embodied most of the features required by the printing press. . . . the primary problems of innovation centered around the arts of engraving and casting . . ."47 The goldsmiths and many others were needed to make up the family of inventions that add up to "printing."So complex is the story that a query has arisen: "What did Gutenberg invent?" Usher says (p. 247) : "Unfortunately, no wholly decisive answer can be given, because we really have no competent contemporary evidence as to the details of the processes by which the various early books were produced." In the same way the Ford company has no record of the actual procedures followed in making its first cars. The concern in the present book is to point out the contemporary response to this new technology, as in years to come historians will chart the effects of radio on the movie and of TV in disposing people towards the new kinds of space as, for example, of the small car. It seemed quite natural to Rabelais to hymn the printed book, product of the new wine press. The following passage from the disputed “fifth" book of the work would seem, in terms of my suggestion about the dominant continuing metaphor of the new printing press in the entire conception, to be integral to Rabelais. Bottle whose Mysterious Deep Does ten thousand secrets keep, With attentive ear I wait; Ease my Mind and speak my Fate, Soul of joy. Like Bacchus, we More than India gain by thee. Truths unborn thy juice reveals, Which Futurity conceals. Antidote to Frauds and Lies, Wine that mounts up to the skies, May thy Father Noah's Brood Like him drown, but in thy Flood. Speak, so may the Liquid Mine Of Rubies, or of Diamonds shine. ## Every technology contrived and outered by man has the power to numb human awareness during the period of its first interiorization. That wisdom and knowledge should be distilled from the press seemed an obvious metaphor to anybody in the sixteenth century. Just how deeply the printed book was embedded in the preceding culture is made manifest by Curt Bühler in The Fifteenth Century Book: the Scribes; the Printers; the Decorators. Buhler tells of the “very considerable number of such manuscripts, copied from printed books" that have survived to our day; “Actually, of course, there is very little real difference between the fifteenth-century manuscripts and the incunabula—and the student of the earliest printing would be well advised if he viewed the new invention, as the first printers did, as simply another form of writing—in this case, “artificialiter scribere." (p. 16) The “horseless carriage" was for a time in the same ambiguous state as the printed book. Buhler's data about the peaceful co-existence between scribe and printer will be new and welcome to many readers: What, then, became of the book-scribes? What happened to the various categories of writers of literary works, who practiced their trade prior to 1450, once the printing press was established? The professionals previously employed by the large scriptoria seem to have done no more than to change their titles and thereupon became calligraphers; in any event, they went right on doing what had been their task for centuries. On the one hand, it should be remembered that calligraphers necessarily catered principally, if not exclusively, to the “de luxe-bespoke" trade. On the other, it was not apparent until the very late fifteenth century—or more fully, perhaps, in the sixteenth—that calligraphy had turned into an applied art or, at worst, a mere hobby. The scriptoria themselves seem to have been unable to compete with the printing firms and the publishing houses which subsequently came into being—although some managed to survive by becoming booksellers. Their employees, however, enjoyed a variety of alternate choices, in that they could contrive to attach themselves to well-to-do patrons, to carry on a bespoke trade, or to become the itinerant scribes (mostly of Germanic or of Low Country origin) who wandered all over Europe in these years, even working in Italy. Some scribes joined forces with the enemy and became printers themselves—though some of those upon whom Fortune did not smile later forsook the press and returned to their former occupation. This is rather strong evidence for the belief that a scribe, in the closing years of the fifteenth century, could still make a living for himself with his pen. (pp. 26–7) Usher has made it plain that the cluster of events and technologies that got together in the mind and age of Gutenberg is quite opaque. Nobody is today prepared to say even what it was that Gutenberg invented. In the laughing phrase of Joyce we must “sink deep or touch not the Cartesian spring." Only in our own time have people begun to analyse: "what is a business?" B. J. Muller-Thym answers that it is a machine for making wealth, successor to the family as the wealth-making unit of the pre-industrial ages. G. T. Guilbaud in asking the question What is Cybernetics? refers to the work of Jacques Lafitte, engineer and architect, saying (pp. 9-10) that whereas today nobody doubts "the importance of the study of machines for their own sake" . . . twenty-five years ago, as Lafitte pointed out in his book, the science of machines did not exist. Elementary fragments of it could be found here and there among the works of engineers, in the writings of philosophers or sociologists, in novels or essays—but nothing systematic had so far taken shape. The organised constructions of man'.. . these are our machines. From the primitive flint knife to the modern lathe, from the rude shanty to the perfected dwellings of the present day, from the simple abacus to the enormous calculating machine—what variety from which to extract common characteristics and attempt a useful classification! The notion of a machine is as hard to define as that of a living organism; a great engineer once spoke indeed of an ‘artificial zoology'. But it is not definition or classification that is needed most urgently. Here is how Lafitte put it: 'Because we are their makers, we have too often deluded ourselves into believing that we knew all there was to know about machines. Although the study and construction of machines of all sorts owes much to advances in mechanics, physics and chemistry, nevertheless mechanology—the science of machines as such, the science of the organized constructions of man—is not a branch of these sciences. Its place is elsewhere in the ranks of scientific disciplines.' It will seem more and more strange to us why men have chosen to know so little about matters about which they have done so much. Alexander Pope may have noticed this matter ironically when he wrote: One science only will one genius fit So vast is art, so narrow human wit. For he well knew that this was the formula for the Tower of Babel. At any rate, with the Gutenberg technology we move into the age of the take-off of the machine. The principle of segmentation of actions and functions and roles became systematically applicable wherever desired. Basically it is the principle of visual quantification discovered in the later Middle Ages, as Clagett explained. This principle of translating non-visual matters of motion and energy into visual terms is the very principle of “applied" knowledge in any time or place. The Gutenberg technology extended this principle to writing and language and the codification and transmission of every kind of learning. ## With Gutenberg Europe enters the technological phase of progress, when change itself becomes the archetypal norm of social life. teaches and the historian gives examples of philosophical principle, only the poet applies the whole matter to the correction of the human will and the erection of the human spirit: Now doth the peerless poet perform both: for whatsoever the philosopher saith should be done, he giveth a perfect picture of it in some one by whom he presupposeth it was done; so as he coupleth the general notion with the particular example. A perfect picture I say, for he yieldeth to the powers of the mind an image of that whereof the philosopher bestoweth but a wordish description: which doth neither strike, pierce, nor possess the sight of the soul so much as that other doth.48 A more unexpected translation into the new mode appears in a letter of Descartes prefacing his Principles of Philosophy: ". . . it may first of all be run through in its entirety like a novel, without forcing the attention unduly upon it. . . . It is only necessary to mark with a pen the places where difficulty is found, and continue to read without interruption to the end." The instruction of Descartes to his readers is one of the more explicit recognitions of the change in language and thought resulting from print. Namely, that there is no more need, as there had been in oral philosophy, to probe and check each term. The context will now do. The situation is not unlike the meeting of two scholars today. When one asks, "How do you use the term ‘tribal' in that connection?", the other can say, "Read my article on it in the current issue of . . ." Paradoxically, a close attention to precise nuance of word use is an oral and not a written trait. For large, general visual contexts always accompany the printed word. But if print discourages minute verbal play, it strongly works for uniformity of spelling and uniformity of meaning, since both of these are immediate practical concerns of the printer and his public. In the same way, a written philosophy, and especially a printed one, will naturally make "certitude" the primary object of knowledge, just as the scholar in a print culture can have acceptance for his accuracy even though he have nothing to say. But the paradox of the passion for certitude in print culture is that it must proceed by the method of doubt. We shall find abundance of such paradoxes in the new technology that made each book reader the centre of the universe and also enabled Copernicus to toss man to the periphery of the heavens, dislodging him from the centre of the physical world. Equally paradoxical is the power of print to install the reader in a subjective universe of limitless freedom and spontaneity: My mind to me a Kingdom is; Such perfect joy therein I find That it excels all other bliss Which God or Nature hath assigned. 48In W. J. Bates, ed., Criticism: the Major Texts, p. 89. But by the same token print induces the reader to order his external life and actions with visual propriety and rigour, until the appearance of virtue and stability usurp all inner motive and Shades of the prison-house begin to close Upon the growing Boy. The celebrated “To be or not to be" of Hamlet is the scholastic sic et non of Abelard translated into the new visual culture where it has a reverse significance. Under oral scholastic conditions the sic et non is a mode of experiencing the very sinuosities of the dialectical movements of the inquiring mind. It corresponds to the verbal sensing of the poetic process in Dante and the dolce stil nuovo. But in Montaigne and Descartes it is not the process but the product that is sought. And the method of arresting the mind by snapshot, which Montaigne calls la peinture de la pensée, is itself the method of doubt. Hamlet presents two pictures, two views of life. His soliloquy is an indispensable point of reorientation between the old oral and new visual cultures. He concludes with an explicit recognition of the contrast between the old and the new, putting “conscience"against “resolution": And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pith and moment With this regard their currents turn awry And lose the name of action. (III, i) This is the identical division we have already seen in Thomas More's contrast: "Your scholastic philosophy is not unpleasant among friends in familiar communication, but in the councils of Kings where great matters be debated and reasoned with great authority these things have no place." Hamlet is repeating a commonplace conflict of his century, that between the old oral “field" approach to problems and the new visual approach of applied or “resolute" knowledge. And “resolution" is the cant or conventional term used by the Machiavellians. So the conflict is between "conscience" and “resolution," not in our sense at all, but between an over-all awareness and a merely private point of view. Thus, today the conflict goes the other way. The highly literate and individualist liberal mind is tormented by the pressure to become collectively oriented. The literate liberal is convinced that all real values are private, personal, individual. Such is the message of mere literacy. Yet the new electric technology pressures him towards the need for total human interdependence. Hamlet, on the other hand, saw the advantages of corporate responsibility and awareness ("conscience") with each man in a role, not at his private peephole or "point of view." Is it not obvious that there are always enough moral problems without also taking a moral stand on technological grounds? Having asked myself this question some time ago, the following feature emerged: the printed word is an arrested moment of mental movement. To read print is to act both as movie projector and audience for a mental movie. The reader attains a strong feeling of participation in the total motions of a mind in the process of thinking. But is it not basically the printed word's 'still shot' that fosters a habit of mind which tackles all problems of movement and change in terms of the unmoved segment or section? Has not print inspired a hundred different mathematical and analytical procedures for explaining and controlling change in terms of the unchanging? Have we not tended to apply this very static feature to print itself and talked only of its quantitative effects? Do we not speak more of the power of print to increase knowledge and to extend literacy than the most obvious features of song, dance, painting, perception, poetry, architecture, and town planning?49 Print is the extreme phase of alphabet culture that detribalizes or decollectivizes man in the first instance. Print raises the visual features of alphabet to highest intensity of definition. Thus print carries the individuating power of the phonetic alphabet much further than manuscript culture could ever do. Print is the technology of individualism. If men decided to modify this visual technology by an electric technology, individualism will also be modified. To raise a moral complaint about this is like cussing a buzz-saw for lopping off fingers. "But," someone says, "we didn't know it would happen." Yet even witlessness is not a moral issue. It is a problem, but not a moral problem; and it would be nice to clear away some of the moral fogs that surround our technologies. It would be good for morality. As for the technique of doubt in Montaigne and Descartes, it is inseparable, technologically, as we shall see from the criterion of repeatability in science. The print reader is subjected to a black and white flicker that is regular and even. Print presents arrested moments of mental posture. This alternating flicker is also the very mode of projection of subjective doubt and peripheral groping. Applied knowledge in the Renaissance had to take the form of translation of the auditory into visual terms, of the plastic into retinal form. The Renaissance discoveries of Father Ong, detailed in his Ramus: Method, and the Decay of Dialogue (from which we quote below) and numerous articles, are of direct relevance to the student of the effects of Gutenberg technology. Ong's investigation of the role of visualization in later medieval logic and philosophy is our direct concern here, for visualization and quantification are near twins. Earlier we have seen how, for the humanists, medieval glosses, illumination, and architectural modes had all served the art of memory. Also, the medieval dialecticians pursued their oral courses well into the sixteenth century: The invention of printing invited large-scale manipulation of words in space and gave new urgency to the drive toward handling logic or dialectic quantitatively, a drive long manifest in the medieval arts scholostics. . . . The tendency for quantitative or quasi-quantitative manipulation of logic to dissipate itself in memory devices will be a noteworthy feature of Ramism. (p. xv) The manuscript culture had not been able to duplicate visual knowledge on a mass scale and was less tempted to seek the means of reducing nonvisual processes of mind to diagrams. Yet, even so, there is steady pressure in the later scholasticism to strip language to a kind of neuter mathematical counters. The “nominalists" were those who specialized in the logical treatises of Peter of Spain. The opening words of his Summulae have a ring, as Ong notes (p. 60), that would be familiar at any time from Cicero to Emerson: “Dialectic is the art of arts and the science of sciences, possessing the way to the principles of all curriculum subjects. For dialectic alone disputes with probability concerning the principles of all other arts, and thus dialectic must be the first science to be acquired." The humanists, especially after printing extended the boundaries of literature, complained bitterly that boys should have to comb through the divisions and distinctions of Peter of Spain. The point of all this is that the drive to deal spatially and geometrically with words and logic, while useful as an art of memory, proved cul de sac in philosophy. It needed the mathematical symbolism we have devised today. But it did contribute directly to the spirit of quantification that expressed itself in the mechanization of writing and what followed long before Gutenberg, "the advance in quantification which medieval logic exhibits is one of the chief differences between it and the earlier Aristotelian logic."(p. 72) And quantification means the translation of non-visual relations and realities into visual terms, a procedure inherent in the phonetic alphabet, as was shown earlier. But with Ramus in the sixteenth century it is not enough to make trees and schemes of knowledge: For at the heart of the Ramist enterprise is the drive to tie down words themselves, rather than other representations, in simple geometrical patterns. Words are believed to be recalcitrant insofar as they derive from a world of sound, voices, cries; the Ramist ambition is to neutralize this connection by processing what is of itself nonspatial in order to reduce it to space in the starkest way possible. The spatial processing of sound by means of the alphabet is not enough. Printed or written words themselves must be deployed in spatial relationships, and the resulting schemata thought of as a key to their meanings. (pp. 89–90) Confronted with the numerous relationships between Ramus and “applied knowledge,"Father Ong has published an article, “Ramist Method and the Commercial Mind,"ão which makes an admirable approach to the obsession with quantification in the Renaissance: One of the persistent puzzles concerning Peter Ramus and his followers is the extraordinary diffusion of their works during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The general pathway of this diffusion has been well known since Waddington's Ramus in 1855. It proceeds chiefly through bourgeois Protestant groups of merchants and artisans more or less tinged with Calvinism. These groups are found not only in Ramus' native France, but especially in Germany, Switzerland, the Low Countries, England, Scotland, Scandinavia, and New England. Perry Miller's work, The New England Mind: the Seventeenth Century, is the most detailed study of Ramism in any such group. Such groups were moving into more openly influential positions socially and were improving themselves intellectually, and Ramism appeals to them as they move up. Ramus' works thus enjoyed particular favor not in highly sophisticated intellectual circles but rather in elementary or secondary schools or along the fringe where secondary schooling and university education meet . . . What is necessary to understand here is that the key to any kind of applied knowledge is the translation of a complex of relations into explicit visual terms. The alphabet itself as applied to the complex of the spoken word translates speech into a visual code that can be uniformly spread and transported. Print had given an intensity to this latent process that was a virtual educational and economic take-off. Ramus, with the whole scholastic drive behind him was able to translate it into the visual “humanism of the new merchant classes." Such is the simplicity and crudity of the spatial models promoted by Ramus that no cultivated mind, and nobody sensitive to language, could be bothered with them. And yet it was this crudity that gave him his appeal to the self-educated and to the merchant classes. Just how large a section of the new reading public these were has been demonstrated in the great study of Middle-Class Culture in Elizabethan England by L. B. Wright. ## Typography tended to alter language from a means of perception and exploration to a portable commodity. As for the mere stress on use and practicality, it is not only Ramus but the entire humanist corps that insists upon that. From the Sophists to Cicero training in language and oratory had been accepted as the road to power and top executive action. The Ciceronian program of encyclopedic knowledge in the arts and sciences came back with printing. The essentially dialogue character of scholasticism gave way to a more extensive program in languages and literature for the training of the Courtier and the Governor and the Prince. What we have come to consider as an impossibly genteel curriculum of authors, languages, and history was in the Renaissance held necessary for the statesman, on one hand, and the study of Scripture, on the other. Shakespeare presents (I, i) his Henry the Fifth as combining both: Hear him but reason in divinity, And, all-admiring, with an inward wish You would desire the King were made a prelate; Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs, You would say it hath been all in all his study; List his discourse of war, and you shall hear A fearful battle rend'red you in music; Turn him to any cause of policy, The Gordian knot of it he will unloose, Familiar as his garter: that, when he speaks, The air, a charter'd libertine, is still, And the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears, To steal his sweet and honey'd sentences; So that the art and practic part of life Must be the mistress to this theoric; Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it, Since his addiction was to courses vain, His companies unletter'd, rude and shallow, His hours fill'd up with riots, banquets, sports; And never noted in him any study, Any retirement, any sequestration From open haunts and popularity. But the practical qualities fostered by Ramism are more immediately related to numbers than to letters: "While Adam Smith attacked the system which emerged, he was aware of its advantages in defence. He saw it as part of the spread of the price system which had swept aside the feudal system, and led to the discovery of the New World . . ."51 Innis is here writing on “The Penetrative Powers of the Price System," by which he means the power to translate one set of functions into a new mode and language. The feudal system was based on oral culture and self-contained system of centres-without-margins, as Pirenne showed us earlier. This structure was translated by visual, quantitative means into great centre-margin systems of a nationalist mercantile kind, a process greatly assisted by printing. It is interesting to see the way in which Adam Smith viewed this process of drastic translation carried out in the English Civil War. It was just about to take place in France: A revolution of the greatest importance to public happiness was in this manner brought about by two different orders of people, who had not the least intention to serve the public. To gratify the most childish vanity was the sole motive of the great proprietors. The merchants and artificers, much less ridiculous, acted merely from a view to their own interest, and in pursuit of their own pedlar principles of turning a penny wherever a penny was to be got. Neither of them had either knowledge or foresight of that great revolution which the folly of the one, and the industry of the other, was gradually bringing about. It is thus that through the greater part of Europe the commerce and manufacture of cities, instead of being the effect, have been the cause and occasion of the improvement and cultivation of the country.52 The French Revolution, long prepared by the homogenizing print process, as de Tocqueville will show us, followed the pattern of Ramist reasonings which as Ong stresses “while seldom advertised as serving the purposes of debate, they frequently manifest an express concern for simplification": Hooykaas makes less of Ramus' talk about ‘induction' than of his enthusiasm for usus, that is, classroom practice or exercise, in establishing the relationship of Ramus' educational aims and procedures to bourgeois culture. The break with older ways both among burghers generally and among Ramists in particular consisted more in an interest in pupil activity than in anything we should recognize today as experimentation or induction'. These points Hooykas makes are valid and follow recent lines of thinking in discerning a certain intellectual fertility in the meeting of the artisan and academic minds during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.53 Ong here points to a basic fact about print culture. Printed books, themselves the first uniform, repeatable, and mass-produced items in the world, provided endless paradigms of uniform commodity culture for sixteenth and succeeding centuries. Shakespeare makes frequent play with this fact as in King John (II, i) : That smooth-faced gentleman, tickling Commodity, Commodity, the bias of the world— The world, who of itself is peised well, Made to run even upon even ground Till this advantage, this vile drawing bias, This sway of motion, this Commodity, Makes it take head from all indifferency, From all direction, purpose, course, intent And this same bias, this Commodity, This bawd, this broker, this all-changing word, Clapp'd on the outward eye of fickle France, Hath drawn him from his own determin'd aid, From a resolved and honourable war, To a most base and vile-concluded peace. And why rail I on this Commodity? But for because he hath not woo'd me yet. Not that I have the power to clutch my hand When his fair angels would salute my palm; But for my hand, as unattempted yet, Like a poor beggar, raileth on the rich. Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail And say there is no sin but to be rich; And being rich, my virtue then shall be To say there is no vice but beggary. Since kings break faith upon commodity, Gain, be my lord, for I will worship thee! Typography is not only a technology but is in itself a natural resource or staple, like cotton or timber or radio; and, like any staple, it shapes not only private sense ratios but also patterns of communal interdependence. Print, as it were, translated the dialogue of shared discourse into packaged information, a portable commodity. It put a spin or bias in language and human perception which Shakespeare studies here as “Commodity." How could it do otherwise? It created the price system. For until commodities are uniform and repeatable the price of an article is subject to haggle and adjustment. The uniformity and repeatability of the book not only created modern markets and the price system inseparable from literacy and industry. Lewis Mumford writes in Sticks and Stones (pp. 41–2) : Victor Hugo said in Notre Dame that the printing-press destroyed architecture, which had hitherto been the stone record of mankind. The real misdemeanor of the printing-press, however, was not that it took literary values away from architecture, but that it caused architecture to derive its value from literature. With the Renaissance the great modern distinction between the literate and the illiterate extends even to building; the master mason who knew his stone and his workmen and his tools and the tradition of his art gave way to the architect who knew his Palladio and his Vignola and his Vitruvius. Architecture, instead of striving to leave the imprint of a happy spirit on the superficies of a building, became a mere matter of grammatical accuracy and pronunciation; and the seventeenth century architects who revolted from this regime and created the baroque were at home only in the pleasure gardens and theaters of princes . . . In his youth a student of the Scottish biologist Patrick Geddes, Mumford has always given us a civilized example of how unnecessary and unrewarding are the ways of the specialist who sees nothing in relation to anything else: "It was by means of the book that the architecture of the eighteenth century from St. Petersburg to Philadelphia seemed cast by a single mind." (p. 43) Print was in itself a commodity, a new natural resource which also showed us how to tap all other kinds of resources including ourselves. Media as staples or natural resources are the theme of the later work of Harold Innis. His early work concerns staples in the ordinary sense. In his maturity he hit on the discovery that technological media like writing, papyrus, radio, photoengraving, and such are themselves wealth.54 Without a technology tending to process experience homogeneously, a society cannot go far toward the control of natural forces nor even the organization of human effort. This was the ironic theme of The Bridge Over the River Kwai. The Japanese Buddhist Colonel has no technology to tackle the job. The English Colonel has it all diagrammed and segmented in no time. Of course, he has no proper end in view. His technology is his way of life. He lives by the book of the Geneva Convention. To an oral Frenchman all this is hilarious. English and American audiences found the picture profound, subtle, elusive. In his Two-Edged Sword, John L. McKenzie shows (p. 13) how Biblical studies in the twentieth century have abandoned the concept of the lineal, homogeneous structure of Scriptural narration: Modern control and use of natural forces was not known to the Hebrews, nor did the wildest fancy dream of anything like it. . . . The ancient Hebrews were prephilosophical; the most ordinary patterns of modern thought were unknown to them. Logic as a form of mental discipline they lacked. Their language is the speech of the simple man who sees motion and action rather than static reality, static reality as concrete rather than abstract. In our legal world words are carefully reduced to homogeneous entities so that they can be applied. If allowed any grace or life such as is naturally theirs, they would not serve their practical, applied function. I have shown that the theory I offer you is based on a natural virtue in words themselves. Let me state this theory of interpretation dogmatically before I turn the coin over to show that it conforms with the actual practices of draftsmanship. Words in legal documents—I am not talking about anything else—are simply delegations to others of authority to apply them to particular things or occasions. The only meaning of the word meaning, as I am using it, is an application to the particular. And the more imprecise the words are, the greater is the delegation, simply because then they can be applied or not to more particulars. This is the only important feature of words in legal draftsmanship or interpretation. They mean, therefore, not what their author intended them to mean, or even what meaning he intended, or expected, reasonably or not, others to give them. They mean, in the first instance, what the person to whom they are addressed makes them mean. Their meaning is whatever occasion or thing he may apply them to or what in some cases he may only propose to 54See H. M. McLuhan, "The Effects of the Improvements of Communication Media," Journal of Economic History, December, 1960, pp. 566–75. apply them to. The meaning of words in legal documents is to be sought, not in their author or authors, the parties to a contract, the testator, or the legislature, but in the acts or the behavior with which the person addressed undertakes to match them. This is the beginning of their meaning. In the second instance, but only secondarily, a legal document is also addressed to the courts. This is a further delegation, and a delegation of a different authority, to decide, not what the word means, but whether the immediate addressee had authority to make them mean what he did make them mean, or what he proposes to make them mean. In other words, the question before the court is not whether he gave the words the right meaning, but whether or not the words authorized the meaning he gave them.55 What Curtis so correctly discerns in the nature of applied terminology, equally concerns populations, civil and military. Unless processed in a uniform way, it would be quite impossible to have delegation of functions and duties, and thus there could be no centralized national groupings such as came into existence after printing. Without similar uniform processing by literacy, there could be no market or price system, a factor which constrains "backward" countries to be “communist," or tribal. There is no known means of having our price and distribution system without long and extensive experience of literacy. But we are swiftly becoming aware of these matters as we move into the electronic era. For telegraph, radio and TV do not tend towards the homogeneous in their effects of print culture and dispose us to easier awareness on non-print cultures. ## The passion for exact measurement began to dominate the Renaissance. Just as Father Ong in his work on Ramus has provided the necessary insight into the strange similarities of form and motive between medieval logicians and Renaissance merchants, so John U. Nef has given us the connection between Renaissance science and commerce. His Cultural Foundations of Industrial Civilization is a study of quantification, especially as it intruded into the commercial world. The spirit of rigorous separation and translation of functions by stress on visual quantity had beset the later scholastic centuries and contributed to the mechanization of the scribal craft, as we have seen. The pursuit of 55Charles P. Curtis, It's Your Law, pp. 65–6. dichotomies and divisions carried over from scholasticism to mathematics and science, as Nef indicates (pp. 4–5) : The very separation of science from faith, from ethics and from art, which is so characteristic of our times, is at the roots of the industrialized world in which we live. In a letter destined for Fermat, which he sent to Father Mersenne in 1637, Descartes remarked that the great Toulouse mathematician seemed to suppose 'that in saying a thing is easy to believe, I meant only to say that it is probable. This is far from my position: I consider everything that is only probable as almost false. . . .' Such a position has led to the admission as true of only what is verifiable in tangible and increasingly in measurable terms, or in terms of mathematical demonstrations which start from propositions artificially divorced from the actual experience of living. Since it is impossible, as Pascal seems to have been the first to recognize, to offer the same kind of tangible proof and to get the same kind of assent in matters of faith, of morals and of beauty, the truths of religion, moral philosophy and art have come to be treated as subjects of private opinion rather than of public knowledge. Their contributions to the contemporary world are indirect, though not for that reason necessarily inferior to those of science. Artificial separation of mental modes in the interests of homogeneity conveyed a sentiment of certitude to Descartes and his time. A century of more and more rapid movement of information by print had developed new sensibilities. In Nef's words (p. 8): During the hundred years that followed Rabelais' death in 1553, there are many indications that exact time, exact quantities, exact distances were coming to have a greatly increased interest for men and women in connexion with private and public life. One of the most impressive examples of the new concern with precision was the action taken by the Church of Rome to provide a more exact calendar. Throughout the Middle Ages the ways in which the Christian peoples measured the passage of time were based on calculations made before the fall of the Roman Empire. The Julian calendar of A.D. 325 was still in use in the age of Rabelais. The rise of statistics permitted the isolation of economics from the general social fabric of the sixteenth century: The Europeans were striving after a higher degree of quantitative accuracy in many domains during the span of the eighty years or so that followed. Some of them attached a novel importance to the amassing of statistics, and notable of statistics concerning rates of increase, as guides to economic policy, at the very period when, with Bodin, Malynes, Laffemas, Montchretien and Mun, economics first emerged as a separate subject of human speculative inquiry, independent both of housekeeping, the concern of each of us in his daily active life, and of moral philosophy, the concern of us all for the guidance of our inner lives. (p. 10) Already Europe was moving so far in the direction of visualized measurement and quantification of life that it “came to occupy for the first time a place apart from both the Near and Far East." In other words, under manuscript conditions Europe was not very sharply distinct from the East which was also a manuscript culture. Let us turn a moment from Nef to Ong for confirmation of the new passion for quantity and measurement, we find that "the Ramist method appealed primarily to a desire for order, not to a desire for experimentation. . . . Ramus takes what might be called an itemizing approach to discourse."56 That the new commercial classes took to the itemizing approach can be documented from many quarters. Its novelty and oddity provided hilarity on the Elizabethan stage. Ben Jonson's Sir Politick Would-Be in Volpone is a would-be Machiavel, and Jonson naturally links the new statecraft with the new techniques of visual observation and organization of action: ## I do love To note and to observe: though I live out, Free from the active torrent, yet I'd mark The currents and the passages of things, For mine own private use; and know the ebbs And flows of state. Sir Politick in Venice inquires of Peregrine: Why came you forth Empty of rules for travel? Peregrine: Faith, I had Some common ones from out of that vulgar grammar Which he that cried Italian to me, taught me. (II, i) ## Later in Act IV, Sir Politick is doing some itemizing for Peregrine: Sir P. Nay, sir, conceive me. It will cost me in onions, some thirty livres— Per. Which is one pound sterling. Sir P. Beside my water-works: for this I do, sir First, I bring in your ship 'twixt two brick walls; But those the state shall venture: On the one I strain me a fair tarpauling, and in that I stick my onions, cut in halves: the other Is full of loop-holes, out at which I thrust The noses of my bellows; and those bellows I keep, with water-works, in perpetual motion, Which is the easiest matter of a hundred. Now, sir, your onion, which doth naturally Attract the infection, and your bellows blowing The air upon him, will show, instantly, 56Walter Ong, "Ramist Method and the Commercial Mind," p. 165. By his changed colour, if there be contagion; Or else remain as fair as at the first. —Now it is known, 'tis nothing. Per. You are right, sir. Sir P. I would I had my note. Per. Faith, so would I': But you have done well for once, sir. Sir P. Were I false, Or would be made so, I could shew you reasons How I could sell this state now to the Turk, Spite of their gallies, or their—[Examining his papers] Per. Pray you, sir Pol. Sir P. I have them not about me. Per. That I fear'd: They are there, sir. Sir P. No, this is my diary, Wherein I note my actions of the day. Per. Pray you, let's see, sir. What is here? Notandum, [Reads] A rat had gnawn my spur-leathers; notwithstanding, I put on new, and did go forth: but first I threw three beans over the threshold. Item, I went and bought two tooth-picks, whereof one I burst immediately, in a discourse With a Dutch merchant, 'bout ragion del stato. From him I went and paid a moccinigo For piecing my silk stockings; by the way I cheapen'd sprats; and at St. Mark's I urined. 'Faith these are politic notes! Sir P. Sir, I do slip No action of my life, but thus I quote it. Per. Believe me, it is wise! Sir P. Nay, sir, read forth. There can be, then, no mystery about why Sam Pepys kept just this kind of diary half a century later. It was a discipline of observation and precision for the would-be Machiavellian merchant. To the Elizabethan audience Iago's apologia in the first scene of Othello would have labelled him an obvious goon of the Politick Would-be stamp: O, sir, content you. I follow him to serve my turn upon him. We cannot all be masters, nor all masters Cannot be truly follow'd. You shall mark Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave That, doting on his own obsequious bondage, Wears out his time, much like his master's ass, For naught but provender; and when he's old, cashier'd. Whip me such honest knaves! Others there are, Who, trimm'd in forms and visages of duty, Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves; And, throwing but shows of service on their lords, Do well thrive by them, and, when they have lin'd their coats, Do themselves homage: these fellows have some soul; And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir, It is as sure as you are Roderigo, Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago. In following him, I follow but myself; Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty, But seeming so, for my peculiar end; For when my outward action doth demonstrate The native act and figure of my heart In compliment extern, 'tis not long after But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve For daws to peck at. I am not what I am. ## The print-made split between head and heart is the trauma which affects Europe from Machiavelli till the present. What seemed fantastic in the early phases of print and the isolation of visuality, was that it appeared to create a comic hypocrisy or split between head and heart. It is interesting to see how the same split appeared to an Irishman and an Englishman just two hundred years later, at the end of the eighteenth century. Here is Edmund Burke, the sentimental Gael, commenting on the itemizing, calculating spirit in his Reflections on the Revolution in France: It is now sixteen or seventeen years since I saw the queen of France, then the dauphiness, at Versailles; and surely never lighted on this orb, which she hardly seemed to touch, a more delightful vision. I saw her just above the horizon, decorating and cheering the elevated sphere she just began to move in,—glittering like the morning-star, full of life, and splendour, and joy. Oh! what a revolution! and what a heart must I have to contemplate, without emotion that elevation and that fall! Little did I dream when she added titles of veneration to those of enthusiastic, distant, respectful love, that she should ever be obliged to carry the sharp antidote against disgrace concealed in that bosom; little did I dream that I should have lived to see such disasters fallen upon her in a nation of gallant men, in a nation of men of honour, and of cavaliers. I thought ten thousand swords must have leaped from their scabbards to avenge even a look that threatened her with insult. But the age of chivalry is gone. That of sophisters, economists, and calculators, has succeeded; and the glory of Europe is extinguished for ever. Never, never more shall we behold that generous loyalty to rank and sex, that proud submission, that dignified obedience, that subordination of the heart, which kept alive, even in servitude itself, the spirit of an exalted freedom. The unbought grace of life, the cheap defence of nations, the nurse of manly sentiment and heroic enterprise, is gone! It is gone, that sensibility of principle, that charity of honour, which felt a stain like a wound, which inspired courage whilst it mitigated ferocity, which ennobled whatever it touched, and under which vice itself lost half its evil, by losing all its grossness. And here is William Cobbett, the cool Saxon, in his A Years' Residence in America (1795) recording his amazement at the new kind of man made there by print culture: 356. There are very few really ignorant men in America of native growth. Every farmer is more or less of a reader. There is no brogue, no provincial dialect. No class like that which the French call peasantry, and which degrading appellation the miscreant spawn of the Funds have, of late years, applied to the whole mass of the most useful of the people in England, those who do the work and fight the battles. And, as to the men, who would naturally form your acquaintances, they, I know from experience, are as kind, frank, and sensible men as are, on the general run, to be found in England, even with the power of selection. They are all well-informed; modest without shyness; always free to communicate what they know, and never ashamed to acknowledge that they have yet to learn. You never hear them boast of their possessions, and you never hear them complaining of their wants. They have all been readers from their youth up; and there are few subjects upon which they cannot converse with you, whether of a political or scientific nature. At any rate, they always hear with patience. I do not know what I ever heard a native American interrupt another man while he was speaking. Their sedateness and coolness, the deliberate manner in which they say and do every thing, and the slowness and reserve with which they express their assent; these are very wrongly estimated, when they are taken for marks of a want of feeling. It must be a tale of woe indeed, that will bring a tear from an American's eye; but any trumped up story will send his hand to his pocket, as the ambassadors from the beggars of France, Italy and Germany can fully testify. 357. However, you will not, for a long while, know what to do for want of the quick responses of the English tongue, and the decided tone of the English expression. The loud voice: the hard squeeze by the hand; the instant assent or dissent: the clamorous joy: the bitter wailing: the ardent friendship: the deadly enmity: the love that makes people kill themselves: the hatred that makes them kill others. All these belong to the characters of Englishmen, in whose minds and hearts every feeling exists in the extreme. To decide the question, which character is, upon the whole, best, the American or the English, we must appeal to some third party . . . That most Englishmen still retained the oral, passionate wholeness of character seemed as obvious to Cobbett as to Dickens. And Cobbett does not hesitate to observe that book culture had created the new man in America. The new man has literally taken to heart the message of print, and put on "the napless vesture of humility." He has stripped himself like Lear till he fulfils the ideal of Thomas Huxley, who wrote in 1868 in his essay on “A Liberal Education": "That man, I think, has had a liberal education who has been so trained in his youth that his body is the ready servant of his will, and does with ease and pleasure all the work, that as a mechanism, it is capable of; whose intellect is a clear, cold, logic engine, with all the parts of equal strength, and in smooth working order; ready like a steam engine to be turned to any kind of work. .. ."57 Close on the sentimental heels of this scientific vision came the figure of Sherlock Holmes of whom Doyle said in A Scandal in Bohemia: He was, I take it, the most perfect reasoning and observing machine that the world has seen; but, as a lover, he would have placed himself in a false position. He never spoke of the softer passions save with a gibe and a sneer. . . . Grit in a sensitive instrument, or a crack in one of his own high-power lenses, would not be more disturbing than a strong emotion in a nature such as his.58 It will become even plainer in the present volume why the Gutenberg drive to apply knowledge by translation and uniformity encounters such resistance in the matters of sex and race. The process of “uniformatization" in its social and political bearings is explained by de Tocqueville very clearly in L'Ancien Régime (pp. 83-4, 103,125): I have already pointed out how almost throughout the whole kingdom the special life of the different provinces had long since perished; that had helped very much to make all Frenchmen very like each other. Despite the diversities which still existed, the unity of the nation was already clear; it is disclosed by the uniformity of the legislation. The farther down the eighteenth century we come there is a corresponding increase in the number of royal edicts, royal declarations, decrees of Council, which apply the same rules in the same manner to all parts of the governed, who conceived the idea of a legislation quite general and quite uniform, the same everywhere, the same for all; this idea is revealed in all the successive projects of reform that appeared during the thirty years which preceded the outbreak of the Revolution. Two centuries before, the very material for such a conception would, so to speak, have been wanting. Not only did the provinces resemble each other more and more, but in each province the men of different classes, at least all those who ranked above the common people, became more and more alike, despite the differences of rank. Nothing shows this more clearly than the reading of the instructions' presented by the different orders in 1789. Those who drew them up differed profoundly in their interests, but in everything else they showed themselves alike. What is still more strange is that all these men, who kept themselves so apart from each other, had become so much alike that it would have been impossible to distinguish them if their places had been changed. Nay more, if a man had been able to sound their innermost spirit, he would have discovered that these tiny barriers, which divided people so much alike, appeared to the men themselves as contrary alike to the public interest and to good sense and that in theory they already adored unity. Each of them stuck to his own particular condition simply because every one else was particularized by his condition but they were all ready to be confounded in one mass, provided that no one had any separate position nor rose superior to the common level. Inseparable from the homogenizing of men and manners in the literacy process was the equally pervasive concern with consumer goods: The men of the eighteenth century hardly knew that kind of passion for material comfort, which is, so to speak, the mother of servitude, an enervating but tenacious and unalterable passion, which readily mingles with and twines itself round many private virtues such as love of family, respectability of life, regard for religious beliefs, and even the assiduous if lukewarm practice of the established worship, which is partial to respectability but forbids heroism, which excels in making men steady but citizens meanspirited. The men of the eighteenth century were both better and worse. The French of that date loved joy and adored pleasure; they were perhaps more irregular in their habits and more unbridled in their passions and in their ideas than men of to-day; but they knew nothing of that judicious and well-regulated sensualism that we see around us. The upper classes were more concerned to adorn life than to make it comfortable, to make themselves illustrious rather than rich. Even in the middle classes a man was not entirely devoted to the pursuit of comfort; the pursuit was often abandoned for the desire of higher and more refined pleasures; some other good rather than money was everywhere the objective. 'I know my countrymen,'wrote a contemporary, in a style fantastic but not wanting in pride, 'clever at melting and dissipating the ## The Machiavellian mind and the merchant mind are at one in their simple faith in the power of segmental division to rule all-in the dichotomy of power and morals and of money and morals. As de Chardin explains in his Phenomenon of Man, new invention is the interiorization in man of the structures of earlier technology; and therefore it stockpiles, as it were. What we are studying here is the interiorization of print technology and its effect in shaping a new kind of man. De Chardin speaks of our own day when there are so many new technologies to interiorize: “Firstly, the power of invention, so rapidly intensified at the present time by the rationalised recoil of all the forces of research that it is already possible to speak of a forward leap of evolution."(p. 305) Applied knowledge has no mysteries then. It consists in segmentation of any process or any situation or any human being. The Machiavellian power technique is exactly the one ridiculed by Ben Jonson and Shakespeare in the passages above. One observes a human being to see “what makes him tick." That is, you reduce him to a machine. Then you isolate his ruling passion, the fuel of the machine. Then you have him. Wyndham Lewis has given a fine account of these Machiavellian techniques as they appear in Elizabethan drama in The Lion and the Fox, from which we had seen earlier his description of the Hollywood aspect of Italian princely architecture. It is not only people that are reduced to things by the segmental itemizing methods of the new print culture. Father Ong points out in “Ramist Method and the Commercial Mind"(p. 167): The mass-production methods utilized for bookmaking made it possible and indeed necessary to think of books less as representations of words serving for the communication of thought and more as things. Books came to be regarded more and more as products of crafts and as commodities to be merchandised. The word, living human speech, is here in a sense reified. Even before the advent of typography a marked reification of the word had been begun by the medieval terminist logicians, and elsewhere I have discussed in detail the psychological connections between terminist logic, the topical logic which succeeded it in the humanist age, and the development of attitudes toward communication favoring typography. The terminist logic was indeed still represented at Paris in Ramus' youth or not long before by persons such as Juan de Celaya, John Dullaert, and John Major, and even later by Ramus' own defender Jean Quentin. But the terminist tradition had favored the reification of the word for intellectual purposes. This impulse to reification had come from the academy. When we view typographical developments from the burghers' standpoint, we see another type of drive to reification joining forces with the first. If the logicians wanted to hypostatize expression so as to subject it to formal analysis, the merchants were willing to hypostatize expression in order to sell it. . . . It is not surprising that the Ramist visual methods of itemizing and classifying should sound, as Ong says (p. 167–8) "highly reminiscent of printing processes themselves, so that it enables one to impose organization on a subject by imagining it as made up of parts fixed in space much in the way in which words are locked into a printer's form." This overwhelming example of print as visual, sequential, uniform, and lineal was not lost on human sensibility in the sixteenth century. But before turning to its more dramatic manifestations it is necessary to indicate, as Ong has done, that the obsession with “method" in the Renaissance finds its archetype in “the process of setting up type taken from a font. In each instance, the composition of continuous discourse is a matter of building up discourse by arranging preëxisting parts in a spatial pattern."(p. 168) And it is obvious that Ramus exercised his extraordinary appeal by being close to the new patterns of sensibility that people experienced in their contact with typography. The new "typographic man" who shot into prominence with printing will get full attention a little later on in connection with individualism and nationalism. Here we are concerned to find out the ways in which print structured ideas of applied knowledge by separation and division, moving always towards sharper visualization. In Ong's words (p. 168): "This increased sophistication in visual presentation is not restricted, of course, to Ramist writings, but is part of the evolution of typography, showing clearly how the use of printing moved the word away from its original association with sound and treated it more and more as à 'thing' in space." Ong makes the extremely important point (p. 169) that the Ramist hostility to Aristotle was based on his incompatibility with print culture: In manuscripts, diagrams are much more laborious productions than straight text, for manuscript copying only with great difficulty controls the position of material on the page. Typographical reproduction controls it automatically and inevitably. .. . If Ramus did indeed defend his reputed anti-Aristotelian thesis, Quaecumque ab Aristotele dicta essent commentitia esse, . . . he quite evidently meant this to say not that Aristotle was untruthful (a common interpretation of the reported thesis) but rather that Aristotle's material was poorly organized, not properly controlled by 'method'. In other words, it was unsuited for the Gutenberg era. The accommodation of studies by Ramist diagrams and divisions was the first large move of learning in the direction of the merchant mind. So we shall leave Father Ong after quoting a last passage from page 170 which will help bring us back to Professor Nef: But there was another aspect of Ramist method which gave it appeal to the bourgeois groups among whom it was a favorite. It was very much like account keeping. The merchant not only deals in wares, but he has a way of keeping record of them which levels all sorts of items to the pages of an account book. Here the most diverse products are mingled on an equal footing—wool, wax, incense, coal, iron, and jewels—although they have nothing in common except commercial value. To handle a merchant's wares in terms of his account books, one need not trouble oneself with the nature of the wares. One has to know only the principles of accounting. ## Dantzig explains why the language of number had to be increased to meet the needs created by the new technology of letters. But of course when once the egotistic attitude is introduced into economic relations, these relations have to be objectively regulated. And thus ultimately the principle of economic equivalence of services is introduced and becomes fundamental, while there still remains always some place beside it for the old valuation based upon the efficiency of the help and for the transitory valuation based upon the subjective sacrifice. The exceeding usefulness of The Polish Peasant for understanding the Gutenberg galaxy is that it offers a mosaic study of events in our time that correspond to what happened in the first Gutenberg age. What happened to the Polish peasant confronted with print technology and industrial organization, has happened in lesser degree to the Russian and the Japanese, and is beginning to happen in China. Before concluding Professor Nef's testimony on the development of quantification and applied knowledge in the first phase of Western industrialism, it will be well to notice the role of number and mathematics concurrent with the rise of movable types. Tobias Dantzig, in his Number: The Language of Science, has provided a cultural history of mathematics which led Einstein to declare: "This is beyond doubt the most interesting book on the evolution of mathematics that has ever fallen into my hands." The explanation of the rise of Euclidean sensibility from the phonetic alphabet was given in the early part of this book. Phonetic letters, the language and mythic form of Western culture, have the power of translating or reducing all of our senses into visual and “pictorial" or “enclosed" space. More than anybody else, the mathematician is aware of the arbitrary and fictional character of this continuous, homogeneous visual space. Why? Because number, the language of science, is a fiction for retranslating the Euclidean space fiction back into auditory and tactile space. The example Dantzig uses on page 139 concerns the measurement of the length of an arc: Our notion of the length of an arc of a curve may serve as an illustration. The physical concept rests on that of a bent wire. We imagine that we have straightened the wire without stretching it; then the segment of the straight line will serve as the measure of the length of the arc. Now what do we mean by ‘without stretching'? We mean without a change in length. But this term implies that we already know something about the length of the arc. Such a formulation is obviously a petitio principii and could not serve as a mathematical definition. The alternative is to inscribe in the arc a sequence of rectilinear contours of an increasing number of sides. The sequence of these contours approaches a limit, and the length of the arc is defined as the limit of this sequence. And what is true of the notion of length is true of areas, volumes, masses, movements, pressures, forces, stresses and strains, velocities, accelerations, etc., etc. All these notions were born in a 'linear', rational' world where nothing takes place but what is straight, flat, and uniform. Either, then, we must abandon these elementary rational notions—and this would mean a veritable revolution, so deeply are these concepts rooted in our minds; or we must adapt those rational notions to a world which is neither flat, nor straight, nor uniform. Now Dantzig is quite wrong in supposing that Euclidean space, linear, flat, straight, uniform, is rooted in our minds at all. Such space is a product of literacy and is unknown to pre-literate or archaic man. We have seen earlier that Mircea Eliade has recently devoted a volume to this theme (The Sacred and the Profane), showing how the Western notions of space and time as continuous and homogeneous are quite absent from the lives of archaic man. They are equally absent from Chinese culture. Pre-literate man conceives always of uniquely structured spaces and times in the manner of mathematical physics. The invaluable demonstration of Dantzig is that in order to protect our vested interest in Euclidean space (i.e., literacy) Western man devised the parallel but antithetic mode of number in order to cope with all of the non-Euclidean dimensions of daily experience. He continues (p. 140): But how can the flat and the straight and the uniform be adapted to its very opposite, the skew and the curved and the non-uniform? Not by a finite number of steps, certainly! The miracle can be accomplished only by that miracle-maker the infinite. Having determined to cling to the elementary rational notions, we have no other alternative than to regard the curved' reality of our senses as the ultra-ultimate step in an infinite sequence of flat worlds which exist only in our imagination. The miracle is that it works! ## How the Greeks encountered the confusion of tongues when numbers invaded Euclidean space. Again let us ask why should the phonetic alphabet have created the fiction of flat, straight and uniform space? The phonetic alphabet, unlike the complex pictographics evolved by priestly groups of scribes for temple administration, was a streamlined code for commerce. It was easy for anybody to learn and to use and it was adaptable to any language whatever. Number, that is to say, is itself an audile-tactile code which is meaningless without a highly developed phonetic-literate culture to complement it. Together, letters and number constitute a powerful systole-diastole engine for translating and retranslating the modes of human awareness in a system of "double translation" such as appealed deeply to the early humanists of the Renaissance. Yet today number is as obsolete as the phonetic alphabet as a means of endowing and applying experience and knowledge. We are now as post-number as we are post-literate in the electronic age. There is a mode of calculation that is pre-digital Dantzig points out (p. 14): There exists among the most primitive tribes of Australia and Africa a system of numeration which has neither 5, 10, nor 20 for base. It is a binary system, i.e., of base two. These savages have not yet reached finger counting. They have independent numbers for one and two, and composite numbers up to six. Beyond six everything is denoted by “heap". Dantzig indicates that even digital counting is a kind of abstraction or separation of the tactile from the other senses, whereas the yes-no which precedes it is a more "whole" response. Such, at any rate, are the new binary computers that dispense with number, and make possible the structuralist physics of Heisenberg. For the ancient world, numbers had not been just tactile for measurement as they became in the split visual world of the Renaissance. As de Chardin states it in his Phenomenon of Man (p. 50) : What ancient thought half perceived and imagined as a natural harmony of numbers, modern science has grasped and converted in the precision of formulae dependent on measurement. Indeed, we owe our knowledge of the macro-structure and micro-structure of the universe far more to increasingly accurate measurements than to direct observations. And, again, it is ever bolder measurements that have revealed to us the calculable conditions to which every transformation of matter is subject according to the force it calls into play. Back in the visual space in abstraction from the other senses, the Renaissance and eighteenth-century world “seemed to rest, static and fragmentable on the three axes of its geometry. Now it is a casting from a single mould." It is not here a question of values but rather of the need to understand how the achievements of the Renaissance were associated with the separation of functions and senses. But the discovery of the visual techniques of separation and static arrest in a traditional milieu of audile-tactile culture was of immense fruitfulness. The same techniques used in a world that has been homogenized by these techniques may have much less advantage. De Chardin says (p. 221): Our habit is to divide up our human world into compartments of different sorts of realities': natural and artificial, physical and moral, organic and juridical, for instance. In a space-time, legitimately and perforce extended to include the movements of the mind within us, the frontiers between these pairs of opposites tend to vanish. Is there after all such a great difference from the point of view of the expansion of life between a vertebrate either spreading its limbs like a bat or equipping them with feathers, and an aviator soaring on wings with which he has had the ingenuity to provide himself? It may not be necessary to enlarge here on the role of the infinitesimal calculus as an extension of print technology. More neutral than the alphabet, calculus permits the translation or reduction of any kind of space or motion or energy into a uniform repeatable formula. Dantzig explains in his Number: The Language of Science a great step in numeration and calculation taken by the Phoenicians under commercial pressure: "The ordinal numeration in which numbers are represented by the letters of an alphabet in their spoken succession."(p 24; see also p. 221.) But using letters, Greek and Roman alike never got near a method suited to arithmetical operations: "This is why, from the beginning of history until the advent of our modern positional numeration, so little progress was made in the art of reckoning."(p. 25) That is, until number was given a visual, spatial character and abstracted from its audile-tactile matrix it could not be separated from the magical domain. “A man skilled in the art was regarded as endowed with almost supernatural powers. . . . even the enlightened Greeks never completely freed themselves from this mysticism of number and form."(pp. 25–6) It is easy to see with Dantzig how the first crisis in mathematics arose with the Greek attempt to apply arithmetic to geometry, to translate one kind of space into another before printing had given the means of homogeneity: "This confusion of tongues persists to this day. Around infinity have grown up all the paradoxes of mathematics: from the arguments of Zeno to the antinomies of Kant and Cantor."(p. 65) It is difficult for us in the twentieth century to realize why our predecessors should have had such trouble in recognizing the various languages and assumptions of visual as opposed to audile-tactile spaces. It was precisely the habit of being with one kind of space that made all other spaces seem so opaque and intractable. From the eleventh to the fifteenth centuries the Abacists fought the Algorists. That is, the literate fought the numbers people. In some places the Arabic numerals were banned. In Italy some merchants of the thirteenth century used them as a secret code. Under manuscript culture the outward appearance of the numerals underwent many changes and, says Dantzig (p. 34): "In fact, the numerals did not assume a stable form until the introduction of printing. It can be added parenthetically that so great was the stabilizing influence of printing that the numerals of today have essentially the same appearance as those of the fifteenth century." ## The great sixteenth century divorce between art and science came with accelerated calculators. Print assured the victory of numbers or visual position early in the sixteenth century. By the later'sixteenth century the art of statistics was already growing. Dantzig writes (p. 16) : The late sixteenth century was the time when in Spain figures were printed giving the population of provinces and the population of towns. It was the time when the Italians also began to take a serious interest in population statistics—in the making of censuses. It was the period when in France a controversy was carried on between Bodin and a certain Monsieur de Malestroict concerning the relations of the quantity of money in circulation to the level of prices. There was soon great concern with ways and means of speeding up arithmetical calculations: It is hard for us to realize how laborious and slow were the means at the disposal of medieval Europeans for dealing with calculations which seem to us of the simplest character'. The introduction of Arabic numbers into Europe provided more easily manipulated counters than the Roman numbers, and the use of Arabic numbers seems to have spread rapidly towards the end of the sixteenth century, at least on the Continent. Between about 1590 and 1617 John Napier invented his curious 'bones' for calculating. He followed this invention with his more celebrated discovery of logarithms. This was widely adopted all over Europe almost at once, and in consequence arithmetical calculations were immensely accelerated. (p. 17) There then occurred an event that dramatizes the separation of letters and numbers in a most striking way. In Cultural Foundations of Industrial Civilization (pp. 17–18), Nef cites the studies of Lucien Febvre concerning the sudden reversal in calculation, so that "the ancient habit of adding and subtracting from left to right, which still prevailed according to Lucien Lefebvre, until the end of the sixteenth century, began to be superseded by the much quicker way of making them from right to left." That is to say that the separation of letters and numbers which had taken so long to achieve was finally accomplished by dropping the reading habit of left to right in the use of numbers. Nef spends time (p. 19) trying to resolve the problem of integrating faith, art, and science. Religion and art are automatically excluded from a quantified, uniform, and homogenous system of thought: “One of the major distinctions that has to be made between the work of the two periods relates to the place occupied by faith and art in scientific inquiry. It was hardly until the later period that they began to lose their importance as the basis for scientific reasoning." Today when science also has turned from the segmental to the configurational, or structural mode of observation, it is hard to discover the grounds of difficulty and confusion that invested these matters from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries. It was notably Claude Bernard's approach to experimental medicine in the later nineteenth century that reconquered the heterogeneous dimensions of the milieu intérieur at exactly the same time that Rimbaud and Baudelaire shifted poetry to the paysage intérieur. But for three centuries before this the arts and sciences were engaged in the conquest of the milieu extérieur by means of new visual quantity and homogeneity derived especially from the printed word. And it was print that enabled letters and numbers to go their specialist and divergent ways to the confusion of arts and sciences ever since. But at the start, writes Professor Nef in his Cultural Foundations of Industrial Civilization (p. 21). The novel desire, which was then arising, to see nature, including animal and human bodies, as they appear directly to man's senses, was of much help to science. The researches of a few great Renaissance artists, who were almost universal men in the range of their interests and artistic achievements, helped men to see bodies, plants and landscapes afresh in their material reality. But the ways in which the artist and the modern scientist employ sense impressions to create their independent worlds are fundamentally different, and the phenomenal development of science depended partly on a separation of science from art. This is only to say that what began as a separation of the senses in science became the ground of all artistic opposition. The artist struggled to retain and to regain the integral, the interplay of sense in a world that was seeking madness by the simple road of isolation of the senses. As was indicated in the first pages of this book, the theme of King Lear is precisely what Nef is describing as the origins of modern science. "Strike flat the thick rotundity of the world," cries Lear as a curse to snap “the most precious square of sense." And the striking flat, the isolation of the visual is the great achievement of Gutenberg and the Mercator projection. And Dantzig (p. 125) notes: "Thus the alleged properties of the straight line are of the geometer's own making. He deliberately disregards thickness and breadth, deliberately assumes that the thing common to two such lines, their point of intersection, is deprived of all dimension . . . but the assumptions themselves are arbitrary, a convenient fiction at best." It is easy for Dantzig to see how fictional classical geometry was. It got huge nourishment from printing after being engendered by the alphabet. And the non-Euclidean geometries familiar to our time also depend on electric technology for their nutriment and plausibility, and this is no more seen by mathematicians now than the relations to alphabet and print were seen by mathematicians in the past. It has been assumed till now that so long as everybody is hypnotized by the same isolated sense or spell, that the resulting homogeneity of mental states will suffice for human association. That print increasingly hypnotized the Western world is nowadays the theme of all historians of art and science alike, because we no longer live under the spell of the isolated visual sense. We have not yet begun to ask under what new spell we exist. In place of spell it may be more acceptable to say "assumptions" or “parameters" or “frame of reference." No matter what the metaphor, is it not absurd for men to live involuntarily altered in their inmost lives by some mere technological extension of our inner senses? The shift in our sense ratios brought about by exteriorizations of our senses is not a situation before which we need be helpless. Computers can now be programmed for every possible variety of sense ratio. We can then read off exactly what would be the resulting cultural assumptions in the arts and sciences, of such a new specific ratio as was produced by TV, for example. ## Francis Bacon, PR voice for the moderni, had both his feet in the Middle Ages. Throughout Finnegans Wake Joyce specifies the Tower of Babel as the tower of Sleep, that is, the tower of the witless assumption, or what Bacon calls the reign of the Idols. The figure of Francis Bacon has always seemed full of contradictions. As the PR man for modern science, he has been found to have both feet firmly planted in the Middle Ages. His prodigious Renaissance reputation baffles those who can find nothing scientific in his method. Much more highbrow than the furious pedagogue Petrus Ramus, he yet shares with Ramus an extreme visual bias which links him with his relative Roger Bacon in the twelfth century and with Newton in the eighteenth. Everything said so far in this book applies as an introduction to Francis Bacon. And without the work of Ong, Dantzig, and Nef already introduced, it would not be easy to make sense of Bacon. Simply on his own terms, however, he does make sense. He hangs together once you grant his assumption that Nature is a Book whose pages have been smudged by the Fall of Man. But because he belongs to the history of modern science nobody has been disposed to grant him his medieval assumptions. Ong and Nef and Dantzig will have helped to clear this point. The drive towards science was, from the ancient world to the time of Bacon, a drive to extricate the visual from the other senses. But this stress was inseparable from the cultivation of manuscript and print culture. Thus the medievalism of Bacon would not have been amiss in his time. As Febvre and Martin explain in L'Apparition du livre, the first two centuries of print culture were almost wholly medieval in content. More than ninety per cent of all books printed were of medieval origin. And Professor Nef insists in Cultural Foundations of Modern Industrialism (p. 33) that it was medieval universalism or faith in the adequacy of intellect to the understanding of all created beings that “gave men the courage to read anew the book of nature, which almost every European assumed had been made by God whom Christ revealed. . . Leonardo da Vinci and Copernicus and Vesalius were reading that book anew, but they were not the discoverers of the vital new methods of reading it. They belong to what was in the main a transition period from the older science to the new sciences. Their methods of examining natural phenomena were derived mainly from the past." Thus the grandeur of Aquinas is in his explanation of how the modalities of Being are proportional to the modalities of our intellection. Observation and experiment were not new. What was new was insistence on tangible, repeatable, visible proof. Nef writes (p. 27): "Such insistence on tangible proofs hardly goes back beyond the times of William Gilbert of Colchester, who was born in 1544. In his De magnete, published in 1600, Gilbert wrote that there was no description or explanation in the book that he had not verified several times ‘with his own eyes'." But before printing had had a century and more to build up the assumptions of uniformity, continuity, and repeatability, such an impulse as Gilbert felt or such a proof as he offers would have attracted little interest. Bacon himself was aware of the discontinuity between his age and previous history as consisting in the rise of mechanism. He writes in Novum Organum (aphorism 129): It is well to observe the force and effect and consequences of discoveries. These are to be seen nowhere more conspicuously than in those three which were unknown to the ancients, and of which the origin, though recent, is obscure; namely, printing, gunpowder, and the magnet. For these three have changed the whole face and state of things throughout the world; the first in literature, the second in warfare, the third in navigation; whence have followed innumerable changes; insomuch that no empire, no sect, no star seems to have exerted greater power and influence in human affairs than these mechanical inventions. "With Bacon we enter a new mental climate," writes Benjamin Farrington in Francis Bacon: Philosopher of Industrial Science (p. 141). "When we analyze it we find that it consists not so much in a scientific advance as in the well-founded confidence that the life of man can be transformed by science." Farrington is saying that had things turned out less well for man and science he would have had to regard Bacon's confidence as so much hot air and blather. A person with some acquaintance with Bacon's medieval roots can make a better case for his intellectual plausibility. The very phrase "experimental science" was invented and used in the thirteenth century by Roger Bacon of the same family as Francis. Roger makes the full distinction between deductive reasoning, insisting upon particularity of evidence in his discussion of the rainbow.59 Bacon was more impressed by the meaning of print as applied knowledge than anybody else except Rabelais. The entire Middle Ages had regarded Nature as a Book to be scanned for the vestigia dei. Bacon took the lesson of print to be that we could now literally get Nature out in a new and improved edition. An encyclopedia is envisaged. It is his complete acceptance of the idea of the Book of Nature that makes Bacon so very medieval and so very modern. But the gap is this. The medieval Book of Nature was for contemplatio like the Bible. The Renaissance Book of Nature was for applicatio and use like movable types. A closer look at Francis Bacon will resolve this problem and elucidate the transition from the medieval to the modern world. Another view of the book as bridge between the medieval and the modern is given by Erasmus. His new Latin version of the New Testament in 1516 was entitled Novum Organum in 1620. Erasmus directed the new print technology to the traditional uses of grammatica and rhetoric and to tidying up the sacred page. Bacon used the new technology for an attempt to tidy up the text of Nature. In the different spirit of these works one can gauge the efficacy of print in preparing the mind for applied knowledge. But such change is not as rapid or as thorough as many suppose. Again and again Samuel Eliot Morison in his Admiral of the Ocean Sea is baffled by the inability of Columbus' sailors to fend for themselves in the circumstances of the New World: "Columbus embraced him, as well he might; for there was not a crust left to eat aboard the grounded caravels, and the Spaniards were starving. I cannot understand why they were unable to catch fish . . ."(p. 643) After all, the point of Robinson Crusoe is the very novelty of man as adaptable and resourceful, able to translate one kind of experience into new patterns. Defoe's work is the epic of applied knowledge. In the first age of print people had not yet acquired this ability. ## A strange wedding of the medieval Book of Nature and the new book from movable types was conducted by Francis Bacon. In order to clarify Bacon's strange ideas about science and the text of the Book of Nature a brief look at this idea in the Middle Ages is necessary. Ernst Robert Curtius has taken up the subject of “The Book as Symbol" in chapter xvI of European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages. Greece and Rome had made little use of book symbol or metaphor, and it "was through Christianity that the book received its highest consecration. Christianity was a religion or the Holy Book. Christ is the only god whom antique art represents with a book-scroll. . . . The Old Testament itself contained a large stock of metaphors from the book."(p. 130) It is naturally with the coming of paper in the twelfth century and the ensuing increase of books that there is also an efflorescence of book metaphors. Curtius dips here and there among the poets and theologians and begins his section on the Book of Nature (pp. 319–20): It is a favorite cliché of the popular view of history that the Renaissance shook off the dust of yellowed parchments and began instead to read in the book of nature or the world. But this metaphor itself derives from the Latin Middle Ages. We saw that Alan speaks of the "book of experience.".. Omnis mundi creatura / Quasi liber et pictura / Nobis est et speculum. In later authors, especially the homilists, "scientia creaturarum" and "liber naturae" appear as synonyms. For the preacher the book of nature must figure with the Bible as a source of material. However, it is in Dante himself, according to Curtius (p. 326), that “the entire book imagery of Middle Ages is brought together, intensified, broadened . . . from the first paragraph of the Vita Nuova to the last canto of the Divina Commedia. In fact, the very concept of summa inherent in all medieval organization of knowledge is the same as that of textbook: "Now to reading conceived as the form of reception and study, corresponds writing as tho form of production and creation. The two concepts belong together. In the intellectual world of the Middle Ages they represent, as it were, the two halves of a sphere. The unity of this world was shattered by the invention of printing."(p. 328) And as the work of Hajnal showed earlier, the oral training involved in writing and reading constituted much more of a cultural unity for the book than Curtius suspects. Printing, Curtius sees, split apart the roles of producer and consumer. But it also created the means and the motive for applied knowledge. The means creates the want. It was this homiletic use of the book of nature, the mirror of St. Paul in which we now see in aenigmatate, that enthroned Pliny as a resource of grammatical exegesis from St. Augustine forward. Summing up, Curtius finds (p. 321) "that the concept of the world or nature as a "book" originated in pulpit eloquence, was then adopted by medieval mystico-philosophical speculation, and finally passed into common usage." Curtius then turns (p. 322) to Renaissance writers like Montaigne, Descartes, Thomas Browne, who took over the book metaphor, and Bacon: "The theological concept is preserved by Francis Bacon: "Num salvator noster inquit: Erratis nescientes Scripturas et potentiam Dei (Matt. 22, 29), ubi duos libros, ne inerrores, proponit nobis evolvendos. (De Augmentis Scientiarum, Bk. I.)" Since, however, our present goal is merely to relate Bacon's notion of science to the medieval tradition of the two Scriptures of Revelation and Nature, it is possible to limit discussion to The Advancement of Learning readily accessible in the Everyman edition. Here, too, Bacon makes use of the same text from Matthew (pp. 41-2) : . . . for as the Psalms and other Scriptures do often invite us to consider and magnify the great and wonderful works of God, so if we should rest only in the contemplation of the exterior of them, as they first offer themselves to our senses, we should do a like injury unto the Majesty of God, as if we should judge or construe of the store of some excellent jeweller, by that only which is set out toward the street in his shop. The other, because they minister a singular help and preservative against unbelief and error: for our Saviour saith, You err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God; laying before us two books or volumes to study, if we will be secured from error; first, the Scriptures, revealing the Will of God; and then the creatures expressing His Power; whereof the latter is a key unto the former: not only opening our understanding to conceive the true sense of the Scriptures, by the general notions of reason and rules of speech; but chiefly opening our belief, in drawing us into a due meditation of the omnipotency of God, which is chiefly signed and engraven upon His works. Thus much therefore for divine testimony and evidence concerning the true dignity and value of Learning. The next passage gives Bacon's ever-recurrent theme that all of the arts are forms of applied knowledge for the sake of diminishing the effects of the Fall: Concerning speech and words, the consideration of them hath produced the science of grammar: for man still striveth to reintegrate himself in those benedictions, from which by his fault he hath been deprived; and as he hath striven against the first general curse by the invention of all other arts, so hath he sought to come forth of the second general curse, which was the confusion of tongues, by the art of grammar; whereof the use in a mother tongue is small, in a foreign tongue more; but most in such foreign tongues as have ceased to be vulgar tongues, and are turned only to learned tongues. (p. 138) It is the Fall of Man which engenders the arts of applied knowledge for the relief of man's fallen estate: So in the age before the flood, the holy records within those few memorials which are there entered and registered have vouchsafed to mention and honour the name of the inventors and authors of music and works in metal. In the age after the flood, the first great judgment of God upon the ambition of man was the confusion of tongues; whereby the open trade and intercourse of learning and knowledge was chiefly imbarred. (p. 38) Bacon has the utmost regard for the kind of work done by unfallen man (p.37): After the creation was finished, it is set down unto us that man was placed in the garden to work therein; which work, so appointed to him, could be no other than work of Contemplation; that is, when the end of work is but for exercise and experiment, not for necessity; for there being then no reluctation of the creature, nor sweat of the brow, man's employment must of consequence have been matter of delight in the experiment, and not matter of labour for the use. Again, the first acts which man performed in Paradise consisted of the two summary parts of knowledge; the view of creatures, and the imposition of names. As for the knowledge which induced the fall, it was, as was touched before, not the natural knowledge of creatures, but the moral knowledge of good and evil, but that they had other beginnings, which man aspired to know; to the end to make a total defection from God and to depend wholly upon himself. ## Bacon's Adam is a medieval mystic and Milton's a trade union organizer. Before the Fall the purpose of work was just for experience or “experiment,""not for necessity,""nor matter of labour for the use." Strangely, although Bacon is quite explicit and repetitive in his derivation of the program of applied knowledge from the Scriptures, his commentators have avoided this issue. Bacon pushes Revelation into every part of his program stressing, not only the parallelism between the book of Nature and of Revelation, but also between the methods used in both. Bacon's Adam would seem to correspond to Shakespeare's poet, using his unblemished intuition to pierce all mysteries and to name them like a nominalist magician: The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling, Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven; And as imagination bodies forth The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing A local habitation and a name.60 By comparison, Milton's unfallen Adam is a harassed agricultural labourer: Then commune how that day they best may ply Their growing work—for much their work outgrew The hands' dispatch of two gardening so wide:61 Milton must have some ironic intent. Bacon's conception of applied knowledge concerns the means of restoring the text of the Book of Nature which has been defaced by the Fall, even as our faculties have been impaired. Just as Bacon strives to mend the text of Nature by his Histories, so he sought to repair our faculties by his Essays or Counsels, Civil and Moral, or public and private. The broken mirror or glass of our minds no longer lets "light through" but enchants us with broken lights, besetting us with Idols. Just as Bacon draws on traditional inductive grammatica for his exegesis of the two books of Nature and Revelation, so he relies heavily on the Ciceronian conception of eloquence as applied knowledge, explicitly uniting Cicero and Solomon in this regard. In the Novum Organum (pp. 181–2) he writes: Neither needeth it at all to be doubted, that this knowledge should be so variable as it falleth not under precept; for it is much less infinite than science of government, which, we see, is laboured and in some part reduced. Of this wisdom, it seemeth some of the ancient Romans in the saddest and wisest times were professors; for Cicero reporteth that it was then in use for senators that had name and opinion for general wise men, as Coruncanius, Curius, Laelius, and many others, to walk at certain hours in the Place, and to give audience to those that would use their advice; and that the particular citizens would resort unto them, and consult with them of the marriage of a daughter, or of the employing of a son, or of a purchase or bargain, or of an accusation, and every other occasion incident to man's life. So as there is a wisdom of counsel and advice even in private causes, arising out of a universal insight into the affairs of the world; which is used indeed upon particular causes propounded, but is gathered by general observation of cases of like nature. For so we see in the book which Q. Cicero writeth to his brother, De petitione consulatus, (being the only book of business that I know written by the ancients,) although it concerned a particular action 60Midsummer Night's Dream, V, i. set on foot, yet the substance thereof consisteth of many wise and politic axioms, which contain not a temporary, but a perpetual direction in the case of popular elections. But chiefly we may see in those aphorisms which have place among divine writings, composed by Salomon the king, (of whom the Scriptures testify that his heart was as the sands of the sea, encompassing the world and all worldly matters, we see, I say, not a few profound and excellent cautions, precepts, positions, extending to much variety of occasions; whereupon we will stay awhile, offering to consideration some number of examples. Bacon has much to say of Solomon as the forerunner of himself. In fact, he derives (pp. 39-40) his pedagogical theory of aphorism from Solomon: So like wise in the person of Salomon the King, we see the gift or endowment of wisdom and learning, both in Salomon's petition and in God's assent thereunto, preferred before all other terrene and temporal felicity. By virtue of which grant or donative of God Salomon became enabled not only to write those excellent Parables or Aphorisms concerning divine and moral philosophy; but also to compile a Natural History of all verdure, from the cedar upon the mountain to the moss upon the wall (which is but a rudiment between putrefaction and a herb), and also of all things that breathe or move. Nay, the same Salomon the King, although he excelled in the glory of treasure and magnificent buildings, of shipping and navigation, of service and attendance, of fame and renown, and the like, yet he maketh no claim to any of those glories, but only to the glory of inquisition of truth; for so he saith expressly, The glory of God is to conceal a thing, but the glory of the king is to find it out; as if, according to the innocent play of children, the Divine Majesty took delight to hide His works, to the end to have them found out; and as if kings could not obtain a greater honour than to be God's playfellows in that game; considering the great commandment of wits and means, whereby nothing needeth to be hidden from them. Bacon's allusion to scientific discovery as a children's game brings us close to another of his basic notions, that as man lost his Eden through pride he must regain it by humility: So much concerning the several classes of Idols, and their equipage: all of which must be renounced and put away with a fixed and solemn determination, and the understanding thoroughly freed and cleansed; the entrance into the kingdom of man, founded on the sciences, being not much other than the entrance into the kingdom of heaven, where into none may enter except as a little child.62 Earlier in the Essays (pp. 289–90), Bacon insisted in the same way that "the course I propose for the discovery of sciences is such as leaves but little to the acuteness and strength of wits, but places all wits and understandings nearly on a level." Print had inspired Bacon not only with the idea of applied knowledge by means of the homogeneity of segmental procedure, but it gave him the assurance that men would be levelled in their capacities and performance as well. Some strange speculations have resulted from this doctrine, but few would care to dispute the power of print to level and to extend the learning process as much as cannon or ordnance did level castles and feudal privilege. Bacon, then, argues that the text of Nature can be restored by great encyclopedic fact-finding sweeps. Man's wits can be reconstructed so that they can once again mirror the perfected Book of Nature. His mind is now an enchanted glass, but the hex can be removed. It is quite clear, then, that Bacon would have no respect for scholasticism any more than for the dialectics of Plato and Aristotle “because it is the duty of Art to perfect and exalt Nature; but they contrariwise have wronged, abused, and traduced Nature."63 ## How far did the mass-produced page of print become a substitute for auricular confession? Early in The Advancement of Learning (p. 23), Bacon has a compact history of Renaissance prose that illuminates the role of printing indirectly: Martin Luther, conducted no doubt by a higher providence, but in discourse of reason finding what a providence he had undertaken against the bishop of Rome and the degenerate traditions of the church, and finding his own solitude, being no ways aided by the opinion of his own time, was enforced to awake all antiquity, and to call former times to his succours to make a party against the present time. So that the ancient authors, both in divinity and in humanity, which had long time slept in libraries, began generally to be read and revolved. Thus by consequence did draw on a necessity of a more exquisite travail in the languages original, wherein those authors did write, for the better understanding of those authors, and the better advantage of pressing and applying their words. And thereof grew again a delight in their manner of style and phrase, and an admiration of that kind of writing; which was much furthered and precipitated by the enmity and opposition that the propounders of those primitive but seeming new opinions had against the schoolmen; who were generally of the contrary part, and whose writings were altogether in a different style and form; taking liberty to coin and frame new terms of art to express their own sense, and to avoid circuit of speech, without regard to the pureness, pleasantness, and, as I may call it, lawfulness of the phrase or word. 63Advancement of Learning, p. 125. Bacon says here that the entire humanist effort in languages and historical revival was incidental to religious differences. The printing presses made available authors of remote times. People began to imitate their styles. The schoolmen had such a technical terse way that they fell quite out of fashion, being utterly unable to develop any popularity with the new reading public. The growing public could only be won by flowery rhetoric and, Bacon goes on to say (p. 24) : for the winning and persuading of them, there grew of necessity in chief price and request eloquence and variety of discourse, as the fittest and forciblest access into the capacity of the vulgar sort: so that these four causes concurring, the admiration of ancient authors, the hate of the schoolmen, the exact study of languages, and the efficacy of preaching, did bring in an affectionate study of eloquence and copie of speech, which then began to flourish. This grew speedily to an excess; for men began to hunt more after words than matter; more after the choiceness of the phrase, and the round and clean composition of the sentence, and the sweet falling of the clauses, and the varying and illustration of their works with tropes and figures, than after the weight of matter, worth of subject, soundness of argument, life of invention or depth of judgment. Then grew the flowing and watery vein of Osorius the Portugal bishop, to be in price. Then did Sturmius spend such infinite and curious pains upon Cicero the Orator, and Hermogenes the Rhetorician, besides his own books of Periods and Imitation, and the like. Then did Car of Cambridge, and Ascham with their lectures and writings almost deify Cicero and Demosthenes, and allure all young men that were studious, unto that delicate and polished kind of learning. Then did Erasmus take occasion to make the scoffing Echo: decem annos consumpsi in legendo Cicerone; and the Echo answered in Greek, θve Asine. Then grew the learning of the schoolmen to be utterly despised as barbarous. In sum, the whole inclination and bent of those times was rather towards copie than weight. There in a page or so Bacon renders a detailed image of the literary struggles and fashions of his day. Like his idea of scientific methods, his idea of the literary scene is rooted in religion. His outline of a history of English prose has yet to be examined seriously by literary historians. When, for example, Bacon says: "Then grew the learning of the Schoolmen to be utterly despised as barabarous" he does not say that he himself despises it. He has no respect for the ornate and affected eloquence that was currently trumped up. After this outline of some of the features of applied knowledge in Bacon's medievalism, it is time to consider some of the applications of print technology to individual and national life. And here it is necessary to consider writers and the vernaculars as shaped by the new extension of the visual image by means of the press. Some writers have recently suggested that we can almost regard the whole of creative writing since the Renaissance as an externalization of the medieval confessional. In his Anatomy of Criticism (p. 307) Northrop Frye points to the strong autobiographic strain in prose fiction, "following St. Augustine who appears to have invented it, and Rousseau who established a modern type of it. The earlier tradition gave Religio Medici, Grace Abounding, and Newman's Apologia to English literature, besides the related but subtly different type of confession favored by the mystics." In particular the sonnet as a new form of public confessional fostered by print, is worth study as it relates to new verse forms. Wordsworth's familiar sonnet on the sonnet strikes some main notes of The Gutenberg Galaxy: Scorn not the Sonnet; Critic, you have frowned, Mindless of its just honours; with this key Shakespeare unlocked his heart; the melody Of this small lute gave ease to Petrarch's wound; A thousand times this pipe did Tasso sound; With it Camöens soothed an exile's grief; The Sonnet glittered a gay myrtle leaf Amid the cypress with which Dante crowned His visionary brow: a glow-worm lamp, It cheered mild Spenser, called from Faery-land To struggle through dark ways; and, when a damp Fell round the path of Milton, in his hand The Thing became a trumpet; whence he blew Soul-animating strains—alas, too few! Many a trumpet solo was delivered by the press medium which would else never have been composed. The mere existence of the press created the need and possibility of new expression at the same time: Loving in truth, and fain in verse my love to show, That she, dear she, might take some pleasure of my pain,— Pleasure might cause her read, reading might make her know, Knowledge might pity win, and pity grace obtain, I sought fit words to paint the blackest face of woe; Studying inventions fine, her wits to entertain, Oft turning others' leaves to see if thence would flow Some fresh and fruitful showers upon my sunburn'd brain. But words came halting forth, wanting Invention's stay; Invention, Nature's child, fled step-dame Study's blows, And others' feet still seem'd but strangers in my way. Thus, great with child to speak, and helpless in my throes, Biting my truant pen, beating myself for spite; "Fool," said my Muse to me, "look in thy heart, and write."64