# Aretino, like Rabelais and Cervantes, proclaimed the meaning of Typography as Gargantuan, Fantastic, Supra-human. The outering or uttering of mind under manuscript conditions, was, as we have seen, very restricted. The poet or author was far from being able to use the vernacular as a public address system. With print the discovery of the vernacular as a PA system was immediate. The figure of Pietro Aretino (1492-1556) will serve to illuminate this sudden development. He also illustrates the sudden reversal of the private self-accusation, of the confessional, into public denunciation of others. Aretino was known in his time as "the scourge of Princes": He was monster, it is true: to deny that is to belittle him; but above all he was a man of his day, perhaps the most free and complete expression of the age in which he lived—the sixteenth century. That, and his enormous ability, together with the fact that he founded the modern press and used the hitherto unsuspected weapon of publicity with an incomparable appreciation of its power, are his chief claims upon our notice.65 Born two years after Rabelais, he was, like Rabelais, just in time to seize the new instrument of the press. He became a one-man newspaper, a singlehanded Northcliffe. He is, in a sense, in his “yellow" proclivities, the forerunner of Mr. Hearst, Lord Northcliffe and others, while he is also the father of the awful tribe of modern press agents, who, when they wish to put on airs, become “publicists". It is his boast that throughout the world, “Fame is sold by me." He had to have publicity; it was his living; and he certainly knew how to set about to get it. . . . Here, then, we have a man who may be called, in point of chronology, the first literary realist, the first journalist, the first publicist, the first art critic.66 Like his exact contemporary Rabelais, Aretino sensed the gigantism that is latent in the uniformity and repeatability of the printed word. Aretino, from lowly origins and without education, used the press as it has been used ever since. Putnam writes (p. 37): If Aretino, at this time, was probably the most powerful man in Italy, perhaps in the world, the reason is to be found in the new force which he had discovered, that force which we today would call "the power of the press". Aretino himself regarded it as the power of his pen. He himself did not realize the right Promethean fire with which he was playing. All he knew was that he had a tremendous instrument in his hands, and he employed it quite as unscrupulously as it, consistently, has been employed since his time. He was capable—see his Letters—of being quite as hypocritical as the press of today. Putnam goes on (p. 41) to mention that Aretino was “perhaps the greatest blackmailer in all history, the first truly modern exponent of the poison pen.'" That is to say, Aretino really regarded the printing press as a public confessional with himself as Father Confessor, pen or microphone in hand. Hutton cites Aretino on page xiv of his study: “Let others worry themselves about style and so cease to be themselves. Without a master, without a model without a guide, without artifice I go to work and earn my living, my wellbeing and my fame. What do I need more? With a goose-quill and a few sheets of paper I mock myself of the universe." We shall return to his "without a model, without a guide," for it was literally true. The press was an instrument without precedent. It had no writers and no reading public of its own, and had for a long time to make do with the kind of writer and public created by manuscript conditions. As Febvre and Martin explain in L'Apparition du livre, the press had to rely on medieval manuscripts almost entirely for the first two centuries. As for the role of author, it did not exist, so the writer tried on various masks of preacher and clown for the first two centuries, discovering the role of “man of letters" only in the eighteenth century: Jaques. . . . I must have liberty Withal, as large a charter as the wind, To blow on whom I please; for so fools have. And they that are most galled with my folly, They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so? The why is plain as way to parish church: He that a fool doth very wisely hit Doth very foolishly, although he smart, Not to seem senseless of the bob. If not, The wise man's folly is anatomiz'd Even by the squand’ring glances of the fool. Invest me in my motley. Give me leave To speak my mind, and I will through and through Cleanse the foul body of th' infected world, If they will patiently receive my medicine.67 Though engaged in this cathartic enterprise, Shakespeare felt the absence of role bitterly. In his Sonnet Cx, we read: 67As You Like It, II, vii. Alas, 'tis true I have gone here and there And made myself a motley to the view, Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear, . . . He was little attracted into the print mode and made no effort to publish, since the circulation of his work in print form would have conferred no dignity on him. It was quite otherwise for the writer in divinity. When Ben Jonson published his plays as the Works of Ben Jonson in 1616, there was much derisive comment. It is interesting that Shakespeare should comment on the confessional aspect of authorship, "sold cheap what is most dear," for whether as actor or playwright his going “"here and there" would have seemed the same to him. And it is this confessional pouring forth of private news and views that seemed to Aretino and his contemporaries to warrant the association of the press with pornography and filth. This is the view that dominates Pope's Dunciad in the early eighteenth century. But for Aretino the switching of private confession into public accusation was a perfectly natural response to the print technology. Indeed, remarks Raimondi, Aretino “is a prostitute". He has the prostitute's instinct of social rebellion. "He throws mud not merely in the face of his contemporaries, but of a whole past. It would seem that he lifts up the world and places it against the light of the sun. .. . All is obscene and libidinous, everything is for sale, everything is false, nothing is sacred. He himself makes merchandise of sacred things to gain money and writes romantic lives of the saints. And then? Like Nanna, like Pippa, he finds it convenient to stand above men and hold them with the reins of their own vices. . .. The discipline which Nanna gives to Pippa is the dicipline which guided the life of Aretino."68 ## Marlowe anticipated Whitman's barbaric yawp by setting up a national PA system of blank verse-a rising iambic system of sound to suit the new success story. form of mass-production, seemed to be a visible extension of all the latent venalities of mankind. This then is not the least of the effects of playing up the visual component in human experience. The technique of translation that is applied knowledge is impartially advanced to include the hidden crimes and motives of mankind in a new form of self-expression. Because print is visually a greatly intensified form of the written word, it is insatiable for intense or sensational materials to broadcast. This fact is no more basic for the understanding of current newspapers than for an appreciation of what was happening to language and expression in the sixteenth century: It is because Aretino is a man of genius, and because he sums up and expresses that disastrous age of anarchy, its complete moral disorder and collapse, its delight in insulting and disregarding the past, its repudiation of every ancient authority and tradition, that he is worth studying. And if we add to this that he contrived a weapon for his own ends which has in our own day come to be more powerful than any established government or elected parliament or hereditary monarchy—publicity, the Press—there is more than sufficient excuse for this book.69 Print as a public address system that gave huge power of amplification to the individual voice, soon made itself a new form of expression, namely the Elizabethan popular drama. The opening lines of the very popular Tamburlaine the Great by Christopher Marlowe provides all our new themes: From jigging veins of rhyming mother-wits, And such conceits as clownage keeps in pay, We'll lead you to the stately tent of war, Where you shall hear the Scythian Tamburlaine Threatening the world with high astounding terms, View but his picture in this tragic glass. And then applaud his fortunes as you please. The first speaker, Mycetas, follows this with equally indicative words: Brother Cosroe, I find myself aggriev'd; Yet insufficient to express the same, For it requires a great and thundering speech: What is especially significant is the discovery of blank verse as a broadcasting megaphone and the consciousness that jigging rhymes cannot provide the sweep and volume of public utterance that is resonating in the new age. Blank verse to the Elizabethan was as exciting a novelty as the “close up" in a Griffith's movie, and the two are much alike in the intensity of amplification and exaggeration of feeling. Even Whitman, impelled by the new visual intensities of the newspaper of his time, did not devise a louder vehicle for 69Pietro Aretino, p. xiv. his barbaric yawp than blank verse. Nobody has been willing to offer a theory of the origin of English blank verse. It has no antecedents or exemplars except, perhaps, in the long melodic line of medieval music. I do not think Kenneth Sisam's idea of Old English meter has any bearing on blank verse. He writes in Fourteenth Century Verse and Prose (p. xiii): "Old English had a single metre—the long alliterative line without rime. It was best suited to narrative; it was unmusical in the sense that it could not be sung; it had marked proclivities toward rant and noise." But the paradox is that the blank verse, being one of the first kinds of "spoken," as opposed to sung, poetry is very much faster than song, or perhaps even than speech itself. It is very safe, however, to commence with the consideration that blank verse, unlike rhymed poetry, answered the new need of the vernacular to have recognition and implementation as a public address system. Aretino had been the first to seize the vernacular as the mass medium which print had made it. His biographers note his extraordinary resemblance to the most vulgar press lords and emperors of our own century. Reviewing a biography Citizen Hearst by W. A. Swanberg, the New York Times headlined the review (September 10, 1961): "The Man Who Made Headlines Scream." Blank verse was a means to make English roar and resonate in a way suited to the new extension and consolidation of the vernacular by typography. In our own century as the vernacular has met the non-verbal competition of photo, film, and television, a reverse effect has occurred. It was strikingly noted by Simone de Beauvoir in The Mandarins: "What a derisory triumph, to be a great writer of Guatemala or Hunduras! Yesterday he had thought himself the inhabitant of a privileged part of the world, from which every sound reverberated through the entire globe; but now he knew that his words died at his feet." What an extraordinary insight this passage affords into the Gutenberg era and into blank verse! It is not strange that literary research has failed to reveal the origins of blank verse. Equally fruitless would be the seeking the origins of the long lines of the Roman road in engineering antecedents. The Roman road was a by-product of papyrus and fast-moving couriers. Cesare Folingo has the necessary approach to this kind of problem when writing on "Vernacular Literature" in The Legacy of the Middle Ages (p. 182): "Rome had produced no popular epics. . . . These undaunted builders were wont to construct their epics in stone; miles and miles of paved roads . . . must have possessed an almost emotional appeal such as the long sequences of single rhymed lines may have had for the French." Print, in turning the vernaculars into mass media, or closed systems, created the uniform, centralizing forces of modern nationalism. The French, more than any other modern nation, have felt the unifying force of their vernacular as a national experience. It is fitting that they should be the first to record the break-up of this typographically created unity under the impact of non-verbal media. In the electronic age Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre declaim in tragic mode in What is Literature? the dilemma of “For whom does one write?" An editorial comment on Simone de Beauvoir in Encounter (August, 1955) helps very much to relate the new clamorous voices of the Gutenberg era with the phenomenon of nationalism. The editor is considering the nature of fame and enduring reputation: . . . and to obtain this it is almost necessary, in our age, to be a member of a national community that has, along with whatever moral and aesthetic excellences, the quite vulgar quality of being in some degree powerful— of being regarded attentively by the world and, most important, listened to. The existence of such a community seems to be a precondition for the emergence of a national literature sufficiently large in extent and weighty in substance to fix the world's eye and give shape to the world's imagination; . . . it was the writers themselves who helped call into being this thing called "national literature". At first, their activity had a pleasing artlessness about it, . .. Later under the spell of the Romantic movement, moribund languages were revived, new national epics were composed for nations that as yet barely existed, while literature enthusiastically ascribed to the idea of national existence the most supernatural virtues. . . . Closely interrelated, then, by the operation and effects of typography are the outering or uttering of private inner experience and the massing of collective national awareness, as the vernacular is rendered visible, central, and unified by the new technology. It is quite consistent that Chaucer, as much as Dryden, should have preferred the couplet as an intimate mode of conversation among friends. In this way the Chaucerian couplet would have struck St. Thomas More as quite close in character to the scholastic dialogue, much as the couplet of Pope and Dryden preserved the character of the Senecan amble. The important text of More cited earlier makes the proper distinction between rhyme and blank verse when he contrasts scholastic philosophy as "not unpleasant among friends in familiar communication," and the new modes of discourse for the “councils of Kings, where great matters be debated and reasoned with great authority." More is talking of the centralist and nationalistic political organizatons which were new in his day. For these new forms of gigantism the blank verse of Marlowe was the objective correlative: Cheridamas: Tamburlaine! A Scythian shepherd so embellished With nature's pride and richest furniture! His looks do menace heaven and dare the gods; His fiery eyes are fix'd upon the earth, As if he now devis'd some stratagem, Or meant to pierce Avernus' darksome vaults To pull the triple-headed dog from hell.70 ## The divorce of poetry and music was first reflected by the printed page. Commenting on the melodic line of the Troubadours in Music and Society (p. 29) Wilfred Mellers provides a counter-point from which to observe the precipitate forward drive of Marlowe: The immense length and arching plasticity of line in all these musics is evidence of the advantages, counterbalancing the obvious limitations, of music conceived in terms of a single line; if one sacrifices the possibilities of harmony and sonorous contrast, one gains the possibility of creating melody free of the inhibitions of mensuration. There is no limit to the subtleties of phrase, intonation and nuance one may use, except the limits implicit in the creation of a coherent linear organization. Song is the slowing down of speech in order to savour nuance. Blank verse originated in an age that first split words and music asunder and which moved towards the specialist autonomy of musical instruments. According to Mellers, the role of polyphony was to break up the ancient monodic line. And polyphony was to have effects in music comparable to movable types and mechanical writing in language and literature. For especially after the printing of music quantification and measurement became necessary as a means of keeping the singers of various parts together. But medieval poly- 70Tamburlaine the Great, I, ii. phony only had these separate parts and quantities in latency. Mellers writes (p.31): It seems possible that polyphony was in the first place a largely unconscious result of certain accidents that may occur in unison monophonic singing; it is certainly not surprising that during the later Middle Ages polyphony should be so deeply rooted in what are essentially monophonic attitudes that people of the modern world find it, at first at least, curiously difficult of approach. We know more or less what we expect from music conceived in “parts", and the mediaeval composer does not gratify our expectations. But before we dismiss him as primitive' or ‘tentative' we ought to be sure that we understand what he thought he was trying to do. He was not really trying to break with the implications of the monophonic music on which he had been nurtured and which, as we have seen, symbolized the philosophy inherent in his world; he was perhaps trying to extend that music's resources, and in so doing he quite unwittingly introduced conceptions which were to produce a profound technical revolution. Bruce Pattison's excellent study of Music and Poetry of the English Renaissance stresses that “song-form was virtually the only form up to the seventeenth century"(p. 83). But song-form having been for centuries inseparable from narrative and lineal development of themes, it penetrated and shaped literary practice as well. What we might call the story or “narrative line" today is not much more discernible in Nashe than in the Old Testament. Rather such a "line" is embedded in multitudinous effects of language. This quality of simultaneous interplay or tactile sensuousness is prominent in medieval music. As Pattison puts it (p. 82), "In a sense medieval music is often instrumental in conception, although it is not certain what part instruments took in its performance. Attention was largely concentrated on the sensuous effect of combining different voices rather than on the sentiments of the text or indeed on emotional expression at all." ## The oral polyphony of the prose of Nashe offends against lineal and literary decorum judgment, in exploiting the linguistic resources of the language for his own amusement." Read aloud by a trained rhetorician from the new grammar schools, the passage which Sutherland quotes (pp. 49-50) takes on the brash variety of a Louis Armstrong trumpet solo: Hero hoped, and therefore she dreamed (as all hope is but a dream); her hope was where her heart was, and her heart winding and turning with the wind, that might wind her heart of gold to her, or else turn him from her. Hope and fear both combatted in her, and both these are wakeful, which made her at break of day (what an old crone is the day, that is so long a breaking) to unloop her luket or casement, to look whence the blasts came, or what gait or pace the sea kept; when forthwith her eyes bred her eye-sore, the first white whereon their transpiercing arrows struck being the breathless corps of Leander: with the sudden contemplation of this piteous spectacle of her love, sodden to haddock's meat, her sorrow could not choose but be indefinite, if her delight in him were but indifferent; and there is no woman but delights in sorrow, or she would not use it so lightly for everything. Down she ran in her loose night-gown, and her hair about her ears (even as Semiramis ran out with her lie-pot in her hand, and her black dangling tresses about her shoulders with her ivory comb ensnarled in them, when she heard that Babylon was taken) and thought to have kissed his dead corpse alive again, but as on his blue jellied sturgeon lips she was about to clap one of those warm plaisters, boistrous woolpacks of ridged tides came rolling in, and raught him from her (with a mind belike to carry him back to Abydos). At that she became a frantic Bacchanal outright, and made no more bones but sprang after him, and so resigned up her priesthood, and left work for Musaeus and Kit Marlowe. Just how much the circumstances affected not only the structure of music but of language and music, appears in John Hollander's discussion of the Elizabethan theatres (The Untuning of the Sky, p. 147) with their elaborate use of music in signalling functions and the necessity of incorporating all music except these signals into the plot of the play itself. "The small coterie theaters of the city . . . followed the masque . . ." ## The printing press was at first mistaken for an engine of immortality by everybody except Shakespeare. individual voices and the seizing of the vernacular as a unified and readymade public address system. Simultaneously there occurred the realization that the printed word in the vernacular could confer an artificial eternity of fame. In a delightful essay on Cardano (1501-1576) in Abinger Harvest (p. 190) E. M. Forster points out that: "The printing press, then only a century old, had been mistaken for an engine of immortality, and men hastened to commit to it deeds and passions for the benefit of future ages." And Forster (p. 193) quotes Cardano: It has been my peculiar fortune to live in the century which discovered the whole world—America, Brazil, Patagonia, Peru, Quito, Florida, New France, New Spain, countries to the North and East and South. And what is more marvellous than the human thunderbolt, which in its power far exceeds the heavenly? Nor will I be silent about thee, magnificent Magnet, who dost guide us through vast oceans, and night and storms, into countries we have never known. Then there is our printing press, conceived by man's genius, fashioned by his hands, yet a miracle equal to the divine. ## About the same time Pierre Boaistuau wrote in his Theatrum Mundi:71 I can find nothing that may be equall or compare to the wonderfull invention, utility and dignitie of printing, the which surmounteth all that the antiquitie may conceive or imagine of excellencie, knowing that it conserveth and keepeth all the conceptions of our soules, it is the treasure that doth immortalize the monument of our spirits, and eternizeth world without end and also bringeth to light the fruits of our labours. And although somewhat may be added to all other acts and humane inventions, yet this alone has entred with such good hap and perfection in this world, that ther cannot be added nor diminished any thing that doth not render it defectious and deformed: these effects are so mervailous, and executed with such celerity and diligence, that one man alone in one day will print more letters, than the promptest scribe or scrivener may write with pen in the space of one whole year. Self-expression is yet unknown as a concept; but "bringeth to light the fruits of our labours" is an excellent indication of the matrix from which the concept will be extracted much later. "Doth immortalize the monument of our spirits" renders perfectly the sixteenth-century idea of an immortality won through toil and mechanical repetition of that toil. In our own century the idea of such immortality has taken on a wry quality that is caught by Joyce in Ulysses (p. 41): "When one reads these strange pages of one long gone, one feels that one is at one with one who once . . . The grainy sand had gone from under his feet. His boots trod again a damp crackling mast, razorshells, squeaking pebbles, that on the unnumbered pebbles beats, wood sieved by the shipworm, lost Armada. Unwholesome sandflats waited to suck his treading soles, breathing upward sewage breath. He coasted them, walking warily. A porter bottle stood up, stogged to its waist, in the cakey sand dough. A sentinel: isle of dreadful thirst. From meditation on books and libraries, that is, Stephen Dedalus turns to the message in the bottle, reaching it through a riot of audile-tactile-olfactory experience carefully counterpointed with the subjective vistas of authors, libraries, and literary immortality. The theme of eternizing by means of the printed word had great plausibility in the early period of typography when so many forgotten and unknown writers of the past ages were being brought into a new and far more intense life, by typography, than they had ever known in their actual scribal existences. Shakespeare's inscribed sonnets in 1609 were “To the onlie begetter . . . all happinesses and that eternitie promised by our ever-living Poet, wisheth the well-wishing adventurer in setting forth." The ever-living poet lives ever in print, that is, and promises that eternity of the printed word (ever so much more assured than the manuscript eternity of a message in a bottle) to "the onlie begetter." It is only proper that the identity of the begetter should be as mysterious as the poetic process by which the sonnets were created. Since, however, eternity is now assured for the begetter as he sets forth on a new life of printed poetic existence, the poet wishes him well, even as he is wishing himself well, in his printed voyage through eternity. And so follows the setting forth of (and in) the text of the sonnets, just ten years after the Elizabethan sonnet vogue had passed. More double talk was seldom put in thirty-odd words than in these words of dedication. Similar irony occurs in a preface to Shakespeare's Troilus and Cressida, which appeared in front of the quarto text of 1609, the same year as the sonnets. It does not concern us here whether Shakespeare wrote this preface. It is too witty for Dekker, too restrained for Nashe. It is much on our theme of print as an engine of immortality: A never writer, to an ever reader, Newes. Eternall reader, you have heere a new play, never estal'd with the Stage, never clapper-clawd with the palmes of the vulgar, and yet passing full of the palme comicall; for it is a birth of your braine, that never under-tooke anything commicall, vainlly: And were but the vaine names of commedies changde for the titles of Commodities, or of Playes for Pleas; you should see all those grand censors, that now stile them such vanities, flock to them for the maine grace of their gravities: especially this authors Commedies, that are so fram'd to the life, that they serve for the most common Commentaries, of all the actions of our lives, shewing such a dexteritie, and power of witte, that the most displeased with Playes, are pleasd with his Commedies. And all such dull and heavy-witted worldings, as were never capable of the witte of a Commedie, comming by report of them to his representations have found that witte there, that they never found in them-selves, and have parted better wittied then they came: feeling an edge of witte set upon them, more then ever they dreamd they had braine to grinde it on. So much and such savored salt of witte is in his Commedies, that they may seeme (for their height of pleasure) to be borne in that sea that brought forth Venus. Amongst all there is none more witty then this: And had I time I would comment upon it, though I know it needs not, (for so much as will make you thinke your testerne well bestowed) but for so much worth, as even poore I know to be stuft in it. It deserves such a labour, as well as the best Commedy in Terrence or Plautus. And believe this, that when hee is gone, and his Commedies out of sale, you will scramble for them, and set up a new English Inquisition. Take this for a warning, and at the perrill of your pleasures losse, and Judgements, refuse not, nor like this the lesse, for not being sullied, with the smoaky breath of the multitude; but thanke fortune for the scape it hath made amongst you. Since by the grand possessors wills I beleeve you should have prayd for them rather than beene prayd. And so I leave all such to bee prayd for (for the states of their wits healths) that will not praise it. Vale. This piece of prose requires the same kind of agility of attention as Troilus and Cressida itself. It opens like James Joyce in the role of "Mr. Germ's Choice" saying "My consumers are they not my producers?" The play's never having been “clapper-clawd with the palmes of the vulgar"may indicate an Inns of Court performance. But the preface in its entirety is as much an analysis of communication theory as the play itself. At the hub of the play (III, iii) the theme of the preface is stated at much greater length, beginning: A strange fellow here Writes me, that man—how dearly ever parted, How much in having, or without or in Cannot make boast to have that which he hath, Nor feels not what he owes, but by reflection; The preface uses this idea that the producer is only his consumer to mock both readers and writers of the new age in a dazzling sequence of negative involutions. The author is as little impressed by the ultimate value of print as the Shakespeare who could not be bothered to print his plays. There is no need to do more than mention many of the most popular of Shakespeare's sonnets as bodying forth the accepted ideas of his age on the subject of eternity via the printed vernacular word, as in sonnet Lv, which opens: Not marble nor the gilded monuments Of princes shall outlive this pow'rful rhyme; And because it has lived these centuries we suppose that the authors had no doubts either. But the learned of the age, whatever their attitude to print, had doubts concerning the staying powers of the vernaculars. And some of their doubts appear in Spenser's sonnet (Amoretti, Lxxv) : One day I wrote her name upon the strand, But came the waves and washed it away: Agayne I wrote it with a second hand, But came the tyde and made my paynes his prey. Vayne man, sayd she, that doest in vaine assay A mortall thing so to immortalize: . . . "We must remember," writes J. W. Lever in The Elizabethan Love Sonnet (p. 57) "to what extent life itself is patterned on literary modes: how men in one age tend to conduct their amours in all earnestness, like the heroes of Stendhal; in another in all flippancy, like the heroes of Noël Coward." But whereas the Elizabethan was, like the Chaucerian "I," able to shift into a variety of public and private roles, so he was able to play with language on various levels. The old oral bond with its flexibility of pitch held between reader and writer. Lever in explaining the nineteenth-century failure to grasp Sidney's procedure comments (p. 57) “It was the atrophy of positive convention during the nineteenth century, and the consequent splitting of the individual into a public and a private self, that explains why so much personal verse of the Victorians evokes a sense of embarrassment." S. L. Bethell's Shakespeare and the Popular Dramatic Tradition takes up this theme thoroughly, showing how the break-up of the older bonds between author and public led nineteenth-century critics "to treat Shakespeare as Ibsen is more appropriately treated: they fastened upon his characters as if they were historical personages, examining their psychology. . . . There was no atempt to consider the historical anomaly by which a naturalistic drama could so quickly have arisen out of a conventional tradition."(pp. 13–14) In the same way Hollywood could rise quickly because it built on the nineteenth century novel. ## The portability of the book, like that of the easel-painting, added much to the new cult of individualism. monopoly. Moses Hadas mentions in Ancilla to Classical Reading (p. 7) that: "Papyrus made into rolls continued to be the regular material for books until the introduction, mainly by Christians for the convenience of having the Gospels in a single volume, of the codex form and hence of vellum which is more suitable to that form."He adds: the codex, which is in effect the modern book, consisting of leaves arranged in quires, is obviously more compact than a roll. . . . could be reduced to the convenient size of a pocket edition, and that advantage is usually taken to explain the general adoption of the codex form by Christians in the fourth century . . . but through the third century the great majority of pagan remains are in rolls, while the great majority of Christian works are in codex form. The usual size of the codex was about 10 by 7 inches. As Febvre and Martin report in L'Apparition du livre (p. 126), pocketsize books of devotion and books of hours were perhaps the most numerous among all the books printed in the first century and more of typography: "Moreover, thanks to printing and the multiplication of texts, the book ceased to seem a precious object to be consulted in a library: there was more and more need to be able to carry it about readily in order to refer to it or to read it anywhere at any time." This very natural inclination towards accessibility and portability went hand in hand with greatly increased reading speeds which were possible with uniform and repeatable type, but not at all with manuscript. The same drive towards accessibility and portability created ever larger publics and markets which were indispensable to the whole Gutenberg undertaking. Febvre and Martin make clear (p. 162) that: "From the first, printing emerged as an industry regulated by the same laws as any other, and the book as a product concocted by men who had their living to make—even when, as with the Aldus family or the Eastiennes, they were at the same time humanists and scholars." These authors, then, proceed to go into the question of the considerable capital needed for printing and publishing, the very high incidence of commercial failure, and the drive for sales and markets. Even to the sixteenth century eye there was a notable trend of book selection and circulation that boded "l'apparition d'une civilisation de masse et de standardisation."A new kind of consumer world was organized gradually. Out of the entire production of books till 1500, amounting to fifteen to twenty million copies of 30,000 to 35,000 separate publications, by far the greatest proportion, seventy-seven per cent, are in Latin. But just as the printed book had routed the manuscript between 1500 and 1510, so the vernacular was soon to supersede Latin. For it was inevitable that a larger market existed for the printed book within the bounds of a national speech than the international, clerical élite of Latin readers could ever muster. Book production was a heavy capital venture and needed the utmost markets to survive. Febvre and Martin write (p. 479): "Thus the sixteenth century, era of the renewal of ancient culture, was the time when Latin began to lose ground. From 1530 centainly this trend is clear. The reading public . . . becomes therefore more and more a lay public—often of women and the middle class among whom many were not familiar with Latin." The problem of “what the public wants" is central to printing from the first. But just as book format long retained the characteristics of manuscript appearance, so bookselling long depended on the medieval fair as an outlet. “The trade in books throughout the Middle Ages, it need scarcely be stressed, was largely a second-hand business; only with the invention of printing did a new-book market become a commonplace."72 The meaning of the medieval book trade as a second-hand operation can only be grasped in our time through the parallel that the market in great paintings is largely a secondhand market. For, in general, paintings and antiques are in the category of the manuscript book before printing. For the printed book retaining a manuscript format, this was necessary if only for sales, since readers were trained and disposed to the manuscript mode. Buhler has fascinating details (p. 16) about the early habit of sending printed books to the scribe to be copied, so that the student of the earliest printing would be well advised if he viewed the new invention, as the first printers did, as simply another form of writing. ## The uniformity and repeatability of print created the political arithmetic of the seventeenth century and the hedonistic calculus of the eighteenth. Nevertheless, there was an inherent principle of uniformity in print just as there was the tendency for a manuscript book to become “a leisurely accumulation of heterogeneous texts." The principle of uniformity and repeatability was to find ever fuller expression as print raised visual quantification to eminence. By the seventeenth century we find ourselves in a world that speaks of “political arithemetic," which carries the separation of functions a step past Machiavelli. If Machiavelli could argue in the early sixteenth century that “there is one rule for business and another for private life,"73 he was really recording the effect and meaning of the printed word in separating writer and reader, producer and consumer, ruler and ruled, into sharply defined categories. Before printing these operations were much interfused in the same way as the scribe as producer was involved in reading, and the student was involved in the making of the books he studied. It cannot be easily grasped, else it had been explained long ago, that the mechanical principle of visual uniformity and repeatability which is inherent in the press steadily extended itself to include many kinds of organization. Malynes wrote in his Lex Mercatoria (1622): "We see how one thing driveth or enforceth another, like as in a clock where there are many wheels, the first wheel being stirred driveth the next and that the third and so forth, till the last that moveth the instrument that striketh the clock; or like as in a press going in a strait, where the foremost is driven by him that is next to him, and the next by him that followeth him."74 More than two hundred years before Thomas Huxley's idea of the educated mind as a “clear cold logic engine with all its parts of equal strength" we encounter the principle of movable types and replaceable parts extended to social organization. But let us note that it is a meaningless principle where the uniform processing of minds by the habit of reading the printed word has not occurred. In a word, individualism, whether in the passive atomistic sence of drilled uniformed soldiery or in the active aggressive sense of private initiative and self-expression, alike assumes a prior technology of homogeneous citizens. This scabrous paradox has haunted literate men in every age. In the later nineteenth century it expressed itself in the emancipation of women which was accomplished by assigning men and women to the same jobs. It was thereby hoped they would be free. But this mechanical operation of the human spirit was also felt and furiously resisted in the first age of print. "One might almost say," writes Leo Lowenthal in Literature and the Image of Man' (p. 41), "that the prevailing philosophy of human nature since the Renaissance has been based on the conception of each individual as a “deviant case whose existence consists very largely in his efforts to assert his personality against the restrictive and levelling claims of society." Before considering the evidence from the world of Cervantes offered by Lowenthal, here are two peripheral items that also bear on these issues. Writing of Oxford University in the sixteenth century, C. E. Mallet opens his second volume of his History of the University of Óxford: The year 1485 marks an epoch in history at Oxford as elsewhere. Under the Tudors the mediaeval university passed imperceptibly away. The old customs lost to some extent their meaning. The old views of education altered. The old lawless democratic spirit yielded unwillingly to discipline. The Renaissance set up new ideals of learning. The Reformation brought new energies to theological debate. The old Halls were fast disappearing. The Colleges, some of which had begun life as struggling little communities of theologians or Arts-students, grew into larger and wealthier societies, with a fuller share in the government of the place. Undergraduate Commoners, as we know them, came more definitely into view. Several Colleges had from the beginning elected undergraduates as Fellows, and in some cases young students had been admitted on a special footing. Merton had its parvuli. Queen's had its Poor Boys. Magdalen had some very young Demies. Poor Colleges had eked out their revenues by admitting boarders. Waynflete had sanctioned a system of Gentlemen Commoners, which Wykehan had been unwilling to permit. But it was not till the sixteenth century, when the Colleges became recognized centres of teaching, when the lectures in Schools Street were going out of fashion, when the training of priests was gradually ceasing to be the chief aim of Oxford education, and when, after the perils of the Reformation, the expansion of Oxford on new lines began, that the great class of undergraduate Commoners, with no direct share in College endowments, arose to take the College courts and gardens for their own. The “old lawless democratic spirit" has reference to the decentralist, oral organization of society that preceded print and nationalism. Centralism of the newly released national energies required greatly increased interdependence. Here the printed text books made themselves felt very soon. And just as papyrus made the Roman road, print made for the speed and visual precision felt in the new monarchies of the Renaissance. It is fascinating to move ahead a century and to Cambridge to observe the strong centralist action of the printed book. Christopher Wordsworth tells the story of the strange reversals and interplay of the written and the oral modes in his Scholae academicae: Some Account of the Studies at the English Universities in the Eighteenth Century (p. 16) : Before entering upon the details of the university exercises and examinations, we ought to try to divest ourselves of a modern opinion, that study exists for examinations rather than examinations for study. Indeed, to apply the measure of their prevalence and efficiency to the education of past generations, would be to commit an anachronism. We might look in vain for any public examination to justify the learning and research which in the seventeenth century made English students famous:—whose efforts were fostered, rather by the encouragement of tutors and friends, than by the disputations in the schools. Examinations in our modern acceptation there were none. As books became cheaper, the quicker and the more diligent students discovered that they could acquire knowledge for themselves where previous generations had been dependent on the oral teaching. Then arose the necessity of examination, and as this has come to be more scientifically conducted, and its results to be more public, and at last in a sense marketable, there has been a fresh demand for oral instruction. Wordsworth is describing the rise of centralist examining which arose from access to decentralized learning. For it was easy under print conditions for a student to read in areas unvisited by his examiners. But the principle that the portable, uniform book creates the centralized uniform exam (in place of the older oral test) is one that applies at all levels. The printed word, we shall see, has quite strange organizational effects on the vernacular. And the eighteenth century business man whose political arithmetic was based on visual quantity, or the eighteenth century business man whose speculations were built on the mechanism of “the hedonistic calculus,"alike relate to the uniform repeatability of print technology. Yet the calculating business man who used this principle at every turn, in production and distribution, fought its logic of centralism with anarchic bitterness. So Lowenthal observes in Literature and the Image of Man (pp. 41–2): Very quickly after the downfall of feudalism, the literary artist developed a liking for figures who look at society not from the viewpoint of a participant but from the vantage point of an outsider. The further these figures are removed from the affairs of society, the greater is likely to be their social failure (which is almost, but not quite, a tautology); they are also more prone, as a result, to display unspoiled, uninhibited, and highly individual characteristics. The conditions—whatever they may be—that remove them from the affairs of society are viewed as the conditions that bring them closer to their inner natures. The more primitive and “natural" the setting into which they are cast, the better are they able to develop and maintain their humaneness. Cervantes presents an array of such marginal figures and situations. There are, first, the mad people—Don Quixote and the Man of Glass—who though still operating in the social world are in continuous conflict with it by word and deed. Then in Rinconete and Cortadillo, we meet petty crooks and beggars who live parasitically off the social world. One step farther from the center we find the gypsies presented in The Little Gypsy (La Gitana); they are completely outside the main stream of affairs. Finally, we have the situation wherein Don Quixote, the marginal Knight, speaks to the simple goatherds about the Golden Age in which the unity of man and nature reaches its fulfillment. To this catalog of marginal types and situations, we add the figure of woman, who almost throughout the entire course of modern literature from Cervantes to Ibsen has been treated as an individual closer to her own nature and truth than are men, since man is indissolubly bound up with the competitive processes of work, in contrast to the enforced removal of woman from professional activities. Not accidentally does Cervantes use Dulcinea as a symbol of human creativity.