# The typographic logic created the outsider, the alienated man, as the type of integral, that is, intuitive and irrational, man. If Lowenthal is right, we have spent much energy and fury in recent centuries in destroying oral culture by print technology so that the uniformly processed individuals of commercial society can return to oral marginal spots as tourists and consumers, whether geographical or artistic. The eighteenth century began to spend its time at the Metropolitan Opera as it were. Having refined and homogenized and visualised itself to the point of self-alienation, it hied off to the Hebrides, the Indies, the Americas, the transcendental imagination, and especially to childhood, in search of natural man. D. H. Lawrence and others repeated this Odyssey in our day with much acclaim. It is a performance of automatic kind. Art tends to become a mere compensation for a top-sided life. Lowenthal gives an excellent account of the new alienated man who refused to join the consumer rush and remained on the old feudal and oral margins of society. To the new crowd of visually and consumer-oriented society these marginal figures have great appeal. "The figure of woman" joins this picturesque group of outsiders. Her haptic bias, her intuition, her wholeness entitle her to marginal status as a Romantic figure. Byron understood that men must be homogenized, splintered, specialists. But not women: Man's love is of man's life a thing apart, 'Tis woman's whole existence. "Woman," wrote Meredith in 1859, "is the last thing to be civilized by man."By 1929 she had been homogenized by means of the movies and photo advertizing. Mere print had not been intense enough to reduce her to uniformity and repeatability and specialism. What a fate, to be integral and whole in a fragmented and visual flatland! But the homogenization of women was finally effected in the twentieth century after the perfection of photo-engraving permitted them to pursue the same courses of visual uniformity and repeatability that print had brought to men. I have devoted an entire volume, The Mechanical Bride, to this theme. Pictorial advertisements and movies finally did for women what print technology had done for men centuries before. When raising these themes, one is beset by queries of the "Was it a good thing?" variety. Such questions seem to mean: "How should we feel about these matters?" They never suggest that anything could be done about them. Surely, understanding the formal dynamic or configuration of such events is the prime concern. That is really doing something. Control and action in terms of values must follow understanding. Value judgments have long been allowed to create a moral fog around technological change such as renders understanding impossible. But how were people prevented during these centuries from understanding what they were doing to themselves by means of visual quantification and fragmentation? Boasts on all hands of the segmental analysis of every function and operation of person and society, and wild laments that this splintering is also affecting the inner life! The split man enters the scene as Mr. Entirely Normal. He is still here in that capacity, though increasingly in a panic about electric media, as he might well be. For the marginal man is a centre-without-a-margin, an integral independent type. That is, he is feudal, "aristocratic," and oral. The new urban or bourgeois man is centre-margin oriented. That is, he is visual, concerned about appearances and conformity or respectability. As he becomes individual or uniform, he becomes homogeneous. He belongs. And he creates and craves large centralist groupings, starting with nationalism. ## Cervantes confronted typographic man in the figure of Don Quixote. There is no need to go into Cervantes'novel in detail, since it is well known. But Cervantes, in his life and in his work, presents the case of the feudal man confronted with a newly visually quantified and homogeneous world. In Lowenthal's Literature and the Image of Man (p. 21) we read how In choosing the great folios of medieval romances as his reality, Cervantes establishes an ambivalence of the utmost use. For print was the new reality and it was print that made the old reality of the Middle Ages popularly available for the first time. Thus, in our day, movie and TV have given a dimension and reality to the American frontier in all our lives, such as it had for very few people in historical fact. Next to the Books of Hours, medieval romances were by far the biggest item on the market. And whereas the Books of Hours were preferred in pocket editions, the romances came in folio.7⁵ Lowenthal (p. 22) makes some further observations about Don Quixote that are especially relevant here for the understanding of print culture: One might say that Don Quixote is the first figure in Renaissance literature who seeks by action to bring the world into harmony with his own plans and ideals. Cervantes' irony lies in the fact that while overtly his hero battles against the new (the early manifestations of middle-class life) in the name of the old (the feudal system), actually he attempts to sanction a new principle. This principle consists, basically, in the autonomy of individual thinking and feeling. The dynamics of society have come to demand a continuous and active transformation of reality; the world must be perpetually constructed anew. Don Quixote recreates his world even though he does so in a phantastic and solipsistic fashion. The honor for which he enters the lists is the product of his thinking, not of socially established and accepted values. He defends those whom he considers worthy of his protection and assails those he believes to be wicked. In this sense he is a rationalist as well as an idealist. Enough has been said earlier apropos of the drive towards applied knowledge inherent in print technology to give additional significance to Lowenthal's words. This is the situation which David Riesman highlights in The Lonely Crowd as the pattern of “inner direction." Inner direction towards remote goals is inseparable from print culture and the perspective and vanishing point organization of space that are part of it. The fact that no such organization of space or culture is compatible with electronic simultaneity is what has involved Western man in new anxiety for a century. In addition to the solipsism and solitude and uniformity of print culture, there is now the immediate electric pressure for its dissolution. In a study of The Vanishing Adolescent (p. 25) Edgar Z. Friedenberg casts the adolescent in the role of Don Quixote: The process of becoming an American, as it goes on in high school, tends to be a process of renunciation of differences. This conflicts directly, of course, with the adolescent need for self-definition; but the conflict is so masked in institutionalized gaiety that the adolescent himself usually does not become aware of it. He must still deal with the alienation it engenders. He may do this by marginal differentiation, like Riesman's glad-handing boy with the special greeting style. He may do it by erupting into bouts of occasionally violent silliness, which does not make him seem queer to other people because it is unconsciously recognized as a form of self-abnegation rather than self-assertion, and is not, therefore, threatening. He may, if he has sufficient ego-strength, become the adolescent equivalent of a genuine revolutionary—rather than a rebel—that is, he may actually succeed in rejecting the folkways of the school without identifying with them and becoming guilty and raucous; . . . The school system, custodian of print culture, has no place for the rugged individual. It is, indeed, the homogenizing hopper into which we toss our integral tots for processing. Some of the most memorable poems of our language concern Wordsworth's Lucy, on the one hand, and Yeats Among School-children, on the other. Both of these are much concerned with the poignant conflict between the order of enclosed and uniform systems and the spontaneity of the world of spirit. The inherent conflict that Friedenberg defines so well is at the centre of print technology itself, which isolates the individual yet also creates massive groupings by means of vernacular nationalism. Friedenberg is speaking of a situation inherent in movable types from the first when he says (p. 54): We conceive our country as having achieved a position of leadership and dominance by carefully subordinating personal and ethnic disparity to the interests of teamwork in a colossal technical and administrative enterprise. For us, a personal conformity is a moral mandate. When we insist on taking a personal stand and bucking the system, we feel not only anxious but guilty as well. Donne's mention of his "hydroptic immoderate thirst for humane learning and languages" beset countless men in the sixteenth century. There was a furious consumer urge in that first age of mass production such as struck the United States in the 1920's with the movies and radio. The same consumer urge is only now reaching Europe and England after the Second World War. It is a phenomenon that goes with high-intensity visual stress and organization of experience. ## Typographic man can express but is helpless to read the configurations of print technology. The subject of nationalism and print has been held back until now lest it usurp the entire book. It will be the easier to handle the complex of issues now that we have encountered similar groupings of issues in quite different areas of experience. The present volume to this point might be regarded as a gloss on a single text of Harold Innis: "The effect of the discovery of printing was evident in the savage religious wars of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Application of power to communication industries hastened the consolidation of vernaculars, the rise of nationalism, revolution, and new outbreaks of savagery in the twentieth century."76 Innis in his later work tackled configurations rather than sequences of events in their interplay. In his earlier work, like The Fur Trade in Canada, he had been a conventional arranger of evidence in perspective packages of inert, static components. As he began to understand the structuring powers of media to impose their assumptions subliminally, he strove to record the interaction of media and cultures: "Improvements in communication, like the Irish bull of the bridge which separated the two countries, make for increased difficulties of understanding. The cable compelled contraction of language and facilitated a rapid widening between the English and American languages. In the vast realm of fiction in the Anglo-Saxon world, the influence of the newspaper . . . the cinema and the radio has been evident in the best seller and the creation of special classes of readers with little prospect of communication between them."77 Innis is here speaking with ease of the interplay among literary and non-literary forms exactly as in the earlier quotation he was speaking of the interplay between the mechanization of the vernaculars and the rise of military, nationalist states. There is nothing wilful or arbitrary about the Innis mode of expression. Were it to be translated into perspective prose, it would not only require huge space, but the insight into the modes of interplay among forms of organization would also be lost. Innis sacrificed point of view and prestige to his sense of the urgent need for insight. A point of view can be a dangerous luxury when substituted for insight and understanding. As Innis got more insights he abandoned any mere point of view in his presentation of knowledge. When he interrelates the development of the steam press with “"the consolidation of the vernaculars" and the rise of nationalism and revolution he is not reporting anybody's point of view, least of all his own. He is setting up a mosaic configuration or galaxy for insight. It was a prime effect of print in altering human sense ratios, that it substituted static point of view for insight into causal dynamics. We shall consider this further on. But Innis makes no effort to “spell out"the interrelations between the components in his galaxy. He offers no consumer packages in his later work, but only doit-yourself kits, like a symbolist poet or an abstract painter. Literature and the Press by Louis Dudek provides a straight-away perspective picture of the rise of the steam press, but the effects on language, on war, and on the emergence of new literary forms are not mentioned since they would require a non-literary or mythic form in order to be explained at all. James Joyce devised an entirely new form of expression in Finnegans Wake in order to capture the complex interplay of factors in the very configuration that we are considering here. In the following passage "fowl" includes La Patrie, the Great Mother, and “foule" or mob created by the homogenizating powers of print. When, therefore, it is mentioned that "man will become dirigible," the way in which this happens is simply an inflation by accretion of homogeneous units. Lead, kindly fowl! They always did: ask the ages. What bird has done yesterday man may do next year, be it fly, be it moult, be it hatch, be it agreement in the nest. For her socioscientific sense is sound as a bell, sir, her volucrine automutativeness right on normalcy: she knows, she just feels she was kind of born to lay and love eggs (trust her to propagate the species and hoosh her fluffballs safe through din and danger!); lastly but mostly, in her genesic field it is all game and no gammon, she is ladylike in everything she does and plays the gentleman's part every time. Let us auspice it! Yes, before all this has time to end the golden age must return with its vengeance. Man will become dirigible, Ague will be rejuvenated, woman with her ridiculous white burden will reach by one step sublime incubation, the manewanting human lioness with her dishorned discipular manram will lie down together publicly flank upon fleece. No, assuredly, they are not justified, those gloompourers who grouse that letters have never been quite their old selves again since that weird weekday in bleak Janiveer (yet how palmy date in a waste's oasis!) when to the shock of both, Biddy Doran looked ad literature. (p. 112) It may well be that print and nationalism are axiological or co-ordinate, simply because by print a people sees itself for the first time. The vernacular in appearing in high visual definition affords a glimpse of social unity coextensive with vernacular boundaries. And more people have experienced this visual unity of their native tongues via the newspaper than through the book. Carlton Hayes is most helpful in his Historical Èvolution of Modern Nationalism (p. 293):