Nor is it at all certain that the “masses" in any country have been directly responsible for the rise of modern nationalism. The movement appears to have gotten under way first among the “intellectual" classes and to have received decisive impetus from the support of the middle classes. In England, where physical environment and political and religious circumstances were peculiarly favorable, a strong national consciousness developed considerable before the eighteenth century, and it may be that English nationalism did spring more or less spontaneously out of mass feeling and sentiment. Even here, the matter is debatable, though it is not within the scope of the present work to indicate the pros and cons in any detail. Outside of England, however, there can be little question that in the first half of the eighteenth century the masses of Europe, as well as of Asia and America, whilst possessing some consciousness of nationality, thought of themselves chiefly as belonging to a province or town or an empire, rather than to a national state, and made no serious or effective protest against being transferred from one political domain to another, and that their later thought and action as nationalities were taught them by the intellectual and middle classes of their respective countries. # The historians, although aware that nationalism originated in the sixteenth century, have yet no explanation of this passion that preceded theory. It is important nowadays to understand why there cannot be nationalism where there has not first been an experience of a vernacular in printed form. Hayes here indicates that in non-literate areas, ferment and social action of a tribal kind is not to be confused with nationalism. Hayes had no clue about the rise of visual quantification in the later Middle Ages, nor of the visual effects of print on individualism and nationalism in the sixteenth century. He was keenly aware (p. 4) that there was no nationalism in the modern sense before the sixteenth century when the modern state system of Europe emerged: The states which composed this new system were very different from the “nations" of primitive tribesmen. They were much larger and much looser. They were more in the nature of agglomerations of peoples with diverse languages and dialects and with divergent traditions and institutions. In most of them a particular people, a particular nationality, constituted the core and furnished the governing class and the official language, and in all of them minority as well as majority nationalities usually evinced a high degree of loyalty to a common monarch or “sovereign". They were referred to, in contradistinction to the older comprehensive Empire, as “nations" or “national states", and popular loyalty to their sovereigns has sometimes been described as “nationalism". But it must rigidly be borne in mind that they were not “nations" in the primitive tribal sense and that their “nationalism" had other foundation than that of present-day nationalism. The European "nations" of the sixteenth century were more akin to small empires than to large tribes. Hayes is mystified by the peculiar character of modern internationalism which began with the primitivistic obsession of the eighteenth century: "Modern nationalism signifies a more or less purposeful effort to revive primitive tribalism on an enlarged and more artificial scale."(p. 12) But since the telegraph and radio, the globe has contracted, spatially, into a single large village. Tribalism is our only resource since the electro-magnetic discovery. Alexis de Tocqueville in his L'Ancien Régime (p. 156) shows himself much more aware than Hayes of the causes and effects of nationalism. Not only had accustomation to print tended to create a uniform type of citizen but the political education of France was carried on by men of letters: The writers furnished not merely their ideas to the people who made it, but also their temperament and disposition. As a result of their long education, in the absence of any other instructors, coupled with their profound ignorance of practice, all Frenchmen from reading their books finally contracted the instincts, the turn of mind, the tastes and even the eccentricities natural to those who write. To such an extent was this the case that, when finally they had to act, they transported into politics all the habits of literature. A study of the history of our Revolution shows that it was conducted precisely in the same spirit, that has caused so many abstract books to be written on government—the same attraction for general theories, complete systems of legislation, and exact symmetry in the laws; the same contempt for existing facts; the same confidence in theory, the same taste for the original, the ingenious and the novel in institutions; the same desire to rebuild at once the entire constitution according to the rules of logic and a single plan, in the place of trying to amend it in its parts. The mysterious "logic" mania of the French is easily recognizable as the visual component in isolation from other factors. Similarly, visual quantification as a collective mania yields the French Revolutionary military mania. Here the uniform and the homogeneous are most visibly at one. The modern soldier is especially the instance of the movable type, the replaceable part, the classic Gutenberg phenomenon. De Tocqueville has much to say of this in his European Revolution (pp. 140–1): What the republican partisans took for love of the Republic was chiefly a love of the Revolution. In fact, the army was the only class in France in which every member, without exception, had gained by the Revolution and had a personal interest in supporting it. To it every officer owed his rank, and every soldier his chance of becoming an officer. The army was, in truth, the standing Revolution in arms. If it still fiercely exclaimed: "Long live the Republic!" this was really a challenge to the old regime, whose friends cried: “Long live the King!" Deep down the army cared nothing for civic liberties. Hatred of foreigners and a love of his native land are generally the only elements of the soldier's patriotism even in free nations; still more must this have been the case at that time in France. The army, like almost every other army in the world, could make nothing of the slow and complicated gyrations of a representative government; it detested and despised the Assembly, because it understood only powers that were strong and simple; all it wanted was national independence and victories. ## Nationalism insists on equal rights among individuals and among nations alike. If rigorous centralism is a main feature of literacy and print, no less so is the eager assertion of individual rights. De Tocqueville notes in The European Revolution (p. 103): "In 1788 and 1789 all the pamphlets published even those by the future revolutionaries themselves, are opposed to centralization and in favor of local rule." He adds a little later (pp. 112–13) a note that indicates that, like Harold Innis, he had the habit not of presenting a picture of events but of meditating on their inner causes: "What is so extraordinary in the French Revolution is not so much the procedures it employed as the ideas it conceived. The new and astonishing thing is that so many nations should arrive at a stage where such procedures could be so efficiently employed and such ideas so easily accepted." At this point it would be a joy to have a de Tocqueville to take over the writing of The Gutenberg Galaxy, for his mode of thought is the one that is here followed so far as possible. He defines his method perfectly when speaking of the old regime (p. 136): "I myself have tried to judge it not from my own ideas but from the feelings which it inspired in those who endured and then destroyed it." Nationalism depends upon or derives from the “fixed point of view" that arrives with print, perspective, and visual quantification. But a fixed point of view can be collective or individual or both, thus causing great diversity of clash and outlook. Hayes writes in his Historical Evolution of Modern Nationalism (p. 135): "By 1815 liberal nationalism was a fairly definite intellectual movement throughout western and central Europe. . . . It was surely not aristocratic, and, though paying lip-service to democracy, it tended to be middle-class." It is his next sentences that indicate the “fixed point of view" for the state, on one hand, and the individual, on the other: "It stressed the absolute sovereignty of the national state, but sought to limit the implications of this principle by stressing individual liberties—political, economic, and religious—within each national state." The inevitable condition of fixed viewpoints arising from the visual stress in nationalism also led, writes Hayes (p. 178), to the principle that: "Because the national state does not belong to the citizens of any particular generation, it must not be revolutionized." This principle is made especially manifest in the written-visual fixity of the American Constitution, whereas pre-print and pre-industrial forms of political order have no such pattern. . Early in his book (pp. 10–11), Hayes points to the excitement about the discovery of the “equal" principle as it applied both to groups and individuals: equal rights of individuals to determine the state and government to which they would belong, equal rights of individual nations to selfdetermination. In practice, therefore, nationalism does not develop its full potential of uniform lateral extension until after the application of print technology to the methods of work and production. Hayes can see the logic of this, but is puzzled to see how nationalism ever could have started in agrarian societies. He is entirely without perception of the role of print technology in disposing men to the uniform, repeatable patterns of association: The putting forth of nationalist doctrines was one of the mental exercises of the eighteenth century. Primarily it was the work of intellectuals and an expression of current intellectual interests and tendencies. But what has chiefly enabled nationalist doctrines, once put forth, to take hold of the masses of mankind since then, has been a marvellous improvement in the mechanical arts, an improvement which is nowadays termed the Industrial Revolution—the invention of labor-saving machinery, the perfecting of the steam-engine and other motive devices, the extensive use of coal and iron, the mass production of commodities, and the speeding up of transportation and communication. This Industrial Revolution began in a large way in England about a hundred and forty years ago—about the time of the Jacobin Revolution in France—and its intensification in England and its extension throughout the world have paralleled the rise and spread of popular devotion to doctrines of nationalism. The doctrines themselves were originally crystallized in an agricultural society, before the advent of the new industrial machinery, but their acceptance has accompanied, and their complete triumph has followed, the introduction of the new machinery and the transition from an agricultural to an industrial society. It seems to have been a perfectly natural development. (pp. 232–3) Since industrialism even the arts, philosophy, and religion have been patterned by nationalism. Hayes writes (p. 289): For a century and a half major improvements in technology, in the industrial arts, and in material comfort, as well as most developments in the realms of intellect and aesthetics, have been yoked to the service of nationalism. The Industrial Revolution, despite its cosmopolitan potentialities, has been largely nationalized in actual fact. Modern scholarship, despite its scientific claims and its ubiquitous nature, has been preponderantly enlisted in support of nationalism. Philosophies which in origin were not expressly nationalist and were sometimes definitely intended to be antinationalist, philosophies such as Christianity, Liberalism, Marxism, and the systems of Hegel, Comte, and Nietzche, have been copiously drawn upon and frequently distorted for nationalist purposes. The plastic arts, music, and belles-lettres, despite their universal appeal, have become increasingly the product or the pride of national patriots. So much is nationalism a commonplace in the modes of thought and action of the civilized populations of the contemporary world that most men take nationalism for granted. Without serious reflection they imagine it to be the most natural thing in the universe and assume that it must always have existed. What has given such a vogue to nationalism in recent times? That is the first major question to be raised concerning this most vital phenomenon. ## The citizen armies of Cromwell and Napoleon were the ideal manifestations of the new technology. As an historian Hayes knows well (p. 290) that there is a mystery about nationalism. It never existed before the Renaissance, and it was never originated as an idea: “But the philosophers of nationalism did not make its vogue. The vogue was there when they appeared on the scene. They merely expressed and gave some emphasis and guidance to it. For the historian they are extremely useful in that they afford him vivid illustrations of current tendencies in nationalist thought."He ridicules the idea that "the masses of mankind are instinctively nationalist," or that nationalism is natural at all: "During much the longest periods of recorded history the groups to which individuals have been predominantly loyal have been tribes, clans, cities, provinces, manors, guilds, or polyglot empires. Yet it is nationalism, far more than any other expression of human gregariousness, which has come to the fore in modern times."(p. 292) The answer to Hayes' problem is in the efficacy of the printed word in first visualizing the vernacular and then creating that homogeneous mode of association which permits modern industry, markets, and the visual enjoyment of national status. He writes (p. 61): The “nation in arms" was one Jacobin concept of great significance for nationalist propaganda. The “nation in public schools" was another. Previous to the French Revolution, it had long and generally been held that children belonged to their parents and that it was for parents to determine what schooling, if any, their children should have. Liberty, equality and fraternity found their most natural, if least imaginative, expression in the uniformity of the revolutionary citizen armies. They were not only exact repetitions of the printed page, but of the assembly line. The English were much ahead of Europe in nationalism as in industrialism, and in typographical organization of the army. Cromwell's Ironsides were in action a hundred and fifty years before the Jacobin armies. England preceded all countries on the Continent in the development of an acute popular consciousness of common nationality. Long before the French Revolution at a time when Frenchmen had thought of themselves primarily as Burgundians or Gascons or Provencals, Englishmen had been Englishmen and had rallied with real national patriotism to the secularizations of Henry VIII and the exploits of Elizabeth. There had been a nationalist spirit in the political philosophy of Milton and Locke hardly paralleled by their contemporaries on the Continent, and Bolingbroke, the Englishman, was a pioneer in the expounding of a formal doctrine of nationalism. It was natural, therefore, that any Englishman who would enter the lists against Jacobinism should be arrayed in trappings of nationalism. So writes Hayes on page 86 of Historical Evolution of Modern Nationalism. Similar testimony of English precedence in national unity comes from a sixteenth century Venetian ambassador: In 1557 the Venetian ambassador Giovanni Micheli wrote to his government: 'In so far as religion [in England] is concerned, the example and authority of the sovereign are all-important. The English esteem and practise their religion only in so far as thereby they fulfil their duty as subjects towards their ruler; they live as he lives, believe what he believes: in one word, do everything he commands . . . they would accept Mohammedanism or Judaism if the king believed in it, and it was the king's will that they should believe in it.'To a foreign observer the religious behaviour of the English at that time looked most peculiar. Religious uniformity remained the rule, as on the Continent, but religion changed with each sovereign. After having been schismatic under Henry VIII, and Protestant under Edward VI, England became again, and without any serious upheaval, Roman Catholic under Mary Tudor.78 78Joseph Leclerc, Toleration and the Reformation, vol. II, p. 349. Merely nationalist excitement about the English vernacular was embedded in religious controversy in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Religion and politics had become so interfused as to be indistinguishable. The Puritan James Hunt wrote in 1642: For henceforth no man shall need the Universities, For to learn the wisedom of the wise; For there are very few mysteries in the Gospel that be so strong But they may be unfolded by the plaine true English tongue.79 At the present time the concern among Catholic liturgists about the question of the mass in English, is utterly confused by the new media such as movie, radio, and TV. For the social role and function of a vernacular are constantly being shifted by the means of interrelating it to private life. Thus the question of the mass in English today is as confused as the role of English in religion and politics in the sixteenth century. Nobody will question that it was the medium of print that then gave the vernaculars new functions, and utterly changed the uses and relevance of Latin. By the eighteenth century, on the other hand, the relations between language, religion, and politics had clarified. Language had become religion, in France at least. If the original Jacobins were sluggish in translating all their theories of education into action, they were prompt to recognize the significance of language as the basis of nationality and to try to compel all inhabitants of France to use the French language. They contended that successful rule by "the people" and united action by the nation were dependent, not only on a certain uniformity of habits and customs, but even more on an identity of ideas and ideals which could be effected by speeches, the printing press, and other instruments of education, provided that these employed one and the same language. Confronted with the historic fact that France was not a linguistic unit—that, in addition to widely variant dialects in different parts of the country, "foreign" languages were spoken in the west by Bretons, in the south by Provencals, Basques, and Corsicans, in the north by Flemings, and in the northeast by Alsatian Germans—they resolved to stamp out the dialects and the foreign languages and to force every French citizen to know and employ the French language.80 Hayes in this passage makes it quite clear that the passion behind the vernacular drive was homogenization, a matter which the Anglo-Saxon world has always understood is much better managed by price rivalry and consumer goods. In a word, the English world understands that print means applied knowledge, while the Latin world has always held print at bay, preferring to use it to enhance the drama of oral disputation or military virtuosity. Nowhere can this deep rejection of the print message be better seen than in The Structure of Spanish History by Americo Castro. ## The Spaniards had been immunized against typography by their age-old quarrel with the Moors. As the Jacobeans got the military message of print as lineal levelling aggression, the English were applying print to production and markets. So while the English were extending print to prices, shop-keeping and do-ityourself hand books of every kind, the Spaniards had abstracted from print the message of gigantism and supra-human effort. The Spaniard bypassed or ignored the entire aspect of print as applied, as levelling, homogenizing. There is no intent or wish to set up any other standards. Castro writes (p. 620): They rebel against standards as such. There is a kind of personal separatism. . . . If I had to locate, as it were, that which is most characteristic of Hispanic life, I would put it between the acceptance of inertia and the willful outburst through which the person reveals what there is—be it something insignificant or something of value—in the depths of his soul, as if he were his own theatre. Visible examples of this enormous contrast are the peasant and the conquistador—insensibility to the political and social situations and the insurrections and convulsions of the blind mass of the people, destroying everything; apathy toward the transformation of natural resources into wealth and the use of public wealth as if it were private; archaic and static ways of living and the hasty adoption of modern devices produced outside of Spain. The electric light, the typewriter, and the fountain-pen were popularized in Spain more quickly than in France. On the plane of the highest human values we find a manifestation of this sharp contrast in the poetic inwardness of Saint John of the Cross or of the quietist Miguel de Molinos, and the series of daring assaults to be found in Quevedo and Góngora, or in Goya's artistic transformation of the outer world. The Spaniards are not in the least averse to the acceptance and import of things and ideas from outside: “In 1480 Ferdinand and Isabella authorized the free importation of foreign books."Later they were subjected to censorship, and Spain began to attenuate its lines of communication with the rest of the world. Castro explains (p. 664) how: The Spaniards have expanded and contracted the objective zone of their life in a dramatic rhythm: they are not inclined to industrial activity, nor will they agree to live without industry. At certain moments the outward sallies, the efforts to break out of themselves, . . . give rise to problems that have no “normal"mode of solution. Perhaps the most spectacular effect of print in the Renaissance was the militant campaign of counter-Reformation mounted by Spaniards like St. Ignatius Loyola. His religious order, the first since printing began, embodied much visual stress in religious exercises, intense literary training, and military homogeneity of organization. Writing his Apologie of Two English Seminaries in 1581, Cardinal Allen explains the new militancy of missionary zeal among Catholics: "Books opened the way." The book as a militant missionary affair did appeal to the Spaniard who yet rejected commerce and industry. The Spaniard, according to Castro (p. 624), has always manifested hostility towards the written word: The Spaniard wants a system of justice based on value judgements, not on firm and rationally deduced principles. It is not accident that casuistry was fostered by the Spanish Jesuits, nor that the Frenchman Pascal should find this casuistry perversely immoral. It is written laws that the Spaniard fears and despises: “I find twenty chapters against you and only one that is with you," says a lawyer to the unfortunate litigant in the Rimado de palacio by Pero López de Ayala . . . It is one of Castro's principal themes that the structure of Spanish history is axiologically inclined between the literate West and the oral Moorish East. “Even Cervantes expresses more than once a longing for Moorish justice, in spite of his long captivity in Algiers." And it was the Moorish strain which immunized the Spaniards against the visual quantifications of literacy. Study of the Spanish case offers especially significant light on the diverse effects of literacy as print technology encounters unique cultures. The Spanish preference for living at the passionate centre may have an analogue in Russia where, unlike Japan, the effects of print technology have not extended to the discovery of consumer goods. And the oral Russian attitude to technology has a passionate character that may inure them, too, against the uses of literacy. Castro has a fine essay on “Incarnation in Don Quixote" in Cervantes across the Centuries (pp. 136-78) in which he observes that: "The preoccupation with noting the effects of reading upon the vital processes of readers is characteristically Spanish." Not only is this very fact the principal theme of Don Quixote: The effect of books (religious or profane) upon the life of the reader is an ever-present theme in the letters of the 16th century. The youth of Ignatius of Loyola was spent very much in tune with the novels of chivalry, which “he was very curious and fond of reading. But chance placed in his hands a life of Christ and a Flos Sanctorum. Not only did he begin to find enjoyment, but his heart also began to change, and he was filled with the desire to imitate and put into action what he read. While still undecided between earthly and heavenly values, he sheltered within him both the person that he had been and the one that that great incited man aspired to be: “Then there followed a sovereign light and wisdom, that Our Lord infused into his mind."(p. 163) By way of explanation of this peculiar Spanish consciousness of literary effects, Castro considers (p. 161) that: “To feel books as a living, animate, communicable and inciting reality is a human phenomenon belonging to Oriental tradition . . ." And it may be this oriental sensitivity to form, progressively numbed in the world of the alphabet, that accounts for the unique Spanish outlook on print: ". . . but the peculiarity of sixteenthcentury Spain was the attention accorded to the vital effect of the printed word upon its readers; the communicative power of the word was stressed above even errors and literary defects of the books themselves."(p. 164) The Spanish concern, then, was with the very medium of print as effecting a new ratio of the senses, a new mode of consciousness. As Casalduero puts it in Cervantes across the Centuries (p. 63): “Knight and Squire are neither opposites nor complements to one another. They are of the same nature with a difference in proportion. The comic spirit arises from the juxtaposition of these diverse proportions which are translated plastically." With regard to the peculiar Spanish stress on the medium of the printed word, Stephen Gilman in a chapter on "The Apocryphal ‘Quixote'" in the same book notes (p. 248) that authorship in Spain was secondary: “The reader is more important than the writer." But this is a long way from the idea of "what the public wants," for it is the notion of the medium of the language itself as a public trust rather than of the reader as private consumer. R. F. Jones encountered this attitude in the early sixteenth century in England: The refinement and adornement of the mother tongue were themselves considered the goal of literature. In other words, literature was considered instrumental to language, not language to literature. Writers are more frequently praised for what they have done for the medium of their expression than for the intrinsic value of their compositions. . . .81 ## Print had the effect of purifying Latin out of existence. Many great scholars have toiled at the study of the printed English vernacular. So rich is the field that any kind of approach is arbitrarily selective. Writing on "Tyndale and the English Language," G. D. Bone brings out: “Tyndale's task was to make real the common life of the gospels. He was to rediscover the parables. . . . Before they possessed the Bible in their own language few people considered that a story in some way acquired more weight if it were actually a reflection of common life."82 Implied here is the suggestion that the language of everyday life when seen evokes the need for a literature of everyday life. Print applied to vernaculars transformed them into mass media, which was not too strange since typography was the first form of mass production. But print applied to Latin was a disaster: "The efforts of the great Italian humanists, from Petrarch in his Africa to Cardinal Bembo, had the unexpected effect of purifying Latin out of active existence."83 C. S. Lewis in English Literature in the Sixteenth Century (p. 21) writes: It is largely to the humanists that we owe the curious conception of the 'classical' period in a language, the correct or normative period before which all was immature or archaic and after which all was decadent. Thus Scaliger tells us that Latin was rude' in Plautus, ripe' from Terence to Virgil, decadent in Martial and Juvenal, senile in Ausonius (Poetices viii). Vives says much the same (De tradendis disciplinis iv). Vida, more wildly, makes all Greek poetry after Homer a decline (Poeticorum I, 139). When once this superstition was established it led naturally to the belief that good writing in the fifteenth or sixteenth century meant writing which aped as closely as possible that of the chosen period in the past. All real development of Latin to meet the changing needs of new talent and new subject-matter was thus precluded; with one blow of 'his Mace petrific' the classical spirit ended the history of the Latin tongue. This was not what the humanists had intended. Febvre and Martin point also (in L'Apparation du livre, p. 479) to the role of the revival of ancient Roman script. "Even more, the return to the antique letters contributed to make of Latin a dead language." This is a basic point. The very letters which we associate with print itself were not medieval but Roman and were used by the humanists as part of their archeological effort. But the high visual quality of Roman script, so congenial to the printing press, was the main factor in ending the reign of Latin, even more than the revival of ancient styles by means of the printed word. Print permitted the direct visual confrontation of the ancient styles in all their fixity. The humanists were shocked to discover how far they were in their oral Latin modes from all classical precedent. They decided at once to teach Latin by the printed page rather than by discourse, as a means of stopping the further spread of their own barbarous medieval Latin speech and idiom. Lewis concludes (p. 21): “They succeeded in killing the medieval Latin: but not in keeping alive the schoolroom severities of their restored Augustanism." ## Typography extended its character to the regulation and fixation of languages. Later (pp. 83-4), Lewis contrasts the Renaissance schoolroom “classicality" with the oral and auditory freedom and variety of the medieval Latinity of Gavin Douglas, Bishop of Dunkeld. Douglas shocks us by being closer to Virgil than we. Once a man's eyes have been opened to this, he will find instances everywhere. Rosea cervice refulsit: "her nek schane like unto the rois in May."Do you prefer Dryden's "She turned and made appear her neck refulgent"? But refulsit cannot possibly have had for a Roman ear the "classical" quality which "refulgent" has for an English. It must have felt much more like "schane." What we feel as "classical" in the Augustans and the eighteenth century, that is to say, has to do with the large stratum of Latin neologism which was imported into English by the translators of the first age of print. R. F. Jones in his The Triumph of the English Language devotes much space to this basic matter of the vernacular and neologism. He also discusses at length two questions directly related to the printed form of any language at all, namely the drive for fixity of spelling and grammar. Febvre and Martin devote a chapter of their L'Apparition du livre to "Printing and Languages," pointing to "the essential role of print in the formation and fixation of languages. Until the beginning of the sixteenth century," the forms of written discourse, Latin or vernacular, "had continued to evolve after the pattern of the spoken language."(p. 477) Manuscript culture had no power to fix language or to transform a vernacular into a mass medium of national unification. Medievalists point to the impossibility of a Latin dictionary for the Middle Ages, simply because a medieval author felt free to define his terms progressively by the changing contexts of his thought. The idea of a word having a definite meaning fixed by some lexicon simply could not have occurred to him. In the same way, before writing, words do not have any external "sign," reference or significance. The word “oak" is oak, says the non-literate man; how else could it evoke the idea of oak? But print had just as far-reaching results in every aspect of language as writing had earlier. Whereas medieval vernaculars changed very much even from the twelfth to the fifteenth centuries, "from the beginning of the sixteenth century these matters were no longer thus. By the seventeenth century vernaculars everywhere begin to appear crystalized." Febvre and Martin then point to the efforts made in medieval chancelleries to standard verbal practices, and to the new centralism of Renaissance monarchies to fix languages. The new monarch would gladly have passed Acts of Uniformity, in the spirit of the printing press to extend not only to religion and thought but to spelling and grammar. Today in the electronic age of simultaneity all these policies have had to be reversed, beginning with the new drive for decentralism and pluralism in big business itself. That is why it is so easy now to understand the dynamic logic of printing as a centralizing and homogenizing force. For all the effects of print technology now stand in stark opposition to the electronic technology. In the sixteenth century the whole of ancient and medieval culture stood in equally conflicting relation to the new print technology. In Germany, more pluralistic and tribally diverse than the rest of Europe, "the unifying services of printing in the formation of a literary language" were strikingly effective. And, write Febvre and Martin (p. 483) : Luther made a language which in all domains approaches modern German. The enormous diffusion of his works, their literary quality, the quasi-sacred character which belonged in the eyes of the faithful to the text of the Bible and of the New Testament as established by him, all this soon made his language a model. Accessible immediately to all readers . . . the term employed by Luther finally conquered, and numerous words used only in medieval German were finally adopted universally. And his vocabulary imposed itself in so imperious a fashion that most printers did not dare to diverge from it in the least. Before looking at the English evidence for the same concern with regularity and uniformity among printers and print uses alike, it is well to remind ourselves of the rise of structural linguistics in our day. Structuralism in art and criticism stemmed, like non-Euclidean geometrics, from Russia. Structuralism as a term does not much convey its idea of inclusive synesthesia, an interplay of many levels and facets in a two-dimensional mosaic. But it is a mode of awareness in art language and literature which the West took great