their wit, and their imagination, about the works of Nature, more than was consistent with a sincere Inquiry into them.90 By a kind of metamorphosis it follows from Sprat's position (which tries to follow Bacon) that the modern scientist or philosopher is the true poet. And in order to purge the dross of the past from the present, Sprat sees the Royal Society as having “endeavour'd to separate the knowledge of Nature from the colours of Rhetorick, the devices of Fancy, or the delightful deceit of Fables." The procedure of separation and segmentation as the very technique of applied knowledge comes out clearly wherever a job of reducing antiquity arises. The members of the Royal Society being privy to this technique, repudiate "this vicious abundance of Phrase, this trick of Metaphors, this volubility of Tongue, which makes so great a noise in the world." They have therefore been most rigorous in putting into execution, the only Remedy that can be found for this extravagance: and that has been, a constant Resolution, to reject all the amplifications, digressions, and swellings of style: to return back to the primitive purity, and shortness, when men deliver'd so many things, almost in an equal number of words. They have exacted from all their members, a close, naked, natural way of speaking; positive expressions, clear senses; a native easiness; bringing all things as near the Mathematical plainness, as they can: and preferring the language of Artizans, Countrymen, and Merchants, before that, of Wits, or Scholars.91 # Print created national uniformity and government centralism, but also individualism and opposition to government as such. At this point of reduction of all language to one mode, we are not really disengaged from the original meaning of print in transforming the vernaculars into mass media of nationalist significance. It will repay us to dip more than a century behind Sprat in order to follow the contours of the original manifestation of print as a means of uniformity. Karl Deutsch writes in his Nationalism and Social Communication (pp. 78–9): a nationality is a people pressing to acquire a measure of effective control over the behavior of its members. .. . nationalities turn into nations when they acquire power to back up their aspirations. Finally, if their nationalistic members are successful, and a new or old state organization is put into their service, then at last the nation has become sovereign, and a nation-state has come into being. Carleton Hayes has made it plain that there was no nationalism before the Renaissance, and we have now seen enough of the character of print technology to know why this should be so. For if print made the vernaculars into mass media, they also constituted a means of central government control of society beyond anything that even the Romans had known with papyrus and alphabet and paved roads. But the very nature of print creates two conflicting interests as between producers and consumers, and between rulers and ruled. For print as a form of centrally organized mass-production ensures that the problem of “freedom" will henceforth be paramount in all social and political discussion. In Library Week, March 17, 1950, the Minneapolis Morning Tribune, in an editorial entitled "The Right to Read," quoted a joint statement by Herbert Hoover and Harry Truman: "We Americans know that if freedom means anything, it means the right to think. And the right to think means the right to readanything, written anywhere, by any man, at any time." This is an impressive statement of consumer doctrine based on the homogeneity of print. If print is uniform, it should create uniform rights for writer and reader, publisher and consumer. The American colonies were first settled by people who had long had experience of the exactly opposite idea of the meaning of print. The producer-oriented or ruler-oriented version of the message of Gutenberg is simply that it is the ruler's right to impose uniform patterns of behaviour on society. The police state precedes the consumer society. It is interesting, therefore, to read an American account of Freedom of the Press in England, 1476–1776: The Rise and Decline of Government Controls, by F. S. Siebert, for it provides a fine view of the relative advantages in producer-imposed versus consumer-created uniformity. It is the perpetual and ironic alternation of these two positions that gives to Alexis de Tocqueville's Democracy in America its rich fascination. The same contrast between the interests of centralized government and those of settlers is the theme of The Fur Trade in Canada by Harold Innis. For, writes Innis (p. 388), it was the interest of the centre to organize the margins for the production of staples, not of consumer goods: Large scale production of raw materials was encouraged by improvement of technique of production, of marketing, and of transport as well as by improvement in the manufacture of the finished product. As a consequence, energy in the colony was drawn into the production of the staple commodity both directly and indirectly. Population was involved directly in the production of the staple and indirectly in the production of facilities promoting production. Agriculture, industry, transportation, trade, finance, and governmental activities tend to become subordinate to the production of the staple for a more highly specialized manufacturing community. These general tendencies may be strengthened by governmental policy as in the mercantile system but the importance of these policies varies in particular industries. Canada remained British in spite of free trade and chiefly because she continued as an exporter of staples to a progressively industrialized mother country. The War of Independence of 1776, Innis explains, was the clash between centre and margin, which is identical with the conflict between conformity and non-conformity, politics and literature, in the sixteenth century. And just as “a colony engaged in the fur trade was not in a position to develop industries to compete with manufactures of the mother country," so the margins also developed a merely consumer attitude to literature and the arts, such as has lingered until this century. The non-conformists inclined to the reader or consumer side, interpreting the meaning of print to be private and individual. The conformists inclined to the author-publisher, ruler of the new force. It may or may not be significant that most of English literature since printing has been created by this ruler-oriented minority. Says Siebert (p. 25): “The Tudor policy of strict control over the press in the interest of the safety of the state was maintained throughout the sixteenth century." It was inevitable that with printing the sixteenth century should also witness “a large increase in the powers—executive, legislative, and judicialof the Council (or Privy Council) at the expense of both Parliament and the older courts, but to the distinct advantage of the crown." But as the book market enlarged and the habit of much reading spread widely toward the end of the century, the consumer revolt against central controls got ever stronger. L. B. Wright's splendid account of Middle-Class Culture in Elizabethan England provides an image of the complex uses of print to foster many varieties of self-education and self-help. It becomes obvious how the first age of readers was not merely seeking diversion but instruction in methods of applied knowledge. The reader of Wright's work will easily appreciate how the centralist structure of Elizabeth was being undermined from within by a new variety of rugged individualists: Isolated groups had already begun to challenge the system of government controls, the printers for economic reasons, the Puritans for religious reasons, and at least one member of Parliament for political reasons. Printers like Wolfe chafed under the rules of the Stationers Company. They rebelled against the printing privileges and the patents of monopoly. The religious nonconformists, denied the privilege of appealing to public opinion, darted about inserting wedges with which they eventually wrecked the entire structure.92 It would need a book in itself to explain how the Enclosure movement was related to the centralism of the print process. But no further example of the power of print to enhance central power need be sought beyond the Act of Uniformity of Elizabeth in 1559. The bill was opposed in the Lower House of Convocation on the ground that no government could possess “authority to treat of or to define whatever concerns the faith, the sacraments and ecclesiastical discipline . . ."But liturgy and church observance were an easy mark for print, depending as they long had on book form. As from June 24, 1559, the Prayer Book of 1552 was to be “in full force and effect," all ministers being thenceforth “bounden to say and use the Matins, Evensong, celebration of the Lord's Supper and administration of each of the sacraments, and all their common and open prayer" as these are in the book “and none other or other wise." In 1562 the Book of Homilies was issued for universal public reading from every pulpit. Their content is not our concern, but rather their being uniformly imposed on the entire public. By making the vernacular a mass medium, print created a new instrument of political centralism previously unavailable. And at the same time, as personal and political conformity became matters of sharp formulation, scholars and teachers began a concerted drive for correct spelling and grammar. ## Nobody ever made a grammatical error in a non-literate society. The intensity of the ferment concerning orthography is only a useful index to the novelty of print and its effects of central conformity. Charles Carpenter Fries, in his American English Grammar, studies the question of the clash between written and oral discourse: "Only the sixty-six most common strong verbs have resisted the pull of the regular pattern. . . . As a matter of fact, during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries there was a strong tendency to eliminate the distinction of form between the past tense and the past participle in all of these verbs . . ."(p. 61) 92Siebert, Freedom of the Press in England, 1476–1776, p. 103. Print had a levelling function on all verbal and social forms, it had been said over and over again. And where print has left some inflections unchanged, as in "who-whom," there yawns the great booby-trap of "correct grammar"—that is to say, the abyss between visual and oral modes. The status of these issues in the electronic age is sufficiently indicated in a Time report9ª from the British House of Lords: In debating the merits of a bill concerning the rights and liabilities of hotel proprietors, Britain's House of Lords found itself up against a momentous question: should an a or an an precede hotel? In favor of an was Lord Faringdon, who begged “your Lordships to join me in making a demonstration in favor of elegance." Lord Conesford agreed, pointed out that h words that are not accented on the first syllable demand an."I believe," said he, "that every one of your Lordships would say ‘a Harrow boy,' but would also speak of ‘an Harrovian.'" But what, asked Lord Rea, would Lord Conesford do with one-syllable words? "In the case of an inn sign of a public house, would he look at it as A Horse and a Hound’ or ‘An Orse and an Ound'?" Lord Merthyr fell back on no less an authority than Fowler to prove that an hotel would be hopelessly oldfashioned—but to no avail. When the debate was over, the ans won out. Said a-man Lord Merthyr of an-man Lord Faringdon, an Etonian like himself: "It is rather sad to think that the noble Lord and I should have been educated in the same place, and at the same time, and that 40 years later we should come here to differ upon this question." It is presumably impossible to make a grammatical error in a non-literate society, for nobody ever heard one. The difference between oral and visual order sets up the confusions of the ungrammatical. In the same way the passion for spelling reform in the sixteenth century arose from the new effort to adjust sight and sound. Sir Thomas Smith had argued that “a letter had an inherent nature which made it appropriate to one sound only." This is the one-thing-at-a-time of the natural victim of print. And there were many who extended this logic to the meanings of words as well. But many rugged characters like Richard Mulcaster rallied against this visual logic, just as Dr. Johnson was to rally against the visual logic of the doctrine of the dramatic unities. ## The reduction of the tactile qualities of life and language constitute the refinement sought in the Renaissance and repudiated now in the electronic age. A major theme of the passionate vernacular nationalists brings us to the effect of print in swiftly depriving language of many of its tactile qualities. Until the nineteenth century there was a common boast of “refinement" of the English tongue that had occurred since the sixteenth century. In the sixteenth century there was still plenty of brogue and dialect to confer tactility and resonance. Even by 1577 Holinshed could feel happy about the gradual refinement between the language of the Saxons and the relative perfection of his own time. The old Saxon English was and hard and rough kinde of speach, god wotte, when our nation was brought first into acquaintance withall, but now chaunged with vs into a farre more fine and easie kind of vtterunce, and so polished and helped with new and milder wordes that it is to be aduouched howe there is no one speache vnder the sonne spoken in our time, that hath or can haue more varietie of words, copie of phrases, or figures or floures of eloquence, than hath our English tongue.94 The reduction of tactile quality in life and language is ever the mark of refinement. And it was not till the pre-Raphaelites and Hopkins that a deliberate campaign for Saxon tactile values in language was to begin in English. Yet tactility is the mode of interplay and of being rather than of separation and of lineal sequence. A brief look at the effects of print in reshaping our ideas of space and of time will bridge across into the next centuries after printing. For it is quite impossible to continue to advance on all fronts in the present book. ## The new time sense of typographic man is cinematic and sequential and pictorial. With the stepping up of the isolated intensity and quantity by print the individual is ushered into a world of movement and isolation. In every aspect of experience and affairs the stress is on separation of functions, analysis of components, and isolation of the moment. For with the isolation of the visual, the feeling of interplay and of light through the mesh of being yields, and "Human thought no longer feels itself a part of things."What Shakespeare refers to in Lear as the "precious square of sense" probably has reference to the traditional “square of opposition" in logic and to that fourpart analogy of proportionality which is the interplay of sense and reason. But with the isolation of the visual by this new intensity, Reason is also . . . isolated from exterior time, [and] it feels also equally detached from the time of its mental life. The modifications which happen to affect it by turns can, indeed, in succeeding each other, give it the idea of an interior duration. But this duration, consisting in modes which replace one another, is by no means the duration of the thinking being; it is solely the duration of the successive ensemble of man's thoughts. Separated from the duration of things, and even from that of the modes of its existence, the human consciousness finds itself reduced to existence without duration. It is always of the present moment.95 This is Macbeth's world of "Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow." This, says Poulet, is the experience of modern man, and Montaigne, in his Essays, was the first to depict it. He set out to snapshot his own mind in the act of reading and reflection by way of la peinture de la pensée. In this respect Montaigne more than anybody else, perhaps, carried out the lesson of print as by a kind of applied knowledge. He bred up a great race of selfportrayers by means of the mental snapshot, of the sequence of the arrested and isolated moments of experience which anticipate the cinema: “At first, on this island of the moment which isolates him but which he fills with his presence, man still keeps something of the joy he experienced in the Renaissance when he felt that he existed in all the reaches of space and duration. He is now given no more than a moment at a time, but each moment can be one of illumination and fullness. .. ."96 Inseparably, however, from visual awareness and order, is the sense of discontinuity and a feeling of self-alienation: “Every hour we are swept away from ourselves," says Boileau, and a hectic urgency invades the time sense: "Aware that the instant in which he thinks and wishes is slipping from under him, man hurls himself into a new instant, an instant of a new thought and a new wish: 'But man without rest in his mad course / Flutters incessantly from thought to thought."97 From the isolated present moment, Poulet writes (p. 19), “God the creator and preserver is absent. The principal actor is no longer on the scene. For the supereminent role of the first cause we find substituted the play of second causes. In place of God there are feelings, sensations, and whatever causes sensations." Well, what causes sensations such as the above is unmistakably print technology with its power like Lear's “darker purpose" to divide the little kingdom of man into a batch of jarring atoms, and uniformly homogenized components. Existence becomes, then, not being but only "flux, shadow, and perpetual variation"; “I do not depict being," says Montaigne; "I depict passage."Nothing could be more cinematic than that. Renouncing the depiction of what is favour of an illusion achieved by a sequence of static "shots"—this is typography in extenso. Let us recall King Lear as a live model of the stripping of human institutions, and consciousness itself, by the progressive isolation of the senses. Parallel to this psychological experiment in our time is the deprivation of sense under controlled conditions. But to anybody first undergoing the print experience there was an extreme specialism of sense, not felt again, perhaps, until the movies and then, shortly afterwards, radio. The Baroque painters did exactly as did Montaigne in shifting attention to the peripheries of vision. Poulet is quite right in saying (p. 43), therefore: But to renounce the depiction of being for the depiction of passage is not only an enterprise of unprecedented denudation; it is a task of extreme difficulty. To depict passage is not simply to seize oneself in an object which fades away and by its own blurring lets the self appear more distinctly; it is not to paint a portrait of oneself which would be all the more faithful by the disappearance of all the traces of occasions which had led its creation. It is to seize the self at the instant when the occasions remove from it its old form and impose upon it a new one. It may be a mistake for Poulet or anybody else to see in this new strategy of Montaigne some extraordinarily profound discovery of enterprise. But just as the infinitesimal calculus was devised to translate non-visual experience into homogeneous visual terms, so Montaigne's seizing the imperceptible instant or facet, as "diversely and imperceptibly our soul darts out her passions,"is entering "the home of what Leibnitz was later to call the infinitely small entities. . . . It is a wager to attempt to choose and lay hold of so many nimble little motions'. . . . Thus the self is dissolved not only from 97Ibid., p. 16. instant to instant but even in the middle of the instant-passage, in a prismatic play like that of a spray of water."98 What is being presented here is identical with the methods of precise, visual quantification described by John U. Nef earlier. As Nef showed, these minute statistical methods were the means of applied or translated knowledge. Montaigne had all the experiences and techniques of the impressionist film of our own time. And both modes of awareness are direct extrapolations of typography when applied to the spoken word. In the midst of impressionism symbolism strove to recover the unified field of being once more. It is easy today in an electronic milieu to understand the novelty of segmental impressionist devices as they emerged from the sixteenth until the end of the nineteenth century. They are inseparable from the Gutenberg galaxy of events. And so with Descartes, for whom science is the anticipation of causes with effects: “Foundation of an admirable science which his mind conceives as an ensemble of Concatenated' things: world of the catena, of pure determinism. Spontaneity, liberty, piety have no part in it."99 Having reduced knowledge to a merely visual mode of sequence, "nothing can assure us of one instant's being continued in another; nothing can guarantee to us that a bridge will be built between this instant and the following instant. . .. This is the strongest anxiety of all; the ‘terror,' as Descartes calls it; the terror of failure in time against which there is no recourse except by a veritable leap to God."100 Poulet later (p. 357) describes this "leap": In this manner the idea of God reappears to Descartes. Long neglected by the primary consciousness absorbed in the “science admirable," it reappears in this spontaneous act of the secondary consciousness given to him by his dream. From this moment, so to speak, a change of atmosphere will occur in those dreamlike regions which seem to lead to some inevitable reality of despair. But in order for Descartes to arrive finally at the true "shelter” and to find the genuine “remedy," he must endure other trials. The spontaneous act by which he turns toward God does not possess at this moment the necessary efficacy: it is not pure spontaneity; it is not addressed directly to a God of the present, but to a God of the past . . . The denuding of conscious life and its reduction to a single level created the new world of the unconscious in the seventeenth century. The stage has been cleared of the archetypes or postures of individual mind, and is ready for the archetypes of the collective unconscious. It is thus that the seventeenth century, having emerged into a merely visual science in its conscious life, is reduced to recourse to the world of dreams. The mechanical spirit of movable types in precise lines, thus, could not have been given a more faithful reflection than by Descartes. We have earlier cited his new consumer idea of philosophy, exhorting his reader to go through his work “in its entirety like a novel without forcing the attention unduly upon it or stopping at difficulties." The notion of moving steadily along on single planes of narrative awareness is totally alien to the nature of language and of consciousness. But it is highly consistent with the nature of the printed word. Going closely with this lineal denudation of language is the associated impression of mechanical repetition and recurrence which came to weigh ever more heavily on the Renaissance mind: Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore, So do our minutes hasten to their end; Each changing place with that which goes before, In sequent toil all forwards do contend.101 But it had first a comic aspect which not only Shakespeare but Sidney exploited in his Astrophel and Stella: You that do dictionary's method bring Into your rimes, running in rattling rows; But the examples of the new power of visual lineality are innumerable, onc of the most curious being the King James (1611) version of the Lord's Prayer in which "debt" becomes "trespass." The reduction of the multilevelled idea of “debt" and duty is thus confined to the written legal meaning, and the idea of “stepping out of line" is substituted for a complex of theological and moral implication. Paradoxically, then, the first age of print introduced the first age of the unconscious. Since print allowed only a narrow segment of sense to dominate the other senses, the refugees had to discover another home for themselves. We have seen how aware of this meaning of the effects of print were the Spaniards. Don Quixote is as much as Lear a demonstration of the dichotomies of mind and heart and sense instituted by the printed book. More practical nations preferred to live out these consequences rather than to meditate upon them in live art models. Lancelot Law Whyte in his The Unconscious before Freud gives some idea of the rise of the "discovery" of the unconscious as a result of the restriction of conscious life within the extreme limits of print technology. "Sink deep or touch not the Cartesian spring" is the relevant jest of Joyce in Finnegans Wake (p. 301). But for centuries to come the West chose to be motivated by this simple mechanism and to live as in a dream from which artists strove to awaken us. Whyte says (pp. 59–60) : There have probably been individuals in every culture who knew that the factors of which we are not directly aware influence thought and behavior. As I have suggested, this recognition must have been widespread, for example in China where a more balanced and unified view of mind than that of Cartesian Europe was prevalent in some periods. So far as the present book is concerned, it is not helpful to talk about the unconscious as the domain of the unknown, or as an area more profound than ordinary consciousness. Even a restricted consciousness is far more interesting than the unconscious profound. The concern here is to demonstrate how by stressing the visual sense component in the sense ratio, we have ourselves created that huge area of bathos and dulness which Pope celebrated in The Dunciad and Swift in The Tale of a Tub. The unconscious is a direct creation of print technology, the ever-mounting slag-heap of rejected awareness. No thinker ever imagined that "body" and "mind"—insofar as the terms are valid—are without apparent interactions. We must leave it to the Cartesian scholars, as Descartes did, to explain what it meant to postulate, as one of the first products of clear thinking, two independent realms which are none the less so intimately interdependent. The lesson is that the more brilliant the light cast on two neighboring realms, the more profound the obscurity into which their interactions are thrown.102 Philosophy was as naive as science in its unconscious acceptance of the assumptions or dynamic of typography. The massive and abounding presence of printed matter and its derivatives in new space and time organization gave prestige and authority to the absurdities here cited by Whyte. Thus, for example, today children in schools, when invited to consider the moronic quality of media offerings, are shocked. They entertain an unspoken assumption that whatever the adult world takes the time and trouble to perform is valid. They assume that grown-ups en masse would never be engaged in a depraved activity. It is only after teaching the languages of the media, from script to print and trom print to TV, that this obvious fact is borne in on the mind. A Descartes is validated by his milieu, and by people engaged in living the mechanism he talks. Today in the new electronic milieu Descartes gets short shrift and people now give to the unconscious the same fragmentary attention and acceptance that they had previously given to the bright segmental moments of Cartesian awareness. Is it not possible to emancipate ourselves from the subliminal operation of our own technologies? Is not the essence of education civil defence against media fall-out? Since the effort has never been made in any culture the answer may seem to lie in doubt. There may be some hitherto unsuspected and wise motive for mental sleep and self-hypnosis in man which the confrontation of the effects of media technology would reveal. However this may be, it is plain that the pseudo-dichotomies and visual quantities imposed on our psychology by print began in the seventeenth century to assume the character of consumer packages or “systems" of philosophy. They are of the kind that can be described and presented in a few minutes, but, thanks to the mesmerism of print, were to occupy the attention of generations. Philosophies from Descartes onward are diverse in the way in which a steam engine differs from a gas or diesel engine. And Bergson, who tried to end it all, is as mechanical as his enemy Descartes, although he preferred a kind of cosmic fuel for his system. Once grant the stripping and segmenting process for language and experience such as Shakespeare indicates in Lear, and there is no possible stay. The rollercoaster is off over the Cartesian, Lockeian, Kantian course with all the built-in panic and Angst that could be asked for. Whyte sums it up (pp. 60–1): During the late seventeenth century three main attitudes dominated European philosophical thought, corresponding to three interpretations of the nature of existence. Materialism treated physical bodies and their motions as the primary reality; idealism took it to be spirit or mind; while Cartesian dualism postulated two independent realms: the mental res cogitans and the material res extensa. For the first two schools there was no difficulty in recognizing unconscious mentality though under other names. To the materialists all mentality was physiological, and the existence of unconscious physiological processes, similar to and influencing thought, was an immediate consequence of the fact that our direct awareness of the processes in our bodies is restricted. And to the idealists all natural processes were the expression of a universal mind or world spirit of which the human individual has no direct knowledge, though it shares, in some degree, the characteristics of human mentality. Thus for the idealists also there was no problem; the unconscious mind of the individual was not in any way surprising; it was merely a part of the universal mind to which the individual awareness enjoyed no direct access. But to the third, Cartesian, school the admission of the existence of unconscious mental processes presented an acute philosophical challenge, for it demanded the discarding of the original conception of the dualism, as one of two independent realms, matter in motion and mind necessarily aware. For those who were loyal to Descartes, all that was not conscious in man was material and physiological, and therefore not mental. The last sentence will suggest to some that the present book is material and physiological rather than mental in its assumptions. That is not the case, nor is it the theme. The point is, rather, how do we become aware of the effects of alphabet or print or telegraph in shaping our behaviour? For it is absurd and ignoble to be shaped by such means. Knowledge does not extend but restrict the areas of determinism. And the influence of unexamined assumptions derived from technology leads quite unnecessarily to maximal determinism in human life. Emancipation from that trap is the goal of all education. But the unconscious is no escape-hatch from a world of denuded categories any more than Leibnitzian or any other monism is a resolution of Cartesian dualism. There is still the full ratio or interplay of all the senses in concert, which permits light through. That concert comes to an end with the stepping up of one sense by technology, and by the insistence of light on. The nightmare of light on is the world of Pascal: “Reason acts slowly and with so many views upon so many principles which always must be present, that at any time it may fall asleep or get lost, for want of having all its principles present."103 Heidegger surf-boards along on the electronic wave as triumphantly as Descartes rode the mechanical wave. This kind of ballet of mind choreographed by Gutenberg by means of the isolated visual sense, is about as philosophical as Kant's assumption of Euclidean space as a priori. But the alphabet and kindred gimmicks have long served man as a subliminal source of philosophical and religious assumptions. Certainly Martin Heidegger would seem to be on better ground in using the totality of language itself as philosophical datum. For there, at least in non-literate periods, will be the ratio among all the senses. But this is not to recommend non-literacy, any more than the uses made of print are a judgment against literacy. In fact, Heidegger seems to be quite unaware of the role of electronic technology in promoting his own non-literate bias in language and philosophy. An enthusiasm for Heidegger's excellent linguistics could easily stem from naive immersion in the metaphysical organicism of our electronic milieu. If the mechanism of Descartes looks paltry today, it may be for the same subliminal reasons that it looked resplendent in its own time. In that sense all fashions betoken somnambulism of some kind, and are one means of critical orientation to the psychic effects of technology. Perhaps this is the way to help those who want to say: "But is there nothing good about print?" The theme of this book is not that there is anything good or bad about print but that unconsciousness of the effect of any force is a disaster, especially a force that we have made ourselves. And it is quite easy to test the universal effects of print on Western thought after the sixteenth century, simply by examining the most extraordinary developments in any art or science whatever. Fragmented and homogeneous lineality, which appears as discovery in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, will become the popular novelty or utilitarian fashion of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. That is, mechanism persists as “novelty" into the electronic age that began with men like Faraday. Some may feel that life is too valuable and delightful a thing to be spent in such arbitrary and involuntary automatism. Pascal uses the Montaigne kodak trick of snapshotting moments in order to get into a misery of dilemmas: "When we love ardently, it is always a novelty to see the person beloved."But this spontaneity is the product of simultaneity and instantaneous profusion. And the mind must take the elements one by one. Here then is the gratuitous and subliminal component of typography in Pascal. All experience is segmental and must be processed sequentially. Therefore, rich experience eludes the wretched mesh or sieve of our attention. "One does not show his greatness by being at one extreme, but in touching both extremes at once, and in filling in all the intermediate space."104 Of course, by setting up this little Gutenberg rack to anguish his spirit, Pascal insured himself public notice and acceptance: “Those great efforts of the mind, which the soul occasionally reaches, are such as it cannot sustain. It reaches them only by a bound, not as on a throne, continuously, but for an instant only."105 Pascal indicates that the old kind of consciousness was kingly, continuous, "as on a throne." The old king had a role, not a job. He was an inclusive centre-without-a-margin. The new consciousness like the new prince is a harassed executive, exercising a job, applying knowledge to problems, and having only momentary contacts with his marginal subjects, who are all ambitious rival segments anyway. Says Poulet in what must be an irony (p. 85): "For an instant! Shattering return to the misery of the human condition and to the tragedy of the experience of time: in the very instant man catches his prey, experience dupes him, and he knows he is duped. His prey is a shadow. In the instant he catches the instant, and the instant passes, for it is instant." One gets the uneasy feeling that these philosophers have undertaken expressly to dramatize the mechanism of Gutenberg in our sensibilities, acting it out like all the King's horses and all the King's men, around old Humpty Dumpty. How can one discover the principle of human identity amidst lineal sequences of moments? The self is obliged, such is the discontinuity of these typographic moments, “each time to forget itself in order to re-invent itself, to reinvent itself in order to regain interest in itself, in short to effect a mocking simulacrum of continued creation, thanks to which it believes it will escape the authentication of its nothingness, and out of its nothingness refashion a reality."106 Yet homogeneous repetition à la Gutenberg still leaves something to be desired in the way of a self. How is one to reason with the person who feeds himself into a buzz-saw because the teeth are invisible? Such was the fate of the unified “self" in the age of print segmentation. But it is hard to believe in the reality of anybody who in any age could take seriously the Gutenberg assumptions when applied to the ordering of life. James Joyce certainly thought he had found in Vico a philosopher who had some better cultural awareness than those moved by the “Cartesian spring." And Vico, like Heidegger, is a philologist among philosophers. His time theory of "ricorsi" has been interpreted by lineal minds to imply "recurrence." A recent study of him brushes this notion aside.107 Vico conceives the time-structure of history as “not linear, but contrapuntal. It must be traced along a number of lines of development . . ." For Vico all history is contemporary or simultaneous, a fact given, Joyce would add, by virtue of language itself, the simultaneous storehouse of all experience. And in Vico, the concept of recurrence cannot "be admitted at the level of the course of the nations through time": “The establishment of providence establishes universal history, the total presence of the human spirit to itself in idea. In this principle, the supreme 'ricorso' is achieved by the human spirit in idea, and it possesses itself, past, present, and future, in an act which is wholly consonant with its own historicity."io8 ## Typography cracked the voices of silence. From the plastic and audile-tactile world of southern Italy came an answer to the lineal anguish of the segmenters of the Gutenberg milieu. So thought Michelet and Joyce. Let us briefly return to the space question as affected by Gutenberg. Everybody is familiar with the phrase, "the voices of silence." It is the traditional word for sculpture. And if an entire year of any college program were spent in understanding that phrase, the world might soon have an adequate supply of competent minds. As the Gutenberg typography filled the world the human voice closed down. People began to read silently and passively as consumers. Architecture and sculpture dried up too. In literature only people from backward oral areas had any resonance to inject into the language the Yeats, the Synges, the Joyces, Faulkners, and Dylan Thomases. These themes are linked in the following paragraph by le Corbusier, which makes plain why stone and water are inseparable: Around the building, inside the building, there are definite places, mathematical points, which integrate the whole and establish platforms from which the sound of speech would reverberate in all parts. These are the predestined sites for sculpture. And that sculpture would be neither a metope, a tympanum, nor a porch. It would be much more subtle and precise. The site would be a place which would be like the focus of a parabola or an ellipse, like the precise point of intersection of the different planes which compose the architecture. From there the word, the voice 107A. Robert Caponigri, Time and Idea: The Theory of History in Giambattista Vico, 108Ibid., p. 142. would issue. Such places would be focal points for sculpture, as they are focal points for acoustics. Take up your stand here, sculptor, if your voice is worth hearing.109 It is merely trite to mention that man became the centre via Gutenberg only to be demoted at once by Copernicus to the status of a marginal speck. Dangling for centuries at the end of a chain of being, man's lineality was interrupted by Darwin whose lineality highlighted a missing segment in the sequence. Anyhow, Darwin broke up anthropocentric consciousness just as Copernicus had done for space. Yet till Freud, man somehow clung to some scrap of intuition of consciousness as tinged by spontaneity. But Freud ended that by his image of mind as ripple on the ocean of unconsciousness. Unless the West had long been processed by print these metaphors would have carried no interest whatever. Let us turn to a book by a mathematician, Sir Edmund Whittaker, which explains how some of this came to be. A passage of Kant's from the Critique of Practical Reason (p. 14) will usher us into this territory: "Since mathematics irrefutably proves the infinite divisibility of space which empiricism cannot allow, there is an obvious contradiction between the highest possible demonstrable evidence and the alleged inferences from empirical principles. . . . One might ask like Cheseldren's blind man, 'Which deceives me, sight or touch?' Empiricism is based on touch, but rationalism on a necessity which can be seen." Not only did Kant not know that number is audile-tactile and infinitely repeatable, but that the visual, in abstraction from the audile-tactile, sets up a world of antinomies and dichotomies of insoluble but irrelevant kind. Sir Edmund Whittaker, in his Space and Spirit (p. 121), explains in terms of the recent mathematics and physics, the end of the Renaissance idea of continuous, uniform space that came in with the notion of visual quantification: At this point we escape from the order of the Newtonian cosmos. . . . In the argument as usually presented the language used is appropriate to the case when each effect has only one cause, and each cause has only one effect, so that all chains of causation are simple linear sequences. If we now take into account the fact that an effect may be produced by the joint action of several distinct causes, and also that a cause may give rise to more than one effect, the chains of causation may be branched, and also may have junctions with one another; but since the rule still holds, that the cause always precedes the effect in time, it is evident that the proof is not essentially affected. Moreover, the argument does not require that all chains of causation, when traced backward, should terminate on the same ultimate point: in other words, it does not lead necessarily to the conclusion that the universe acquired its entire stock-in-trade in a single consignment at the Creation, and that it has received nothing since. Thus it does not warrant the view, so common among the deistic Newtonians of the eighteenth century, that the system of the world is absolutely closed and has developed according to purely mechanical laws, so that all the events of history must have been implicit in its specification at the primeval instant. On the contrary, the recent trend of physical thought (as will be evident from what has been said about the principle of causality) is in favor of the view that in the physical domain, there is a continual succession of intrusions or new creations. The universe is very far from being a mere mathematical consequence of the disposition of the particles at the Creation, and is a much more interesting and eventful place than any determinist imagines. That passage explains the title and procedure of the present book, but is in no way necessary to the configurations with which we are dealing. Proneness to look for mono-linear causation may explain why print culture has long been blind to most other kinds of causation. And it has been the consensus of modern science and philosophy that we have now shifted from "cause" to "configuration" in all fields of study and analysis. This is why for a physicist like Whittaker, it seems as unfortunate for St. Anselm in the early Middle Ages to have tried to establish the existence of God by pure reason as for Newton to have taken the opposite tack (pp. 126–7): "Newton, though profoundly interested in theology, seems to have held that the physicist can give his undivided attention to investigating the laws which will enable him to predict phenomena, and can leave the deeper problems entirely out of account: he can make it his purpose to describe rather than to explain." This was the Cartesian technique of separation that ensured that all the neglected aspects of experience would be rolled back into the unconscious. This strategy, which grew from lineal specialism and separation of functions, created the world of dulness, bathos, and mock-profundity that Swift and Pope and Sterne made fun of. Newton was quite eligible as hero for The Dunciad and certainly got a place in Gulliver's Travels. We have seen how the alphabet involved the Greeks in a fictional "Euclidean Space."The effect of the phonetic alphabet in translating the audile-tactile world into a visual world, was both in physics and in literature to create the fallacy of “content." Whittaker writes thus (p. 79): “Aristotle regarded the place of a body as being defined by the inner surface of a body containing it: bodies which are not contained in other bodies are not in any place, and therefore the first or outermost heaven is not in any place: space and time do not exist beyond it. He concluded that the total extent of the universe is finite." The Gutenberg galaxy was theoretically dissolved in 1905 with the discovery of curved space, but in practice it had been invaded by the telegraph two generations before that. Whittaker notes (p. 98) that the space of Newton and Gassendi was "so far as geometry was concerned, the space of Euclid: “it was infinite, homogeneous, and completely featureless, one point being just like another . . ."Much earlier our concern had been to explain why this fiction of homogeneity and uniform continuity had derived from phonetic writing, especially in print form. Whittaker says that from a physics point of view the Newtonian space was “mere emptiness into which things could be put." But even for Newton, the gravitational field seemed incompatible with this neutral space. “As a matter of fact, the successors of Newton felt this difficulty; and, having started with a space that was in itself simply nonentity having no property except a capacity for being occupied, they proceeded to fill it several times over with ethers designed to provide electric, magnetic, and gravitational forces, and to account for the propagation of light."(pp. 98-9) Perhaps no more striking evidence of the merely visual and uniform character of the space was given than in the famous phrase of Pascal: "Le silence éternel des espaces infinis m'effraie." Some meditation on why silent space should be so terrifying yields much insight into the cultural revolution going on in human sensibilities by the visual stress of the printed book. But the absurdity of speaking of space as a neutral container will never trouble a culture which has separated its visual awareness from the other senses. Yet, says Whittaker (p. 100) “in Einstein's conception, space is no longer the stage on which the drama of physics is performed: it is itself one of the performers; for gravitation, which is a physical property, is entirely controlled by curvature, which is a geometrical property of space." With this recognition of curved space in 1905 the Gutenberg galaxy was officially dissolved. With the end of lineal specialisms and fixed points of view, compartmentalized knowledge became as unacceptable as it had always been irrelevant. But the effect of such a segregated way of thinking has been to make science a departmental affair, having no influence on eye and thought except indirectly through its applications. In recent years this isolationist attitude has weakened. And it has been the effort of this book to explain how the illusion of segregation of knowledge had become possible by the isolation of the visual sense by means of alphabet and typography. Perhaps it cannot be said too often. This illusion may have been a good or a bad thing. But there can only be disaster arising from unawareness of the causalities and effects inherent in our own technologies. In the later seventeenth century there is a considerable amount of alarm and revulsion expressed concerning the growing quantity of printed books. The first hopes for a great reform of human manners by means of the book had met disappointment, and in 1680 Leibnitz was writing: I fear we shall remain for a long time in our present confusion and indigence through our own fault. I even fear that after uselessly exhausting curiosity without obtaining from our investigations any considerable gain for our happiness, people may be disgusted with the sciences, and that a fatal despair may cause them to fall back into barbarism. To which result that horrible mass of books which keeps on growing might contribute very much. For in the end the disorder will become nearly insurmountable; the indefinite multitude of authors will shortly expose them all to the danger of general oblivion; the hope of glory animating many people at work in studies will suddenly cease; it will be perhaps as disgraceful to be an author as it was formerly honorable. At best, one may amuse himself with little books of the hour which will run their course in a few years and will serve to divert a reader from boredom for a few moments, but which will have been written without any design to promote our knowledge or to deserve the appreciation of posterity. I shall be told that since so many people write it is impossible for all their works to be preserved. I admit that, and I do not entirely disapprove those little books in fashion which are like the flowers of a springtime or like the fruits of an autumn, scarcely surviving a year. If they are well made, they have the effect of a useful conversation, not simply pleasing and keeping the idle out of mischief but helping to shape the mind and language. Often their aim is to induce something good in men of our time, which is also the end I seek by publishing this little work . . . 110 Leibnitz here envisages the book as the natural successor, as well as executioner, of scholastic philosophy, which might yet return. The book as a spur to fame and as the engine of immortality now seems to him in the utmost danger from "the indefinite multitude of authors." For the general run of books he sees the function of serving as a furtherer of conversation “keeping the idle out of mischief" and "helping to shape the mind and language." It is clear that the book was yet far from having become the main mode of politics and society. It was still a surface fact which had only begun to obscure the traditional lineaments of Western society. With regard to the continuing threat of scholastic renewal there is the ever-present literary or visual complaint about oral scholasticism that it is words, words, words. Leibnitz, writing on the “Art of Discovery,"says: Among the Scholastics there was a certain Jean Suisset called the Calculator, whose works I have not yet been able to find and I have seen only those of a few disciples of his. This Suisset began to use Mathematics in scholastic arguments, but few people imitated him because they would have to give up the method of disputation for that of book-keeping and reasoning, and a stroke of the pen would have spared much clamor.111 Pope's Dunciad indicts the printed book as the agent of a primitivistic and Romantic revival. Sheer visual quantity evokes the magical resonance of the tribal horde. The box office looms as a return to the echo chamber of bardic incantation. In 1683-84 there appeared in London by Joseph Moxon, Mechanick Exercises on the Whole Art of Printing. The editors point out (p. vii) that "it put in writing a knowledge that was wholly traditional", and that Moxon's book "was by forty years the earliest manual of printing in any languge." Like Gibbon in his retrospect of Rome, Moxon seems to have been animated by a sense of print as having reached a terminus. A similar sentiment inspires The Tale of a Tub and The Battle of the Books by Dean Swift. But it is to The Dunciad that we must turn for the epic of the printed word and its benefits to mankind. For here is the explicit study of plunging of the human mind into the sludge of an unconscious engendered by the book. It has been obscured to posterity, in keeping with the prophecy at the end of Book IV, just why literature should be charged with stupefying mankind, and mesmerically ushering the polite world back into primitivism, the Africa within, and above all, the unconscious. The simple key to this operation is that which we have had in hand throughout this book—the increasing separation of the visual faculty from the interplay with the other senses leads to the rejection from consciousness of most of our experience, and the consequent hypertrophy of the unconscious. This ever-enlarging domain Pope calls the world “of Chaos and old Night."It is the tribal, non-literate world celebrated by Mircea Eliade in The Sacred and the Profane. Martinus Scriblerus in his notes to The Dunciad reflects on how much more difficult it is to write an epic about the numerous scribblers and industrious hacks of the press than about a Charlemagne, a Brute, or a Godfrey. He then mentions the need for a satirist “to dissuade the dull and punish the wicked,"and looks at the general situation that has brought on the crisis: We shall next declare the occasion and the cause which moved our Poet to this particular work. He lived in those days when (after providence had permitted the Invention of Printing as a scourge for the Sins of the learned) Paper also became so cheap, and printers so numerous, that a deluge of authors cover'd the land: Whereby not only the peace of the honest unwriting subject was daily molested, but unmerciful demands were made of his applause, yea of his money, by such as would neither earn the one, or deserve the other; At the same time, the Liberty of the Press was so unlimited, that it grew dangerous to refuse them either: For they would forthwith publish slanders unpunish'd, the authors being anonymous; nay the immediate publishers thereof lay sculking under the wings of an Act of Parliament, assuredly intended for better purposes.112 Next he turns (p. 50) from the general economic causes to the private moral motivation of authors inspired by “Dulness and Poverty; the one born with them, the other contracted by neglect of their proper talents . . ." In a word, the attack is on applied knowledge as it manifests itself in “Industry" and "Plodding." For authors inspired by self-opinion and the craving for self-expression are driven into “setting up this sad and sorry merchandise." By means of the agglomerate action of many such victims of applied knowledge—that is, self-opinionated authors endowed with Industry and Ploddingthere is now the restoration of the reign of Chaos and old Night and the removal of the imperial seat of Dulness their daughter from the City to the Polite world."As the book market expands, the division between intellect and commerce ends. The book trade takes over the functions of wit and spirit and government. That is the meaning of the opening lines of the first editions of the poem: Books and the man I sing, the first who brings The Smithfield Muses to the ears of Kings. It seemed quite unnatural to the “polite world" of the time that decisionmaking and kingly rule should be accessible to popular authors. We no longer consider it odd or revolting to be ruled by people for whom the book of the month might appear quite respectable fare. Smithfield, where Bartholomew Fair was kept, was still a place for book-peddling. But in later editions Pope changed the opening: The mighty Mother, and her Son, who brings The Smithfield Muses to the ear of Kings. He has encountered the public, the collective unconscious, and dubbed it "the mighty Mother," in accordance with the occultism of his time. It is Joyce's “Lead kindly Fowl"(foule, owl, crowd), which we have seen earlier. As the book market enlarged and the gathering and reporting of news improved, the nature of authorship and public underwent the great changes that we accept as normal today. The book had retained from manuscript times some of its private and conversational character, as Leibnitz indicated in his evaluation. But the book was beginning to be merged in the newspaper as the work of Addison and Steele reminds us. Improved printing technology carried this process all the way by the end of the eighteenth century and the arrival of the steam press. Yet Dudek in Literature and the Press (p. 46) considers that even after steampower had been applied to printing: English newspapers in the first quarter of the century, however, were by no means designed to appeal to the whole population. By modern standards they would be considered too dull to interest more than a small minority of serious readers. . . . Early nineteenth century newspapers were run largely for the genteel. Their style was stiff and formal, ranging betwen Addisonian gracefulness and Johnsonian elevation. The contents consisted of small advertisements, of local affairs and national politics, especially of commercial news and long transcriptions of parliamentary reports. . . . the best current literature was noticed in the newspapers. . . . 'In those days', Charles Lamb recalled, every morning paper, as an essential retainer to its establishment, kept an author, who was bound to furnish daily a quantum of witty paragraphs. . . .'And since the divorce between the language of journalism (journalese) and the literary use of language had not yet been brought about, we find in the eighteenth and early nineteenth century that some of the principal men of letters contributed to the newspapers or made a living by writing. But Pope peopled his Dunciad with these very figures, for his perceptions and criticisms were not personal or based on a private point of view. Rather he was concerned with a total change. It is significant that this change is not specified until the fourth book of The Dunciad, which came out in 1742. It is after introducing the famous classics master, Dr. Busby of Westminster school, that we hear the ancient and especially Ciceronian theme concerning the excellence of man (IV, 11. 147–50): The pale Boy-Senator yet tingling stands, And holds his breeches close with both his hands. Then thus. 'Since Man from beast by Words is known, Words are Man's province, Words we teach alone. Earlier we had noted the meaning of this theme for Cicero who regarded eloquence as an inclusive wisdom harmonizing our faculties, unifying all knowledge. Pope is here quite explicit in citing the destruction of this unity as deriving from word specialism and denudation. The theme of the denudation of consciousness we have followed continuously throughout the Renaissance. It is also the theme of Pope's Dunciad. The Boy-Senator continues: When Reason doubtful, like the Samian letter, Points him two ways, the narrower is the better. Plac'd at the door of Learning, youth to guide, We never suffer it to stand too wide. To ask, to guess, to know, as they commence, As Fancy opens the quick springs of Sense, We ply the Memory, we load the brain, Bind rebel Wit, and double chain on chain, Confine the thought, to exercise the breath; And keep them in the pale of Words till death. Whate'er the talents, or howe'er design'd, We hang one jingling padlock on the mind: A Poet the first day, he dips his quill; And what the last? a very Poet still. Pity! the charm works only in our wall, Lost, lost too soon in yonder House or Hall. Pope has not received his due as a serious analyst of the intellectual malaise of Europe. He continues Shakespeare's argument in Lear and Donne's in the Anatomy of the World: 'Tis all in pieces, all coherence gone, All just supply and all relation. It is the division of sense and the separation of words from their functions that Pope decries exactly as does Shakespeare in King Lear. Art and science had been separated as visual quantification and homogenization penetrated to every domain and the mechanization of language and literature proceeded: Beneath her foot-stool Science groans in Chains, And Wit dreads Exile, Penalties and Pains. There foam'd rebellious Logic gagg'd and bound, There, stript fair Rhet'ric languish'd on the ground;113 1131bid., IV, I1. 21–4.