# The new collective unconscious Pope saw as the accumulating backwash of private self-expression. Pope had a very simple scheme for his first three books. Book I deals with authors, their egotism and desire for self-expression and eternal fame. Book II turns to the book sellers who provide the conduits to swell the tides of public confession. Book III concerns the collective unconscious, the growing backwash from the tidal wave of self-expression. It is Pope's simple theme that the fogs of Dulness and new tribalism are fed by the printing press. Wit, the quick interplay among our senses and faculties, is thus steadily anesthetized by the encroaching unconscious. Anybody who tried to get Pope's meaning by considering the content of the writers he presents would miss the needed clues. Pope is offering a formal causality, not an efficient causality, as an explanation of the metamorphosis from within. The entire matter is thus to be found in a single couplet (I, 1l. 89–90) : Now night descending, the proud scene was o'er, But liv'd, in Settle's numbers, one day more. Print, with its uniformity, repeatability, and limitless extent, does give reincarnate life and fame to anything at all. The kind of limp life so conferred by dull heads upon dull themes formalistically penetrates all existence. Since readers are as vain as authors, they crave to view their own conglomerate visage and, therefore, demand the dullest wits to exert themselves in ever greater degree as the collective audience increases. The "human interest" newspaper is the ultimate mode of this collective dynamic: Now May'rs and Shrieves all hush'd and satiate lay, Yet eat, in dreams, the custard of the day; While pensive Poets painful vigils keep, Sleepless themselves to give their readers sleep.114 Of course, Pope does not mean that the readers will be bored by the products of sleepless poets or news writers. Quite the contrary. They will be thrilled, as by seeing their own image in the press. The readers' sleep is of the spirit. In their wits they are not pained but impaired. Pope is telling the English world what Cervantes had told the Spanish world and Rabelais the French world concerning print. It is a delirium. It is a transforming and metamorphosing drug that has the power of imposing its assumptions upon every level of consciousness. But for us in the 1960's, print has much of the quaint receding character of the movie and the railway train. In recognizing its hidden powers at this late date we can learn to stress the positive virtues of print but we can gain insight into the much more potent and recent forms of radio and television also. In his analysis of books, authors, and markets, Pope, like Harold Innis in The Bias of Communication, assumes that the entire operation of print in our lives is not only unconscious but that for this very reason it immeasurably enlarges the domain of the unconscious. Pope placed an owl at the beginning of The Dunciad, and Innis entitled the opening chapter of The Bias of Communication, "Minerva's Owl": "Minerva's Owl begins its flight only in the gathering dusk . . ." Aubrey Williams has a fine treatment115of the second Dunciad of 1729 in which he quotes Pope's own words to Swift: The Dunciad is going to be printed in all pomp. . . . It will be attended with Proeme, Prolegomena, Testimonia Scriptorum, Index Authorum, and Notes Variorum. As to the latter, I desire you to read over the text, and make a few in any way you like best, whether dry raillery, upon the style and way of commenting of trivial critics; or humorous, upon the authors in the poem; or historical, of persons, places, times; or explanatory; or collecting the parallel passages of the ancients. Instead, that is, of a mere individual book attack on Dulness, Pope has provided a collective newspaper format and much “human interest" for the poem. He can thus render the plodding industry of Baconian applied knowledge and group toil with a dramatic quality that renders, yet irradiates, the very Dulness he decries. Williams points out (p. 60) that the reason why "the new material attached to the poem has never been adequately defined is due, I think, to the assumptions most critics and editors have made: that the notes are to be taken at the level of history, and that their main purpose is to continue the personal satire in a prose commentary." The last book of The Dunciad proclaims the metamorphic power of mechanically applied knowledge as a stupendous parody of the Eucharist. The entire fourth book of The Dunciad has to do with the theme of The Gutenberg Galaxy, the translation or reduction of diverse modes into a single mode of homogenized things. Right off, (ll. 44–5) this theme is rendered in terms of the new Italian opera. When lo' a Harlot form soft sliding by, With mincing step, small voice, and languid eye; In the new chromatics, Pope finds (ll. 57–60) the all-reducing and homogenizing power that the book exercises on the human spirit: One Trill shall harmonize joy, grief, and rage, Wake the dull Church, and lull the ranting Stage; To the same notes thy sons shall hum, or snore, And all thy yawning daughters cry, encore. Reduction and metamorphosis by homogenization and fragmentation are the persistent themes of the fourth book (1l. 453–6) : O! would the Sons of Men once think their Eyes And Reason giv'n them but to study Flies! See Nature in some partial narrow shape, And let the Author of the Whole escape: But these were the means by which, as Yeats tells us: Locke sank into a swoon; The Garden died; God took the spinning jenny Out of his side. The popular mesmerism achieved by uniformity and repeatability, taught men the miracles of the division of labour and the creation of world markets. It is these miracles that Pope anticipates in The Dunciad, for their transforming power had long affected the mind. The mind now afflicted with the desire and power to climb by sheer sequential additive toil: Why all your Toils? Your Sons have learn'd to sing. How quick Ambition hastes to ridicule! The Sire is made a Peer, the Son a Fool. Then follows a decisive passage of explicit comment (ll. 549–57) on the Gutenberg miracles of applied knowledge and human transformation: On some, a Priest succinct in amice white Attends; all flesh is nothing in his sight! Beeves, at his touch, at once to jelly turn, And the huge Boar is shrunk into an Urn: The board with specious miracles he loads, Turns Hares to Larks, and Pigeons into Toads Another (for in all what one can shine?) Explains the Seve and Verdeur of the Vine. What cannot copious Sacrifice attone? Pope deliberately makes the miracles of applied knowledge a parody of the Eucharist. It is the same transforming and reducing power of applied knowledge which has confounded and confused all the arts and sciences, for, says Pope, the new translatio studii or transmission of studies and disciplines by the printed book has not been so much a transmission as a complete transformation of the disciplines and of the human mind as well. Studies have been translated exactly as was Bottom the Weaver. How closely Pope's progress of Dulness over the earth conforms to the concept of translatio studii can be seen easily if lines 65–112 of Dunciad III are compared to this statement of the historic theme by an English humanist of the fourteenth century, Richard de Bury: Admirable Minerva seems to bend her course to all the nations of the earth, and reacheth from end to end mightily, that she may reveal herself to all mankind. We see that she has already visited the Indians, the Babylonians, the Egyptians and Greeks, the Arabs and the Romans. Now she has passed by Paris, and now has happily come to Britain, the most noble of islands, nay, rather a microcosm in itself, that she may show herself a debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians.'116 And Pope in making Dulness the goddess of the unconscious is contrasting her with Minerva, goddess of alert intellect and wit. It is not Minerva but her obverse complement, the owl, that the printed book has conferred on Western man. "However ill-fitting their heroic garb," Williams remarks (p. 59), “one at last finds the dunces invested with uncivilizing powers of epic proportions." Supported by the Gutenberg technology, the power of the dunces to shape and befog the human intellect is unlimited. Pope's efforts to clarify this basic point have been in vain. His intense concern with the pattern of action in his armed horde of nobodies has been mistaken for personal spite. Pope was entirely concerned with the formalistic pattern and penetrative and con- 116Ibid., p. 47. figuring power of the new technology. His readers have been befogged by "content" obsession and the practical benefits of applied knowledge. He says in a note to Book III, 1. 337: Do not gentle reader, rest too secure in thy contempt of the Instruments for such a revolution in learning, or despise such weak agents as have been described in our poem, but remember what the Dutch stories somewhere relate, that a great part of their Provinces was once overflow'd, by a small opening made in one of their dykes by a single Water-Rat. But the new mechanical instrument and its mesmerized and homogenized servants, the dunces, are irresistible: In vain, in vain,—The all-composing Hour Resistless falls: The Muse obeys the Pow'r. She comes! she comes! the sable Throne behold Of Night Primaeval, and of Chaos old! Before her, Fancy's gilded clouds decay, And all its varying Rain-bows die away. Wit shoots in vain its momentary fires, The meteor drops, and in a flash expires. As one by one, at dread Medea's strain, The sick'ning stars fade off th'ethereal plain; As Argus' eyes by Hermes' wand opprest, Clos'd one by one to everlasting rest; Thus at her felt approach, and secret might, Art after Art goes out, and all is Night. See skulking Truth to her old Cavern fled, While the Great Mother bids Britannia sleep, And pours her Spirit o'er the Land and Deep. She comes! she comes! The Gloom rolls on, Mountains of Casuistry heap'd o'er her head! Philosophy, that lean'd on Heav'n before, Shrinks to her second cause, and is no more. Physic of Metaphysic begs defence, And Metaphysic calls for aid on Sense! See Mystery to Mathematics fly! In vain! they gaze, turn giddy, rave, and die. Religion blushing veils her sacred fires, And unawares Morality expires. Nor public Flame, nor private, dares to shine; Nor human Spark is left, nor Glimpse divine! Lo! thy dread Empire, CHaos! is restor'd; Light dies before thy uncreating word: Thy hand, great Anarch! lets the curtain fall; And Universal Darkness buries All.117 This is the Night from which Joyce invites the Finnegans to wake. 117Dunciad (B), IV, 11. 627–56.