Official commentators ascribed the hostile attitudes of rural women to their susceptibility to rumors and agitation by kulaks.24 In fact, women had many grievances against the new collective farm system. One major issue centered on the socialization (communal ownership) of livestock, an aspect of the peasant household economy and culture traditionally under female supervision. During the early months of forced collectivization in 1929 and early 193o, local authorities confiscated peasants' farm animals, particularly the precious cow—the burenushka of Russian folklore—which provided milk for the children and often functioned as a ritual totem of the peasant household.25 Collectivization coincided with a vigorous campaign against institutionalized religion, and the establishment of the new farms often coincided with the closing of churches and suppression of religious activity in the countryside. The attack on churches and the clergy infuriated many peasants and galvanized women into mass resistance.26 Women also feared rumored changes. Word had it that "collectivization would bring with it the socialization of children, the export of women's hair, communal wife-sharing, and the notorious common blanket under which all collective farmers, both male and female, would sleep."27 Not all these rumors seemed far-fetched to rural women, many of whom had observed a libertarian attitude toward sex on the part of some Communist Youth League activists and incidents of sexual impropriety by local party bosses. Faced with the destruction of their way of life, peasant women (and men) sought to explain their sudden and devastating misfortune with reference to two great calamities of the Russian popular consciousness, one historical and the other symbolic. According to the first, collectivization was a "second serfdom"; according to the other, it was the arrival of the Antichrist and the beginning of the Apocalypse. Of course, the two were historically related. Peter the Great, who extended the system of serfdom, appeared to the popular imagination—particularly among Old Believers—precisely as the Antichrist. The collective farm, together with its tractors, became a symbol of the Antichrist on earth. In late 1929, rumors began to circulate in many rural areas that the "antichrist had arrived and that the world would soon come to an end."28 Female resistance to collectivization took active as well as passive forms. Not only did many women refuse to join the farms (even when, in some cases, their husbands did so), they also participated in riots that led to violent incidents. In some cases, they burned down the kolkhoz stables, barns, haystacks, and houses; in other cases, they confiscated seeds, blocked and destroyed tractors, and attacked local officials Women showed up at meetings on collectivization instead of the men interrupted the proceedings, and mounted a vociferous protest.29 The authorities adopted a cautious and moderate response to peasant women who resisted collectivization, a circumstance that helps explain the predominantly female composition of the rebellions. In contrast to their male counterparts, the women who participated in violent collective actions were seldom accused of being kulak henchmen (podkulachnitsy), and relatively few were charged with counterrevolutionary crimes. Local authorities generally did not use force to contain women's protests and sometimes did not even report incidents to higher authorities. Even though women were arrested for their activities from time to time, they enjoyed an immunity from summary prosecution not extended to men.30 Yet official indulgence was limited to acts of collective female resistance. Women enjoyed no special status when it came to the campaign to "liquidate the kulaks as a class." Entire families were expropriated and sent into exile, with no special dispensations for either women or children.31 The official terminology for the peasant women's rebellions was bab’i bunty. The words themselves conveyed official assumptions about the actors and their actions and shed some light on government léniency toward the protesters. The term baba had, as noted in chapter 2, strong pejorative connotations, especially for politically conscious women and men. Bunt referred to a particular type of mass action and carried the connotations of uncontrolled elemental rebellion or riot. The underlying implication was that ignorant, naive, oppressed women were engaged in spontaneous and irrational protests.32 The term implied an attitude that was both dismissive (the protests could not be taken seriously) and demeaning (the actors belonged to a category of the population so lowly that they were unworthy even of retribution). Verbal and visual discourse in 193o thus offers a study in contrasts. The pejorative characterization of women implicit in the term bab’i bunty differed sharply from the image of peasant women conveyed by political art. In fact, the new image of the female peasant represented the antithesis (and very deliberately so) of the previous imagery, which had carried associations with the much maligned baba. This circumstance accentuates the complexity of the new imagery and invites a consideration of the conditions that account for the ubiquitous presence of the kolkhoznitsa in visual propaganda just when peasant women were presenting the authorities with formidable and unrelenting opposition to collectivization in the countryside. The new image of the female peasant conveyed several meanings simultaneously and must be comprehended as a complex symbol Viewed against the background of women's resistance to the kolkhoz, the new iconography of peasant women functioned in much the same way as Stalin's pronouncements did. Moshe Lewin has given this characterization of the role of Stalin's verbal discourse: "Stalin's method consisted of presenting his plans and wishes as accomplished fact, so as to encourage the Party organizations and the other sectors of the administration to come into line with the actual situation' as it allegedly existed everywhere else.'"33 In a similar fashion, the smiling woman tractor driver appeared in posters not as an accomplished fact but as an indication of what should be, as an incentive to make it happen. The poster constituted a kind of incantation designed to conjure up the new woman, who would perform certain roles in a specific spirit and manner. Representing the countryside as though it were populated exclusively by vigorous young kolkhoznitsy and kolkhozniki may also have facilitated the imposition of agrarian policies in the early 193os. Political art projected a rural world in which the krest’ianka-baba, together with traditional peasant customs and attitudes, no longer had any place. An old Russian proverb, originating in the countryside, was known to all: "A chicken is not a bird; a baba is not a human being."34Visual propaganda reinforced the old proverb by creating an image of the present-future in which the krest’ianka-baba had been replaced by the youthful and enthusiastic kolkhoznitsa building socialism. The new world of the village depicted by Stalinist posters effaced virtually all aspects of the traditional peasant woman, her culture, her way of life. Within the context of a society undergoing forced collectivization, visual propaganda helped justify and make more palatable policies designed to reconstitute the countryside by brutal means. ## THE ART OF SCIENTIFIC PROPAGANDA How did contemporaries “read" political posters associated with the collectivization campaign? Officials concerned with visual propaganda, as well as poster artists themselves, placed great importance on this question. In the 193os, those engaged in poster production focused their attention on the effectiveness of propaganda and its capacity to convey the desired message. Although there had been some research conducted in the 192os on viewer responses to art of various kinds, the 193os marked the beginning of what might be called "scientific propaganda," an attempt to gauge viewer responses to posters and systematically evaluate audience reception. A Central Committee resolution of March 11, 1931, addressed the issue of reception directly and called for specific measures to improve information concerning viewer responses. These measures included broader, more systematic poster reviews in the press, the creation of poster review committees among workers and peasants, and the founding of a new organization of poster artists.35 All these proposals were rapidly implemented in the spring of 1931.36 Contemporaries concerned with the production of posters proceeded from the assumption that worker and peasant audiences required different styles of political art to accommodate the different ways of viewing visual propaganda in the cities and countryside. One artist argued in March 1931, "The city poster must cry out, be eyecatching, because here people only catch a glimpse of it, see it in passing. The peasant, on the contrary, loves to stop in front of a poster and examine it in all its particulars." A leading official in poster production observed that "the eye of the peasant finds it easiest to comprehend the lubok and gets lost in the details of the usual city' poster."37 The application of traditional folk styles to Soviet posters was a controversial issue in the 193os, when artists and officials were eager to create an entirely new "proletarian" style of political art. Despite the controversy, however, the lubok format, with such characteristic conventions as contrasting panels showing "then and now" and "we and they," was commonly utilized in the 1930s. It might at first be assumed that posters on agricultural themes and especially those promoting collectivization were aimed at a rural audience. Certainly, some of these posters made their way to the countryside, where they hung in collective farm meeting rooms, reading rooms, and the headquarters for local party and government organizations. But in the early 193os, when chaos and disruption prevailed in most rural areas, it is far from clear how extensively visual propaganda penetrated the countryside or was even intended to penetrate the countryside.38 Judging by the content of these posters, a rural audience hardly seems appropriate. What did peasants in 1930 or 193ı see in a poster featuring tractors driven by kølkhoznitsy when the number of tractors in these years was still small? As of December 193o, 88.5 percent of the collective farms still had no tractors of their own; Machine Tractor Stations served only 13.6 percent of all collective farms.39 Women drivers were an even greater oddity. They made up only 6 percent of the tractor drivers in the country as a whole in 1932.40 What kind of an impression did the image of a trim young peasant woman make on peasants, especially in the years 1932–1933, when millions were emaciated and dying in the famine? These and many other incongruities between the pictures and experience indicate that perhaps a different audience was intended. Although further evidence is needed, I would argue that many of the posters relating to collectivization in the early 193os were aimed at an urban and working-class audience to a far greater extent than at the rural population. The point of this visual propaganda was to generate support outside rural areas for state policies that were being imposed violently on the countryside. Images of the smiling, slender kolkhoznitsa, which must have appeared grotesque in a rural context, especially in the midst of devastating famine, were perhaps more plausible in an urban setting, where the image of the peasant woman now shared com-, mon features with the image of the woman worker. In fact, visual representations generated by Soviet artists during the collectivization campaign were primarily projected through an urban lens. The specific images discussed above, accentuating as they did certain body characteristics and expressions, conveyed urban values and assumptions (slimness versus robustness, for instance) far more than rural ones. Even the emphasis on tractors played more effectively to an urban than a rural audience. Whereas workers easily comprehended the value of mechanization, "the reaction of peasants to the tractor was extremely varied."41 Many peasants were deeply hostile to tractors and mistrustful about their function. The contemporary press reported incidents in which peasants destroyed tractors; others denounced them as "the work of the Antichrist" and a return to serfdom.42 The inappropriateness of some posters for a rural audience was underscored in reviews of posters by students, officials, artists, and even workers and peasants. 'These reviewers often drew attention to the lack of authenticity in the representation of rural scenes. They complained that some Soviet artists had little knowledge of the countryside and created images that contained gross inaccuracies relating to machinery, terrain, people, clothing, labor activities, and animals. One poster showed tractors sowing in green fields; another had peasants working in winter without suitable clothes.43 Reviewers concluded that peasants laughed at such posters and did not take them seriously. But these inaccuracies presented fewer problems if the audience was urban and not rural. We have very little information about the reception of posters by contemporary viewers, either urban or rural. A rare glimpse of viewer reactions is provided by a report of a meeting of fifty collective and state farm workers that took place on February 28, 1932, in accordance with the March 1931 decree requiring poster review committees composed of workers and peasants.44 For two hours, they examined and discussed five posters on various themes. The first poster subjected to scrutiny was by Valentina Kulagina, an artist trained in Soviet art schools and a practitioner of photomontage.45 Her poster, "Udarnitsy zavodov i sovkhozov, vstupaite v riady VKP(b)" (Shock Worker Women of Factories and State Farms, Enter the Ranks of the Communist Party [Bolshevik]), features a photograph of a woman with her right arm raised high (palm forward), a copy of Pravda in her left hand. The woman's expression conveys pleasure, almost ecstasy. Compared to the crowd of people clustered below her, she is represented as a giant figure. The collective and state farm workers viewing the poster had a number of serious criticisms of this poster. Most devastating of all was their observation that the woman presented by the artist did not resemble a shock worker woman but rather a female "kulak or a sales clerk." They further objected to the lack of communication between the giant woman and the demonstrators below, the inclusion of male rather than female tractor drivers, and the poster's failure to invite collective farm shock worker women into the party. Other posters were criticized because of the artist's ignorance of the countryside or the improper tipazh of the woman shock worker. Some posters featuring young women were deemed positively dangerous, even counterrevolutionary. One reviewer of Korableva's "Idi, tovarishch, k nam v kolkhoz" (fig. 3.3), possibly the most emblematic of the collectivization posters, harshly criticized what he saw as an implicit sexual invitation in the poster. In a vituperative review, he argued that the poster was having a "counterrevolutionary and harmful effect in the contemporary countryside because the second half of the text is written on the woman and, undoubtedly, will be used by kulakagitators in the broadest possible way."46 His point was that the phrase "Join us in the collective farm" happened to be printed across her midsection——by implication, a sexual invitation. The suggestion that collective farm women proffered sexual invitations had grave significance in the contemporary context, amplifying fears of a linkage between communalization of peasant property and the peasant woman's body. ## THE GREAT RETREAT The First Five Year Plan lasted four years and three months. When the plan ended on December 31, 1932, the country was in the midst of a massive famine that claimed millions of lives in agricultural regions of the country. Against this background, the regime celebrated the success of collectivization.47 By 1933, nearly four-fifths of all the cultivated land in the Soviet Union had been collectivized and over three-fifths of the peasant households.48 The Seventeenth Party Congress, held in February 1934 and proclaimed the "Congress of Victors," celebrated the victory of socialism. The year 1934 has been described as the beginning of the “great retreat"from social, economic, and cultural policies introduced during the "socialist offensive" of the period 1929-1933. Nicholas Timasheff coined the phrase “great retreat" to describe the restoration of ideas and practices predating the First Five Year Plan or even the 1917 revolution.49 The result was an amalgam of the old and the new, within the overall framework of the Stalinist party-state. In agriculture, the "great retreat" led to promulgation of the Model Charter for Collective Farms in 1935, supplanting the far more draconian version of 1930.50 The 1935 charter eased various regulations and restored small personal farming on plots allotted to collective farm workers, while retaining the basic organization of collectivized agriculture imposed in the early 193os. Political art witnessed its own version of a “great retreat" beginning in 1934. Toward the end of 1933, artists and critics expressed dissatisfaction with the prevailing canons for visual representation of the countryside. A review of Natal’ia Pinus's 1933 poster, "Kolkhoznitsa, bud' udarnitsei uborki"(Collective Farm Woman, Be a Shock Worker of the Harvest) (printing of 30,ooo) focused attention on the inadequacies of the tipazh (fig. 3.8).51 The reviewer disapproved of the artist's picture of two young, trim, and energetic kolkhoznitsy (one smiling, one serious) on their way to the field with rakes on their shoulders: "In the choice of tipazh, the artist Pinus wanted to present healthy, jolly, prètty, and intellectual faces, to show the new person who combines in herself physical strength and energy with a high level of culture. But it must be recognized that the artist did not succeed. The kolkhoznitsy are not typical. In the poster, we have instead some kind of Mashen'ka and Dasha, pretty and rosy but completely uncharacteristic of the kolkhoz masses."52 The atypicality of the collective farm women in the poster acquired importance because of a transformation that was taking place in the objective of visual propaganda. Posters on rural themes were increasingly measured by their effectiveness in reaching and persuading a rural audience, now that the great majority of peasants had been collectivized.53 A growing preoccupation with peasant reception of posters, in combination with other factors, led to important modifications in the representation of the peasant woman. By 1934, the kolkhoznitsa had begun to fill out and acquire a fuller, more rounded look. The large bosoms and corpulence of the 192os did not return, but the trim and athletic look of the early 193os also faded from the scene.54 Collective farm women were still generally depicted as youthful, but now older, more mature women occasionally made an appearance.s Smiles and quiet satisfaction became far more prevalent than before, and few posters conveyed the intensity and determination characteristic of kolkhoznitsy in the early 1930s. The new demeanor of collective farm women disconcerted some reviewers, who criticized posters for failing to show the kolkhoznitsa's intensive struggle for socialist reconstruction of the countryside, resistance to the class enemy, resolute surmounting of obstacles, enthusiasm for collective labor and its pathos."56 But in 1934, especially after the Congress of Victors, rural propaganda shifted its emphasis from struggle and confrontation to serenity and joyfulness amid abundance. Earlier posters characteristically showed peasant women engaged actively in work. Now they were often depicted in a contemplative or celebratory mood as they surveyed the results of collective farm labor. Symbols of prosperity abound: sheaves of wheat, plump and wellgroomed farm animals——especially the venerable cow—and fields redolent with crops.57 The 1934 poster by Aleksei Sitaro, "K zazhitochnoi kul'turnoi zhizni" (Toward a Prosperous Cultured Life), presents five collective farm women (three agricultural workers, a mechanic, and a teacher) cheerfully striding forward carrying farm animals, wheat, books, and a wrench (fig. 3.9).58 They are robust—obviously well fed—and joyous. The artist has included three women (the mechanic, the teacher, and the milkmaid) with kerchiefs tied at the back of their neck, in the new style of the kolkhoznitsa; the other two collective farm women wear their kerchiefs in the traditional way, a significant departure from the standard semiotic code. The clustering of farm women in this and other posters may have suggested to viewers that kolkhoznitsy of all types had earned, perhaps for the first time, full confidence from the authorities, not just as individuals but as a social collectivity.59 Color symbolism changed as well. In the course of the 193os, pastel colors, especially blues and greens, as well as pink and yellow, were often substituted for the harsher tones of red and black that dominated earlier collectivization posters. A fascinating report of collective farmers reactions to posters in late 1934 noted that the viewers displayed a strong preference for soft muted colors and were especially partial to one poster with a "delicate blue background." They reacted negatively to bright garish colors. According to this report, the collective farmers paid attention to color and imagery and generally ignored the text.60 Although most kolkhoznitsy in posters from 1934 still wore a kerchief tied at the back of the neck in the fashion of urban women, their clothing was sometimes more decorative than previously and included traditional touches, like an apron, which had been part of the standard image in the 192os but disappeared in the early 193os. Mariia Voron's striking poster, "Udarnuiu uborku—bol'shevistskomu urozhaiu"(Shock Work at Reaping Befits a Bolshevik Harvest) (printing of 6o,ooo), shows the complex combination of details that characterized rural imagery during the Second Five Year Plan (fig. 3.1o).61 The kolkhoznitsa's appearance (especially her stoutness, the blue color of the dress, and her apron) as well as her almost classically serene and motionless pose signify departures from visual conventions of the early 193os. Except for the text, the only red in the picture is her kerchief, tied behind her head. A contemporary reviewer of the poster gave the artist high marks for tipazh and praised the "romantic solemnity" of the image of the kolkhoznitsa.62 An official campaign mounted in 1934 promoted personal cleanliness and attractive clothing.63 When a new glossy magazine, Na stroike MTS i sovkhozov (Building Machine Tractor Stations and State Farms), appeared in June 1934, it heralded with pictures and accompanying text the "new life" in the countryside.64 This slick propaganda organ, which attracted the services of Maksim Gorky and El Lissitzky, asserted in a later issue that "our rural youth are not dressed any worse than city youth. Many of our girls have begun to wear silk dresses, velveteen, and fine wool coats with fur collars, berets. The men wear good suits, shoes, and always a necktie."65 Political artists became more attentive to clothing and depicted peasant women wearing pretty blouses or dresses, sometimes accentuated by decorative articles such as embroidered scarves, even while at work.66 The inclusion of traditional Russian folk-style embroidery—inconceivable during the early 193os—reflected the nationalist and folk revival then under way. A poster by Konstantin Zotov in 1934, "Liuboi krest'ianin-kolkhoznik ili edinolichnik imeet teper’ vozmozhnost' zhit' po-chelovecheski' (Every Collective Farm Peasant or Individual Farmer Now Has the Opportunity to Live Like a Human Being), exemplifies some of the changes taking place in the semantic system of visual propaganda (plate 4).67 Zotov's poster (printing of 6o,ooo) depicted a peasant family—a mother, father, and toddler—joyfully gathered around a gramophone. The text is a quotation from Stalin: "Any peasant-collective farmer or individual farmer now has the possibility to live in a humane manner if he only wants to, work honestly and doesn't loaf, is not a vagrant, and doesn't plunder kolkhoz property."68 What is unusual about the poster is that it emphasizes, at least implicitly, the woman's achievements in both production (she is a collective farm worker) and reproduction (she is a mother). Moreover, the poster shows collective farmers at leisure rather than at work. The labor process has been replaced by the fruits of labor, in the form of a gramophone, other household belongings, and personal attire.69 Both husband and wife in the poster are well dressed: she in a pink blouse and he in a black jacket with a peasant-style shirt, embroidered at the collar. He is strikingly handsome; she is lovely to look at and, with her gay smile, might well have appeared in a commercial advertisement for gramophones! A contemporary critic, reviewing the poster, considered the tipazh of the kolkhoznitsa the most successful of the three figures.70 The child is plump, cute, and claps his hands in delight at the music; his hands also suggest a prayerful position, echoing Madonna and Child images in religious icons. Mothers and children can seldom be found in collectivization posters of the early 193os and then only in those explicitly devoted to the theme of social services. Even during the Second Five Year Plan, few posters on general themes show the peasant woman with her child, although such images did occasionally appear in contemporary magazines.71 The family is shown listening to the gramophone. Behind them are two items that signified a cultured and comfortable life in the countryside: an electric light and a shelf of books. The titles of the books include works by Maksim Gorky, Maintenance for the Tractor, works by V. I. Lenin, Agrotechnology, works by I. Stalin, a partially obscured title ending with the words "in the collective farm,"Improving Milk Yields, and Village Reading Room.72 The reading material for exemplary collective farmers was thus of three types: works of literature, especially by Gorky; political writings of Lenin and Stalin; and technical books relating to agriculture. The Gorky book is strategically placed first on the left, an indication of its importance. Highly visible in 1934 because of his role as an architect of socialist realism at the First Congress of Soviet Writers, Gorky advocated the use of literature as a force for remolding backward and predominantly rural Russians into a new generation of Soviet citizens. Gorky's own humble origins and his subsequent rise to fame helped to validate the Stalinist ideal of a society where industrious workers and loyal Communists could rise from rags to riches. The books, together with the certificate on the wall, provide considerable information concerning the people in the poster. The man is a tractor driver by the name of Nikolai Vasil’evich Lebedev. He received recognition as an exemplary shock worker, and his accomplishments, by implication, can be attributed to mental as well as physical labor (thus the books on tractor maintenance and agrotechnology). His wife, judging by the books on the shelf, most likely works as a milkmaid on the collective farm, a common female occupation. The poster implies that both Lebedev and his wife are literate. The implicit message of the poster is that exemplary collective farmers can expect to enjoy the accouterments of a good life, including a gramophone, books, and electric light. Visual propagandists devoted a good deal of attention to the issue of rural prosperity in the mid-193os. As presented in posters and magazine articles, the good life had come to embrace a host of material possessions: samovar, sewing machine, camera, bicycle, watch, musical instruments, and such home furnishings as "rugs, soft furniture, a dresser with a mirror, a radio, flowers, and lace curtains."73 The contemporary reviewer of the poster expressed particular dissatisfaction with the artist's rendering of the dwelling of the "new people of the countryside." Zotov's representation, he asserted, failed to contrast adequately the “"bright, clean, cozy, and spacious home" of the present with the inhumane conditions of the precollectivization hut.74 The figures, he thought, were too close together and gave the impression of lack of interior living space. The electric light, he noted, was not illuminated. Beginning in 1933, political posters more and more often emphasized the linkage between the kolkhoznitsa and Stalin.75 Occasionally, his presence was signified by a quotation or a book, as in the Zotov poster.76 Other times, he appeared in the background, for example, as a silhouette on a red flag. In some posters, he was placed alongside the peasant woman. Natal'ia Pinus's 1933 poster, "Zhenshchiny v kolkhozakh—bol'shaia sila" (Women in the Collective Farms Are a Great Force), takes the form of a triptych (fig. 3.11).78 On either side are kolkhoznitsy: a tractor driver and a woman with a rake. Both are focused on their work and surrounded by scenes of abundance. Between them is Stalin—the ultimate talisman—appearing here in a photograph taken as he addressed a conference of collective farmers (the source of the famous quotation that provides the caption for the poster). The visual association of Stalin and the kolkhoznitsy suggests a close relationship between the leader and the new heroes of the countryside. As if by contagious magic, Stalin enabled ordinary people to perform heroic feats. This point was clearly brought out by a poster published two years later: Iurii Tsishevskii's "Shire riady stakhanovtsev sotsialisticheskikh polei!" (Expand the Ranks of the Stakhanovites of the Socialist Fields!) (fig. 3.12).79 Published in 1935, the poster had a press run of 200,000, an extraordinary number for that year and an indication that the authorities considered it important. The centerpiece of the poster is Mariia Demchenko, a Stakhanovite kolkhoznitsa who wrote to Stalin promising to achieve a record in the harvesting of beetroot.80 She stands in a field, holds a red banner, and smiles modestly while gesturing toward her accomplishments and toward Stalin. In the upper left-hand corner appears a sketch of Stalin reading Demchenko's letter to him that was published in Pravda (and is reprinted below Stalin's image). Prior to 193o, when political artists represented the peasantry as a whole, they did so by depicting a muzhik (male peasant), usually bearded, wearing a Russian shirt and bast shoes, and sometimes holding a scythe. The image of the muzhik was often combined with a beardless male worker—a blacksmith with an apron and a hammer— who symbolized the working class.81 With the coming of collectivization, the muzhik virtually disappears from political posters (replaced by a new image of the young beardless kolkhoznik), and the male peasant is no longer paired with the male worker to symbolize the union of the working class and the peasantry. In 1937, a new image of the worker-peasant combination appeared in political art. This time, instead of two men, the artist presented a male worker and a female peasant. Vera Mukhina's sculpture Rabochii i kolkhoznitsa (Worker and Collective Farm Woman) brought together elements of old and new iconography (fig. 1.16). Her image of the peasant woman combined elements of the athletic and forceful kolkhoznitsa of the early 193os with the ample figure of the peasant woman featured in visual propaganda from 1934 on. She does not wear a kerchief, and her hair is cut short in the style of urban women. Like the krest’ianka of the 192os, she carries a sickle, a symbol that had disappeared from posters after 1929. In Mukhina's statue, the sickle and hammer function not only as class markers but also as the coat of arms of the Soviet nation-state. The eclecticism of the imagery contributed to its appeal, and the statue was widely reproduced during the Stalin era.82 How can we explain the substitution of a woman for a man in this important symbolic union between workers and peasants? The association of a female figure and agriculture seems natural given the many connections between fertility and the feminine, both in the classical and Russian folk art traditions. But it must not be forgotten that Bolshevik artists deliberately and consistently used a male figure—the muzhik—to symbolize the peasantry before 193o. Mukhina's statue owes its inspiration to visual propaganda of the early 193os, when the female figure acquired unprecedented significance. To a considerable extent, the kolkhoznitsa displaced the muzhik as the central image and symbol of the peasantry as a whole. The prominent position of the kolkhoznitsa in collectivization posters is indicative of a new gendered discourse about the countryside. Political artists promoted collectivization in the female idiom and, in the process, feminized the image of the peasantry as a social category.83 Mukhina created the definitive statement of that feminization, using gender differences to convey the hierarchical relationship between the worker (male) and peasant (female) and, by implication, between urban and rural spheres of Soviet society. In terms of both syntax and lexicon, Stalinist iconography expressed the domination of the cities over the countryside. Collectivization posters of the early 193os were most likely directed at an urban audience and expressed quintessentially urban values concerning the body, the nature of labor, and the role of mechanization. Images of tractors, women, and hard work helped affirm the logic behind collectivization and provide a justification for the terror and famine inflicted on the rural population in the name of progress. The focus of visual propaganda with agrarian themes shifted to the countryside after the First Five Year Plan. The kolkhoznitsa was not emphasized to the same extent as earlier, although she still appeared in memorable posters produced in large numbers. The “great retreat" in political art meant a recasting of the image of the collective farm woman to incorporate elements of the semantic traditions of both the krest’ianka (peasant woman) and the kolkhoznitsa. Nevertheless, an urban vision of rural life persisted. As the decade progressed, rural propaganda came to express more and more vividly the dreamlike quality of the Stalinist utopia, with well-fed joyous peasants in fields of plenty. During the Civil War and the 192os, images of social groups functioned as abstractions. Everyone knew that not all workers were blacksmiths with a hammer and not all peasant women carried a sickle. These images were symbolic, intended to capture an element of what it meant to be a worker or female peasant. In the early 193os, a new type of image appeared in visual propaganda, an image that served as a model, as an ideal type. This was the meaning of tipazh, the problem of typicalization that so concerned contemporary reviewers of political art. The image of the kolkhoznitsa was not supposed to be realistic. Its purpose was to provide a visual script and an incantation, engendering a powerful illusion. To depict the rural woman was to invoke her. The image became a vehicle for anticipating and achieving the future. Stalinist propaganda created, in sum, a new political mythology. The picture, especially with the use of photomontage, acquired an unprecedented verisimilitude, not with the existing society but with the rural social world of the imagined future.