"Eloquently demonstrates that combining political analysis, historical perspective, social psychology, and art history can better explain propaganda and political art than can any single discipline. . . . Replete with weighty arguments, learned allusions, and thick documentation. . . . For all that, Iconography of Power is refreshingly jargon free and . . , a delight to read. . . . Her readings of the blacksmith figure and the tractor are brilliant. . . . This attractively produced and intelligently written book will stimulate discussion, arouse theoretical interest, and excite students who are lucky enough to read it." Richard Stites, American Journal of Sociology "Victoria E. Bonnell's beautifully crafted book deals with a visual facet of the most ambitious of all Soviet projects: the creation of the new "socialist" society through a total reconstruction of Russian culture. . . . The book is . . . meticulously produced. It contains first-rate reproductions of no less than one hundred posters, including eight high-quality color plates. . . . Bonnell's book is a new treasure. "Drawing on a range of disciplines to elucidate her analyses (political and cultural history, historical sociology, cultural anthropology, and art history), she has produced a stimulating study that examines the genesis of poster images, their cultural resonanćes, and the way contemporaries may have read them. Indeed, this book reveals a great deal about Soviet culture and should become essential reading for all those interested in the history of Russian politics, society, culture, and art." “An invaluable book that makes available a huge fund of visual material from Soviet Russia and provides a rich contextualization of these images. Much larger in scope than a study of political posters, Iconography of Power traces the remarkable evolution of Soviet culture." Katerina Clark, author of Petersburg, Crucible of Cultural Revolution "Bonnell has performed a valuable service in exploring the development of several themes in Soviet poster art, showing how the treatment of workers, peasants, women, leaders, and enemies shifted over the years. . . . An accessible and useful addition to the literature on Soviet art, propaganda, and culture." J. Zimmerman, Choice victoRIA E. BonNELL is Professor of Sociology and Chair of the Center for Slavic and East European Studies at the University of California, Berkeley. She is the author of Roots of Rebellion: Workers' Politics and Organizations in St. Petersburg and Moscow, 1900–1914 (California, 1983) and the editor of The Russian Worker: Life and Labor under the Tsarist Regime (California, 1983). Studies on the History of Society and Culture, 27 A Centennial Book Cover illustration: Gustav Klutsis, "Under Lenin's Banner for Socialist Construction," 1930. Lithographic poster. Courtesy Modernism Gallery, San Francisco. Cover design by Barbara Jellow. UNIVERSITYOF CALIFORNIAPRESS