a poetic invention that, by stretching established conventions, whether physical, social, or political, rather than simply affirming them, takes on a radical critical function, a material critical theory, or what Dunne terms a "parafunctionality." Like Michel Foucault's concept of a discourse which crosses and challenges traditional disciplinary territories,1º Dunne's research methodology does not readily fit into traditional analytical categories, because an attempt is being made to generate a different conception of the role of the design researcher/intellectual. Rather than asking the familiar question "What is good design?", the written section of Dunne's thesis attempts to provide thematic analyses of the electronic object (e.g., the use of estrangement, subversion, or humor), with the goal of allowing refusal, curiosity, and innovation. To this extent, Dunne's work offers a positive and radical model of the action researcher in design as a critical interpreterof design processes and their relationship to culture and society, rather than a skilled technician preoccupied by theminutia of industrial production, or aslick but intellectually shallow semiotician.

## Conclusion: The Object as Research Discourse

The methodological strategies employed by the research projects reviewed above seem to offer some solutions to the problem of the role of the object/artifact in research by project. As experienced craftsman, graphic designer, and product designer, respectively, Ferguson, Johnson and Dunne acknowledge that there is a kind of tacit knowledge creative professionals possess which cannot be separated from theirperception, judgment, andskill.However, rather than arguing that a radically new electronic product or a new method for producing metals can be constituted as providing new knowledge “in themselves,"Johnson, Dunne, and Ferguson situate their discoveries in a research context. All threeof these doctoral programs have been conducted as systematic research activities and contain explicit data. The record of theconduct of both programs is “transparent" in the sense that a future researcher could uncover the same information, rehearse thearguments expoundedand, to a lesser or greater degree, produce the same results. In all three projects, the data employed and the results obtained are validated and related to a review of previous research in appropriate fields. In short, if research in “any" discipline can be described as a systematic inquiry whose goal is knowledge, then Ferguson, Johnson, and Dunne offer good examples of systematic and original research by project in art and design in which the object occupies a central place. All three pieces of research also raise the question of the role of design/craft in an academic context free of commercial values. In Dunne's case, the electronic object produced as the studio section of the doctorate is still “design," but in the sense of a “material thesis" in which the object itself becomes a physical critique. In all three cases, research is interpreted as “conceptual modeling" involving a critique of existing approaches to production/consumption communicated through highly considered artifacts.

## References

Christopher Frayling, Research in Art and Design (Royal College of Art,Research Papers 1:1, 1993/94).

Alex Seago, Research Methods for M. Phil and Ph.D. Students in Art and Design: Contrasts and Conflicts (Royal College of Art Research Papers 1:3, 1994–95).