# PREFACE TO THE NEW VERSION This book has been entirely rewritten. Such a revision may come more naturally to a teacher than to other authors, for a teacher is accustomed to being given another chance every year: to formulate his ideas more clearly, to drop dead weight and add new facts and insights, to improve the arrangement of his material, and in general to profit from the reception his presentation has received. About twenty years ago, the first version of this book was written at a headlong pace. I had to do it in fifteen months if I wanted to do it at all. I wrote it essentially in one long sitting, looking up only rarely to consult resources beyond those stored in my head, and I let the demonstrations and arguments follow one another as they presented themselves to my mind. It was an exhilarating effort and a very personal one. The friendly reception the book has received may be due in part to this reckless verve of a lightly shod man, uncommon in a systematic work of theoretical exposition. However, some drawbacks of the procedure became apparent, as I continued to teach the subject of the book and observed reactions to my presentation. Much of what I had described derived from a few basic principles, but this derivation was not always made explicit in the text, nor were the principles themselves spelled out with sufficient emphasis. This style was not averse to the mentality of artists and art students who fastened on the visual specifics and caught the general sense pervading the whole. But even they, I came to feel, would be better served by a more unified organization. And certainly I could do better by the scientists and thinkers who preferred something more systematic. Moreover, the underlying principles were not outlined in my mind two decades ago as sharply as they are now. In the new version I endeavor to show that the tendency toward the simplest structure, the development by stages of