require the kind of intimate knowledge that springs only from long love and patient devotion. Good art theory must smell of the studio, although its language should differ from the household talk of painters and sculptors. My own undertaking here is limited in many ways. It refers only to the visual media, and among them mostly to painting, drawing, and sculpture. This emphasis, to be sure, is not altogether arbitrary. The traditional arts have accumulated innumerable examples of the greatest variety and highest quality. And they illustrate aspects of form with a precision obtainable only from the handiwork of the mind. These demonstrations, however, point to similar, though often less sharply manifest, phenomena in the photographic and performing arts. In fact, the present study developed from a psychological and aesthetic analysis of the film conducted in the twenties and thirties. A further limitation of my work is psychological. All aspects of the mind bear on art, be they cognitive, social, or motivational. The artist's place in the community, the effect of his occupation on his relations with other human beings, the function of creative activity in the mind's striving for fulfillment and wisdom—none of these are the central focus of this book. Nor am I concerned with the psychology of the consumer. But I hope the reader will feel compensated by the rich imagery of shapes, colors, and movements that will meet him here. To establish some order in this lush overgrowth, to lay out a morphology, and to derive some principles gives us plenty to do. This will be the first task: a description of what sorts of things we see and what perceptual mechanisms account for the visual facts. To stop at the surface level, however, would leave the whole enterprise truncated and meaningless. 'There is no point to visual shapes apart from what they tell us. This is why we shall constantly proceed from the perceived patterns to the meaning they convey; and once we endeavor to look that far, we may hope to recapture in depth what we lost in scope by deliberately narrowing our horizon. The principles of my psychological thinking and many of the experiments I shall cite below derive from gestalt theory—a psychological discipline, I should probably add, which has no relation to the various forms of psychotherapy that have adopted the name. The word gestalt, the common German noun for shape or form, has been applied since the beginning of our century to a body of scientific principles that were derived mainly from experiments in sensory perception. It is generally admitted that the foundations of our present knowledge of visual perception were laid in the laboratories of the gestalt psychologists, and my own development has been shaped by the theoretical and practical work of this school. More specifically, from its beginnings gestalt psychology had a kinship to art. Art pervades the writings of Max Wertheimer, Wolfgang Köhler, and Kurt Koffka. Here and there the arts are explicitly mentioned, but what counts more is that the spirit underlying the reasoning of these men makes the artist feel at home. Indeed, something like an artistic vision of reality was needed to remind scientists that most natural phenomena are not described adequately if they are analyzed piece by piece. That a whole cannot be attained by the accretion of isolated parts was not something the artist had to be told. For centuries scientists had been able to say valuable things about reality by describing networks of mechanical relations; but at no time could a work of art have been made or understood by a mind unable to conceive the integrated structure of a whole. In the essay that gave gestalt theory its name, Christian von Ehrenfels pointed out that if each of twelve observers listened to one of the twelve tones of a melody, the sum of their experiences would not correspond to the experience of someone listening to the whole melody. Much of the later experimentation of the gestalt theorists was designed to show that the appearance of any element depends on its place and function in an overall pattern. A thoughtful person cannot read these studies without admiring the active striving for unity and order manifest in the simple act of looking at a simple pattern of lines. Far from being a mechanical recording of sensory elements, vision proved to be a truly creative apprehension of reality—imaginative, inventive, shrewd, and beautiful. It became apparent that the qualities that dignify the thinker and the artist distinguish all performances of the mind. Psychologists also began to see that this fact was no coincidence: the same principles apply to all the various mental capacities because the mind always functions as a whole. All perceiving is also thinking, all reasoning is also intuition, all observationis also invention. The relevance of these views to the theory and practice of the arts is evident. No longer can we consider what the artist does to be a self-contained activity, mysteriously inspired from above, unrelated and unrelatable to other human activities. Instead, we recognize the exalted kind of seeing that leads to the creation of great art as an outgrowth of the humbler and more common activity of the eyes in everyday life. Just as the prosaic search for information is "artistic" because it involves giving and finding shape and meaning, so the artist's conceiving is an instrument of life, a refined way of understanding who and where we are. As long as the raw material of experience was considered an amorphous agglomeration of stimuli, the observer seemed free to handle it according to his arbitrary pleasure. Seeing was an entirely subjective imposition of shape