and meaning upon reality; and in fact, no student of the arts would deny that individual artists or cultures form the world after their own image. The gestalt studies, however, made it clear that more often than not the situations we face have their own characteristics, which demand that we perceive them appropriately. Looking at the world proved to require an interplay between properties supplied by the object and the nature of the observing subject. This objective element in experience justifies attempts to distinguish between adequate and inadequate conceptions of reality. Further, all adequate conceptions could be expected to contain a common core of truth, which would make the art of all times and places potentially relevant to all men. If it could be shown in the laboratory that a well-organized line figure imposes itself upon all observers as basically the same shape, regardless of the associations and fantasies it stirs up in some of them because of their cultural background and individual disposition, one could expect the same, at least in principle, with respect to people looking at works of art. This trust in the objective validity of the artistic statement supplied a badly needed antidote to the nightmare of unbounded subjectivism and relativism. Finally, there was a wholesome lesson in the discovery that vision is not a mechanical recording of elements but rather the apprehension of significant structural patterns. If this was true for the simple act of perceiving an object, it was all the more likely to hold also for the artistic approach to reality. Obviously the artist was no more a mechanical recording device than his instrument of sight. The artistic representation of an object could no longer be thought of as a tedious transcription of its accidental appearance, detail by detail. In other words, here was a scientific analogy to the fact that images of reality can be valid even though far removed from "realistic" semblance. It was encouraging for me to discover that similar conclusions had been reached independently in the feld of art education. In particular Gustaf Britsch, with whose work I had become acquainted through Henry Schaefer-Simmern, asserted that the mind in its struggle for an orderly conception of reality proceeds in a lawful and logical way from the perceptually simplest patterns to patterns of increasing complexity. There was evidence, then, that the principles revealed in the gestalt experiments were also active genetically. The psychological interpretation of the growth process advanced in Chapter IV of the present book relies heavily on Schaefer-Simmern's theoretical formulations and lifelong experience as an educator. His work, The Unfolding of Artistic Activity, has demonstrated that the capacity to deal with life artistically is not the privilege of a few gifted specialists, but is available to every sane person whom nature has favored with a pair of eyes. To the psychologist this means that the study of art is an indispensable part of the study of man. At the risk of giving my fellow scientists good reason for displeasure, I am applying the principles in which I believe with a somewhat reckless onesidedness, partly because the cautious installation of dialectic fre escapes, side entrances, emergency closets, and waiting rooms would have made the structure impractically large and orientation dificult, partly because in certain cases it is useful to state a point of view with crude simplicity and leave the refinements to the ensuing play of thrust and counterthrust. I must also apologize to the art historians for using their material less competently than might have been desirable. At the present time it is probably beyond the power of any one person to give a fully satisfactory survey of the relations between the theory of the visual arts and the pertinent work in psychology. If we try to match two things which, although related, have not been made for each other, many adjustments are necessary and many gaps have to be closed provisionally. I had to speculate where I could not prove, and to use my own eyes where I could not rely on those of others. I have taken pains to indicate problems that await systematic research. But after all is said and done, I fel like exclaiming with Herman Melville: "This whole book is but a draught-nay, but the draught of a draught. Oh, Time, Strength, Cash, and Patience!" The book deals with what can be seen by everybody. I rely on the literature of art criticism and aesthetics only insofar as it has helped me and my students to see better. I have tried to spare the reader a hangover caused by reading many things that serve no good purpose. One of my reasons for writing this book is that I believe many people to be tired of the dazzling obscurity of arty talk, the juggling with catchwords and dehydrated aesthetic concepts, the pseudoscientific window dressing, the impertinent hunt for clinical symptoms, the elaborate measurement of trifles, and the charming epigrams. Art is the most concrete thing in the world, and there is no justification for confusing the mind of anybody who wants to know more about it. To some readers the approach may seem inappropriately sober and pedestrian. They might be answered by what Goethe once wrote to a friend, Christian Gottlob Heyne, professor of rhetoric in Göttingen: "As you can see, my starting point is very down-to-earth, and it may seem to some that I have treated the most spiritual matter in too terrestrial a fashion; but I may be permitted to observe that the gods of the Greeks were not enthroned in the seventh or tenth heaven but on Olympus, taking a giant-sized stride not from sun to sun but, at most, from mountain to mountain."And yet, some caution n how to use this book may be in order. Recently, a young instructor at Dartmouth College exhibited an assemblage which, I am pleased to report,