was called Homage to Arnheim. It consisted of ten identical mousetraps, arranged in a row. At the spot where the bait was to be affixed, he had written the titles of this book's ten chapters, one on each contraption. If this artist's work was fair warning, what was he warning against? This book may indeed act as a trap if it is used as a manual on approaching works of art. Anyone who has watched teachers guiding groups of children through a museum knows that to respond to the works of the masters is difficult at best. In the past, visitors could concentrate on the subject matter and thereby avoid facing the art. Then a generation of influential critics taught that even to consider the subject matter was a sure sign of ignorance. From then on, interpreters of art began to preach formal relations. But since they considered shapes and colors in a vacuum, theirs was nothing but a new way of avoiding art. For, as I suggested earlier, there is no point to visual shapes apart from what they tell us. Imagine now that a teacher used the method of this book superficially as a guide to approaching a work of art. "Now, children, let us see how many spots of red we can find in this painting by Matisse!" We proceed systematically, establishing an inventory of all the round shapes and all the angular ones. We hunt for parallel lines and for examples of superposition and of figure and ground. In the higher grades we seek out systems of gradients. When all the items are strung in order, we have done justice to the whole work. It can be done, and it has been done, but it is the last approach an adherent of gestalt psychology would want laid at his door. If one wishes to be admitted to the presence of a work of art, one must, first of all, face it as a whole. What is it that comes across? What is the mood of the colors, the dynamics of the shapes? Before we identify any one element, the total composition makes a statement that we must not lose. We look for a theme, a key to which everything relates. If there is a subject matter, we learn as much about it as we can, for nothing an artist puts in his work can be neglected by the viewer with impunity. Safely guided by the structure of the whole, we then try to recognize the principal features and explore their dominion over dependent details. Gradually, the entire wealth of the work reveals itself and falls into place, and as we perceive it correctly, it begins to engage all the powers of the mind with its message. This is what the artist works for. But it is also in the nature of man that he wishes to define what he sees and to understand why he sees what he does. Here the present book may be helpful. By making visual categories explicit by extracting underlying principles, and by showing structural relations at work, this survey of formal mechanisms aims not to replace spontaneous intuition but to sharpen it, to shore it up, and to make its elements communicable. If the tools provided here kill the experience rather than enrich it, something has gone wrong. The trap must be avoided. My first attempt to write this book dates back to the years 1941-1943, when I received a grant from the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation for the purpose. In the course of my work I was driven to the conclusion that the tools then available in the psychology of perception were inadequate for dealing with some of the more important visual problems in the arts. Instead of writing the book I had planned, I therefore undertook a number of specific studies, mainly in the areas of space, expression, and movement, designed to fill some of the gaps. T'he material was tested and expanded by my courses in the psychology of art at Sarah Lawrence College and the New School for Social Research in New York. When, in the summer of 1951, a fellowship from the Rockefeller Foundation made it possible for me to take a year's leave of absence, I felt ready to give a reasonably coherent account of the field. Whatever the worth of this book, I am greatly indebted to the officers of the Foundation's Humanities Division for enabling me to satisfy my need to put my findings on paper. It should be understood that the Foundation assumed no control over the project and has no responsibility for the result. In 1968 I moved to Harvard University. The Department of Visual and Environmental Studies, housed in a beautiful building by Le Corbusier, became a new inspiration. In the company of painters, sculptors, architects, photographers, and film-makers I was able, for the first time, to devote all my teaching to the psychology of art and to test my suppositions against what I saw around me in the studios. The alert comments of my students continued to act as a stream of water, polishing the pebbles that. make up this book. I wish to express my gratitude to three friends, Henry Schaefer-Simmern, the art educator, Meyer Schapiro, the art historian, and Hans Wallach, the psychologist, for reading chapters of the first edition in manuscript and making valuable suggestions and corrections. My thanks are due also to Alice B. Sheldon for alerting me to a large number of technical flaws after the book came out in 1954. Acknowledgments to the institutions and individual proprietors that permitted me to reproduce their works of art or to quote from their publications appear in the captions and in the notes at the end of the volume. I wish explicitly to thank the children, most of them unknown to me, whose drawings I have used. In particular, I am happy that my book preserves some of the drawings of Allmuth Laporte, whose young life of beauty and talent was destroyed by illness at the age of thirteen years.