istic whole. The cubists used a different procedure for a different purpose. They attempted to portray the modern world as a precarious interplay of independent units, each coherent and lawful in itself, but unrelated to the spatial coordinates governing its neighbors. I mentioned the cubists earlier, in comparison with the transitional stages between central and isometric perspectives (Figure 2o8), and I pointed out that the resulting visual clashes, contradictions, and mutual interferences were deliberately sought by artists such as Braque and Picasso. What they wanted to show was not a chaotic accumulation of objects, comparable to a mountain slope strewn with boulders, since this would be an instance of disorder in a perfectly coherent spatial setting. They were after a much more fundamental disorder, namely, the incompatibility inherent in total space itself. Each of the small units that together constitute a cubist still life or figure obeys its own spatial framework. Often these units are simple isometric rectangles. However, their spatial interrelation is deliberately irrational. They are not to be seen as parts of a continuous whole but as small, self-contained individualities, blindly crossing one another. In order to show that these superpositions do not occur in coherent space, the cubists used the device of making the units render one another transparent or fade out into the neutral ground of the painting. The psychological effect becomes evident if we remember that the same means are used in motion pictures to represent discontinuity of space. If the scene shifts from the living room to the hotel lobby, the room fades out into spacelessness—that is, for a moment pictorial space gives way to the physical surface of the screen, after which the opposite process introduces the new space of the lobby. Or, in a lap dissolve, both scenes appear for a moment as overlaying each other, thereby indicating their spatial independence to the eye. But whereas in the conventional film story, fade and dissolve represent only leaps within homogeneous and orderly space, experimental films and cubist paintings use them as part of their attempts to obtain an integration of discordant orders. Being forced into spatial simultaneity, the individual units cannot replace one another like film scenes but must refute one another's solidity. From the point of view of any one of them, the others are unreal. Only a delicate balancing of the innumerable forces meeting one another at innumerable angles can provide a semblance of unity. Perhaps this is the only kind of order available to modern man in his social relations and in dealing with the contradictory powers of his mind. ## VI ## LIGHT If we had wished to begin with the first causes of visual perception, a discussion of light should have preceded all others, for without light the eyes can observe no shape, no color, no space or movement. But light is more than just the physical cause of what we see. Even psychologically it remains one of the most fundamental and powerful of human experiences, an apparition understandably worshiped, celebrated, and importuned in religious ceremonies. To man as to all diurnal animals, it is the prerequisite for most activities. It is the visual counterpart of that other animating power, heat. It interprets to the eyes the life cycle of the hours and the seasons. Yet, since man's attention is directed mostly toward objects and their actions, the debt owed to light is not widely acknowledged. We deal visually with human beings, buildings, or trees, not with the medium generating their images. Accordingly even artists have been much more concerned with the creatures of light than with light itself. Under special cultural conditions light enters the scene of art as an active agent, and only our own time can be said to have generated artistic experiments dealing with nothing but the play of disembodied light ## The Experience of Light Physicists tell us that we live on borrowed light. The light that brightens the sky is sent through a dark universe to a dark earth from the sun over a distance of ninety-three million miles. Very little in the physicist's description accords with our perception. To the eye, the sky is luminous by its own power and the sun is nothing but the sky's brightest attribute, affxed to it and perhaps generated by it. According to the Book of Genesis, the creation of light produced the first day, whereas the sun, the moon, and the stars were added only on the third. In Piaget's interviews with children, a seven-year-old as-