serted that it is the sky that provides light. "The sun is not like the light. Light illuminates everything, but the sun only where it is." And another child explained: "Sometimes when the sun gets up in the morning, he sees that the weather is bad, so he goes to where it's good." Since the sun appears as nothing but a shiny object, light must reach the sky from somewhere else. S. R. Driver, in his comment on Genesis, says: "It seems thus that, according to the Hebrew conception, light, though gathered up and concentrated in the heavenly bodies, is not confined to them; day arises, not solely from the sun, but because the matter of light issues forth from its place and spreads over the earth, at night it withdraws, and darkness comes forth from its place, each in a hidden, mysterious way."This is more clearly expressed in the Lord's question to job:"Where is the way were light dwelleth?And as for darkness, where is the place thereof, that thou shouldst take it to the bound thereof, and that thou shouldst know the paths to the house thereof?" Instead of being an effect exerted by a few sources upon all other objects, "day" here is a bright thing which arrives from the beyond and moves over the vault of the sky. In the same way the brightness of objects on earth is seen basically as a property of their own rather than as a result of reflection. Apart from special conditions to be discussed below, the luminosity of a house, a tree, or a book on the table does not appear to the eye as a gift from a distant source. At most, the light of the day or of a lamp will seem to call forth the brightness of things, as a match ignites a pile of wood. Things are less bright than the sun and the sky, but not different in principle. They are weaker luminaries. It follows that darkness is seen either as the extinction of the object's inherent brightness or as the effect of dark objects hiding bright ones. Night is not the negative result of withdrawn light, but the positive arrival of a dark cloak that replaces or covers the day. Night, according to children, consists of black clouds, which move close together so that none of the white can shine through. Some artists, such as Rembrandt or Goya, at least part of the time show the world as an inherently dark place, brightened here and there by light. They happen to endorse the findings of the physicists. But the prevailing view throughout the world seems to have been and to be that light, although originally born from primordial darkness, is an inherent virtue of the sky, the earth, and the objects that populate them, and that their brightness is periodically hidden or extinguished by darkness. To assert that these are children's and primitives' misconceptions eradicated by modern science would be to close our eyes to universal visual experiences, which are refected in artistic presentations. Knowledge has made us stop talking like children, ancient chroniclers, or Polynesian islanders. Our image of the world, however, is all but unchanged, because it is dictated by compellinig perceptual conditions that prevail everywhere and always. Even so, we have trained ourselves to rely on knowledge rather than our sense of sight to such an extent that it takes accounts by the naive and the artists to make us realize what we see. ## Relative Brightness Another discrepancy between physical and perceptual facts is uncovered when we attempt to answer the question: How bright are things? It has often been observed that a handkerchief at midnight looks white, like a handkerchief at noon, although it may send less light to the eyes than a piece of charcoal under the mid-day sun. Here again, as in the case of the perception of size or shape, we cannot account for the facts by talking about the "constancy" of brightness, certainly not in the simple sense of asserting that objects are seen 'as bright as they really are." The brightness we see depends, in a complex manner, on the distribution of light in the total situation, on the optical and physiological processes in the observer's eyes and nervous system, and on an object's physical capacity to absorb and reflect the light it receives. This physical capacity is called luminance or reflectance. It is a constant property of any surface. Depending on the strength of the illumination, an object will refect more or less light, but its luminance, i.e., the percentage of the light it throws back, remains the same. A piece of black velvet, which absorbs much of the light it receives, may under strong illumination send out as much light as a dimly lit piece of white silk, which reflects most of the energy. Perceptually, there is no direct way of distinguishing between reflecting power and illumination, since the eye receives only the resulting intensity of light but no information about the proportion in which the two components contribute to this result. If a dark disk, suspended in a dimly lit room, is hit by a light in such a way that the disk is illuminated but not its environment, the disk will appear brightly colored or luminous. Brightness or luminosity will appear as properties of the object itself. The observer cannot distinguish between the brightness of the object and that of the illumination. Indeed, under such conditions he sees no illumination at all, though he may know that the light source is in action and may even see it. If, however, the room is made brighter, the disk appears correspondingly darker. In other words, the observed