Just as in central perspective a system of convergence is imposed upon a setting of shapes, illumination is the perceivable imposition of a light gradient upon the object brightness and object colors in the setting. The superposition observed on the surface of illuminated things is, as I have said, a transparency efect. Such transparency can be obtained in painting by actual glazes and superposition. Around 15oo, artists often used sheets of colored paper for their drawings as a ground of medium brightncss, to which they added highlights by applying white ink, shadows by black hatching. Painters often started with a monochromatic underpainting, which laid out the shadows and was then covered with transparent glazes of local color. This separation of illumination and object color reflected the perceptual split observed by the painter as he looked at things in the physical world; it also manifested a practical, objectoriented attitude, intent on distinguishing properties of the objects themselves from transitory effects momentarily imposed upon them. Quite a different attitude is expressed by painters of the nineteenth century who represented the sum of local brightness, local color, and the brightness and color of the illumination through a single shade of pigment. This technique not only confirmed the purely visual sensation as the finaly reality; it also asserted philosophically that the being of things is not untouchably permanent. Accidentals are seen as participating in the essence of things just as much as their invariant properties. This pictorial procedure also dehined the individual as being partly the creature of its environment, subject to infuences that cannot simply be shed like veils. As in other instances of transparency, the illumination effect is brought about by the tendency toward simplest structure. When illumination is perceived as a superposition, the illuminated object is able to maintain a constant brightness and color, while shading and highlights are attributed to a light gradient, which has a simple structure of its own. It should be noted that there is no obvious answer to the question how the object's brightness-color value is determined. Thinking back to the cxample of the wooden barrel grazed by light, we realize that what the eyes actually receive is a gamut of shades. Is one of them designated as the "true" color of the object, perhaps because it is the most saturated, the least contaminated by grayness? Delacroix assumed the existence of such a true tone (le ton vrai de l'objet) and noted that it is found next to the "luminous point," i.e. the highlight. But perhaps no such tone is actually present in the percept, and object brightness and object color are instead medium values, which serve as common denominators of the various shades. Light Creates Space All gradients have the power to create depth, and gradients of brightness are among the most efficient. This is true for spatial settings, such as interiors and landscapes, but also for single objects. In an experiment by Gehrcke and Lau, a wooden, whitewashed cone, whose base had a diameter of about fve inches was viewed from a distance of thirteen yards. The cone was placed with its vertex toward the observer, whose line of sight coincided with the main axis of the cone. When the cone was lighted evenly from all sides the observer saw no cone, simply a fat white disk. The cone became visible when the light fell from only one side. Evidently a three-dimensional view could provide no structural simplification as long as the lighting was even. When lateral illumination was used, however, it introduced a gradient of shading, which resulted in a strong three-dimensional effect revealing the shape of the cone. The increase in relief produced by lateral lighting is well known. Goethe says of the sun that it receives an immaculate view of the world "because it never saw the shadow," and the amateur photographer obtains flat pictures when he mounts the flash bulb on his camera. When the moon is full, its mountains and depressions appear as mere spots, but they stand out in bold relief as soon as the light strikes the crescent laterally. Overwhelming is the testimony of the scanning electron microscope, which has introduced the world of the infnitely small into our common visual experience by providing strong illumination effects. The fat sections supplied by the light microscope or the transmission electron microscope have their own beauty and informative value, but they can hardly be experienced as belonging to the same world as the animals and plants known to the naked eye. Under the scanning microscope, the tiny cones and rods of the retina look like the withered trunks of a petrified forest, and the red cells of human blood look like a feld of densely grown fungi or a junkyard of discarded tires. By giving these small objects the tangible volume of things as we know them, the scanning microscope has extended the continuum of visual experience to the limits ofthe organic and inorganic worlds. Curved surfaces are obtained by accelerating brightness gradients, which correspond to the fact that the curvature of an object is almost flat where the line of sight strikes it at a right angle but increases ever more rapidly from the center toward the boundary (Figure 225). By varying the steepness of the gradient, one can control the shape of the curvature perceived. A gradient