writer of the seventeenth century, said that if objects are arranged in such a way that all the lights are together on one side and their darkness on the other, this collection of lights and shades will keep the eye from wandering. "Titian called it the bunch of grapes because the grapes, being separated, would have each its light and shade equally, and thus dividing the sight into many rays, would cause confusion; but when collected into one bunch, and becoming thus but one mass of light and one of shade, the eye embraces them as a single object." The neat analogy between brightness and spatial orientation is interfered with by cast shadows, because they may darken an area that would be bright otherwise, and by reflections that light up dark places. Differences in local brightness will also interact with the lighting scheme. In sculpture, dirt spots on the marble or irregularities of brightness in the grain of the wood will often distort shape by being subject to misinterpretation as effects of shading. We are again up against the problem that arises from the eye's inability to distinguish directly between reflecting power and strength of illumination. Roger de Piles writes in a discussion of claro-obscuro: "Claro implies not only anything exposed to a direct light, but also all such colors as are luminous in their natures; and obscuro, not only all the shadows directly caused by the incidence and privation of light, but likewise all the colors which are naturally brown, such as, even when they are exposed to light, maintain an obscurity, and are capable of grouping with the shades of other objects." In order to avoid the confusion between brightness produced by illumination and brightness due to the coloring of the object itself, the spatial distribution of light in the setting must be understandable to the eyes of the viewer. This is most easily achieved when no more than one light source is used. But often in photography or on the stage several light sources are combined in order to avoid excessively dark shadows. Such dark shadows, it may be mentioned in passing, will destroy shape not only by hiding relevant portions of the object but also by cutting across the continuity of the curvature with sharp boundary lines between brightness and darkness. In recent years museums and art galleries have taken to murdering sculpture by illuminating it with focused spotlights to create a dramatic effect. Experiments have shown that attached shadows maintain their character of a transparent film only when their borders are blurred gradients. Hering observed: "A small shadow, thrown upon the surface of one's writing paper, appears as a casual spot of blurred gray superimposed upon the white paper. Under normal circumstances the white paper is seen through the shadow. There is no suggestion that it forms in any way a part of the genuine color of the paper. If, now, a heavy black line is drawn around the shadow so as to coincide exactly with its outline, a striking change may be observed to take place. The shadow ceases to appear as a shadow and becomes a dark gray spot on the surface of the paper, no longer a casual spot superimposed upon the paper but an actual part of the color of the paper." The focused spotlight creates the same sharp contours as Hering's black lines and therefore slashes the continuity of the sculptural surface mercilessly and produces a senseless arrangement of white and black shapes. Daylight, on the other hand, makes sculpture so beautifully visible because its diffuseness supplements the direct incidence of the sunlight and creates mellow gradients. For lighting in art galleries or film studios or on the stage to avoid harsh one-sidedness, it must combine light sources in an organized whole. Several lights may add up to an even illumination, or each of them may create a clearly self-contained gradient of brightness values. The overall result can convey visual order. But the light sources may also interfere with one another by partly increasing or reversing the others' effects. This will make the shape of objects as well as their spatial interrelations incomprehensible. If several light sources are to cooperate, the photographer endeavours to organize them in a hierarchy, giving one of them the leading part of the "motivating source" and clearly weaker supporting roles to the others. ## Shadows Shadows may be either attached or cast. Attached shadows lie directly on the objects by whose shape, spatial orientation, and distance from the light source they are created. Cast shadows are thrown from one object onto another, or from one part onto another of the same object. Physically both kinds of shadow are of the same nature; they come about in those places of the setting where light is scarce. Perceptually they are quite different. The attached shadow is an integral part of the object, so much so that in practical experience it is generally not noted but simply serves to define volume. A cast shadow, on the other hand, is an imposition by one object upon another, an interference with the recipient's integrity. By means of a cast shadow one house reaches across the street to streak its opposite number, and a mountain may darken the villages in the valley with an image of its own shape. Thus cast shadows equip objects with the uncanny power of sending out darkness. But this symbolism becomes artistically active only when the perceptual situation is made comprehensible to the eye. There are two things the eye must understand. First, the shadow does not belong to the object on which it is seen; and second, it does belong to another object,