distinguished by the eyes from modif.cations imposed by spatial orientation and illumination. Not only do the brightness patterns of shading get entangled with the brightness and darkness values of the object itself, but they also interfere with the clarity of the object's local colors and their interrelations. When painters began to create volume and space by means of illumination effects, this technique of chiaroscuro was soon found to disturb color composition. As long as shadows were conceived as applications of monochromatic darkness, they inevitablymuddied and obscured the colors and thereby not only tampered unattractively with the saturation of the colors, but also dulled their identity. A blue coat shaded with black no longer looked truly blue and lost the simple homogeneity of its local color; an arm or leg underlaid with dark paint neither looked the color of skin nor presented a good, clear hue of pink. It is quite possible that Leonardo da Vinci, whom Heinrich Wölflin has called the father of chiaroscuro, was unable to complete some of his paintings because the desire to produce strong spatial relief by shading coincided in time with a new sensitivity to color organization. The unification of the two competing systems of pictorial form came gradually. Shadow was redefined as a modification of hue-a development that led from Titian by way of Rubens and Delacroix to Cézanne. "Light does not exist for the painter," wrote Cézanne to Emile Bonnard. In our own century, the color style of the Fauves often eliminated the problem by omitting all shading and by composing with saturated hues. ## Paintingwithout Lighting Although the painter who uses effects of illumination is very much aware of their power, the influence of light and shadow is experienced in everyday life mostly in very practical ways. The seeking or avoidance of light is common at all levels of the animal world, and in the same way man seeks the light when he wants to see or be seen and avoids it otherwise. For these practical purposes, however, light is merely a means of dealing with objects. Light and shadow are observed, but hardly consciously for their own sake. They define the shape and spatial position of things and are consumed in this service. The naive observer is unlikely to mention them when asked to give a carefully detailed description of what he sees; he assumes that he is being asked about objects and their adherent characteristics. Ernst Mach reports: "In my earliest youth the shadows and lights on pictures appeared to me as spots void of meaning. When I began to draw I regarded shading as a mere custom of artists. I once drew the portrait of our pastor, a friend of the family, and shaded, from no necessity, but simply from having seen something similar in other pictures, the whole half of his face black. I was subjected for this to a severe criticism on the part of my mother, and my deeply offended artist's pride is probably the reason that these facts remained so strongly impressed upon my memory." Early art everywhere represents objects by their outlines, local brightness and local color, and some cultures have retained this practice even at high levels of refinement. In the art work of young children, brightness values serve mostly to mark differences. Dark hair may be set off against a bright face. Light sources, such as the sun or a lamp, are often shown as sending out rays, but no indication is given that it is these rays which make objects visible. The same is true for early Egyptian painting. On Greek vases figures are detached from the background by strong contrast, but these differences appear as the result of object brightness or darkness, not of illumination. Literary sources indicate that in the course of the centuries Greek painters learned the use of shadows, and the results of these discoveries can be seen in the Hellenistic wall pictures or the Egyptian mummy portraits around the second and first centuries B.c. Here the chiaroscuro was handled with a virtuosity not rediscovered until the late Renaissance. As the need to convey the roundness of solids arises, shading is introduced, later complemented by heightening. In physical space these effects are produced by illumination. But the use of shading does not necessarily originate from the observation of nature, and certainly is not always used in accordance with the rules of illumination. Rather, we can assume that after working for a while with the perceptually simpler means of line contour and homogeneously colored surfaces, the painter will discover the spatial virtues of unevenly distributed brightness. The perceptual effect of gradients becomes apparent to the eyes. Dark shading will make the surface recede toward the contours. Highlights will make it protrude. These variations are used to create roundness or hollowness; they do not necessarily imply a relation to a light source. ●ften the distribution of "shadows" follows different principles. Shading may issue from the contour all around the pattern, and give way gradually to lighter values toward the center. In the symmetrical compositions of medieval painters the figures at the left often have their highlights on the left side, those on the right on the right side; or in the laterally foreshortened faces the larger half may always appear bright, the narrower dark. Thus, in adapting itself to the requirements of composition and shape, brightness is often distributed in a way that would be termed incorrect if judged by the laws of illumination. The same is true when brightness differences are used to detach overlapping objects from each other. When a depth interval between objects of