## The Symbolism of Light During the early Renaissance, light was still used essentially as a means of modeling volume. The world is bright, objects are inherently luminous, and shadows are applied to convey roundness. A different conception is observable in the Last Supper of Leonardo da Vinci. Here the light falls as an active power from a given direction into a dark room, applying strokes of brightness to each figure, to the table top, and to the walls. The effect is pitched to the highest key in paintings by Caravaggio or Latour, who prepare the eyes for the electric spotlights of the twentieth century. This sharply focused light animates space with directed motion. It sometimes fractures the unity of bodies by tracing the boundary lines of darkness across the surfaces. It stimulates the sense of sight by playfully disfiguring familiar shape and excites it by violent contrast. A comparison with Hollywood movies is not entirely out of place, because in the one case as in the other, the impact of the dazzling rays, the dance of shadows, and the secret of darkness give tonic thrills to the nerves. The symbolism of light, which finds such moving pictorial expression in the work of Rembrandt, probably goes as far back as the history of man. I mentioned earlier that in perception darkness does not appear as the mere absence of light, but as an active counterprinciple. The dualism of the two antagonistic powers is found in the mythology and philosophy of many cultures—for example, China and Persia. Day and night become the visual image of the conflict between good and evil. The Bible identifies God, Christ, truth, virtue, and salvation with light, and godlessness, sin, and the Devil with darkness. The influential philosophy of Neoplatonism, based entirely on the metaphor of light, found its visual expression in the use of illumination by daylight and candles in the churches of the Middle Ages. The religious symbolism of light was, of course, familiar to the painters of the Middle Ages. However, the gold grounds, halos, and geometric star patterns-symbolic representations of the divine light—appeared to the eye not as effects of lighting, but as shiny attributes; on the other hand, the correctly observed light effects of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries were essentially the products of curiosity, research, and sensory refnement. Rembrandt personifies the fi.nal confluence of the two sources. Divine light is no longer an ornament but the realistic experience of radiant energy, and the sensuous spectacle of highlights and shadows is transformed into a revelation. Rembrandt's pictures typically present a narrow, dark scene, into which the beam of light carries the animating message of a beyond, unknown and invisible in itself but perceivable through its powerful reflection. As the light falls from above, life on earth is no longer in the center of the world but at its dark bottom. The eyes are made to understand that the human habitat is nothing but a valley of shadows, humbly dependent upon the true existence on the heights. When the source of light is located inside the picture, the meaning changes. Now the life-giving energy establishes the center and the range of a narrow world. Nothing exists beyond the corners to which the rays reach. There is a Holy Family by Rembrandt in which the light seems to originate in the brilliantly lighted book from which Mary is reading, because the candle itself is hidden. The light of the Bible reveals the sleeping child in the cradle, and the listening Joseph is dwarfed by his own towering shadow, which is cast on the wall behind and above him. In another painting by Rembrandt, the light, again hidden, brightens the body of Christ, which is being taken down from the cross. The ceremony is performed in a dark world. But as the light falls from below, it heightens the limp body and imparts the majesty of life to the image of death. Thus the light source within the picture tells the story of the New Testament-that is, the story of the divine light transferred to the earth and ennobling it by its presence. In Rembrandt's paintings, the objects receive light passively as the impact of an outer force, but at the same time they become light sources themselves, actively radiating energy. Having become enlightened, they hand on the message. The hiding of the candle is a means of eliminating the passive aspect of what is happening-the illuminated object becomes the primary source. In this way Rembrandt enables a book or a face to send out light without violating the requirements of a realistic style of painting. By this pictorial device he copes with the central mystery of the Gospel story, the light that has become matter. How does Rembrandt obtain his glowing luminosity?I have already mentioned some of the perceptual conditions. An object appears luminous not simply by virtue of its absolute brightness, but by surpassing the average brightness established for its location by the total field. Thus the uncanny glow of rather dark objects comes about when they are placed in an even darker environment. Furthermore, luminosity results when brightness is not perceived as an effect of illumination. To this end, shadows must be eliminated or kept to a minimum. And the strongest light must appear within the confines of the object. Rembrandt frequently places a bright object in a dark field, keeps it almost free of shadow, and partially lights the objects around it. Thus in his Wedding of Samson Delilah is enthroned as a pyramid of light in front of a dark curtain, and the refection of her splendor is seen on the table and the