people around her. Similarly, in a Toilet of Bathshebah the body of the woman is singled out by a strong light, whereas the environment, including the two maids who minister to her, remains in the dark. Glow is also associated with a lack of surface texture. Objects appear opaque and solid by means of texture, which establishes the frontal surface. A glowing object does not stop the glance by such an outer shell. Its limits are not clearly defined for the eyes. In David Katz's terms, it has "film color" rather than "surface color."Light seems to originate within the object at an indefinite distance from the observer. Rembrandt enhances luminosity by giving little detail to the areas of highest brightness. The indefniteness of the outer surface endows his glowing objects with a transfgured, immaterial quality. In a more didactic sense, illumination tends to guide attention selectively, in accordance with the desired meaning. An object can be singled out without having to be large or colorful or situated in the center. Similarly, secondary features of the scene can be subdued at will. All this without "surgical interventions,"which would alter the inventory of the scene itself. Light can be made to fall on, or be withheld from, any object A given arrangement of dancers on the stage can be interpreted to the audience in different ways depending upon the scheme of lighting. Rembrandt uses this means of interpretation constantly without being much concerned about a realistic justification of the effect. In the aforementioned Descent from the Cross brilliant light falls on the fainting Mary, whereas the bystanders next to her remain relatively dark. Or we see Samson's hands brightly lighted as they explain a riddle to the wedding guests, while his face is kept in the dark because its contribution is secondary. In his representation of the Potiphar story Rembrandt translates the accusing words of the woman into visual language by throwing the strongest light on the bed (Figure 224). In styles of painting that do not conceive of illumination, the expressive and symbolic character of brightness and darkness is rendered through properties adherent to the objects themselves. Death may appear as a figure clothed in black, or the whiteness of the lily may depict innocence. When illumination is represented, light and shadow tend to assume the task of producing these moods. An instructive example can be found in Dürer's engraving Melencolia. Traditionally the melancholic was given a black face, because it was assumed that a darkening of the blood-the word "melancholy" means literally "black bile"—was responsible for a depressed state of mind. Dürer places his melancholy woman with her back against the light so that her face is in the shadow. In this way the darkness of her face is at least partially justified by the absence of light. For the realistic painter this method has the advantage of giving an object the degree of brightness that suits his purpose without interfering with its "objective"appearance. He can make a white thing dark without suggesting that it is dark in itself. The procedure is used constantly in Goya's etchings. In the movies also, back lighting serves to give a figure the sinister quality of darkness. The uncanny sensation obtained in this manner occurs in part because the dark hgure is not visible positively as a solid material body with observable surface texture, but only negatively as an obstacle to light, neither round nor tangible. It is as though a shadow were moving in space like a person. When darkness is so deep that it provides a foil of black nothingness, the beholder receives the compelling impression of things emerging from a state of non-being and likely to return to it. Instead of presenting a static world with a constant inventory, the artist shows life as a process of appearing and disappearing. The whole is only partly present, and so are most objects. One part of a figure may be visible while the rest is hidden in darkness. In the film The Third Man the mysterious protagonist stands unseen in a doorway. Only the tips of his shoes reflect a street light, and a cat discovers the invisible stranger and sniffs at what the audience cannot see. The frightening existence of things that are beyond the reach of our senses and yet exercise their power on us is represented by means of darkness. Pictorial objects vanish not only into darkness but also into whiteness. In Far Eastern landscapes, most brilliantly in the "spattered ink"or haboku technique of the Japanese painter Sesshu, we see mountains emerge from a base hidden in fog. It would be quite misleading to say that in such instances imagination completes" what the painter omitted. On the contrary, the meaning of the presentation depends precisely on the spectacle of objects emerging from nothingness to develop more and more articulate shape as they rise toward the peak. The heaviness of the mountain base is paradoxically replaced by the ethereal lightness of the white silk or paper, which acts as figure rather than ground but looks immaterial nevertheless. Thus the most gigantic formations on earth are made into apparitions. Finally, two modern reinterpretations of illumination in painting should be mentioned. The impressionists played down the difference between light and shadow and blurred the contours of objects. They also replaced the variety of realistic textures with the uniform surface quality of small brushstrokes,