# VII # COLOR If it is true that cats and dogs do not see colors, what is it they are missing? Of one thing we can be certain: the absence of color will deprive them of a most efficient dimension of discrimination. A ball rolling across a lawn can be spotted and caught much more surely if it is identified not only by its movement, shape, texture, and perhaps brightness, but also by the intense red color that sets it apart from the green grass. In addition, it is possible that animals who possess color vision are impressed by the powerfully enlivening quality that for us distinguishes a colorful world from a monochromic one. This latter difference must have been foremost in the mind of the painter Odilon Redon when, after three decades devoted almost entirely to what he called "his blacks," i.e., hundreds of charcoal drawings and lithographs, his work suddenly burst into paintings of full color. He had written: "One must respect black. Nothing prostitutes it. It does not please the eye or awaken another sense. It is the agent of the mind even more than the beautiful color of the palette or prism." But when in the 189o's he abandoned the chilly purity of monochromatic light and darkness, he must have deeply appreciated the possibility of defining, say, the figure of a cyclopean giant not just by a fantastic shape, but by the particular color quality of an earthy brown lurking above a landscape of purple rocks; or the chance to create a green figure of death propelled through a world of burning orange—so profoundly different from the sober health of the spring colors he could use for the portrait of his young son. ## From Light to Color No one will ever be sure that his neighbor sees a particular color exactly the same way he himself does. We can only compare color relations, and even that raises problems. One can ask subjects to group colors that belong together or to match a certain nuance with an identical sample. Such procedures can avoid any reference to color names, but we cannot assume that different persons of similar background, let alone members of different cultures, have the same standards for what they consider "alike" or "the same" or "different." Within these limits, however, it is safe to state that color perception is the same for people of different ages, different backgrounds, or different cultures. Except for individual pathology, such as color blindness, we all have the same kind of retina, the same nervous system. It is true, however, that when observers are asked to point out certain colors in the spectrum the results vary somewhat. This is so because the spectrum is a sliding scale, a continuum of gradations, and also because people mean different sensations by different color names. Color names are somewhat indeterminate because the conceptualization of colors themselves is problematic. To be sure, the world of color is not simply an assortment of innumerable hues; it is clearly structured on the basis of the three fundamental primaries and their combinations. However, it takes a particular mental attitude to organize one's world of color according to these purely perceptual characteristics. Instead, a person's world is a world of objects, whose given perceptual properties matter in varying degrees. A particular culture may distinguish the colors of plants from those of the soil or water, but have no use for any other subdivision of hues—a perceptual classification that will be reflected in the vocabulary. An agricultural tribe may possess many words to describe subtle differences in the colors of cattle, but none to distinguish blue from green. In our own environment, certain occupations call for refined color distinctions and a correspondingly sophisticated vocabulary. Others call for none at all. For our present purpose the most interesting difference in the conceptualizing of color relates to cultural development. Recent studies have suggested that the basic color names, relatively few in number, are common to all languages, but also that they cover different ranges of hues and that not all languages possess all these names. Anthropological research by Brent Berlin and Paul Kay indicates that color names do not occur in arbitrary selection. The most elementary nomenclature distinguishes only between darkness and lightness, and all colors are classified according to this simple dichotomy. When a language contains a third color name, it is always red. This new category absorbs the reds and oranges and most yellows, pinks, and purples, including violet. The remainder is divided between darkness and lightness (black and white). If these data, gathered from twenty languages, are reliable, they tell us