bursts. A preference for shape reactions in patients goes with an introverted disposition, strong control over impulses, a pedantic, unemotional attitude. Rorschach offered no theoretical explanation for the relationship he posited between perceptual behavior and personality. Ernest Schachtel, however, has suggested that the experience of color resembles that of affect or emotion. In both cases we tend to be passive receivers of stimulation. An emotion is not the product of the actively organizing mind. It merely presupposes a kind of openness, which, for example, a depressed person may not have. Emotion strikes us as color does. Shape, by contrast, seems to require a more active response. We scan the object, establish its structural skeleton, relate the parts to the whole. Similarly, the controlling mind acts upon impulses, applies principles, coordinates a variety of experiences, and decides on a course of action. Broadly speaking, in color vision action issues from the object and affects the person; but for the perception of shape the organizing mind goes out to the object. A literal application of this theory might lead to the conclusion that color produces an essentially emotional experience, whereas shape corresponds to intellectual control. Such a formulation seems too narrow, particularly with reference to art. It is probably true that receptivity and immediacy of experience are more typical for color responses, whereas active control characterizes the perception of shape. But a picture can be painted or understood only by actively organizing the totality of color values; on the other hand, we passively surrender in the contemplation of expressive shape. Instead of speaking of color responses and shape responses, we may more appropriately distinguish between a receptive attitude to visual stimuli, which is encouraged by color but applies also to shape, and a more active attitude, which is prevalent in the perception of shape but applies also to color composition. More generally, it is probably the expressive qualities (primarily of color, but also of shape) that spontaneously affect the passively receiving mind, whereas the tectonic structure of pattern (characteristic of shape, but found also in color) engages the actively organizing mind. It is tempting to explore these correlations between perceptual behavior and personality structure in the arts. The first attitude might be called a romantic one; the second, classicist. In painting, we might think, for example, of the approach of Delacroix, who not only bases his compositions on striking color schemes but also stresses the expressive qualities of shape, as against Jacques Louis David, who conceives mainly in terms of shape, employed for the relatively static defnition of objects, and subdues and schematizes color. Matisse has said: "If drawing is of the spirit and color of the senses, you must draw first, to cultivate the spirit and to be able to lead color into spiritual paths."He is voicing a tradition which holds that shape is more important and moredignified than color. Poussin said: "The colors in painting are, as it were, blandishments to lure the eyes, as the beauty of the verses in poetry is a lure for the ears."A Germanic version of this view can be found in the writings of Kant: "In painting, sculpture, and indeed in all the visual arts, in architecture, horticulture, to the extent to which they are fine arts, design is essential, for design serves as the foundation of taste only by the pleasures deriving from shape, not by the entertainment of sensation. The colors, which illuminate the pattern of outlines, belong to the stimulation. They may animate the sensation of the object but cannot make it worthy of contemplation and beautiful. Rather they are often greatly constrained by the requirements of beautiful shape and, even where stimulation is admitted, ennobled only by shape." Given such views, it is not surprising that we fnd shape identified with the traditional virtues of the male sex, color with the temptations of the female. According to Charles Blanc, "the union of design and color is necessary to beget painting just as is the union of man and woman to beget mankind, but design must maintain its preponderance over color. Otherwise painting speeds to its ruin: it will fall through color just as mankind fell through Eve." ## How Colors Come About There is no need here to describe in detail the principles of optics and neurophysiology by which color perception has been explained in the past and is explained today. However, some general features, helpful in clarifying the overall character of the color phenomenon, are easily overlooked as the student of the arts tries to pick his way through the technicalities of atomic particles and wavelengths, cones and rods, lights and pigments. Moreover, certain key concepts have commonly been presented in a misleading manner. The names of three of the early pioneers of color theory can stand for the three principal components of the process to be explained. Newton described colors as due to properties of the rays that compose light sources; Goethe proclaimed the contribution of the physical media and surfaces encountered by the light as it travels from its source to the eyes of the viewer; and Schopenhauer foresaw in a fanciful though uncannily prophetic theory the function of retinal responses in the eyes. "As the rays of light differ in degrees of refrangibility," wrote Newton in his report of 1672 to the Royal Society, "so they also differ in their disposition to exhibit this or that particular color. Colors are not qualifications of light, derived from refractions, or reflections of natural bodies (as it is generally be-