## A Capricious Medium Remarkably little has been written about color as a means of pictorial organization. There are descriptions of the palette used by particular painters; there are critical judgments praising or condemning an artist's use of color. But on the whole, one can only agree that, in the words of the art historian Allen Pattillo, "a large part of what has been written about painting, it is fair to say, has been written almost as if paintings were works in black and white." In some university art departments, black-and-white slides are preferred, either because colors "distract attention"from the shapes or, more sensibly, because the reproductions cannot be trusted. Anyone working with color slides knows that no two slides of the same object look alike and that the differences are often far from subtle. Even under optimal conditions, the projection of transparencies on the screen transforms the subdued surface colors of paintings into rhapsodies of luminous jewelry, and the change in size also influences appearance as well as composition. The color reproductions in art books and magazines vary from excellent to miserable. Most of the time the viewer cannot judge how much of a truth or a lie he is beingtold. Apart from false testimony, the originals themselves let us down. Most masterpieces of painting can be seen only through layers of darkened varnish, which has absorbed the dirt of the ages. We can have a more reliable view of fishes swimming in the muddy green water of an aquarium than we can of the Mona Lisa. No one has seen the Titians and Rembrandts for centuries, and the cleaning and restoring of paintings lead to notoriously unreliable results. Moreover, pigments are known to change chemically. By the time one has seen aggressive blues play havoc with the compositions of a Bellini or Raphael, or has seen a Harunobu print or Cézanne watercolor bleached beyond recognition by sunlight, one realizes that our knowledge of the pictures we possess is based to a considerable extent on hearsay and imagination. I mentioned how thoroughly color is modifed by illumination. Such modifications are not mere transpositions: light of a given color will affect different colors in a picture differently. Even more fundamental is the constant perceptual interaction among colors by contrast or assimilation. Place a triangle next to a rectangle, and you will find that they remain what they are, although the shapes infuence each other somewhat. But a blue color placed next to a strong red veers toward the green, and two paintings hanging side by side on a wall may profoundly modify each other's colors. A green hue that looked conservatively restrained in the sample booklet at the paint shop will overwhelm you when it covers the walls. The color trees and cones designed by Munsell and Ostwald as systematic presentations of colors according to hue, brightness, and saturation serve admirably to make us understand the complex interaction of the three dimensions; but a color seen in the context of its neighbors will change when placed in a different environment. In no reliable sense can we speak of a color "as it really is"; it is always determined by its context. A white background is by no means a zero background but has strong idiosyncrasies of its own. Wolfgang Schöne has pointed out that in European paintings of the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries, the light is more important than the color and that therefore they are badly served by being displayed on white or very bright walls. Such mistreatment occurs, he says, at museums such as the Louvre, the Ufizi, the National Gallery in London, and the Hamburg Kunsthalle under the infuence of modern painting, which stresses color rather than light-an effect enhanced by light-colored walls. To all these uncertainties we must add the problems of perceptual and verbal identification. When observers are presented with a continuum of the rainbow colors, e.g. with a light spectrum, they do not agree on where the principal colors appear at their purest. This is true even for the fundamental primaries, especially for pure red, which may be located by observers anywhere between 66o and 76o millimicrons. Accordingly, any color name refers to a range of possible hues, so that verbal communication in the absence of direct perception is quite imprecise. Newton, for example, used "violet" and "purple" interchangeably-not a negligible matter since according to modern usage, violet is contained in the spectrum of light but purple is not. In our own time Hilaire Hiler has compiled a chart of color names which indicates, for example, that the color corresponding to the wavelength of 6oo millimicrons is described by various authors as orange chrome, golden poppy, spectrum orange, bittersweet orange, oriental red, Saturn red, cadmium red orange, or red orange. It will be evident why the discussion of color problems is fraught with obstacles and why so little useful discussion therefore takes place. However, these facts shouid not be taken to mean that what we see when we look at a painting is elusive, accidental, or arbitrary. On the contrary, in any successfully organized composition, the hue, place, and size of every color area as well as its brightness and saturation are established in such a way that all the colors together stabilize one another in a balanced whole. Ambiguities resulting from relations between parts compensate one another in the total context, and the