complete work, when adequately perused, represents an objectively defined statement. Individual colors resist abstractive generalization. They are tied to their particular place and time. But within any given order they behave lawfully and obey structural rules, which we sense intuitively, but about which we so far know much too little. ## The Quest for Harmony How are colors related to one another? Most theorists have dealt with this question as though it meant: Which colors go together harmoniously? They have tried to determine the assortments of colors in which all items blend readily and pleasantly. Their prescriptions were derived from the attempts to classify all color values in a standardized, objective system. The earliest of these systems were two-dimensional, depicting the sequence and some interrelations of hues by a circle or polygon. Later, when it was realized that color is determined by at least three dimensions—hue, brightness, and saturation—three-dimensional models were introduced. J. H. Lambert's color pyramid dates back to 1772. The painter Philipp Otto Runge published in 181o an illustrated description of a spherical model, of which he wrote: "It will be impossible to think of any nuance produced by a mixture of the five elements (blue, yellow, red, white, and black) and not contained in this framework; nor can the whole system be represented by any other correct and complete figure. And since each nuance is given its correct relation to all the pure elements as well as to all mixtures, this sphere must be considered a universal chart, enabling anybody to orient himself as to the overall context of all colors." Later the psychologist Wilhelm Wundt also proposed a color sphere, as well as the kind of double cone developed after him by Ostwald. The color tree devised by the painter Albert Munsell in 1915 is also spherical in principle. A particularly attractive design of the overall system was done by Paul Klee for his students at the Bauhaus. He called it "Canon of Color Totality." Although differing in shape, the various models of color classifcation are all based on the same principle. The central vertical axis presents the scale of achromatic brightness values from the lightest white at the top to the darkest black at the bottom. The equator, or the polygonal contour corresponding to it, contains the scale of hues at a medium brightness level. Each horizontal section through the solid presents all available degrees of saturation for all the hues at a given brightness level. The closer to the outer border of the section, the more saturated the color; the closer to the central axis, the greater its admixture with a gray of the same brightness. Double pyramids, double cones, and spherical color solids, all agree in having their maximum girth at medium height and tapering off toward the poles. These idealizations neglect the fact that different hues reach their highest intensity of saturation at different brightness levels; thus yellow is purest at a relatively high level of brightness, purple blue at a lower one. The cone and the pyramid on the one hand and the sphere on the other imply different theories of the rate at which the range of saturation changes with changing brightness. Again, the difference between the roundness of cone and sphere and the angularity of the pyramid distinguishes between theories that present the sequence of hues as a continuously gliding scale and others that emphasize three or four elementary colors as cornerstones of the system. Finally, there is a difference between regularly shaped color models, which provide space for all colors considered possible in principle, and irregularly shaped ones-like, for example, the Munsell color tree-which accommodate only the colors obtainable with the pigments at our disposal today. These systems are supposed to serve two purposes: to allow an objective identification of any color, and to indicate which colors harmonize with one another. I am concerned here with the second function. Ostwald proceeded on the basic assumption that "two or more colors in order to harmonize must be equal with regard to essential elements." Uncertain whether brightness could be considered an essential element, he based his rules of harmony on identity either of hue or of saturation. This implied that all hues were consonant as long as they were equal in saturation. Even so, Ostwald believed certain hues fitted each other particularly well, notably those that faced each other in the color circle and represented a pair of complementaries. Any regular tripartition of the circle was also expected to yield an especially harmonious combination, because such triads too were complementary; that is, they added up to gray when mixed at equal parts. We note here the underlying assumption that colors which generate an achromatic color by their combination will also be perceived as fundamental complementaries. Munsell, too, based his theory of harmony on the principle of common elements. Any horizontal circle around the axis of his color model represented a set of harmonious colors because it contained all the hues of equal brightness and saturation. Any vertical line defined harmony as the set of all colors differing only in brightness. And since every horizontal radius groups all the shades of saturation for a hue of given brightness, these gradients, too, were considered harmonious. However, Munsell went further, suggesting that "the center of the sphere is the natural balancing point for all colors," so that any straight line through the center would connect harmonizing colors. This meant that