two complementary hues could be combined in such a way that the greater brightness of the one would be compensated by the lower brightness of the other. Munsell also admitted colors lying on a spherical surface "in a straight line," meaning presumably on a great circle. Now harmony is indeed necessary, in the broad sense that all the colors of a composition must fit together in a unifedwhole if they are to be relatable to one another. It may also be true that all the colors used in a successful painting or by a good painter keep within certain limits, which exclude some hues, brightness values, or saturation levels. Since we now possess fairly reliable standards of objective identification, it would be valuable to measure the palette of specific works of art and specific artists. One such attempt has been made by Egbert Jacobson. What is much less probable is that the colors used by artists will in many cases be found to fit any such simple rules as those suggested by the systems of color harmony. For one thing, the interrelation of colors is strongly modified by other pictorial factors. Both Ostwald and Munsell recognized the influence of size and suggested that large surfaces should have subdued colors whereas highly saturated colors should be used only in small patches. But it seems that even this one additional factor would so complicate the proposed rules of harmony as to render them practically useless—and there are many other relevant factors, which cannot be controlled by quantitative measurement as comfortably as size: The influential teacher Adolf Hölzel suggested at the beginning of the century that "a painting attains harmony only when all its colors, introduced in the proper artistic variety and arrangement, add up to white." If an approximation of this condition were tested experimentally by means of a color wheel, the results could be expected not to confirm the theory. There are, however, more fundamental objections to the principle on which the rules of color harmony are based. This principle conceives of a color composition as a whole in which everything fits with everything else. All local relations between neighbors show the same pleasant conformity. Obviously this is the most primitive kind of harmony, suitable at best for the color schemes of nurseries and baby clothing. The art historian Max J. Friedländer has spoken of the "cheapest kind of harmony" in painting, obtained by the exaggerated warmth and darkness of colors as they are seen through layers of varnish. A color composition based on nothing but such a common denominator could describe only a world of absolute peace, devoid of action, static in mood. It would represent that state of deadly serenity at which, to borrow the physicist's language, entropy approaches an absolute maximum. A glance at music may drive the argument home. If musical harmony were concerned only with the rules determining which sounds go well together, it would be limited to a kind of aesthetic etiquette for dinner entertainment. Instead of telling the musician by which means he can express what, it would teach him only how to be unobtrusive. Actually, this aspect of musical harmony has proved to be of no permanent validity because it is dependent on the taste of the period. Effects forbidden in the past are welcome today. Sometimes such rules are outmoded even as they are uttered. This has happened to certain norms of color harmony as well. For example, Wilhelm Ostwald, commenting in i91g on a rule which held that saturated colors should be presented only in small bits, asserted that large-sized surfaces of pure vermilion, as found in Pompeii, are crude, "and all the blindly superstitious belief in the artistic superiority of the'ancient' has been unable to keep attempts at the repetition of such atrocities alive." In reading this today, we may recall a painting by Matisse in which six thousand square inches of canvas are covered almost completely and quite satisfactorily with a strong red, and we note that the painting was done in 1911. But—to return to music—the rules of suitable form are hardly concerned with such matters. Arnold Schönberg says in his Theory of Harmony: "The subject matter of the doctrine of musical composition is usually divided into three areas: harmony, counterpoint, and the theory of form. Harmony is the doctrine of the chords and their possible connoctions with regard to their tectonic, melodic, and rhythmic values and relative weight. Counterpoint is the doctrine of the movement of voices with regard to motivic combination. . .. The theory of form deals with the disposition for the construction and development of musical thoughts." In other words, musical theory is not concerned with which sounds go nicely together, but with the problem of giving adequate shape to an intended content. The need for everything to add up to a unifed whole is only one aspect of this problem, and it is not satisfied in music by drawing the composition from an assortment of elements that blend smoothly in any combination. To state that all the colors conta ined in a pictorial composition are part of a simple sequence derived from a color system would mean no more and probably much less—than to say that all the tones of a certain piece of music fit together because they belong to the same key. Even if the statement were correct, still next to nothing would have been said about the structure of the work. We would not know what the component parts were, or how these parts were related to one another. Nothing would be known about the particular arrangement of the elements in space and time; and yet it is true that the same assortment of tones will make a comprehensible melody in one