against each other. When the same colors are combined in many small doses, as for example in the brushstrokes of divisionist paintings, or when viewed from a distance, they combine by addition to a silvery gray. The variety of vital forces, displayed in many gentle steps, produces richness rather than contrast. Instead of being divided in large opposing camps, the colors show their total range in each area of the picture. The resulting overall grayness is loaded with life but serene. Kurt Badt has written: "In the late works of the great masters every particularity of feeling is extinguished by a unity of all opposites. Such pictures have neither grace nor grandeur nor splendor. They possess everything but are beyond any limitation. In these late works the details dissolve, the melodies dissipate, and even the accomplishments of middle life, namely clarity, richness, beauty of color, disappear. There remains an ultimate simplicity of effect and countereffect, of the spirituał and the material, of surface and space, of color and line. Nothing is any longer by itself, nothing predominant.' The antagonistic relationship of complementary pairs is beautifully expressed in Denise Levertov's poem A Vision, in which two angels, one with red wings, the other with green, are "poised on the brink of dispute" because they sense the threat of revealing each other's incompleteness. The conflict is solved when each angel gazing on the angelic wings of the other, the intelligence proper to great angels flew into their wings, the intelligence called intellectual love, which, understanding the perfections of scarlet, leapt up among blues and green strongshafted, and among amber down illumined the sapphire bloom, so that each angel was iridescent with the strange newly-seen hues he watched, and their discovering pause and the speech their silent interchange of perfection was never became a shrinking to opposites, and they remained free in the heavenly chasm, remained angels, but dreaming angels, each imbued with the mysteries of the other. Since the eye spontaneously seeks out and links complementary colors, they are often used to establish connections within a painting between areas that lie at some distance from one another. However, a strong complementary duo or triad tends to be so self-contained and self-suffcient that it not only helps to hold a picture together but also poses a compositional problem. Like perfect circular shape, which does not fit easily into a context and therefore is often given a central or frankly isolated position, the complementary pattern subordinates itself only with difficulty to a larger color scheme. It functions best as a relativelyindependent subwhole, or as a central core or theme around which further color values are arranged. Finally, the completion attainable by means of complementary pairs has served the colorists among the painters to make the three-dimensional volume of objects, such as fruits or human bodies, more salient. I have pointed out that the awkward competition between the local colors of objects on the one hand and the lights and shadows introduced by chiaroscuro on the other was resolved in Western painting by the introduction of colored shadows. This technique, in the work of Rubens or Delacroix, not only serves to create a unitary medium of representation that renders local coloration and the brightness values of illumination by the same device; it also shapes the roundness of a pictorial object in a particularly compelling way. Monochromatic shading is certainly effective in expressing volume by scales of gray. But the gray scale cannot mark the antagonistic poles of light and darkness by two strongly contrasting colors, as the colorist does when he opposes a pink in the illuminated area of a thigh or apple with a green in the shadow, or when yellow light goes with violet darkness. Also, the completeness of the complementary pair of colors confirms the boundaries of the object, whereas the gray scale is, as it were, boundless: there could be a brighter white and a darker shadow than those used for gradation in the object, and therefore the modeling by shading gives less finality to the volume. Although it takes complementary colors to produce maximum contrast, there are other confrontations, such as blue and yellow, which also present mutually exclusive hues. There is no yellow in pure blue, no blue in pure yellow, and therefore the two colors articulate their difference neatly, even harshly. However, there is no real polarity in such opposition because it takes place within a limited sector of the color system. Both colors possess the same partial expression : a metallic coldness perhaps in blue and yellow, or a sweetish warmth in red and blue. I suggested earlier that there is something one-sided about any particular color. A similarly one-sided mood pervades a picture based on a palette that excludes one of the primaries. The absence of blue in the late works of Rembrandt presents the human experience through a particular temperament.