## Interaction of Color I referred earlier to the perplexing instability of colors. They are the most impressive demonstration of the fact that the same part in two different wholes is not the same thing. The same color in two different contexts is not the same color. John Ruskin warned the painter: "Every hue throughout your work is altered by every touch that you add in other places; so that what was warm a minute ago, becomes cold when you have put a hotter color in another place, and what was in harmony when you left it, becomes discordant as you set other colors beside it." Because of this extreme instability and reciprocal dependence, it is not surprising that psychological experiments in which random series of isolated colors or pairs of colors were presented to observers led to chaotic results. It is significant, however, that Johannes von Allesch, whose investigation brought out this ambiguity most clearly, remarks that the pregnancy or variability of any color is reduced when it is put in a context. We must emphasize here once more that the order of a pictorial composition stabilizes the character of each color, making it as unequivocal as is necessary for the artistic statement to be valid. This means that the identity of a color does not reside in the color itself but is established by relation. We are aware of this mutual transfiguration, which makes every color dependent on the support of all the others, just as the stones of an arch hold one another in place. But whereas the stones counterbalance one anoth er's weight physically, the web of interacting colors is created only by the eye, and this subjectivity—quite different from the sturdy objectivity of shapes-gives them the quality of apparitions. Kandinsky wrote in his Reminiscences: "I saw that there was nothing magical about any large surface by itself and that any such surface revealed at once its derivation from the palette; but through another surface, opposed to it, this surface acquired indeed a magic power, so that its origin on the palette seemed unbelievable at first impression." The most prominent among the phenomena of interaction is, of course, color contrast. The principle received its classical formulation by Michel Eugène Chevreul, the French chemist and director of the Gobelin tapestry works. He described simultaneous contrast as follows: "If one views at the same time two areas of different brightness but of the same hue, or of the same brightness but of different hue, in juxtaposition, i.e., bordering on each other, the eye will observe (provided the areas are not too large) modifications that bear in the first case on the intensity of the color and in the second on the optical composition of the two juxtaposed colors." Since the effect of color contrast operates in the direction of physiological complementarity, it serves to heighten it where it already exists, e.g., in the relation between blue and yellow, or to modify colors in the direction of such complementarity if they are reasonably close to it. Von Allesch experimented with a greenish yellow and a reddish yellow whose admixtures were so slight that when inspected separately both colors looked like pure yellows. Brought together they tended to emphasize their distinctness, looking clearly greenish and reddish and presumably producing the kind of clash already discussed as the effect of "Similarity of the Dominant." But if a third yellow of intermediate hue was placed between the two, the contrast diminished and the total arrangement showed a more unified yellow. Such effects of assimilation are also observed when, for example, one strongly red patch in a painting brings out subtly red components in the colors around it. Much attention has been paid to color contrast. It has been superbly demonstrated in Josef Albers's Interaction of Color. The countereffect, namely assimilation, is rather neglected, although the antagonism of the two perceptual mechanisms makes it imperative that the one should not be considered without the other. Since perceptual patterns tend toward the most clear-cut organization available, a configuration of colors will strive either toward contrast or toward assimilation, depending on which is closer to the given stimulus information. We also can apply the concepts of sharpening and leveling, which served us to describe modifications of shapes. Assimilation is closely related to the additive combination of colors. When the hues bordering on each other are sufficiently similar or when the areas carrying the hues are sufficiently small, the colors will approach each other rather than emphasize contrast. Jameson and Hurvich have proposed a physiological theory that accounts for at least some aspects of the phenomenon. They remind us that the microscopically small receptors in the retina do not act singly but as constituents of receptive fields, each of which combines the action of a large number of receptors and reports as a unit to a single ganglion cell. Within each held, the receptors respond antagonistically: in the central area the response to the intensity and color of light is positive, in the surrounding receptors it is negative. When these receptor fields are relatively small they discriminate sharply between stimulus areas of reasonably large size and emphasize the contrast between them. When the stimulus areas are small, c.g., when they form a fine-grained dot pattern, as would reach the eye from a divisionist painting, there will be no resolution and the result will be a true additive mixture.When the units are somewhat larger, however, assimilation (sometimes called the Bezold