the superpositions of shape. The two whites, at the extremes of the total range of space, tend to lie in the same plane and thereby to compress the threedimensional expanse. The orange areas do the same. The three yellow figures overlap the entire landscape and lie in front of it. But they are brought back into the spatial context by the distribution of the brightness values. The two white areas, being the brightest spots in the picture, protrude most stronglythat is, they move the somewhat darker human figures back to a place inside the distance scale, enclosing them between the brightest and darkest tones. Except for the whites and the small spots of black and blue, there are no pure primaries in the picture. The yellow of the bodies is warmed by a reddish tinge. Yellow, established as the dominant color of the composition by the three figures, is also contained in the orange and the green, but is probably absent from the sky and the bluish-red mountain. Thus in the upper left corner the common color element is limited to red, which, however, is weak in the sky and quiet faint in the figure. Essentially the colors in that area are distinct to the point of being mutually exclusive. Just as yellow is excluded from the upper corner of the background landscape, so blue, most clearly expressed in the sky and contained in the bluish-red mountain and the green water, is absent from the lower part of the picture. The two colors meet in balanced proportion in the central green. The only clash of hues seems to occur between the yellow red of the mountain and the blue red next to it (Similarity of the Dominant). Is this conflict justified by its function in the total composition or is it an unresolved problem? The only example ofan approximately exclusive distinction occurs, as I said before, between the sky and the yellow face and shoulders. Here is also the greatest depth interval. The figures are most intimately connected with the landscape at the bottom of the picture, where yellow and, to a slight extent, red are shared. The hair of the kneeling figure even picks up the orange. In the middle ground there is greater distinction. The bodies and the water contain yellow as one common fundamental, but the reddish admixture of the skin and the blue contained in the green emphasize mutual exclusion. The black hair of the small figure and the colors of the bouquet add to the feeling of detachment. The crescendo of separation reaches its climax in the upper left corner. The spatial leap between the head and shoulders and the sky is compensated, however, by an approximate complementarity between the reddish yellow of the human skin and the violet blue of the sky. The colors produce strong cleavage and at the same time bridge the gap by the harmony of their mutualcompletion. As a second example I have chosen El Greco's The Virgin with Santa