clearly, although a blend of yellow and blue might be closest to coldness. Balanced combinations of red and blue or red and yellow might tend to be neutral or ambiguous. Naturally, the instability of colors will influence their temperature. As a color changes its hue in response to the hues of its neighbors, its temperature may change as well. Brightness and saturation may also have a bearing on the phenomenon. In Albers's color circle the realms of cold and warm coincide roughly with those of dark and bright, and Itten associates cold with shady, warm with sunny. If my approach is viable it may apply more generally to the expressive qualities of colors. Perhaps it is not so much the dominant hue but its "aflictions" that give a color its character. We noted that the pure fundamental primaries lack the dynamic qualities of mixtures; they may also be more neutral in expression, whereas a color producing a dynamic tension effect by leaning toward another color may be more expressive. Reddishness, yellowishness, bluishness, by drawing another color away from its own fundamental character, may produce the tension without which no expression is possible. Here, then, are suggestions that invite verification by experiment. Finally, let us puzzle for a moment over the habit of using temperature sensations to describe colors. What is the common denominator? We are hardly reminded of a hot bath or summer heat when we perceive the dark red of a rose. Rather the color brings about a reaction also provoked by heat stimulation, and the words "warm"and "cold"are used to describe colors simply because the expressive quality in question is strongest and biologically most vital in the realm of temperature. We are describing a quality emanating from the object as well as our reaction to that quality. The experience need not be perceptual. We also speak of a cold person, a warm reception, a heated debate. A cold person makes us withdraw. We feel like defending ourselves against an unwholesome powerwe close up and shut the gates. We are ill at ease, inhibited in venting our thoughts and impulses. A warm person is one who makes us open up. We are attracted, willing to expose freely whatever we have to give. Our reactions to physical chill or warmth are obviously similar. In the same way, warm colors seem to invite us whereas cold ones keep us at a distance. Warm colors are outgoing, cold ones draw back. For the purposes of the artist, of course, both are welcome. They express different properties of reality calling for different responses. If we wanted to discuss the expression of colors beyond what has been said so far, we would have to report on the character attributed to particular colors by various artists, writers, civilizations. In the earlier version of this book I gave samples of such attributions. It is an entertaining subject, and the observations of Goethe or Kandinsky on the character of red or yellow are attractively poetical. But no suffciently good purpose seems to be served by such anecdotes. For one thing, these characterizations are so heavily overlaid with personal or cultural factors that they cannot claim much general validity. When Kandinsky taught in his Bauhaus seminar that the color yellow was akin to the shape of a triangle, blue to a circle, and red to a square, was he voicing more than a personal impression? And when yellow symbolized imperial splendor in China but indicated shame and contempt in the European Middle Ages, can we be sure that, as Goethe assumes, the Chinese referred to a golden yellow, whereas the color of the prostitutes and the persecuted Jews had a mean, greenish tinge? If it is our task to search the perceived object for the formal factors that determine what the eyes see, we may claim to have examined the factors of color structure at least sketchily. But just as in the chapter on the expression of shape I shall refrain from lengthy speculation on the state of mind that takes to certain shapes, I propose not to rehearse here the facts of color preference. In the case of shape, we can analyze formal characteristics with considerable precision. The analogies between what shapes look like and what they express can therefore be explored with some confdence. We would accordingly be on relatively firm ground if we asked, as art historians have done, why Raphael's shapes differ from those of Dürer. But when it comes to color, can we do better than reflect vaguely on why Picasso preferred blue in the early years of our century or let Van Gogh tell us what he meant by yellow? Quantitative studies on the color preferences of various populations have been numerous, partly because passing fashions are of interest to market researchers, partly because reactions to unanalyzed stimuli are easier for the experimenter to handle than studies requiring structural analysis. It is also true that the notion of "aesthetic pleasure," considered important in the traditional philosophy of art, has been impressed upon psychologists by philosophers. It was thought relevant to find out who was pleased by which colors. The results have been singularly unrewarding. Nothing of general validity emerged. Besides, preference has little bearing on art. "What a miserable fate for a painter who adores blondes," said Picasso to Christian Zervos, "to have to stop himself from putting them into a picture because they don't go with the basket of fruit!"