of this kind, and so were certain narrative paintings, popular in the ffteenth century, in which one saw, from left to right, how Eve was created from the rib of Adam, how she presented him with the apple, how they were reprimanded by God and fnally thrown out of paradise by the angel. Conversely, there are mobile works that are not sequential. A dance composition is likely to unfold logically from its beginning to its end, but a waltz in the ballroom is not. Similarly, certain kinds of music, intended to establish a particular mood, are stationary, without a beginning, end, or development. The movements of a sculpturalmobile have no progression. They reveal the varieties of spatial relation within a set of jointed elements. The order and coordination of the displacements at the various levels are left to chance, and the surprises of the unprescribed configurations are what we enjoy. When sequence is confused with mobility, misinterpretations result. For example, it has been asserted that painting and sculpture are as much "time art" as music and the drama because the viewer must move with his eyes all over the surface of the work and therefore perceives its parts in succession. Actually, the order of a picture exists only in space, in simultaneity. The picture contains one or several dominant themes to which all the rest is subordinated. This hierarchy is valid and comprehensible only when all the relations it involves are grasped as being coexistent. The observer scans the various areas of the picture in succession because neither the eye nor the mind is capable of taking in everything simultaneously, but the order in which the exploration occurs does not matter. The path of the glance need not adhere to the vectorial directions created by the composition. A compositional "arrow" leading from left to right may be perceived correctly even if the eye moves in the opposite direction, or indeed crosses the tract in an arbitrary zigzag. Barriers erected in the picture by contours or color conflict do not stop the eye. On the contrary, they are noticed and experienced while they are traversed. I have already mentioned the many recent studies of eye movements. They show, not surprisingly, that the viewer spends most of his fixations on the items of prime interest. But the order of the fixations is largely accidental and irrelevant. In a play or musical composition, by contrast, sequence is of the essence. To change the order of events means to change, and probably destroy, the work. It is imposed upon the viewer and listener and must be obeyed. In a dance there are one or several dominant themes, just as in a painting; but the order of their appearance is linked to definite phases of the total development, and different meanings adhere to different locations in the perceptual sequence. A theme may be presented at the very beginning and then demonstrated and explored by a number of changes or variations. Or it may be subjected to encounters with other themes and deploy its nature through the resulting attractions or repulsions, victories or defeats. But the theme, perhaps embodied in the principal dancer, may also make a late appearance, after a slow buildup that leads through a crescendo to the climax. This different order in time produces a completely different structure. Even the objective movement of a piece of sculpture differs in principle from the change of aspects we experience in walking around it; otherwise sculptors would not bother, as some do, to mount their works on motorized turntables. In such cases, the pace and direction of the rotation are prescribed properties of the sculptural display itself, Moreover, we shall find that it makes all the difference for perception and expression whether one sees a thing in motion or walks past, around, or across it. When a work based on linear succession narrates a story, it actually contains two sequences, that of the events to be portrayed and the path of disclosure. In a simple fairy tale the two coincide. The account duplicates the order of the events. In more complex works the journey that the author prescribes for the spectator or reader may differ considerably from the objective sequence of the plot. For example, in Hamlet the inherent sequence leads from the murder of the king through the wedding of his queen and brother to Hamlet's discovery of the crime, and so to the end. The path of disclosure starts somewhere in the middle of that sequence, and moves first backward and then forward. It proceeds from the periphery of the problem toward its center, introducing first the watchmen, then Hamlet's friend, then the mysterious ghost. Thus, while unfolding the dramatic conflict, the play also deals with man's ways of discovering the facts of life—a secondary plot, of which the spectatoris the protagonist. And just as a traveler's route toward an unknown city will influence the notion of it he receives, so the path of disclosure will encourage a particular response to the subject of a work by giving precedence to certain of its aspects and withholding others. Shakespeare's indirect approach to the Hamlet story stresses the effects of the crime before presenting the crime itself, and sets the initial accents of night, disturbance of the peace, mystery, and suspense. We must take a further step and realize that in the last analysis even a work based on sequence presents not only an event but, through the event, a state of being. To use the formula offered by Lessing in his Laocoon: whereas narrative painting or sculpture presents action by means of objects, the dramatist or novelist uses action to present states of affairs. ("Things that exist next to one another or whose parts do so, are called objects. Therefore objects with