their visible properties are the true content of painting. Things that follow one another or whose parts do so are called actions. Therefore actions are the true content of literature.") The Hamlet drama reveals an underlying œnfiguration of antagonistic forces, love and hatred, loyalty and treachery, order and crime. The pattern could be represented in a diagram that would contain no reference to the sequence of the story. This pattern is gradually uncovered by the play, explored in its various relations, tested by the introduction of crucial situations. A man's biography, which describes his life from his birth to the grave, must add up to the presentation of a character, a state of being and behaving in its constant interplay with the polarity of life and death. And just as the young Michelangelo's Pietà in St. Peter's shows a mother holding her child and at the same time a man leaving his mother behind, so does the story of the Gospel, like every great narrative, contain its end in its beginning and its beginning in its end. Together, the sequential and the nonsequential media interpret existence in its twofold aspect of permanence and change. This complementarity expresses itself in a reciprocal relation between space and force. The forces represented in a painting are defined primarily by space. The direction, shape, size, and location of the shapes that carry these forces determine where they apply, where they go, how strong they are. The expanse of space and its structural features—for example, its center—serve as a frame of reference for the characterization of forces. Conversely, the space of a theater or dance stage is defined by the motor forces that populate it. Expanse becomes real when the dancer runs across it; distance is created by actors withdrawing from each other; and the particular quality of central location is brought to light when embodied forces strive for it, rest at it, rule from it. In short, the interaction of space and force is interpreted with different emphasis. ## When Do We See Motion? Under what conditions do we perceive movement? A caterpillar crawls across the street. Why do we see it in motion and the street at rest rather than seeing the entire landscape, including ourselves, displaced in the opposite direction, with the caterpillar alone remaining at the same spot? The phenomenon is not explained simply by learning or knowledge because against our better knowledge we see the sun move across the sky and the moon through the clouds. Dante notes that when a person looks up to one of Bologna's leaning towers from "beneath its leaning" while a cloud moves in the opposite direction, the tower seems to topple over. Sitting in a rocking chair, we find ourselves in motion and the room standing still. But when an experiment makes the whole room revolve, like a rolling barrel, and the observer's chair stand perfectly still, the sensation that the chair is turning is so compelling that theobserver will fall unless he is tied down. This happens even though the observer's kinesthetic sensations indicate the true state of affairs. We can clarify at least a few elements of this complicated situation by noting that the visual experience of movement can be due to three factors: physical movement, optical movement, perceptual movement. To these we must add the kinesthetic factors, which can produce the sensation of motion all by themselves under certain conditions, e.g., by vertigo. I see the caterpillar in motion because it is actually crawling; this is motion perception based on physical movement. But, as our examples show, physical movement does not necessarily correspond to what happens in the eyes or in perception, We can speak of optical motion when the projections of objects or of the entire visual field are displaced on the retina. Such optical displacement occurs when the observer's eyes do not follow the movements of the perceived objects. But physical motion may be recorded as optical standstill, e.g., when my eyes are locked on the caterpillar while it crawls across the street or when I see the cabin of the airplane surround me in perfect stillness even though both the plane and I are moving. ●n the other hand, the projection of my immobile workroom sweeps across the retinas optically as soon as I move my eyes or my head or get up from my chair. If someone could observe what goes on in my eyes while I examine the various parts of a painting on the wall, he would find that each time I change the fxation of my glance, the entire picture moves on the retinas in the opposite direction. And yet, most of the time such faulty optical information is not reflected in perceptual experience. I see the insect crawl although my eyes are locked onto it, and the painting remains unmoved even though my eyes scan it. The most powerful factor compensating for such misleading input is kinesthetic perception. Any movement by eyes, head, or body is reported to the sensory motor center of the brain, and in fact the mere impulse to move is a brain event. The feedback from these motor processes influences visual perception. The information that I am moving my head induces the sense of sight to attribute the motion to the head visually as wel, and to perceive the environment as immobile. In a film, however, the setting photographed by the traveling camera is seen as moving across the screen, mostly because the viewer receives the kinesthetic information that his body is at rest. Only in extreme cases, e.g., when enough of the entire environment is seen as moving, will the visual input overrule thekinesthetic.