made the overall structure of the visible changes more compelling. However, the change of speed not only served to adapt visual movement to the range of human perception, but also changed the expressive qualities of an action. When street scenes were photographed at subnormal speed for the early slapstick comedies, cars did not simply move faster. They dashed around in an aggressive panic—a mood hardly suggested by their normal behavior. Conversely, high-speed shots make the movements of a sportsman or dancer not only slower, but wooly and soft. In addition to the expressive qualities of the moving object, those of the invisible medium are affected. The slowed-down football player seems to be moving through water-that is, through a denser medium, which puts up resistance to motion and cushions the effect of gravity. Even to the naked eye a school of fast-moving fish makes the water look as thin as air, whereas a lazy goldfish seems to move through oil. This phenomenon is the result of an ambiguity of visual dynamics. The high speed of an object may be perceived as being caused by great motor power in the object, weak resistance of the medium, or both, Slowness is seen as weakness of effort on the part of the object, great resistance of the medium, or both. This effect of movimento frenato has been investigated by Gian Franco Minguzzi, who had a black disk travel across a field, half of which was white, the other gray. As the disk reached the gray area, its velocity was abruptly slowed to about one-seventh its previous rate. Most observers saw the disk braked by the stronger friction encountered in the gray zone, which appeared "more viscous, dense, gelatinous."Interestingly enough, when Minguzzi reversed the situation by making the disk start out slowly in the gray area and increase its speed abruptly upon entering the white area, the effect was quite different. Only one out of ten subjects attributed the increase in speed to reduced friction in the white area. Four subjects saw no relation between the change of speed and the change of background brightness; and five reported positively that the disk "started to run." Speeding up was more compellingly attributed to the initiative of the object than slowing down. Visual speed also depends on the size of the object. Large objects seem to move more slowly than small ones. A smaller surrounding field makes for faster motion. J. F. Brown had rows of figures move through rectangular frames. When the size of the frame as well as that of the figures was doubled, velocity seemed reduced by one half. In order to appear equal, velocities had to be in exact proportion to the size dimensions. This leads us to expect that on a narrow stage, dancers will seem to move faster, and that the larger the human figures or other objects on the movie screen, the slower their movement will seem, if their images move across the observer's retina at an objectively identical speed. ## Stroboscopic Movement All motion perception is basically stroboscopic. When a bird fies through my field of vision, its physical displacement is continuous. What I see of the fight, however, derives from a sequence of recordings by the individual receptors or "receptive fields," in the retina. As the bird arrives from the left, the receptors on the retinas' right side will be activated first, the ones to the left, last. The nervous system creates the sensation of continuous movement by integrating the sequence of these momentary stimulations, none of which records anything but a static change. H. L. Teuber reports that with certain brain injuries a moving motorcycle is seen as a string of overlapping cycles, each standing still. Whether the integration occurs at the retinal or the cortical level, the basic fact is that the experience of mobility derives from a sequence of immobile inputs. Therefore, when the physical event is itself discontinuous, we have a dif ference in magnitude, but not in principle. The most obvious example is the motion picture. With exposure to a minimum of about twenty frames per second, we can see continuous motion. The same is true for the luminous panels of advertising signboards, on which the flashing on and off of light bulbs produces the moving images of letters, geometrical shapes, or human figures, even though objectively nothing moves. The pioneering experiments on stroboscopic movement were done by Max Wertheimer. He investigated the perceptual effects induced by the successive flashing of two luminous objects, e.g. two lines, in the dark-a phenomenon familiar to us from the signal lights of airplanes and from trafic lights. When the two stimuli are close together in space or flash at a very short time interval, they look simultaneous. When the space or time distances are large, one sees two separate objects appearing one after the other. But when conditions are favorable, one sees a single object move from the first position to the second. For example, a vertical line is seen as tipping over and coming to rest in a horizontal position. In such cases, therefore, observers see motion even though physically there is a mere succession of immobile stimuli. This presupposes that the two stimuli produced an integrated process of sweeping displacement somewhere in the brain. Wertheimer concluded that in such cases the two stimulations, occurring close together in time and space, cause a