Iti s well known that the distinction between inorganic and organic things comes fairly late. At early stages of development primitives as well as children, guided by what they see, do not distinguish in principle between dead things and living ones. Stones are believed by some primitives to be male or female, to have offspring and to grow. They live forever, whereas animals and humans die. To the artist also the distinction is artificial. The painter sees no difference in principle between the sweep of a coastline and the undulation of a snake. Ordinary perception suggests no split in nature; it rather indicates various degrees of liveliness. Spring water looks more alive than a flower. What is observed here is not just a difference in the amount or speed of motion. There is also a scale that leads from simpler to more complex behavior. And here it must be realized that the distinction between things that have consciousness, feelings, desires, intentions, and others that do not is equally alien to a world view based on spontaneous perception. There is a difference in degree between the rain that falls without much consideration of what it is hitting and a crocodile going after his prey. But this is not a diference between having or not having a mind or soul. It concerns the extent to which behavior seems directed by external goals as well as the complexity of the observable reactions. A Westerner living in the twentieth century is supposed to make a fundamental distinction between a man walking along a hotel corridor in search of his room number and a wooden cart, steered by a pair of photoelectric cells, that will set itself in motion and run after any bright light. But even the Westerner is strongly impressed by the "human" qualities of the phototropic robot, There are good reasons for the comparison. The behavior of both the hotel guest and the wooden cart is distinguished by a visible striving toward specific aims, which is quite different from what we observe when the pendulum of a clock moves to and fro or when a bored museum guard strolls through the rooms assigned to his care. It might well be maintained that the difference between high-level and low-level performance is more essential than the fact that the hotel guest and the guard are supposed to have consciousness whereas the robot and the pendulum are not. In his interviews with children, Jean Piaget studied their criteria for considering something alive and endowed with consciousness. At the lowest age level anything involved in some action is considered alive and conscious, whether it moves or not. At the second stage, movement makes the difference. A bicycle has consciousness, a table has not. At the third level, the child bases its distinction on whether the object generates its own movement or is moved from the outside. Older children consider only animals both alive and in possession of consciousness, although they may count plants among the living creatures. It will be seen that the modern scientist's way of separating the inanimate from the animate and the mindless from the mindful, does not hold for spontaneous perception, To repeat, it does not hold for the artist either. To a flm director, a thunderstorm can be more alive than the passengers sitting impassively on the benches of a streetcar. A dance is not a means of conveying to us the feelings or intentions of the person represented by the dancer. What we experience is much more direct. When we see agitation or calm, escape or pursuit,we watch the behavior of forces whose perception does not require a distinction between a physical outside and a mental inside. What counts is the level of complexity in the observed behavior. If we attempt informally to sketch some of the pertinent criteria, we find the following. In agreement with the opinions of children, there is first the difference between what moves and what does not move. Second, flexible movement, which involves internal change, is at a higher level of complexity than the mere displacement of rigid objects or parts of objects. Third, an object that mobilizes its own power and determines its own course is higher than one that is moved and steered-that is, passively submits to being pushed, pulled, repelled, attracted-by an external agent. Fourth, among the "active" objects there is a distinctionbetween those that move merely on an internal impulse and others whose behavior is influenced by external centers of reference. Within this latter group there is lower-level behavior, which requires direct contact by the outer agent (e.g., object B's "taking off" when touched by A), and higher-level behavior, which involves response to the object of reference across some distance in space (e.g, A is seen as moving "toward"B, or B escapes while A is approaching). The level of the fourth group does not presuppose that the objects "have awareness." All we are implying is that the behavior pattern of the observed forces is more complex when it involves an interplay between the object and its environment. Such interplay may occur even though the forces are purely physical, as in the phototropic robot; on the other hand, the obtuse "blindness" of the lower level may be found in a sophisticated dreamer, who pursues his path without regard for events around him. When an object moves along a complex path at varying speed it seems to be controlled by correspondingly complex forces. Compare, for example, the diference between A's moving toward B in a straight line and at constant speed with the following hypothetical situations. A slows down while approaching and suddenly "leaps at" B, with a sharp increase in speed. Or A