the parallel with sculpture, where the compositional theme is frequently developed from the center of the body and sometimes limited to a headless and limbless torso. Just as in other forms of art, all movement in dancing and acting must be subordinated to a dominant theme. In daily life the body accomplishes motor coordination with little difficulty, once the initial stages of training are overcome. When a child first learns to walk, each step is innervated deliberately and separately. The same lack of integration can be observed whenever a new motor skill is being acquired. For the purposes of dancing and acting, all motor behavior must be learned afresh until it becomes spontaneous again at a higher level of form and control. When one feels self-conscious, the smooth submission to the dominant theme of a motion is disturbed by the sudden conscious control of secondary centers of action. In an essay on the puppet theater the poet Heinrich von Kleist recommended to the dancer the example of the marionette, which in his opinion has the negative advantage of never being affected. "For affectation, as you know, appears when the soul (vis motrix) finds itself at a point other than that of the center of gravity of the movement. Since the puppeteer, when he holds this wire, has no other point in his power but this one, all other limbs are what they should be, dead; they are only pendula and just follow the law of gravitation; an excellent quality, which we seek in vain with most of our dancers. . . . Look at young F. when, as Paris, he stands among the three goddesses and hands the apple to Venus; his soul-it is awful to look at—is seated in his elbow. Such mistakes .. . are unavoidable since we have eaten of the tree of knowledge. But Paradise is bolted, and the cherub is behind us; we must make the voyage around the world and see whether, perhaps, it is open again somewhere at the back." To be sure, Kleist simplifed the condition of grace. No model of perfection is produced at the lowest level of integration when dead limbs drag behind the motion of a central point. Even the puppeteer is faced with the delicate task of organizing the various centers of motion in accordance with their functions in the whole. ## The Kinesthetic Body Image In dancing and acting, the artist, his tool, and his work are fused into one physical thing: the human body. One curious consequence is that the performance is essentially created in one medium while it appears to the audience in another. The spectator receives a strictly visual work of art. The dancer uses a mirror occasionally; he also has at times a more or less vague visual image of his own performance; and of course as a member of a group or as a choreographer, he sees the work of other dancers. But as far as his own body is concerned, he creates mainly in the medium of the kinesthetic sensations in his muscles, tendons, and joints. This fact is worth noting, if only because some aestheticians have maintained that only the higher senses of vision and hearing yield artistic media. All kinesthetic shape is dynamic. Michotte has observed that "movement seems to be essential to the phenomenal existence of the body, and posture is probably experienced only as the terminal phase of motion."Merleau-Ponty points out that "my body appears to me as posture"; and that, in contrast to visually observed objects, it does not have a spatiality of position but one of situation."When I stand in front of my desk and lean on it with both hands, the accent is all on my hands, while my entire body trails behind them like the tail of a comet. Not that I am unaware of the locations of my shoulders or hips, but they are only implied in that of my hands, and my entire posture is, as it were, readable through the hands' leaning on the desk." The dancer builds his work from the feelings of tension and relaxation, the sense of balance, which distinguishes the proud stability of the vertical from the risky adventures of thrusting and falling. The dynamic nature of kinesthetic experience is the key to the surprising correspondence between what the dancer creates by his muscular sensations and the image of his body seen by the audience. The dynamic quality is the common element uniting the two different media. When the dancer lifts his arm, he primarily experiences the tension of raising. A similar tension is visually conveyed to the spectator through the image of the dancer's arm. When dancers and actors coordinate the kinesthetic with the visual medium, learning how much to give is a major problem. The performer's initial uncertainty in this matter may be partly the result of the fact that, as Michotte has pointed out, our dynamic body image has poorly defined limits. It is a 'kinesthetic amoeba"; it has no contour. Michotte explains that this is true because the body is the one and only content of the kinesthetic field. There is nothing beyond and around it, no"ground"from which it could detach itself as the figure. Thus we can judge the size and strength of our motions in relation to one another, but we have little concept of their impact as a visual image in the surrounding feld. The dancer must learn how large or fast a gesture should be in order to achieve the desired effect. Of course the proper dimensions depend also on the function of the movement pattern in the whole performance and on the size of the image