of art, film, and the theater, and although it represents a special case, I shall discuss it frst. When humans deal with humans, animals with animals, or when a cat and his owner try to get along with each other, they constantly read their partner's external behavior and control their own. This seems a remarkable achievement once we realize that the eyes of the person or of the cat see nothing but a relief of muscles and bones covered with skin and subjected to various displacements, contractions, and expansions. What can such purely physical patterns have in common with states of mind, which ofer no perceivable shape? What makes us see pleasure in a smiling face? Physiognomies as a method of direct cognition has been earnestly sustained and strongly attacked since antiquity, when Aristotle wrote a treatise on the subject. We read of an edict under the first Queen Elizabeth, which decreed that "all persons fayning to have knowledge of Phisiognomic or like Fantasticall Ymaginacions" were liable to "be stripped naked from the middle upwards andopenly whipped until his body be bloudye." The art of telling people's character from the form of their faces, especially the profile, flourished in the eighteenth century. The traditional explanation of how this was to be accomplished can be gathered from a playful review of Johann Kaspar Lavater's Physiognomic Fragments for the Advancement of the Knowledge and Love of Our Fellow Man, written by the poet Matthias Claudius around 1775. "Physiognomics is a science of faces. Faces are concreta for they are related generaliter to natural reality and specialiter are firmly attached to people. Therefore the question arises whether the famous trick of the 'abstractio' and the 'methodus analytica' should not be applied here, in the sense of watching out whether the letter i, whenever it appears, is furnished with a dot and whether the dot is never found on top of another letter; in which case we should be sure that the dot and the letter are twin brothers, so that when we run into Castor we can expect Pollux not be to be far away. For an example we posit that there be one hundred gentlemen, all of whom are very quick on their feet, and they had given sample and proof of this, and all of these hundred gentlemen had a wart on their noses. I am not saying that gentlemen with a wart on their noses are cowards but am merely assuming it for the sake of the example... . Now ponamus there comes to my house a fellow who calls me a wretched scribbler and spits me into the face. Suppose I am reluctant to get into a fist fight and also cannot tell what the outcome would be, and I am standing there and considering the issuc. At that moment I discover a wart on his nose, and now I cannot refrain myself any longer. I go after him courageously and, without any doubt, get away unbeaten. This procedure would represent, as it were, the royal road in this field. The progress might be slow but just as safe as that on other royal roads." In a more serious vein, the theory was stated early in the eighteenth century by the philosopher Berkeley. In his essay on vision he speaks about the way an -observer reads shame or anger in a man's looks. "Those passions are themselves invisible: they are nevertheless let in by the eye along with colors and alterations of countenance, which are the immediate object of vision, and which signify them for no other reason than barely because they have been observed to accompany them: without which experience, we should no more have taken blushing for a sign of shame for gladness."Charles Darwin, in his book on the expression of emotions, devoted a few pages to the same problem. He believed that external manifestations and their psychical counterparts are connected by the observer on the basis either of an inborn instinct or of learning. "Moreover, when a child cries or laughs, he knows in a general manner what he is doing and what he feels; so that a very small exertion of reason would tell him what crying or laughing meant in others. But the question is, do our children acquire their knowledge of expression solely by experience through the power of association and reason? As most of the movements of expression must have been gradually acquired, afterwards becoming instinctive, there seems to be some degree of a priori probability that their recognition would likewise have become instinctive.' A more recent version of the traditional theory developed from a curious tendency on the part of some social scientists to assume that when people agree on some fact, it is probably based on an unfounded convention. According to this view, judgments of expression rely on "stereotypes,"which individuals adopt ready-made from their social group. For exa mple, they have been told that aquiline noses indicate courage and that protruding lips betray sensuality. The promoters of the theory generally imply that such judgments are wrong, as though information not drawn from a person's firsthand experience could never be trusted. Actually the danger lies not in the social origin of the information, but rather in the fact that people tend to acquire simply structured concepts on the basis of insuficient evidence, which may have been gathered firsthand or secondhand, and to preserve these concepts unchanged despite contrary experience. Although this may make for many one-sided or entirely wrong evaluations of individuals and groups of people, the existence of stereotypes does not explain thc origin of physiognomic judgments. If these judgments stem from tradition, what is the tradition's source? Even though often misapplied, traditional interpretations of physique and behavior may still be