willow tree, the colors of a sunset, the cracks in a wall, a tumbling leaf, a fowing fountain, and in fact a mere line or color, or the dance of an abstract shape on the movie screen have as much expression as the human body, and may serve the artist equally well. In some ways they serve him even better, for the human body is a particularly complex pattern, not easily reduced to the simplicity of shape and motion that transmits compelling expression. In addition, it is overloaded with non-visual associations. Vincent Van Gogh once made two drawings, one called Sorrow and representing a nude girl sitting with her head buried in her arms, the other a sketch of bare trees with gnarled roots. In a letter to his brother Theo he explained that he tried to put the same sentiment in both, "clinging to the earth convulsively and passionately and yet being half torn up by the storm. I wanted to express something of the struggle for life, in that pale, thin woman's figure as well as in the black, gnarled, and knotty roots." Actually, the almost abstract shapes of the roots carry the message more successfully than the conventionally drawn figure. The human body is not the easiest, but the most difficult vehicle of visual expression. If one thinks of expression as something reserved for human behavior, one can account for the expression perceived in nature only as the result of the “"pathetic fallacy"—a notion apparently introduced by John Ruskin and intended to describe, say, the sadness of weeping willows as a figment of empathy, anthropomorphism, primitive animism. However, if expression is an inherent characteristic of perceptual patterns, its manifestations in the human figure are but a special case of a more general phenomenon. The comparison of an object's expression with a human state of mind is a secondary process. The willow is not "sad" because it looks like a sad person. Rather, because the shape, direction, and flexibility of the branches convey passive hanging, a comparison with the structurally similar state of mind and body that we call sadness imposes itself secondarily. Once expression has been anthropomorphized, it is natural to use words derived from human states of mind to describe objects, processes, or the dynamics of music. Actually it would be instructive and appropriate to do the opposite, and describe human behavior and expression by the more general properties pertaining to nature as a whole. Goethe once remarked: "It is our conviction that the quest for adjectives to express diversities of character has by no means exhausted the possibilities. For instance, one may attempt to use metaphorically the differences pointed up in the physical theory of cohesion; there would be strong, firm, dense, elastic, flexible, agile, rigid, tough, fuid, and who knows what other characters." In following Goethe's advice, one would get a better sense of human expression as a special case of organic and inorganic behavior, instead of insisting on man as the center and standard of nature. With regard to such phenomena, science is still waiting for its Copernicus. When we go by the perceived patterns of forces, some objects and events resemble each other; others do not. On the basis of their expressive appearance, our eye spontaneously creates a kind of Linnean classification of all existing things. This perceptual classihcation cuts across the order suggested by other kinds of categories. Particularly in our modern Western civilization we are accustomed to distinguishing between animate and inanimate things, human and nonhuman creatures, the mental and the physical. But in terms of expressive qualities, the character of a given person may resemble that of a particular tree more closely than that of another person. The state of affairs in a human society may be similar to the tension in the skies just before the outbreak of a thunderstorm. Poets use such analogies, and so do other unspoiled people. So-called primitive languages give us an idea of the kind of world that derives from a classification based on perception. Instead of restricting itself to the verb "to walk," which rather abstractly refers to locomotion, the language of the African Ewe takes care to specify for every kind of walking the particular expressive qualities of the movement. There are expressions for "the gait of alittle man whose limbs shake very much, to walk with a dragging step like a feeble person, the gait of a long-legged man who throws his legs forward, of a corpulent man who walks heavily, to walk in a dazed fashion without looking ahead, an energetic and firm step," and many others. These distinctions are made not as an aesthetic exercise, but because the expressive properties of the gait are believed to reveal important and useful information on the kind of man who is walking and his intent at the time. Although such languages often surprise us by their wealth of subdivisions for which we see no need, they also reveal generalizations that to us may seem unimportant or absurd. For example, the language of the Klamath Indians has prefixes for words referring to objects of similar shape or movement. Such a prefix may describe "the outside of a round or spheroidal, cylindrical, discoid or bulbed object, or a ring; also voluminous; or again, an act accomplished with an object which bears such a form; or a circular or semi-circular or waving movement of the body, arms, hands, or other parts. Therefore this prefix is to be found connected with clouds, celestial bodies, rounded slopes on the earth's surface, fruits rounded or bulbed in shape, stones and dwellings (these