last being usually circular in form). It is employed, too, for a crowd of animals, for enclosures, social gatherings (since an assembly usually adopts the form of a circle), and so forth. Such a classification groups things together that to our way of thinking belong in very different categories and have little or nothing in common. At the same time, these features of primitive language remind us that the poetical habit of uniting practically disparate objects by metaphor is not a sophisticated invention of artists, but derives from and relies on the universal and spontaneous way of approaching the world of experience. Georges Braque advises the artist to seek the common in the dissimilar. "Thus the poet can say: The swallow knifes the sky, and thereby makes a knife out of a swallow." It is the function of the metaphor to make the reader penetrate the conventional shell of the world of things by juxtaposing objects that have little in common but the underlying pattern. Such a device, however, works only if the reader of poetry is still alive, in his own daily experience, to the symbolic or metaphoric connotation of all appearance and activity. For example, hitting or breaking things normally evokes, if ever so slightly, the overtone of attack and destruction. There is a tinge of conquest and achievement to all rising—even to climbing a staircase. If the shades are pulled up in the morning and the room is flooded with light, more is experienced than a simple change of illumination. One aspect of the wisdom that belongs to a genuine culture is the constant awareness of the symbolic meaning expressed in a concrete happening, the sensing of the universal in the particular. This gives significance and dignity to all daily pursuits and prepares the ground on which the arts can grow. At its pathological extreme such spontaneous symbolism manifests itself in what is known to the psychiatrist as the "organ speech" of psychosomatic and other neurotic symptoms. There are people who cannot swallow because there is something in their lives they "cannot swallow," or whom an unconscious sense of guilt compels to spend hours every day on washing and cleaning. ## The Priority of Expression Let me emphasize once more that in our particular civilization we have come to think of perception as the recording of shapes, distances, hues, motions. The awareness of these measurable characteristics is actually a fairly late accomplishment of the human mind. Even in twentieth-century Western man, it presupposes special conditions. It is the attitude of the scientist and the engineer, or of the salesman who estimates the size of a customer's waist, the shade of a lipstick, the weight of a suitcase. But when I sit in front of a fireplace and watch the flames, I do not normally register certain shades of red, various degrees of brightness, geometrically defined shapes moving at such and such a speed. I see the graccful play of aggressive tongues, fexible striving, lively color. The face of a person is more readily perceived and remembered as being alert, tense, and concentrated than it is as being triangularly shaped, having slanted eyebrows, straight lips, and so on. This priority of expression, although somewhat modifed in adults by a scientifically oriented education, is striking in children and primitives, as has been shown by Werner and Köhler. The profile of a mountain is soft or threateningly harsh; a blanket thrown over a chair is twisted, sad, tired. The priority of physiognomic properties should not come as a surprise. Our senses are not self-contained recording devices operating for their own sake. They have been developed by the organism as an aid in reacting to the environment, and the organism is primarily interested in the forces active around it—their place, strength, direction. Hostility and friendliness are attributes of forces. And the perceived impact of forces makes for what we call expression. If expression is the primary content of vision in daily life, the same should be all the more true of the way the artist looks at the world. The expressive qualities arc his means of communication. They capture his attention, they enable him to understand and interpret his experiences, and they determine the form patterns he creates. Therefore the training of art students should be expected to consist basically in sharpening their sense of these qualities, and in teaching them to look to expression as the guiding criterion forevery stroke of the pencil, brush, or chisel. In fact many good art teachers do prccisely this. But in other cases the student's spontaneous sensitivity to expression not only is not developed further, it is even impaired and suppressed. There is, for example, an old-fashioned but not extinct way of teaching students to draw from the model by asking them to establish the exact length and direction of contour lines, the relative position of points, the shape of masses. In other words, students are to concentrate on the geomctric-technical qualities of what they see. In its modern version this method consists in urging the young artist to think of the model or of a freely invented design as a configuration of masses, planes, direction. Again interest is focused on geometric technical qualities. Such teaching follows principles of description often employed in mathematics or physical science rather than thosc of spontaneous vision. Thcre arc, however, teachers who will proceed differently. With a model sitting on the floor in a hunched-up position, such a teacher will not begin by making the students notice that the whole figure can be inscribed in a triangle. Instcad he