will ask about the expression of the figure; he may be told that the person on the floor looks tense, tied together, full of potential energy. He will suggest, then, that the student try to render this quality. In doing so the student will watch proportions and directions, but not as static geometric properties, "correct" for correctness's sake. These formal features will be understood as means of making the primarily observed expression come across on paper, and the correctness and incorrectness of each stroke will be judged on the basis of whether or not it captures the dynamic "mood"of the subject. Equally, in a lesson on design, it will be made clear that to the artist just as to any unspoiled human being, a circle is not a line of constant curvature whose points are all equidistant from a center, but first of all a compact, hard, stable thing. Once the student has understood that roundness is not identical with circularity, he may try for a design whose structural logic will be controlled by the primary concept of something to be expressed. An artificial concentration on mere shapes and colors as such will leave the student at a loss as to which pattern to select among innumerable and equally acceptable ones. An expressive theme will serve him as a natural guide to forms that fit his purpose. It will be evident that what is advocated here is not so-called "selfexpression." The method of self-expression plays down, or even annihilates, the theme to be represented. It recommends a passive, "projective" pouring-out of what is felt inside. On the contrary, the method discussed here requires active, disciplined concentration of all organizing powers upon the expression found in one's vision of the world. It might be argued that an artist must practice the purely formal technique before he can hope to render expression successfully. But this notion reverses the natural order of the artistic process. In fact all good practicing is highly expressive. This first occurred to me many years ago when I watched the dancer Gret Palucca perform one of her most popular program pieces, which she called "Technical Improvisations."This number was nothing but the systematic exercise that the dancer practiced every day in her studio to loosen up the joints of her body. She would start out by doing turns of her head, then move her neck, then shrug her shoulders, ending up wriggling her toes. This purely technical practice succeeded with the audience because it was thoroughly expressive. Forcefully precise and rhythmical movements presented quite naturally the entire repertoire of human pantomime. They passed through all the moods from lazy happiness to impertinent satire. In order to achieve technically precise movements, a capable dance teacher may ask students not to perform"geometrically"defined positions, but to strive for the muscular experience of uplift, or attack, or yielding, that will be created by correctly executed movements. Comparable methods are nowadays applied in physical therapy. For example, the patient is asked to concentrate not on the meaningless, purely formal exercise of flexing and stretching his arm, but on a game or piece of work that involves suitable motions of the limbs as means to a sensible end. ## Symbolism in Art All perceptual qualities have generality. I mentioned this earlier, and I intended the statement to mean that to some extent we see redness in every red spot or speed in every fast movement. The same is true for expression. When Picasso conveys to us in a painting the gentle ways in which a mother guides the first steps of her unsteadily walking child, we see gentleness as a general quality exemplified in a particular case. In this sense it is valid to say that Picasso's picture symbolizes gentleness. In fact, for our purpose, the terms expression and symbolization can be used interchangeably. The example also suggests that the task of expressing or symbolizing a universal content through a particular image is carried out not only by the formal pattern, but by the subject matter as well, if there is one. Only with regard to subject matter can the term symbolism be used in a more restricted sense. When Rembrandt depicts Aristotle contemplating the bust of Homer, it makes sense to ask whether the artist intended to narrate a scene that has taken place or might have taken place in a world of history or fable, or whether the scene is meant as purely "symbolic." In the latter case the subject matter and its arrangement are designed to embody an idea, and they may indicate this purpose by the unlikelihood of their occurrence in any real or imagined world. A clear instance of such symbolism is the painting by Titian commonly referred to as "Sacred and Profane Love"; it will hardly be taken by anyone as a genre scene, in which a clothed and a nude woman sit together on a well. The same is true for the engraving of Dürer's in which a winged woman with a goblet in her hand stands on a sphere moving through the clouds. The correct reading of such a picture depends heavily on conventions. These conventions tend to standardize the way a certain idea is to be depicted, so that, for example, in Christian art a lily is known to symbolize the virginity of Mary, lambs are disciples, and two deer drinking from a pond show the recreation of the faithful. However, the more an artistic experience depends on knowledge, the less direct it is likely to be. Therefore symbolism in this sense is hardly relevant to