It should be noted that the directional vector, which makes compositions asymmetrical, has little to do with eye movements. From tracings of eye movements we know that viewers explore a visual scene by roaming about irregularly and concentrating on the centers of major interest. The left-right vector results from this exploration, but it does not derive from the direction of eye movements themselves. Nor is there any hard evidence that lateral bias is related to handedness or eye dominance. Van der Meer claims that scholastic training may have some influence: she found that persons of limited education are less inclined than university students to perceive directed tension toward the right in pictorial objects. She also reports, however, that sensitivity to the left-right vectors appears rather suddenly at the age of fifteen—strangely late if training in reading and writing is decisive. ## Balance and the Human Mind We have noted that weight is distributed unevenly in visual patterns and that these patterns are pervaded by an arrow pointing to "movement" from left to right. This introduces an element of imbalance, which must be compensated if balance is to prevail. Why should artists strive for balance? Our answer thus far has been that by stabilizing the interrelations between the various forces in a visual system, the artist makes his statement unambiguous. Going a step further, we realize that man strives for equilibrium in all phases of his physical and mental existence, and that this same tendency can be observed not only in all organic life, but also in physical systems. In physics the principle of entropy, also known as the Second Law of Thermodynamics, asserts that in any isolated system, each successive state represents an irreversible decrease of active energy. The universe tends toward a state of equilibrium in which all existing asymmetries of distribution will be eliminated, and the same holds true for narrower systems if they are sufficiently independent of external influences. According to the physicist L. L. Whyte's "unitary principle," which he believes to underlie all natural activity, "asymmetry decreases in isolable systems."Along the same lines, psychologists have defined motivation as "the disequilibrium of the organism which leads to action for the restoration of stability." Freud, in particular, interpreted his "pleasure principle"to mean that mental events are activated by unpleasant tension, and follow a course that leads to reduction of tension. Artistic activity can be said to be a component of the motivational process in both artist and consumer, and as such participates in the striving for equilibrium. Equilibrium achieved in the visual appearance not only of paintings and sculpture, but also of buildings, furniture, and pottery is enjoyed by man as an image of his broader aspirations. The quest for balance, however, is not sufficient to describe the controlling tendencies in human motivation generally or in art particularly. We end up with a one-sided, intolerably static conception of the human organism if we picture it as resembling a stagnant pool, stimulated to activity only when a pebble disturbs the balanced peace of its surface and limiting its activity to the reëstablishment of that peace. Freud came closest to accepting the radical consequences of this view. He described man's basic instincts as an expression of the conservatism of all living matter, as an inherent tendency to return to a former state. He assigned a fundamental role to the "death instinct,"the striving for a return to inorganic existence. According to Freud's economy principle, man constantly tries to expend as little energy as possible. Man is lazy by nature. But is he? A human being in good physical and mental health finds himself fulfilled not in inactivity, but in doing, moving, changing, growing, forging ahead, producing, creating, exploring. There is no justification for the strange notion that life consists of attempts to put an end to itself as rapidly as possible. Indeed, the chief characteristic of the live organism may well be that it represents an anomaly of nature in waging an uphill fight against the universal law of entropy by constantly drawing new energy from its environment. This is not to deny the importance of balance. Balance remains the final goal of any wish to be fulfilled, any task to be accomplished, any problem to be solved. But the race is not run only for the moment of victory. In a later chapter, on Dynamics, I shall have occasion to spell out the active counterprinciple. Only by looking at the interaction between the energetic life force and the tendency toward balance can we reach a fuller conception of the dynamics activating the human mind and reflected in the mind's products. ## Madame Cézanne in a Yellow Chair It follows from the foregoing discussion that an artist would interpret human experience quite one-sidedly if he allowed balance and harmony to monopolize his work. He can only enlist their help in his effort to give form to a significant theme. The meaning of the work emerges from the interplay of activating and balancing forces. Cézanne's portrait of his wife in a yellow chair (Figure 17) was painted in 1888-18go. What soon strikes the observer is the combination of external tranquillity and strong potential activity. The reposing figure is charged with