(Ethics, appendix to Part I) is cited in a paper by Hartmann and Sickles on the theory of order (173). These authors, who seem to think of order mainly, or perhaps exclusively, as a characteristic of grouping—that is, as a relationship between discrete objects—assert that "order is the term applied to any subjective quality or sensation which is produced by, and dependent upon, the number of straight l'ines which can be drawn through three or more actual or supplied points or centers of the sensory field; it varies directly with the degree to which these lines tend to become parallel with each other and with the vertico-horizontal coordinate system natural to the organism." This definiui'on, applicable also to simplicity, points correctly to the im portance of the spatial frame of reference and of parallel orientation. But it describes the effect of parallelism in terms of a summation of clements and is inadequate also in considering only two specific factors. For exarmple, circles, which contain no parallels, have a high degree of order. In a second paper Sickles (4or) realizes that a circular arrangement of objects would possess order, but maintains that no such arrangement is ever perceived, because "the eyes never see curves save when these are objectively present—all subjective intervals being straight lines." This assertion is based on insuficient observation (see, e.g., our Fig. 28). Alexander and Carey (4). Hochberg et al. on simplicity (195 and 197). Peter Blake, in a review of the book The Road Is Yours by R. M. Cleveland and S. T. Williamson, published in the New York Times, 1951. Chaplin: Cocteau (79), p. 16. Parsimony: Cohen and Nagel (80), Pp. 212, 384. Newton: Mathematical Principles, Book III, rule 1. Badt on simplicity (36). Ben Nicholson's relief is illustrated in Circle (297), plate 6. Victory Boogie-Woogie, a painting by Piet Mondrian (312), p. 55. Rebellion Tamed by Wise Government is the title f a painting by Rubens, c. 1631. Isomorphism: Koffka (250), pp. 56-68. Simplification Demonstrated (pp. 63-66) r Lucretius: De Rerum Natura, Book IV, 353. Leonardo (291), vol. 2, P. 238. A detailed survey of experiments on the reactions to subdued stimuli can be found in the first edition of Woodworth (469), ch. IV, 'Memory for Form." Consult aiso Koffka (250), Pp. 493-505. Considerable controversy has been aroused by experiments based on the effect of memory. The pioneering study by Wulf (472) was done under the guidance of Koffka, Among the more recent publications, that of Goldmeier (153) is particularly relevant. Hebb and Foord (178) interpreted thetr results as being contrary to gestalt predictions. The examples of reactions to Fig. 38, which is adapted from Wohlfahrt in Neue Psychologische Studien 1928/32, derives from demonstrations in my classes. Fig. 4oa is based on Wulf, Fig. 4od on Allport (6). See also Arnheim (16), Pp. 81-84. Leveling and Sharpening (pp. 66-67) On Prägnanz see Rausch (364), pP. g4ff. An example of the confusion created by pregnance: Woodworth and Schlosberg (47o), P. 419. On leveling and sharPening in the transmission of rumors see Allport and Postman (7), reprinted in Katz et al. (225), Pp. 394-404. A W hole Maintains Itself (Pp. 67-69) On the principles of Gestalt psychology see the books of Köhler (241) and Koffka (250), as well as the anthologies edited by Ellis (104) and Henle (188). Torroja (42r) p. 285. The law of simplicity, as I prefer to call it, has often been called the law of the good gestalt or of pràgnanz. The notion of "goodness" suggests subjective value judgment rather than objective fact. On prégnanz see p. 67 and the note relating to it, Köhler's book on physical gestalten (246) has not been translated, but references to the subject abound in his later writings. The quotation is from (240), p. 242. Ivo.Kohler on experiments with goggles (253). Hemianopia: Gelb (133) and Teuber (415), Pp. 1614f. Figs. 41 and 46 are taken from Metelli (303) by permission of the author. Subdivision (pp. 69-73) Fig. 42 is after Arnheim, in Whyte (452), p. 202. On the golden section see Arnheim (18), pp. 102-119, and the literature cited there. Why the Eyes Often Tell the Truth (pp. 73-74) Wertheimer's example of the bridge on p. 336 of the German original (444). The drawing is mine. Stein (407) p. 11. On camouflage in nature see Cott (87). Compare Köhler (241), Pp. 156-160. Wertheimer explains the correspondence between perceptual and physical organization as an evolutionary adaptation of the nervous system to the cnvironment; P. 336 of the German original (444), omitted in the summary by Ellis (104). Subdivision in the Arts (pp. 74-76) Brancusi's stone sculpture of 19o8 is in the Philadelphia Museum. What 1s a Part? (pp. 76-78) Fig. 50 on p. 323 of Wertheimer's original paper (444). Early formulations of the gestalt principle assumed the existence of an additional 'gestalt quahty." Cf. Ehrenfels (r02), reprinted in Weinhandl (436), pp. rr-43; also Arnheim in Henle (188) PP. 90-96. In a "gestalt" the structure of the whole is determined by the structure of the parts, and vice versa. For a list of definitions of "gestalt" see Katz (226), p. 91. For an introduction to the theory see Wertheimer (446), Köhler (241), and Koffka (250). Picasso's sketches for Guemica: Arnheim (19). Waddington's article on biological shape in Whyte (452), pp. 44-56. Waddington als criticizes modern sculpture from the anatomist's point of view. Similarity and Difference (pp. 79-88) Rules of grouping: Wertheimer (445), Musatti (32r). On experiments with animals see Ellis (104), selections 18-21. Dante: Paradiso III, 14. Aristotle on similarity: On Memory and Reminiscence, 45ıb. See also Plato's Phaedo, 74. Mosconi in the Rivista di Psicologia, 1965. Figs. 52–56 are adapted from my paper in Whyte (452), p, 200, The piecemeal character of the rules of grouping is often overlooked. Wertheimer himself was well aware of it. After introducing his rules he called them "a poor a bstraction,' thus giving his paper a dramatic turning point. He described the law of similarity as "a special case of the law of good gestalt," and assertedl that visual patterns should not be treated in terms of "distances and relations between pieces." Fig. 59 is traced from a reproduction in Duncan (98), p. 54. The painting dates from 1go8. Big Dipper: reproduced by permission of Prof. Weiss from (437). Walter Piston (353), p, 2o. Other principles found in visual organization could also be beneficially applied to music.