Examples from Art (pp. 88-92) Brueghel's Parable of the Blind Men, painted in 1568, is in the Naples Museum. The biblical referencc is to Matthew 15:14. Grünewald's altar, finished c. 1515, is in the Museum of Colmar. Gombrich (156), p. 259. Five versions of El Greco's Expulsion from the Temple are known. I am referring to the one in the Frick Collection, rvew . Van Gogh's Bedroom, painted in Aries in 1888, is in the Chicago Art Institute. The Structural Skeleton (Pp. 92-95) Delacroix (93'), I, Etudes Esthétiques, p. 69. Eve movements: Yarbus (474) and Buswell (71). Eye movements: Yarbus (474) and husweu (71). Fig. 72 is derived from a procedure suggested by Wertheimer on p. 318 of the originai paper (444). Wittgenstein (458), part II, sect XI. NOTES TO CHAPTER III. FORM Ben Shahn (398), p. 6r. Wittgenstein (458), p. 235. Goethe, Dichtung und Wahrheit, Book I1. Illusionistic doctrine: cf. Arnheim (14), P. 125. Pliny on Zeuxis: Panofsky (339), P. 99. Orientation in Space (pp. 98-103) Gellermann (135). Tilted square: e.g., Piaget (348). The influence of orientation on the shape of the square was first pointed out in 18g6 by Mach (293), p. 106. Kopfermann (254), p. 352. Picasso's still life The Red Tablecloth, painted in 1924, is reproduced as plate 187 by Barr (42). Witkin (457). For two early studies on children's responses to orientation see Stern (4o8) and Rice (37o); more recently Ghent (139). Projections (pp. 103-106) ojections (pp. 103-106) Wölfl'in in ap aper on the reproduction and interpretation of works of art (464), Pp. 66-7 6, comp lains about the distorting efect of photographs that show pieces of sculpture from inappropriate viewpoints. In a photograph such distortion occurs more easily than in direct perception because it presents an isolated aspect under conditions of greatly reduced three-dimensionality. When the shape of a statue is rather complex, an obliquely taken picture may produce a "pseudo-front"—that is, the impression -L cnnt ieur of the statue. Hence the distortion. that the observer is tacing the rront vicw u Projective geometry deals with a similar problem by determining the structural "invariants," which remain untouched by distortion through projection. See Courant and Robbins (88), pp. 165ff. Bower on constancy in infants (6o). Depth perception in infants: Gibson (140). Which Aspect is Best? (pp. 16-111) Galton (129), p. 68. Eidetic images: Haber (170). Hogarth's Analysis of Beauty, lntrod. Computer graphics: Sutherland (411). Chesterton in "The Eye of Apollo," one of his Father Brown stories. On Giaco. metti see Lord (28o), p. 14. Kerschensteiner (236), pp. 229-230. The Egyptian Method (pp. 112-116) Mach (292). Schäfer (386), p. 254, hg. 199; elevations of the sphinx, p. 202. Oskar Schlemmer's Tischgesellschaft, painted in 1923, is in the Ströher Coliection, Darmstadt. Foreshortening (pp. 116-120) If we think of the sections of the foreshortened bodies, we realize more easily how a partially given simple shape tends toward its completion. Fig. 88 is drawn after a detail from an Attic amphora of the early sixth century, in the possession of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York (illustrated in Greek Painting [166], p. 8). The compelling power of structurally simple patterns is demonstrated by the fact that such monsters can be produced in a period when the sense of the visually significant was otherwise so strict that even mild foreshortenings, e.g., of heads or feet, were avoided. The symmetry of the front view is so inviting that its inadequacy is overlooked. It also affords a simple solution to the problem of representing a set of four horses (cf. p. 125). Rathe (36o), p. 37, mentions similar cases in Far Eastern art as examples of the impact ("Durchschlagskraft") of such projections. Delacroix, Journal (94), vol. 3, p. 13, entry of Jan. 13, 1857. Fig. 90 is enlarged from Fernand Léger's film Ballet Mécanique (1924). 1 am in. debted for the photograph to Guido Aristarco, editor of Cinema Nuovo. Andrea Mantegna's foreshortened figure of Christ is in the Brera, Milan. Figs. 91a and b are sketched after pp. 9 and 36 of Cooper (84). The Barlach quotation is translatod from a letter of June, 1889 (41), p. 17. Overlapping (pp. 120-123) The Picasso examples of Fig. 92 are sketched from Cooper (84), pp. 13 and 14. Apologies are due Rockwell Kent, a detail of whose woodcut T'he Lovers gave me the idea for Fig. 93. Michelangelo's Last Judgment in the Sistine Chapel of the Vatican was painted in 1536-1541. Low-cut dresses that end in a horizontal line slice the shoulders from the rest of the body, whereas the oblique V-shaped cut deviates from the axes of the body strongly enough not to interfere with its usity. What Good Does Overlapping Do? (pp. 123-127) Fig. 98 is taken from an Egyptian relief at Abydos (c. 13o0 .c.) representing King Sethos I and the goddess Isis. Rubens' Shepherd Embracing a Young Woman of 1636-1638 is in the Munich Pinakothek. For further examples of how superposition is used to convey meaning in fims see Arnheim (20) PP. 47ff. Alschuler and Hattwick (8), vol. 2, p. 129. The picture of St. Ursula from a calendar manuscript in Stuttgart is reproduced by Gombrich (156), p. 129. The parallel noted in the development of music and the visual arts refers mainly to the soquence of comparable steps, not to coincidence in history. It may be mentioned, however, that although in Western culture visual overlapping precedes musical harmony by thousands of years, the arrangement of pictures in horizontal rows