gives way to an integrated organization of the depth dimension only in the Renaissance. See Bunim (69) and White (448). Interplay of Plane and Depth (pp. 127-130) T'he group in Fig. 102is a detail from a scroll painted by a Sung emperor Hui Tsung (1o82-rr35). The scroll is a copy of a work done in the Tang period. My presentation of the relation between perspective projection and visual conception has profited greatly from conversations with Henry Schaefer-Simmern. Competing Aspects (pp. 130-133) Fig. 104 is taken from Boas (54), Pp. 224-225. Morin-Jean (315), pp. 86, 87, 138, 139, 152. Fig. 105a is taken from a drawing by a fve.and-a-half-year old child, 1o5b from Picasso's Still Life with an Enomel Saucepan, painted in 1945 (Musée d'Art Moderne, Paris). On interpretations of the cubist procedure see, e.g., Paul Laporte's article (262). Picasso's head of a bull is sketched from his Mise à Mort of 1934. Realism and Reality (pp. 134-136) Wölflin (468), p. 63. Fig. 107 gives the outlines of the figure of Abias from the lunettes of the Sistine Chapel. W hat Looks Lifelike? (pp. 136-139) Boccaccio on Giotto in the fifth story on the sixth day of the Decamerone. Adaptation level: Helson (184). On holography see, e.g., Pennington (344). Picasso on lifelikeness, cf. Ashton (33) p. 67; on originality, Couturier (89). Form as Invention (pp. 139-144) Giacometti: Selz (396), p. 17. Hochberg and Brooks (1g6) on picture perception of infants. Rudrauf on Annunciations (379). Levels of Abstraction (pp. 144-152) Parts of the following discussion are adapted from Arnheim (28). A pertinent analysis can be found in Worringer's book on abstraction and empathy (47r). See also Blanshard (53). Worringer (471), p. 68, quoting Von den Steinen without specifying the reference, I am not concerned here with the special problem of realism in paloolithic or bushman art. Although the animal pictures of the Altamira type have the earmarks of a late, mature style, as Meyer Schapiro pointed out many years ago (3go), the question remains whether highly realistic pictures are ever produced at a primitive level of development by a kind of spontaneous "photographic" recording of momentary visual impressions—that is, whether under special conditions the visual conception of the object may be overruled by the impact of a specific percept. At present I know of no evidence to support this assertion. On primitive thinking consult Lévy-Bruhl (269) and Radin(358). A survey of the literature on "artisu'c behavior in the abnormal" has been published by Anastasi and Foley (ro). Many examples can be found in the American /ournal of Art Therapy, formerly the Bulletin of Art Therapy. Nijinsky's drawings are reproduced in his diary (327). A good characterization of the schizoid temperament is given in ch. 1o of Kretschmer's book on physique and character (257). Alfred Bader (35) has published a monograph on Friedrich Schröder-Sonnenstern. Coomaraswamy (82), pp. 85-99, has pointed out that traditionally an ornament or decoration is an integral part of the wok of art and not "millinery," as it is considered today. Etymologically the Latin "ornate" means primarily to "fit out, furn'ish, provide with necessaries," and even in the sixteenth century one reads of the "tackling or ornaments of a ship." Similarly, asserr Coomaraswamy, "décor" is related to "decorous" or "decent," meaning "suitable to a character or time, plaee, and occasion" and to "decorum," that is, "what is befitting." uuung. Hodler's painting Silvaplanersee of 1907 is in the Kunsthaus, Zurich. Homarth /0)1 Hogarth (199) chs. II and VII. For the observation that symmetry is frequent in the staging of comedies, I am indebted to my student Toni Cushing. Bergson in his book on laughter (47). 1 ua res agitur: "This concerns you." Horace, Epistles, I, 18, 84. La Source (pp. 152-156) Muther (322), vol. III, p. 163. Visual lnformation (Pp. 156-161) Leonardo da Vinci's Notebooks (2g1), vol. I, p. 105. T1 ⁻7⁻/ The subway map is reproduced by permission of London Transport. Notehaoh./-- Notebooks (291), vol. I, p. 107. ## NOTES TO CHAPTER IV. GROWTH The main ideas presented in the first section of this chapter were developed earlier in a paper of mine n perceptual abstraction and art (28). Th.i. T'he literature on comparisons between children's art and primitive art is summarized by Anastasi and Foley (1o), vol, II, pp. 48-65. In particular see Levinstein (268), Eng (105), Britsch (64), and Löwenfeld (284). The Intellectualistic Theory (pp. 164-167) Compare Herbert Read's remarks on the "conceptual fallacy"(365), p. 134. Read discusses many of the most important among the books and papers that had been written on the subject of the present chapter until then. Luquet (287) asserts that the child's drawings go through three main stages: incapacity for synthesis, inellectual realism, and visual realism. See also Good. enough (159). Gesell (138) and Bower (59). They Draw What They See (pp. 167-169) On perceiving and performing in children see Olson and Pagliuso (333). The symposium consists of papers by Maccoby, McNeill, Olson, Staats, and Arnheim. Representational Concepts (pp. 169-171) Rebresentotional Concensr (nn -5- The Matisse anocdote is reported by Gertrude Stein (407), p. 17. \4/. 1/. Olson on diagonals (332). Quotation from Arnherm in Olson, p. 206. . We often read that children endlessly repeat "stereotyped schemas" they have worked out. The adult tends to pay more attention to the basic patterns that keep reappearing in the drawings than to the variations obteined with these patterns. It is true that children will cling to a formal discovery and experiment with its capacities until its virtues are exhausted and something new is needed. This, however, is good practice, fortunately not limited to children. T'he question whether or not the drawings and paintings of children are "art" may be safely feft to the philosophers. 1!1. puosopncr. Little of Gustaf Britsch's teaching is available in his own words. The book Theorie der Kunst (64), published in 1926 under his name with his student Egon Kornmann indicated as editor, was actually written by Kornmann after Britsch's death. He relied on oral communication and on Britsch's notes and papers, some of which are quoted verbatim in the last part of the book. The main ideas are summarized in English in the introduction to (388) by Britsch's disciple, Henry Schaefer-Simmern, who ap-