plied and developed them. Frequent conversations with Professor Schaefer-Simmern have been of the greatest value to me in writing the present chapter. ## Drawing as Motion (pp. 171-174) On the paintings of apes ee Morris (316); also Köhler (244) p. 96. The basic texts on graphology, still untranslated, are by Klages (237) and Pulver (357). Goodnow (r6r). For an example of a disconnected drawing by a weak-sighted child see Löwenfeld (284), p. 155, fig. 3. Occasionally such drawings occur also in normal children, but they are not frequent enough to represent a typical phase ("incapacity for synthesis"), as Luquet has maintained (287). Luquet arrived at his conclusion by including in this category the so-called "tadpole" drawimgs. He relied here on the common erroneous view that in these drawings arms are attached to the head or the legs. Compare also Piaget (35o), p. 65. Baudelaire in his report on the Salon of r859. The passage is repeated in his "L'oeuvre et la vie d'Eugène Delacroix" of 1863. See (44), pp. 1043 and 1121. The translation is mine. ## The Primordial Circle (pp. 174-179) The example of the horses was sometimes used by Max Wertheimer in his lectures. Cott (87) on animal camouflage. Charlotte Rice (370) p. 133. Also Goodenough (159) and Spears (403), who hists recent literature on shape preference in infants. Piaget and lnhelder (350). Jonas (2rr) contains his two essays on sight and image-making. Experiments in which children are asked to copy geometrical fgures have shown that between the ages of three and four they often employ, e.g., two concentric circles o represent a triangle inscribed in a circle. Piaget (350), p. 75, and Bender (46) chs. 2 and 4. Fig. 122k is drawn after Werner (440) p. 122; a and g are originals; the other examples are copied from originals. The Law of Differentiation (pp. 179-182) On biological differentiation see Arnheim (15), p. 40. Piaget (349), p. 12. Gombrich (157), ch. XI. On marked and unmarked concepts see Lyons (289), p. 79. Goodenough (159) and more recently Harr'is (172). ## Vertical and Horizontal (pp. 182-187) Kellogg (230). Delacroix's remark is quoted after (92), p. 8, where it is dated 1843. Kerschensteiner's statement (236), p. 17, is substantially--but not entirely—correct, since the very first two samples he reproduces show a linear trunk, mis interpreted by him as "one leg, to which feet are attached." However, even in these samples, heads, fingers, and feet are given as outline figures, which keep the whole pattern, as it were, visually afoat. Wöltin (464), P. 79. On the copying of fgures in intelligence tests see Terman and Merrill (413), pp. 92, 98, 219, 230. Also Piaget (350), ch. 2: the drawing of geometrical figures. Hubel and Wiesel (2o3) on feature analyzers in the cat's brain. Attneave (34); Mondrian (312). ## Obliqueness (pp. 187-190) vr Olson's monograph on children's conception of the diagonal (332). See also The Swructurist, 1969, #9, a special issue on the oblique in art. The office furniture of Fig. 13o is manufactured by the Oxford Pendaflex Corporation in Garden City, N.Y., as "The Cluster 12o Work Station." The Fusion of Parts (pp. 191-194) For an early drawing of a person sitting on a chair see Eng (ro5), p. 69. Five-year.old children who have become aware of the perspective effect but are not yet able to tackle the deformation of shape will sometimes draw a tilted disk as a smaller but perfectly round circle rather than as an ellipse. Piaget (350), p. 214. Sixe (pp. 195-197) Löwenfeld (284), Pp. 25-31, and (282), fig. 26, p, x67. For distances between objects see pp. 4I, 47, 49, 77, 127, in Löwenfeld (284), who is inclined to explain the long arms as an expression of the muscular feeling of stretching experienced in such situations. There seems to be no need for resorting to a specifc kinesthetic factor when a universal visual factor provides a full explanation. ## The Misnamed Tadpoles (pp. 97-199) A characteristic in-between position on the interpretation of the tétards is assumed by Luquet (287). He realizes that the omission of the trunk may be only apparent, but attributes it to lack of importance for the child. Fig. 139 is traced from Kerschensteiner (236), table 82. Translation into Two Dimensions (pp. 199-203) Abbott on Flatland (r). The Australian bark painting of the kangaroo is in the National Museum of Victoria in Melbourne. Clark (76). Educational Consequences (pp. 203-208) Cocteau (78), p. 19. On Arnold Schönberg as a teacher see Wellesz (439), Pp. 49ff. On the forerunners of central perspective see White (448) and Bunim (69). Quotation from Arnheim (16), PP. 3067. Herbert Read (365), plate 18b. Sticks and Slabs (pp. 209-215) A curious solution of the head-face problem may be seen in the small Sumerian bronzes that show divinit.es with four faces symmetrically arranged around the head, Examples are in the Oriental Institute, Chicago. Illustrated in Master Bronzes (299), plates I and 2. On the flatness of early faces in the work of beginners see, e.g., Schaefer-Simmern (388), PP. 98-99. Examples of early sculpture on plates 83, 86, 404-409, in Bossert's book on ancient Crete (58). Lange's law of frontality (260). The fusion of units in sculpture may be comparod with the analogous development in drawings described earlier in the section"The Fusion of Parts." The Cube and the Round (pp. 215-217) Löwy (285). Fig. 15o is drawn after plate viii of Perrot and Chipiez (345), vol. II, p. 130. For the quote from Lomazzo see Holt (2oo), p. 260 ## NOTES TO CHAPTER V. SPACE Line and Contour (pp. 219-223) Hogarth in the Introduction to his Analysis of Beauty (199). Moholy-Nagy (311). Experiments on density in figure-ground situations by Gelb and Granit are discussed in Koffka (250), p. 187.