Help From Physical Space (pp. 269-271) Wittgenstein (458), p. 248. Visual cliff: Gibson (14●). A survey of depth-determined factors in space perception is given by Woodworth and Schlosberg (470), ch. 16. Simple Rather Than Truthful (pp. 271-275) On Borromini consult Hempel (186). Vitruvius (428), Book 3, ch. 3. Plato's Sophist, 236. Vasari, On Sculpture, ch. 1, 36. Ames demonstrations: Lawrence (264) and Blake and Ramsay (51), Pp. 99-103. Gradients Create Depth (pp. 275-280) Gibson on gradients (143). Van Gogh's chairs are from his Bedroom, painted in Arles in 1888. The painting is in the Art Institute, Chicago. So is Seurat's Afternoon on the Grande Jatte of 1886. The Bible on "a little cloud": I Kings, ch. 18:44. In his work for the Army Air Forces (14r) Gibson showed that the point of the environment toward which an airplane or car is directed becomes the center of a centrifugal expansion imparted to the entire surroundings. The world seems to Ay apart. In looking backward, we find that the point from which the vehicle is moving away marks the center of a constriction or centripetal movement. Magritte's painting "Euclidean Promenades" is in the Minneapolis Institute of Art, Toward a Convergence of Space (pp. 28o-282) The scroll paintings for the Tale of Genji are of the twelfth century. The surviving fragments are in the Tokugawa Collection and the Goto Museum in Tokyo. The silver relief of St. Matthew is in the museum of Aachen cathedral. On the development of central perspective consult White (448), Bunim (69), Kern (233, 234), and Panofsky (340). The quotation from Cennini is in ch. 87 of his Il Libro dell'Arte o Trattato della Pittura, written before 1437. The Two Roots of Central Perspective (pp. 283-285) The hrst treauise on central perspective, Della Pittura Libri Tre, was written by Leon Battista Alberti in 1435. Direr's treatise Underweysung der Messung was first published in Nuremberg in 1525. On Vermeer and the camera obscura see Seymour (397) and Fink (112). Ivins (206), p. 9. Pyramidal Space (pp. 287-294) Thouless (418). Afterimages and depth: on Emmert's law see Woodworth (47o), p. 486, and Koffka (250), ch. 6. Gibson (143), p. 181. Optical illusions: Rausch (362). Cézanne's perspective: Novotny (328). On perspective in film see Spottiswoode (406) pp. 40-43, and Arnheim (20), pp. II, 58. The Symbolism of a Focused World (pp. 294-296) Leonardo in (291), vol. 2, p. 376. Panofsky (340), p. 161. Tintoretto's Last Supper, c. 156o, is in the church of San Giorgio Maggiore in Venice. Centrality and Infinity (pp. 297-298) Lucretius; De Rerum Natura, Book 2: 1048. On infinity see, e.g., Weizsäcker (438) pp. r18ff. Spengler (404) pp. 175ff., dis. cusses the presence of the infinite in definitions of the finite as characteristic of modern European thinking. Playing With the Rules (pp. 298-302) Zajac on perspective (477). Giorgio de Chirico's Lassitude of the Infinite, paintod in 1g12, is in the Collection Pierre Matisse, New York. ## NOTES TO CHAPTER VI. LIGHT The Experience of Light (pp. 303-305) Piaget (351), chs. 8 and 9. Driyer (97), p. 6. Job 38: 19-20. Relative Brightness (pp. 305-309) On the relativity of brightness see Wallach (43o) and MacLeod (294). The Alberti quotation is from his treatise on painting. See also Helson on adaptation level (183, 184). On the three-dimensional efect of brightness gradients see Turhan (422) and Gibson (143), Pp. 94ff. For "obliterative shading," see Cott (87), p. 124. Illumination (pp. 309-310) n light and illumination in the history of painting see the fundamental treatise by Schöne (392). Delacroix on the true color (94), Jan. 13, 1857 Light Creates Space (pp. 311-315) Gehrke and Lau (132). Goethe, Faust, Part I, Act 3. On the use of lighting in film see Arnheim (2o), Pp. 65ff. Scanning microscope: Everhart (107) and Gilmore (150). Mach's lecture, "Why Man Has Two Eyes?" in (292) and (293), ch. 10, sect. 6. Roger de Piles quoted after Holt (200), pp. 412-413. Quontion from Hering by MacIeod (294), Pp, 11-12, who later investigated the "penumbra" effect systematicaily (295). Shadows (pp. 315-320) On the spatial effect of shadows: Lauenstein (263). Rembrandt's Night Watch, painted in 1642, is in the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam. A detailed analysis of the use of light in this picture is in Fromentin (24), chs. 21 and 22, On the primitive view of shadows consult Lévy-Bruhl (269), pp. 54-56, and (270), PP. 136ff. Jung (213), p. 173. Fig. 22g is taken from an advertisement for Eleven Came Back, a novel by Mabel Seeley (New York: Doubleday, 1943). Cézanne's letter to Bernard of Dec. 23, 1904. Painting Without Lighting (pp. 320-323) Mach (292). Bunim (69), p. 27, notes that Apollodorus, a painter of the ffth century B.c., was famous for his effects of light and shade. The evidence is of course indirect since no works of the early Greek painters have survived. Britsch (64), pp. 34-35, and Schaefer-Simmern (388), pp. 22-25. A striking example is provided by the dark cloud behind the face in Piero di Cosimo's portrait of Simonetta in Chantilly.