Carpenter (73). Fig. 232 is a detail from Titian's Noli Me Tangere in the National Gallery, London. Goethe's conversations with Eckermann, Apr. 18, 1827. The description of the picture matches best, though not perfectly, with Rubens's Return from the Labor in the Fields, painted c. 164o, in the Palazzo Pitti in Florence. Perhaps the engraving was made after this landscape. See also Lindsay's and Huppé's observation that in Brueghel's Le Monde Renversé (Netherlandish Proverbs) of the Berlin Museum the buildings and human figures are illuminated from the front although the sun is visible at the far distance above the horizon (276). The Symbolism of Light (pp. 324-329) Wölflin (467). See the article on "Light and Darkness" in Hastings (174), vol. 8. Rembrandt's Holy Family, painted c. 1644, is in the Lennox Collection in Scotland. The Descent from the Cross of 1634 is in Hermitage, Leningrad. The Wedding of Samson of 1638 belongs to the Dresden Gallery. The Toilet of Bathshebah of 1643 is in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York. Katz (227), pp. 7f., on the appearance of colors. The relation between luminosity and surface quality is discussed by Wallach (43o). Interpretations of Dürer's Melencolia are given by Panofsky and Saxl (341) and by Wölflin (465), Pp. 96-105. Wöllin (467), ch. 1. The Third Man is a British film, directed by Carol Reed in 1949. Georges Braque's Painter and Model of 1939 is in the collection of Walter P. Chrysler, Jr. On the "antagonism of contrasting forces" cf. Freud's doctrine of the ego and the id or the dialectic process in Marxism. ## NOTES TO CHAPTER VIL COLOR Color perception in animals: Ash (32). Odilon Redon: Rewald (369). From Light to Color (pp. 330-332) On anthropological aspects of color vision see Segall (395), Pp. 37-48, and Berlin (48). Law of differentiation is discussed in Ch. IV. Shape and Color (pp. 332-337) Color constancy: Katz and Révész (229) and Wallach (43r) Helson (185) and Koffka (250), p. 254. Experiment with children: Werner(440), Pp. 234-237, and Vicario (427). Rorschach (375) and Schachtel (384). Kretschmer (257), ch. 13 ("Experimentelle Typenpsychologie"), Pp. 190-191, refers to experiments that show cyclothymes to be more sensitive to color, schizothymes to shape. The former group comprises people whose temperament is represented in its pathological extreme by manic.depressives. The chapter, added to Kretschmer's book in the seventh edition, is not included in the English translation. However, the translation does contain Kretschmer's reference to the way the two types express themselves in the visual arts (257), pp. 23-24r. Matisse (300), p. 15. Poussin quoted from Holt (2oo), p. 369. Kant, Critique of ludgment, part I, sect. I, Book I, 14. Charles Blanc (52), p. 23. How Colors Come About (pp. 337-339) Newton: Philos. Transactions of the Royal Society #8o, 1672, P. 131. Goethe (151). Schopenhauer: Ueber das Sehen und die Farben, 1815. Helmholtz on Goethe's theory of color (182), also Deane Judd's introduction to (151). For a visualization of Schopenhauer's quantification of hues see the section on "quantity contrast" in Itten (2o5), who mistakenly attributes the principle to Goethe. On Hering see (1go) and the introduction therein by Jameson and Hurvich. Teevan and Birney (412) have edited a good reader on the historical theories of color. The Generative Primaries (pp. 339-341) Helmholtz on trichromatic theory: Teevan and Birney (412), p. 1o; also Young in (412), P. 7. Color receptors in the retina: MacNichol (296). Maxwell's principle: Rushton (382). The Generative Complementaries (pp. 342-343) Webster on impressionism (435). Woodworth and Schlosberg (470), p. 39r. Helmholtz on afterimages (181), vol. 2, Pp. 240, 267. On the theory of complementary colors see Parsons (342), pp. 38ff., Woodworth (469), PP. 552-553. Boring (56), PP. 141-145. A Capricious Medium (pp. 344-346) Pattillo, Art Bulletin, Sept. 1954, vol, 36. Schöne (392), p. 109. Newton's color names: Biernson (50). Hiler (193), p. 211. The Quest for Harmony (pp. 346-350) Runge (380). Klee's "canon of color totality" in (238). Jacobson (207). The history of color diagrams is described by Boring (56), Pp, 145-154. Characteristic attempts at color classification are described by Wilhelm Ostwald in his introduction to the theory of color and by Munsell in his work on color notation (319). Ostwald, Einführung in die Farbenlehre, Pp. 137, 146-148. Munsell (319). The influence of subject matter on color is discussed by Kandinsky (22•), pp. 82–85. Hölzel (198), p, 124. Friedländer (r22) in the section on picture restoring. Schönberg (391), p. 8. Retranslated from the German original. Marisse's The Studio of 1gr1 is in the Museum of Modern Art, New York. The Elements of the Scale (pp. 350-353) Chandler (74), Pp. 670, maintains that an average of 214 gradations of gray can be discriminated. Freeman (117), p. 380, speaks of 700 such gradations. Goodman (160), PP. 133ff. Hering (190), plate I. On the controversy about the nature of green consult Boring (56), p. 131. Turner's color system was based on Moses Harris's Natural System of Colors, published in 1766. See Gowing (164), p. 23. Syntax of Combinations (pp. 353-356) I am indebted to Meyer Schapiro for suggesting that I illustrate my discussion of color pairs with triangular diagrams. The Fundamental Complementaries (pp. 357-361)