Goethe in his Theory of Colors (Der Farbenlehre didaktischer Teil), part 6, sect. 812. Translation mine. Delacroix's sketchbook is in the Museum of Chantilly and reproduced by Guif. frey (169). Descartes: Rules for the Direction of the Mind, rule 14. Van Gogh on the colors of the seasons cited after Badt (37), Pp. 125, 124. T'he description of Delacroix's painting is in a letter to Emile Bernard of 1888. In experiments by H. and S. Kreitler (256), p. 36, 83% of the colors called "tension-laden" were found to be complementary pairs. Cf. also the discussion on their P. 374. Badt on late works of masters (36), p. 13. Denise Levertov's lines are quoted from The Sorrow Dance, p. 73, by permission of New Directions. McCandless (29o), p. 56, alking about stage lighting says: "By using warm and cool colors on opposite sides and varying the intensity between the two, it is possible to retain a considerable amount of the plastic quality." Carpenter (73), P. 18o, maintains that there is no such thing as modeling without gradation of brightness, "and Cézanne rarely tries to model form just with changes of hue." He concludes that modeling with change of color alone does not work. Compare, however, Delacroix in his /ournals (July 10, r847). Speaking of the head of Magdalen in the Christ in the Tomb (Boston Museum), he says that "it was sufficient to color the whole shaded area with warm, reflected tones, and although the bright and shaded areas are almost of the same brightness value, the cold tones of the one and the warm ones of the other are sufhcient to set the accents in the whole.' Interaction of Color (pp. 362-364) Ruskin (383), p. 138. Von Alesch (5), P. 46. Kandinsky (22i), p. 17. Translation mine. See also Herbert (18g), p. 28. Chevreul on contrast (75). Albers (3). Sharpening and leveling: Wulf (472). Assimilation: Jameson and Hurvich (20g). Liebmann (273), PP. 308 ff. Matisse and El Greco (pp. 364-368) Matisse's Le Luxe II (1907 or 1908), is in the Copenhagen Statens Museum for Kunst. A sketchier version, Le Lure I, is at the Musée National d'Art Moderne in Paris. Given the considerable inaccuracies of color reproductions, the reader should not be surprised to find discrepancies between the descriptions given here and his own impressions of a work. In the present case, a color print may reproduce the foreground and the hill to the right as a rusty brown rather than orange; the left hill may appear violet rather than purple. Reactions to Color (pp. 368-369) Féré (11o), Pp. 43-47, as quoted by Schachtel (384), p. 403. Goldstein (154). Vol. 1942 of "Occupational Therapy and Rehabilitation" contains several other articles on color therapy. Kandinsky (220), Pp. 61-62. Warm and Cold (pp. 369-371) Von Allesch (5), Pp. 234-235. Itten (205). Albers(3), sect. 21. On expressive qualities shared by different sensory media see Hornbostel (2or). On the expressiveness of color see Kreitler (256), pp. 67ff. Also Chandler (74), ch. 6. Goethe's classical treatment of the subject appears in the sixth section of his Theory of Colors (151). Kandinsky on the "language of form and color" (220), PP. 63-72. Color preferences: Kreitler (26), p. 64. Chandler (74), pP. 7off., characteristically opens his discussion of the subject with the remark, "The first eflors in the experimental aesthetics of color were naturally directed to the problem of the pleasantness and unpleasantness of color." Such an approach is "natural" only when a hedonistic theory of art is taken for granted. Picasso after Ashton (33), p. 35. ## NOTES TO CHAPTER VIII, MOVEMENT On eye movements: Thomas (416). Retinal receptors for movement: Lettvin (266). Happenings and Time (pp. 372-375) Wertheimer (443) p. 63. My discussion of time is influenced by Merleau-Ponty's treatment of the subject (302), PP. 469ff. On the spatialization of time in memory see Koffka (25o), p. 446. For the psychological concept of the past as an aspect of the present see Lewin (272). Compare also Freud's assertion in his Interpretation of Dreams that the dream translates temporal relations into spatial ones. For the text of the letter attributed to Mozart see, e.g., Storck (4og), letter no. 179. Translation mine. Simultaneity and Sequence (pp. 375-378) Persons who maintain that motion and time are just as inherent in painting and sculpture as they are in the dance or film, because the eyes and the legs of the spectators move, may find their thinking clarifed by Gregory's remark (168), Pp. 25-26, that time is involved in applied geometry "in the first degre only, i.e., in the purely qualitative sense that to observe, to test, to measure, to advance, to retreat, to rotate a line about a point, a plane about a line, etc., all take time, and change of some kind is involved. The important thing is, however, that the amount of time taken is of no consequence, [whereas] with rotating and revolving bodies, swinging pendulums, wave motion generally, and changing currents in electric circuits, the rate of motion is an additional quantity to be determined." That is, in the latter cases, motion is an integral part of the phenomenon itself. On eye movements: Buswell (71), Yarbus (474), Thomas (416). For examples of "exposition" in film and literature see Aroheim (16), p. 248. Lessing, Laocoon, sect. 16. Michelangelo's early Pietà of 1498-15o0 is in St. Peter's, Rome. Firestone (113) pomnts out that the motif of the sleeping Christ child was intended and understond during the Renaissance as a prefiguration of the death of Christ. When Do We See Motion? (pp. 378-382) Dante, Inferno, canto 31, verses 136-138. On the perception of motion: Gibson (145). Kinesthetic feedback: Teuber (415), p. 198. Duncker (100), p. 170. Oppenheimer (335). Metelli (303). Direction (pp. 382-383) On the rotation of wheels see Rubin (378) and Duncker (10o), Pp. 168-169. The Revelations of Speed (Pp. 384-387) Piéron cited by Lecomte du Noiiy (265), ch. 9, Pp. 145-177.