Stroboscopic Effects (pp. 434-437) Fig. 272, reproduced by courtesy of Rudolf Knubel, is based on Fischer (114), p. 78. Rodin (373), ch, 4. It would seem, however, that in the examples from sculpture cited by Rodin, "movement" is obtained not so much because the figure represents different phases of a time sequence as because there is a graduał change of visual dynamics—for examp e, in the Age of Iron—from the relaxed posture of the legs to the high charge of tension in the chest, the neck, and the arms Riegl (372), p. 33. Figs. 273a-e are tracings from works by Picasso reproduced as numbers 249, 209, 268, 246, 216, by Barr (42). How Does Dynamics Come About? (pp. 437-440) Cf. Arnheim (18), p. 62. Newman (325) and Lindemann (275) investigated gamma motion. Examples from Art (pp. 440-443) Piero della Francesca's Resurrection of c. 145o is in the town hall of Borgo San Sepolcro. Bach, St. Matthew Passion, no. 46, recitative, ## NOTES TO CHAPTER X. EXPRESSION Balzac on expression of gait (4o), p. 166. A more theoretical treatment of the psychology of expression is given in Arnheim (24). Traditional Theories (pp. 445-449) Article on "physiognomics" in Encyclopedia Britannica, rith edition, vol. 21, P. 550. Quotation ranslated from Claudius (77), vol. 1, p. 177. Berkeley, An Essay Towards a New Theory of Vision, 165. Darwin (90). The quotation by Lipps is translated from (278), p. 359. Compare also his (277) and Langfeld's presentation of empathy (26r), Pp. 113ff. Lipps's rather complex theoretical position is discussed in Arnheim (24), Pp. 159-160, and (17). Friedländer on columns (122), p. 155. Aesthetic theories of expression are discussed by Osborne (336), chs. 4 and 5. ## Expression Embedded in Structure (pp. 449-454) James (2o8), ch. 6, p. 147. He is referring to a somewhat different subject—the relations between the nervous system and psychical experience--but his reasoning applies to the problem of expression as well. On the gestalt psychology of expression see Wertheimer (446), pp. 94-96, Köhler (241), Pp. 216-247, Koffka (250), Pp. 654-661, Arnheim (24), and Asch (31), chs. 5-7. Jane Binney, a student of mine, performed the experiment at Sarah Lawrence College in 1946. It is discussed in more detail in (24). In terms of projective geometry the parabola as a conic section is intermediate between the horizontal section of the cone, i.e. the circle, and the vertical section, i.e. the straight-edged triangle. Wölfin on St. Peter's cupola (46o), p. 3o6. Note, however, that after Michelangelo, the mannerist architect Giacomo della Porta modifed the external contour and the lantern somewhat, in the direction of more weightlessness; cf. Frey (121), p. 66. Fig. 278 is derived from Wölflin (46o), p. 297. I have corrected a mechanical error in Wölflin's drawing, which resulted in the centers of the circles being placed slightly too high. Van Gogh's letter is dated May 8, 1882. Ruskin on "pathetic fallacy" in Modern Painters, vol. 3, ch. 12. Goethe remarks on character description in an essay on Newton, contained in his T'heory of Color. On physiognomic perception cf. Werner (440), Pp. 67-82, and Köhler (245). The examples from primitive languages after Lévy-Bruhl (269). Braque (62). On metaphors see Arnheim (29). Schizophrenics seem to revert to a primitive kind of logic. E. von Domarus, in his study on the relations between normal and schizophrenic thinking, formulates the following principle: "Whereas the normal person accepts identity only upon the basis of identical subjects, the paleologician accep identity based upon identical predicates." See Arieti (13). ## Symbolism in Art (pp. 457-461) On Freudian symbolism in art cf. Arnheim (r8), Pp. 215-22r. Fig. 279: Cézanne's still life of c. 18go is in the National Gallery in Washington. Picasso'sStill Life with Fowl of 1942 is reproduced in Boeck (55), p. 81.