literally given in the stimulus. But if we leave the world of well-defined, manmade shapes and look around a real landscape, what do we see? Perhaps a rather chaotic mass of trees and brushwood. Some of the tree trunks and branches may show definite directions, to which the eyes can cling, and the whole of a tree or bush often presents a fairly comprehensible sphere or cone shape. We may also take in an overall texture of leafiness and greenness, but there is much in the landscape that the eyes are simply unable to grasp. And it is only to the extent that the confused panorama can be seen as a configuration of clear-cut directions, sizes, geometric shapes, colors, or textures that it can be said to be truly perceived. If this description is valid, we are compelled to say that perceiving consists in the formation of "perceptual concepts." By usual standards this is uncomfortable terminology, because the senses are supposed to be limited to the concrete whereas concepts deal with the abstract. T'he process of vision as it was described above, however, seems to meet the conditions of concept formation. Vision deals with the raw material of experience by creating a corresponding pattern of general forms, which are applicable not only to the individual case at hand but to an indeterminate number of other, similar cases as well. In no way is the use of the word "concept" intended to suggest that perceiving is an intellectual operation. The processes in question must be thought of as occurring within the visual sector of the nervous system. But the term concept is intended to suggest a striking similarity between the elementary activities of the senses and the higher ones of thinking or reasoning. So great is this similarity that many psychologists attributed the achievements of the senses to secret aid supposedly rendered them by the intellect. Those psychologists spoke of unconscious conclusions or computations because they assumed that perception itself could do no more than mechanically register the impingements of the outer world. It seems now that the same mechanisms operate on both the perceptual and the intellectual level, so that terms like concept, judgment, logic, abstraction, conclusion, computation, are needed in describing the work of the senses. Recent psychological thinking, then, encourages us to call vision a creative activity of the human mind. Perceiving accomplishes at the sensory level what in the realm of reasoning is known as understanding. Every man's eyesight anticipatesin a modest way the justly admired capacity of the artist to produce patterns that validly interpret experience by means of organized form. Eyesight is insight. ## What Is Shape? The physical shape of an object is determined by its boundaries—the rectangular edge of a piece of paper, the two surfaces delimiting the sides and the bottom of a cone. Other spatial aspects are not generally considered properties of physical shape: whether the object is placed right-side-up or upsidedown, or whether other objects are present nearby. Perceptual shape, by contrast, may change considerably when its spatial orientation or its environment changes. Visual shapes influence one another. In addition, we shall see later (Figure 72) that the shape of an object is determined not only by its boundaries; the skeleton of visual forces created by the boundaries may, in turn, infuence the way the boundaries are seen. Perceptual shape is the outcome of an interplay between the physical object, the medium of light acting as the transmitter of information, and the conditions prevailing in the nervous system of the viewer. Light does not traverse objects, except for those we call translucent or transparent. This means that the eyes receive information only about outer, not inner, shapes. Moreover, light travels in straight lines, and therefore the projections formed on the retinas correspond only to those parts of the outer surface that are linked to the eyes by straight lines. A ship looks different from the front than from the side. The shape of an object we see does not, however, depend only on its retinal projection at a given moment. Strictly speaking, the image is determined by the totality of visual experiences we have had with that object, or with that kind of object, during our lifetime. If, for example, we are shown a melon that we know to be a mere hollow leftover, a half shell whose missing part is not visible, it may look quite different from a complete melon that on the surface presents us with the identical sight. A car known to contain no motor may actually look different from one known to contain one. Correspondingly, if someone makes an image of something he has experienced, he can choose how much of the shape he wishes to include. The Western style of painting, created by the Renaissance, restricted shape to what can be seen from a fxed point of observation. The Egyptians, the American Indians, and the cubists ignore this restriction. Children draw the baby in the mother's belly, bushmen include inner organs and intestines in depicting a kangaroo, and a blind sculptor may hollow out the ocular cavities in a clay head and then place round eyeballs in them. It also follows from what I said that one may omit the boundaries of an object and yet draw a recognizable