to the sense of sight. A body of water is a gestalt since what happens in one place has an effect on the whole. But a rock is not, and in a countryside trees and clouds and water interact only within the limits of severe constraints. Moreover, whatever physical interaction occurs in the world we see does not necessarily have a visual counterpart. An electric radiator has a strong but unseen effect on a nearby violin, whereas a pale human face made to look green by contrast with an adjacent red dress suffers from a perceptual effect that has no physical counterpart. It did not matter to the marble torso of Michelangelo's Madonna that a deranged man broke one of her arms with a hammer; nor does the pigment on a canvas undergo any physical change when half the picture is cut off. The interactions we observe visually must be due to processes in our nervous system. The architect Eduardo Torroja observes: "The total vision of a straight line, a curve, or a volume is influenced by the other surrounding lines and planes. So, for example, the straight line of the tie member of a flattened arch may appear as a curve, whose convexity is opposite to that of the arch. A rectangle placed within an ogive has a deformed shape." Earlier I suggested that interactions within the visual field are controlled by the law of simplicity, which asserts that the perceptual forces constituting such a field will organize themselves in the simplest, most regular, most symmetrical pattern available under the circumstances. The extent to which this law can impose itself depends in each case on the constraints prevailing in the system. As long as an articulate stimulus pattern is projected upon the retinas of the eyes, perceptual organization must accept this given shape; it must limit itself to grouping or subdividing the existing shape in such a way that the simplest possible structure results. As Figures 38 and 39 have shown, further simplification becomes possible when the effect of the stimulus input is weakened by short exposure, dim light, or some similar condition. In visual experience we observe only the results of this organizing process. Its causes must be sought in the nervous system.Of the exact nature of such physiological organization, next to nothing is known. By inference from what occurs in vision one can tell that the organization must involve field processes. Wolfgang Köhler has pointed out that field processes are frequently observed in physics and therefore can occur in the brain as well, since the nervous system belongs to the physical world. "As a familiar example,"Köhler wrote, "take the stationary distribution of water current in a network of pipes. By mutual influence throughout the system, the extended process maintains itself as a whole." Three examples will sufice to illustrate the strength and ubiquity of the tendency in a visual whole to maintain or re-establish its simplest state. The psychologist Ivo Kohler has been working with distorting goggles. His curisity was aroused by the fact that, considering the defects of man's visual apparatus, "the image is better than it should be." For example, the lens of the eye is not corrected for spherical aberration, and yet straight lines do not look curved. Kohler used prismatic lenses, which create a "rubber world": when the head is turned right or left, objects become broader or narrower; when the head is moved up or down, objects seem to slant first one way, then the other. After the goggles have been worn for several weeks, however, the distortions disappear and the usual stable simplicity of visual shapes re-establishes itself. Other observations show that when brain injuries cause blind areas in the visual field, incomplete figures are seen as complete, provided their shape is suffciently simple and enough of it appears in the sighted area. An extensive injury to one of the cortical lobes in the back of the brain may black out either the right or left half of the visual field completely, a condition known as hemianopia. If the patient is made to fixate the center of a circle for one tenth of a second, even though only half of it actually stimulates the visual centers in his brain, he reports seeing a complete circle. On being shown a smaller portion of the circle he will report seeing "a kind of bow," and the same is true for half an ellipse, The patient is not merely guessing by inference from past experience, but actually sees either the complete or the incomplete figure. In fact, even the afterimages of completed figures are perceived as complete. Apparently, when enough of the projected figure is received by the visual cortex, the electrochemical process caused by the projection can complete itself in the brain and thereupon produces the percept of a complete whole in consciousness. Finally, the psychologist Fabio Metelli has contributed a particularly elegant reference to an elementary phenomenon, one likely to be taken for granted. If one rotates a black disk around its center, no locomotion will be perceived although every spot of the entire surface is actually moving. If, however, one rotates a black square around its center, the entire surface is seen as rotating, including any circular surface (Figure 41), which by itself would show no locomotion at all. Whether a moving spot is perceived as being in motion or at rest depends on the simplest visual situation available for the total pattern: for the square it is rotation, for the disk it is repose. ## Subdivision Even though well-organized figures cling to their integrity and complete themselves when mutilated or distorted, we should not assume that such fig-