## III ## FORM "Form is the visible shape of content," wrote the painter Ben Shahn, and this is as good a formula as any to describe the distinction between shape and form I am observing in these chapters. Under the heading "Shape" I discussed some of the principles by which visual material, received by the eyes, organizes itself soit can be grasped by the human mind. Only for the sake of extrinsic analysis, however, can shape be separated from what it stands for. Whenever we perceive shape, consciously or unconsciously we take it to represent something, and thereby to be the form of a content. Most practically, shape serves, first of all, to inform us about the nature of things through their external appearance. What we see of the shape, color and externaì behavior of a rabbit tells us much about the nature of a rabbit, and the difference in appearance between a teacup and a knife indicates which object is suited to containing a liquid and which to cutting a cake. Furthermore, while the rabbit, the cup, and the knife tell us about their individual selves, each of them teaches us automatically about whole categories of things —rabbits in general, cups, and knives—and, by extension, about animals, containers, cutting tools. Thus, a shape is never perceived as the form of just one particular thing, but always as that of a kind of thing. Shape is a concept in two different ways: first, because we see every shape as a kind of shape (compare what was said about perceptual concepts on p. 44); second, because each kind of shape is seen as the form of whole kinds of objects. To use an example of Wittgenstein's: the line drawing of a triangle can be seen as a triangular hole, a solid, a geometrical figure; as standing on its base or hanging by its top corner; as a mountain, a wedge, an arrow, a pointer, etc. Not all objects concentrate on telling by their shape about their own physical nature. A painted landscape has little reference to a flat piece of canvas covered with traces of pigment. A figure carved in stone reports about living creatures, creatures that differ so much from inert pieces of marble. Such objects are made for vision only. But they, too, serve as form for whole categories of things: the painted view of the Grand Canyon reports about landscapes, the bust of Lincoln speaks of thoughtful men. In addition, form always goes beyond the practical function of things by finding in their shape the visual qualities of roundness or sharpness, strength or frailty, harmony or discord. It thereby reads them symbolically as images of the human condition. In fact, these purely visual qualities of appearance are the most powerful of all. It is they that reach us most directly and deeply. All this will come up repeatedly in this book. But one further point needs to be made before we proceed to details. All shape, I implied, is semantic; that is, merely by being seen it makes statements about kinds of subjects. In doing so, however, it does not simply present replicas of its subjects. Not all the shapes recognized as rabbits are identical, and Dürer's picture of a rabbit is not strictly identical with any rabbit anybody has ever seen. This fundamental condition of all imagery would not have had to be pointed out to a peasant living in the Maya's Classic age—at least, not as far as pictorial and sculptural likenesses are concerned, because the woven and ceramic images of his time differed all too obviously from the subjects they represented. The fact is less evident in our own tradition, based on centuries of more or less realistic art. Diirer's rabbit looks in fact so strikingly like a real animal that it takes enlightened inspection to discover the fundamental difference. "He was a very skillful artist," says Goethe of a painter friend of his, and he was among the few who know how to transform artifice entirely into nature and nature entirely into art. They are exactly the ones whose misunderstood merits keep giving rise to the doctrine of false naturalness." The doctrine to which Goethe referred long ago held, and still holds, that art aims at a deceitful illusion, and that any deviation from this mechanical ideal needs to be explained, excused, justified. It is an approach developed from some of the principles underlying Renaissance art from the ffteenth century on. If a style of picture-making fails to fit this standard—and all styles of art, modern or ancient, in practice fail more or less conspicuously to do so— the discrepancy is explained in one of the following ways. The draftsman lacks the skill to accomplish what he wants to do; he depicts what he knows rather than what he sees; he blindly adopts the pictorial conventions of his peers; he perceives wrongly because of defects in his eyes or his nervous system; he applies the correct principle from an abnormal point of view; he deliberately violates the rules of correct representation. This illusionistic doctrine, as I would call it, continues to produce a great