This enabled the modern artist, for example, to split up a face and fuse part of it with the background. By illuminating objects from a particular direction, artists had come to cast shadows across them, subdividing them in ways that had little organic justifcation. Carrying this device still further, Braque made one female figure consist of two—a black profle woman and a light front-face woman (see Figure 233). ## What Looks Lifelike? We have come a long way from the narrow belief that only mechanically faithful replication is true to nature. We realize that the whole range of infinitely different styles of representation is acceptable, not only to those who share the particular attitude that created it, but also to those of us who can adapt to it. However, mere tolerance for different approaches to the same goal is not good enough. We must go further and realize that just as persons of our own civilization and century may perceive a particular manner of representation as lifelike even though it may not look lifelike at all to the adherents of another approach, so do the adherents of those other approaches find their preferred manner of representation not only acceptable, but entirely lifelike. This would be hard to believe had we not documents to prove it. Stories about paintings or statues so lifelike that they deceived man and beast have come to us from periods of Chinese and Greek art whose style would by no means deceive us into believing that we were facing reality rather than manmade images. We do not know exactly what the paintings of Zeuxis looked like, but we have reason to doubt that his painted grapes really made sparrows peck at them in the belief that they were real. More probably these stories express the visual experiences of contemporary viewers, to whom the pictures looked most lifelike. Boccaccio tells in the Decamerone that the painter Giotto "was a genius of such excellence that there was no thing of nature . . . that he did not depict with the pencrl or the pen or the brush in a manner so similar to the object that it seemed to be the thing itself rather than merely resembling it; so much so that many times the visual sense of men was misled by the things he made, believing tobe true what was only painted." The highly stylized pictures of Giotto could have hardly deceived his contemporaries if they had judged lifelikeness by direct comparison with reality. Compared with the work of his immediate predecessors, however, Giotto's rendering of expressive gestures, depth, volume, and scenery could indeed be considered very lifelike, and it was this deviation from the prevailing norm level of pictorial representation that produced the astonishing effect on Giotto's contemporaries. The principle of adaptation level, introduced into psychology by Harry Helson, indicates that a given stimulus is judged not according to its absolute qualities, but in relation to the norm level established in the person's mind. In the case of. pictorial representation, this norm level seems to be derived not directly from perception of the physical world itself, but from the style of the pictures known to the observer. Reactions to photography and film have shown that progress in pictorial lifelikeness creates the illusion of life itself. The frst motion pictures, shown about 189o, were so crude technically that they give us little illusion of reality today, but the mere addition of movement to the black-and-white image sufficed to make the first spectators scream with fear when the train rushed headlong toward them. Curiously enough, the advent of color produced hardly any additional increment; but the spatial resonance of sound temporarily increased the visual depth and volume of the picture considerably. And the first life-size holographs, which added the powerful motion parallax to the still image, were so shockingly real that the absence of live motion made the portrayed person look like a corpse. Actual illusions are, of course, rare; but they are the extreme and most tangible manifestation of the fact that, as a rule, in any given cultural context the familiar style of pictorial representation is not perceived as that at all—the image looks simply like a faithful reproduction of the object itself. In our civilization this is true for "realistic" works; they look "just like nature"to many persons who are unaware of their highly complicated and specific style. However, this "artistic reality level" may shift quite rapidly. Today we can hardly imagine that less than a century ago the paintings of Cézanne and Renoir were rejected not only because of their unusual style, but because they in fact looked offensively unreal. It was not merely a matter of different judgment or taste, but of different perception. Our forefathers saw on those canvases incoherent patches of paint that we are no longer able to see, and they based their judgment on what they saw. Those of us who live with the art of our century fnd it increasingly difficult to see what "the man in the street" means when he takes exception to deviations from realistic rendition in the Picassos, the Braques, the Klees. In Picasso's portrait of a schoolgirl we see the elementary liveliness of the young creature, the girlish repose, the shyness of the face, the straightly combed hair, the burdensome tyranny of the big textbook. The strongly colored, wildly overlapping geometrical shapes do not detract from the subject but carry its expression with such mastery that we no longer see them as mere shapes: they are consumed in the task of representation. In fact, it seems safe to assert that