every successful work of art, no matter how stylized and remote from mechanical correctness, conveys the full natural flavor of the object it represents. Picasso's painting not only depicts a schoolgirl; it is a schoolgirl. "I always aim at resemblance,"said Picasso in 1966. And he exclaimed that an artist should observe nature, but never confuse it with painting. "It is only translatable into painting by signs." If someone sees the shapes instead of the subject, something may be wrong with the picture. Or the observer may be perceiving from an inappropriate adaptation level. (In fact, the "man in the street" is often fixated at a style level established by the painters of the seventeenth century.) It is also true that for informational illustrations in anthropology textbooks or biology manuals, a different style, perhaps the linear classicism of the Ingres school, is taken for granted; a painting by Matisse, perceived as though it were intended as such a textbook illustration, will necessarily show its shapes rather than its subject. As far as the artists themselves are concerned, there seems to be little doubt that they see in their work the embodiment of the intended object. The sculptor Jacques Lipchitz tells of admiring one of Juan Gris' pictures while it was still on the easel. It was the kind of cubistic work in which many a layman even today discovers little but an agglomeration of abstract shapes. Lipchitz exclaimed: "T'his is beautiful! Do not touch it any morel It is complete." At which Gris, flying into a rage, shouted in reply: "Complete? Don't you see that I have not finished the moustache?" To him the picture contained the image of a man so clearly that he expected everyone to see it immediately in all its detail. The utterances of artists make it clear that they think of "style" simply as a means of giving reality to their image. "Originality" is the unsought and unnoticed product of a gifted artist's successful attempt to be honest and truthful, to penetrate to the origins, the roots, of what he sees. The deliberate search for a personal style inevitably interferes with the validity of the work, because it introduces an element of arbitrariness into a process that can be governed only by necessity. Picasso once said: "Always strive for perfection. For instance, try to draw a perfect circle; and since you can't draw a perfect circle, the involuntary flaw will reveal your personality. But if you want to reveal your personality by drawing an imperfect circle—your circle—you will bungle the whole thing." One misunderstanding must be avoided. When I assert that in a successful work of art one perceives the subject rather than the shapes, I may seem to be suggesting that form does not matter. Nothing could be further from my intention. In fact, the same suggestion holds for "abstract" or nonmimetic art. It makes all the difference whether in an "abstract" painting we see an arrangement of mere shapes, i.e., visual objects that can be completely described by their area, outline, color, location, etc., or see instead the organized action of expressive visual forces. In the latter case, the shapes vanish in the dynamic play; and it is only this dynamic play that conveys the meaning of the work. The bulging, twisting columns, the swinging scrolls and roofs of a Baroque façade leave the geometry of their shapes and the material substance of the stone behind as the total architectural composition transfigures itself into a symphony of movement. Similarly, in a representational work of painting or sculpture, the shapes made by the artist and the pigment or metal or wood of the medium are transformed into visual action, which gives life to the subject matter. Good form does not show. ## Form as Invention Many of our examples will have helped to illustrate what I suggested early in this chapter, namely that image-making, artistic or otherwise, does not start from the optical projection of the object represented, but is an equivalent, rendered with the properties of a particular medium, of what is observed in the object. Visual form can be evoked by what is seen, but cannot be taken over directly from it. It is well known that the death masks and plaster casts of actual persons, which are mechanically lifelike, nevertheless often have a purely material presence and tend to let us down when we expect them to interpret character through visual appearance. They are essentially shapeless and therefore cannot serve as form. Any beginner, drawing from the model, discovers that the shapes he expects to find by looking carefully at a face, a shoulder, a leg, are not really there. The same problem, however, seems to have caused the tragic struggle that Alberto Giacometti never overcame. It started in 1921, when he wanted to portray a figure and found that tout m'échappait, la téte du modèle devant moi devenait comme un nuage, vague et illimité—"everything escaped me, the head of the model in front of me became like a cloud, vague and limitless." He tried to represent this unreachability of the model in the evasive surfaces of his sculpted and painted figures, while insisting at the same time upon the pursuit of the shapes he thought had to exist objectively in those human heads and bodies. The attempt to find representational form in the model was doomed to failure because all form must be derived from the particular medium in which the image is executed. The elementary act of drawing the outline of an object in the air, in the sand, or on a surface of rock or paper means a reduction of