the artist's purpose better, but on the contrary interfere with it. Primitive images, for example, do spring neither from detached curiosity about the appearance of the world nor from the "creative"response for its own sake. They are not made to produce pleasurable illusions. Primitive art is a practical instrument for the important business of daily life; it gives body to superhuman powers so that they may become partners in concrete undertakings. It replaces real objects, animals, or humans, and thus takes over their jobs of rendering all kinds of services. It records and transmits information. It makes it possible to exercise "magic infuences" on creatures and things that are absent. What counts in all these operations is not the material existence of things, but the effects they exert or submit to. Modern natural science has accustomed us to thinking of many of these effects as physical events that reflect the composition and behavior of matter. This view is of relatively recent origin, and is quite different from a simpler notion that finds its purest expression in primitive science. We think food is necessary because it contains certain physical substances that our bodies absorb and utilize. To the primitive, food is the carrier of immaterial powers or forces whose vitalizing virtue is transferred to the eater. Disease is caused not by the physical action of germs, poisons, or temperature, but by a destructive "Auid" emitted by some hostile agency. For the primitive it follows that the specific appearance and behavior of natural things, from which we derive information about probable physical effects, are as irrelevant to their function as a book's shape and color are to the content we find in it. Thus, for example, in depicting animals the primitive limits himself to the enumeration of such features as limbs and organs, and uses geometrically clear-cut shape and pattern to identify their kind, function, importance, and mutual relations as precisely as possible. He may use pictorial means also to express "physiognomic"qualities, such as the ferocity or friendliness of the animal. Realistic detail would obscure rather than clarify these relevant characteristics. (Similar principles of representation are found in our own civilization, in the illustrations for medical treatises written before the advent of modern natural science.) Early stages of development produce highly abstract shapes because close contact with the complexities of the physical world is not, or not yet, pertinent to the task of picture making. It is not possible, however, to turn this statement around and assume that highly abstract shape is always the product of an early mental stage. People often create elementary images, not because they have so far to go, but because they have so far withdrawn. An example may be found in Byzantine art, which was a withdrawal from the most realistic style of representation the world had then seen. Art became the servant of a state of mind that, in its extreme manifestations, condemned the use of images altogether. Life on earth was considered a mere preparation for life in Heaven. The material body was the vessel of sin and suffering. Thus visual art, instead of proclaiming the beauty and importance of physical existence, used the body as a visual symbol of the spirit; by eliminating volume and depth, by simplifying color, posture, gesture, and expression, it succeeded in dematerializing man and world. The symmetry of the composition represented the stability of the hierarchic order created by the Church. By eliminating everything accidental and ephemeral, elementary posture and gesture emphasized lasting validity. And straight, simple shape expressed the strict discipline of an ascetic faith. The art of our own century offers another striking example of high abstraction obtained through withdrawal. Like Byzantine art, it renounced the skillful illusionism of its forebears. Here, a specific psychological reason can be found in the changed position of the artist. The craftsman who had fulfilled an established need in the affairs of government and religion was gradually transformed into an outsider-the producer of surplus luxury goods to be stored in museums or used to demonstrate the wealth and refined taste of the rich and privileged. This exclusion from the economic mechanism of supply and demand tended to transform the artist into a self-centered observer. Such a detachment from the give and take of civic existence has its pros and cons. On the positive side, a spectator can stand back, and thus see better and more independently. At a distance, personal commitments lose their power; accidental detail drops out and essence reveals its broad shape. The detached artist, like the scientist, withdraws from individual appearance to seize more directly upon fundamental qualities. An immediate grasp of the pure essentials, for which Schopenhauer praised music as the highest of the arts, is attempted through the abstractness of the best modern painting and sculpture. Pure form aims more directly at the hidden clockwork of nature, which more realistic styles represent indirectly by its manifestations in material things and events. The concentrated statement of these abstractions is valid as long as it retains the sensory appeal that distinguishes a work of art from a scientifc diagram. Negatively, high abstraction risks detaching itself from the wealth of actual existence. The great works of art and science have always avoided this limitation; they have encompassed the whole range of human experience by applying the most general forms or principles to the greatest variety of phenomena. We need only think of the teeming variety of creatures that a Giotto,