is lengthened and strengthened by the raised right arm. This combined trunk and arm contour is a good example of formal reinterpretation of a subject, because it is a discovery, a new line, not foreseen in the basic visual concept of the human body. The right contour spells out the vertical that is only implied in the zigzag of the central axis. It embodies rest and approximates geometry, and thus fulfills a function similar to that of the face. The body, then, lies between pure statements of the two principles it unites in itself: the perfect calm of its right contour, and the undulating action of the left. The symmetry of top and bottom that the artist invented for his figure is not derived from organic structure. It is also checked by the overall outline of the figure. The figure is inscribed in a slim, tilted triangle, formed by the raised elbow, the left hand, and the feet as corners. The triangle establishes a secondary, oblique central axis, which teeters unstably on a narrow base. Its sway adds subtly to the life of the figure without disturbing its basic verticality. It relieves the plumb line of the right contour of some of its rigidity because the vertical contour is read as a slanted deviation from this secondary axis of the triangle (compare Figure 72b).Finally, the oblique symmetry of the two elbows should be observed because here is an element of angularity that is quite important in giving the "salt" of sharpness to a composition that otherwise might have suffered from the monotony of sweet curves. A few of the features described above follow simply from the objective shape and construction of the human body, but a comparison of La Source with a Venus by Titian or Michelangelo's David will demonstrate how little the bodies artists create have in common. T'he remarkable fact about a painting like La Source is that in looking at it we sense the effect of the formal devices that make it represent life so fully, even though we may not be conscious of these devices at all. So smoothly are they blended into a whole of great overall simplicity, so organically is the compositional pattern derived from the subject and the pictorial medium, that we seem to see simple nature at the same time that we marvel at the intelligence of the interpretation it conveys. ## Visual Information What has been said against the mechanical replication of physical things and about the visual interpretation of meaning through organized abstract form may have seemed to apply only to art. When it comes to images intended to convey factual information for scientifc texts, dictionaries, technical manuals, etc., mechanical exactness of representation would seem to be the one obvious requirement. And yet this is not so. Recording by photography, the most faithful method of image-making, has not really superseded the human craftsman, and for good reasons. Photography is indeed more authentic in the rendering of a street scene, a natural habitat, a texture, a momentary expression. What counts in these situations is the accidental inventory and arrangement, the overall quality, and the complete detail rather than formal precision. When pictures are to serve technological or scientifc purposes—for example, illustrations of machines, microscopic organisms, surgical operations--the preference is for drawings, or at least for photographs retouched by hand. The reason is that pictures give us the thing "itself" by telling us about some of its properties: the characteristic outline of a bird, the color of a chemical, the number of geological layers. A medical illustration is meant to distinguish between smooth and rough texture, to show the relative size and position of organs, the network of blood vessels, the mechanism of a joint. A technological picture must give exact proportions and angles, establish the concavity or convexity of a given part, and distinguish between units. Properties of this kind are all we need to know. This means not only that the better picture is one that omits unnecessary detail and chooses telling characteristics, but also that the relevant facts must be unambiguously conveyed to the eye. This is done by means of perceptual factors, some of which are discussed in this book: simplicity of shape, orderly grouping, clear overlapping, distinction of figure and ground, use of lighting and perspective to interpret spatial values. Precision of form is needed to communicate the visual characteristics of an object. A draftsman charged with producing a faithful likeness of an electric clockwork or a frog's heart must invent a pattern that fits the object—exactly as the artist must do. And since producing a likeness means nothing but bringing out the relevant traits, it is not surprising that the draftsman must understand what these traits are. Biological, medical, technological training may be needed to make a usable reproduction of an object. Such knowledge will suggest to the artist an adequate perceptual pattern to be found in the object and applied to the picture. All reproductien is visual interpretation. The interpretations of the uninformed draftsman, based on nothing but what he can see at the moment, are likely to be misleading or too vague. Leonardo da Vinci's scientific drawings are remarkable because he thoroughly understood the structure and function of the things he was depicting and at the same time could organize complex perceptual patterns with the utmost clarity (Figure 116). The relation between intellectual knowledge and visual representation is frequently misunderstood. Some theorists talk as though an abstract concept could be directly rendered in a picture; others deny that theoretical knowledge