tive interaction of touch and sight at all stages of human development. But the priority of touch or "motor behavior" is another matter. It seems to be a mere assumption, unsupported by evidence. The child psychologist Arnold Gesell asserted years ago that "ocular prehension precedes manual."He wrote: "Nature has given top priority to the sense of sight. Six months before birth the eyes of the fetus move sketchily and independently beneath their sealed lids. In time the eyes move in unison, so the child is born with two eyes partly yoked in a single organ. . . . The infant takes hold of the world with his eyes long before he does so with his hands—an extremely significant fact. During the first eight weeks of life the hands remain predominantly fisted, while the eyes and brain are busy with looking, staring, seeking and, in a rudimentary manner, apprehending." Recently, T. G. R. Bower has suggested by ingenious experiments that infants come to know physical objects as solid and tangible through visual experience, and not through a primary reliance on touch. This is not surprising once we realize that to apprehend the shape of an o bject by touch is in no way simpler or more direct than apprehension by vision. To be sure, there is a physical distance between the eyes and a box they see, whereas hands are in immediate contact with the box. But the mind does not partake in the directness of the contact out there. It depends entirely on the sensations aroused in the sense organs. As the hands explore the box, the so-called "touch spots," independent of one another, are stimulated in the skin. The touch image of a surface, a shape, or an angle must be composed by the brain, just as it must create the visual image from a multitude of retinal stimulations. Neither physical size nor distance are given directly to the sense of touch. All the brain receives are messages about the muscular extensions and contractions that occur when a hand reaches out or around a corner. As a person moves through space, his brain is notifed of a series of successive leg motions. These sensations do not in themselves include space. To experience space kinesthetically, the brain must create that experience from sensory messages that are not spatial. That is, kinesthesia involves the same kind of task as vision, except that the way it is accomplished seems immensely more difficult to understand in the case of kinesthesia—so much so that, to my knowledge, no psychologist has attempted to describe the process. It cannot be doubted that the sensations deriving from the organs of touch, from muscles, joints, and tendons, contribute enormously to our awareness of shape and space. But anyone who tries to avoid the problems in visual perception by referring to kinesthesia is leaping from the frying pan into the fre. The intellectualistic theory has been applied not only to children's drawings but to all kinds of highly formalized, "geometric"art, particularly that of primitive peoples. And since it could not very well be asserted that all art was derived from nonvisual concepts, the theory led to the contention that there existed two artistic procedures, different in principle from each other. Children, Neolithic painters, American Indians, and African tribesmen worked from intellectual abstractions; they practiced "conceptual art."Paleolithic cave dwellers, Pompeian muralists, and Europeans during and after the Renaissance represented what they saw with their eyes; they practiced "perceptual art."This absurd dichotomy was one of the main drawbacks of the theory, for it obscured the essential fact that the same kind of well-defined form so prominent in the work of many primitives is indispensable to any "realistic"representation that deserves the name of art, A child's figure is no more a "schema" than one by Rubens. It is only less differentiated. And, as I have pointed out, Albrecht Dürer's highly naturalistic studies of hands, faces, and birds' wings are works of art only because the innumerable strokes and shapes form well.organized, even though complex, patterns that interpret the subject. On the other hand, the theory neglects the important contribution of perceptual observation even to highly stylized work. When a South Sea Islander paints the sea stirred by the wind as a rectangle striped with obłique parallel lines, essentials of the model's visual structure are rendered in a simplified but entirely un-"symbolic"manner. ## They Draw W hat They See A theory so palpably in conflict with the facts could never have been widely accepted had an alternative been available. None was, so long as it was believed that percepts can refer only to particular, individual instances: a particular person, a particular dog, a particular tree. Any general notion about persons, dogs, or trees as kinds of things had to derive necessarily from a nonperceptual source. This artificial distinction between perception and conception has been superseded by evidence that perception does not start from particulars, secondarily processed into abstractions by the intellect, but from generalities. "Triangularity" is a primary percept, not a secondary concept. The distinction between individual triangles comes later, not earlier. Doggishness is perceived earlier than the particular character of any one dog. If this is true we can expect early artistic representations, based on naive observation, to be concerned with generalities—that is, with simple, overall structural features. Which is exactly what we find. Children and primitives draw generalities and nonprojective shape pre-