distinguish it from a verticai or horizontal, but cannot imitate a model diagonal either by drawing one or by arranging checkers on a checkerboard. In one of his experiments, children were shown a diagonal array on the model board, except that the bottom right checker was moved over one space to the left. All the children immediately said the arrangement was not a "criss-cross," but none of them was able to say or show how they knew this, or to correct the deviation by moving the checker to the right place. The only effective way of making the children succeed was by attracting their attention to the formal components involved in making a diagonal: Start at one bottom corner, go straight across, end up at the opposite top corner, do not move in the vertical or horizontal direction, etc. In other words, what the children had to learn was not just the visual concept of the diagonal but the formal features of which it is composed."The difference,"I have stated in this connection, "is not primarily between perception and representation, but between perception of effect and perception of form, the latter being needed for representation." Whether taught or not, children eventually acquire the art of making diagonals. As we shall see, during the development of spontaneous drawing children first master the relation between horizontal and vertical and then proceed from there to oblique directions. That is, they attain the representational concepts needed to handle increasingly complex shapes and shape relations. The kinds of shapes the novice can control are sometimes described as "schemata." Not much would be wrong with this term if, as I said earlier, it were applied to all art and did not carry negative connotations. Unfortunately, the term often implies that the child is bound by rigid conventions which bind his eyes and hands to primitive templates and which must be broken like eggshells if the fedgling is to acquire his freedom of expression. Such a view can only block understanding and lead to harmful educational practices. When someone climbs a staircase, he must overcome the first step in order to reach the second; however, the first step was not an obstacle to the second, but rather a prerequisite for reaching it. In the same way, early representational concepts are not strait-jackets but the indispensable forms of early conceptions. Their simplicity is appropriate to the level of organization at which the mind of the young draftsman operates. As the mind becomes more refined, the patterns it creates become more complex, and the two growth processes constantly reinforce each other. At levels of high complexity, representational concepts are no longer as easily detected as they are in early work, but, far from being overcome or cast aside by the mature artist, they remain—at a level appropriate to the richness of his thought-the indispensable forms that alone enable him to express what he has to say. Credit is due to Gustaf Britsch for having been the first to demonstrate systematically that pictorial form grows organically according to defnite rules, from the simplest to progressively more complex patterns, in a process of gradual differentiation. Britsch showed the inadequacy of the "realistic" approach, which found in children's drawings nothing but charming imperfection and which could deal with the phases of their development only in terms of increasing "correctness."An art educator, Britsch did not avail himself of the psychology of perception, but his findings support and are supported by the more recent trends in that field. Like many pioneers, in attacking the realistic approach Britsch seems to have carried his revolutionary ideas to the opposite extreme. As far as can be determined from the writings published under his name, his analysis leaves little room for the influence of the perceived object upon pictorial form. To him the development of form was a self-contained mental process, an unfolding similar to the growth of a plant. But this one-sidedness makes his presentation all the more impressive; and I acknowledge that as I try to describe some phases of formal development as an interplay of perceptual and representational concepts, I am proceeding from the base laid byBritsch. ## Drawing as Motion The eye and the hand are the father and mother of artistic activity. Drawing, painting, and modeling are kinds of human motor behavior, and they may be assumed to have developed from two older and more general kinds of such behavior—expressive and descriptive movement. The first scribbles of a child are not intended as representation. They are a form of the enjoyable motor activity in which the child exercises his limbs, with the added pleasure of having visible traces produced by the vigorous backand-forth action of the arms. It is an exciting experience to bring about something visible that was not there before. This interest in the product for its own sake can be obser:ved even in chimpanzees whitewashing their cages with lumps of white clay or wielding a paint brush. It is a simple sensory pleasure, which remains undiminished even in the adult artist. Children have a need for abundant movement, and thus drawing starts as gamboling on paper. The shape, range, and orientation of the strokes are determined by the mechanical construction of arm and hand as well as by the child's temperament and mood. Here are the beginnings of expressive movement, i.e., the manifestations of the draftsman's momentary state of