The New Historicism: Studies in Cultural Poetics Stephen Greenblatt, General Editor 1. Holy Feast and Holy Fast: The Religious Significance of Food to Medieval Women, by Caroline Walker Bynum 2. The Gold Standard and the Logic of Naturalism: American Literature at the Turn of the Century, by Walter Benn Michaels 3. Nationalism and Minor Literature: James Clarence Mangan and the Emergence of Irish Cultural Nationalism, by David Lloyd 4. Shakespearean Negotiations: The Circulation of Social Energy in Renaissance England, by Stephen Greenblatt 5. The Mirror of Herodotus: The Representation of the Other in the Writing of History, by François Hartog, translated by Janet Lloyd 6. Puzzling Shakespeare: Local Reading and Its Discontents, by Leah S. Marcus 7. The Rites of Knighthood: The Literature and Politics of Elizabethan Chivalry, by Richard C. McCoy 8. Literary Practice and Social Change in Britain, 1380-1530, edited by Lee Patterson 9. Trials of Authorship: Anterior Forms and Poetic Reconstruction from Wyatt to Shakespeare, by Jonathan Crewe 10. Rabelais's Carnival: Text, Context, Metatext, by Samuel Kinser 11. Behind the Scenes: Yeats, Horniman, and the Struggle for the Abbey Theatre, by Adrian Frazier # 12. Literature, Politics, and Culture in Postwar Britain, by Alan Sinfield 13. Habits of Thought in the English Renaissance: Religion, Politics, and the Dominant Culture, by Debora Kuller Shuger 14. Domestic Individualism: Imagining Self in Nineteenth-Century America, by Gillian Brown 15. The Widening Gate: Bristol and the Atlantic Economy, 1450- 1700, by David Harris Sacks 16. An Empire Nowhere: England, America, and Literature from "Utopia" to "The Tempest," by Jeffrey Knapp 17. Mexican Ballads, Chicano Poems: History and Influence in Mexican-American Social Poetics, by José E. Limón 18. The Eloquence of Color: Rhetoric and Painting in the French Classical Age, by Jacqueline Lichtenstein, translated by Emily McVarish 19. Arts of Power: Three Halls of State in Italy, 1300-1600, by Randolph Starn and Loren Partridge 20. Expositions: Literature and Architecture in Nineteenth-Century France, by Philippe Hamon, translated by Katia Sainson-Frank and Lisa Maguire 21. The Imaginary Puritan: Literature, Intellectual Labor, and the Origins of Personal Life, by Nancy Armstrong and Leonard Tennenhouse