# Image not available. "Aztecs and Their Industries" at the 1904 Saint Louis world's fair. Source: David R. Francis, The Universal Exposition of 1904, vol. 2 (Saint Louis, 1913), 119. To the left of the entrance there stood an image of a naked woman of huge physical proportionsa sort of Amazonwhile on the right, there was a representation of a half-naked Indian man. Crowning the entrance was a frieze containing the great names in the history of anthropology: Buffon, Blaumenbach, Lamarck, Cuvier, Hilaire, Retzius, Broca, and Darwin. 26 This set of heroes was established by a disciplinary infrastructure that included research institutions, journals, congresses, and government agencies. But the exhibition consisted of more than thought: a hundred masks and full-sized models of individuals of various races, "77 pieces or molds . . . of the brain, fifteen of the hand, 234 molds of human skulls, of which 48 are prehistorical or ancient."27 Anthropology was then considered at the root of human labor, a discipline concerned with the historicization of labor itself, while ethnography was considered the history of progress in material things.28 The focus of anthropology was in the essence of human labor: the brain. Therefore, all sorts of an thropometric instruments were displayed at world's fairs, as was the case with the arrays of the British biologist Francis Galton.29 Thus Mexico also exhibited Indian skulls, measurements, and statistics. This was a Mexico anthropologized by itself, demonstrating the existence of a common set of references between Mexico's exhibits and world's fairs: science, progress, race, skulls, primitive, civilized oriental, Aztec. . . .