## PREFACE Think for a moment of The Book of Thousand and One Nights as a model of historiographical narrative. History, it would be contested, cannot be so chaotic, inclusive, and unprofessional. Yet there is a logic, a crystalline sequence of argumentation, between and within the stories told in The Book of Thousand and One Nights that is, I believe, akin to the chaos that is history. But the writing of history has suffered what a learned seventeenth-century New Spanish poetess called ''hidropesía de mucha ciencia": "Para todo se halla prueba / y razón en que fundarlo; / y no hay razón para nada de haber razón para tanto." 1 In effect, through the constant work of our imagination and research, we have furnished history with an accessible profile. But if we were to be fair with history when writing it, our narratives would approximate more that of The Book of Thousand and One Nights without abandoning our linear monographs. This study is a monograph that, nonetheless, resembles the polyphony of a chronological history telling, for here an effort is made to respect the varied interactions and simultaneity of historical occurrence. Accordingly, the reader might find himself or herself shifting from account to account, detecting concepts, characters, or arguments that gradually become familiar. This familiarity constitutes the narrative plot of this work. The book is limited, however, both by our current way of arranging knowledge and by the author's ignorance. Throughout, I had to face these limitations in trying to tell a story. The repercussions of these limitations may be found in the constant interaction between a general, provocative, abstract, and speculative realm and a concrete, empirical, and temporally and spatially confined domain. Consequently, this study moves back and forth between general and abstract topics, such as nationalism and modernity, and the concreteness of Porfirian Mexico as represented at late-nineteenthcentury world's fairs. In short, this study examines Mexican exhibits at world's