fairs with the larger objective of evaluating how these exhibits reflected the emerging concept of an ideal modern Mexican nation as formulated during those decades. It is a history of Mexico set within the context of the origins of Western nationalism, cosmopolitanism, and modernism. As a history of Mexico, this study suggests that cultural and political phenomena must be seen in a larger context from the second part of the nineteenth century to the 1920s. The historiographical gap created by the overwhelming preference of historians to study the Mexican Revolution of 1910 needs revision. Periodization is always an arm of our imagination, but if we are to mark the origins of modern Mexico, the Porfirian era (1877-1910) constituted the first period of relative social peace, political stability, and dynamic economic development since independence had been won in 1821, and it was during these years that the notion of a modern nation took hold. As a study of modernity, this work attempts both to redefine the common dichotomy between tradition and modernity and to show how the global phenomena of nationalism occurred in the specific locale of Mexico. In this sense, the book seeks to recapture for Mexican history that subtle, fleeting, and quintessential nineteenthcentury transitional moment between the emergence of modern, industrial, and capitalist progress and its acceptance as an ahistorical and natural scenario of humankind. This work has benefited enormously from various academic and non-academic studies. To call the approach of this book a theory would be both pretentious and ambitious; on the other hand, to fully enumerate the inspirations of this study would be a lengthy and redundant task because they are evident in every chapter. But empirical research guides this study, almost in the same way that a writer with no inventiveness looks for inspiration in a personal adventure or in history; this work is empirical research and all eclecticism implied therein. The study consists of two parts, following an introductory chapter which develops a general scheme of the components of world's fairs and the elements of them that are emphasized in this study. The first part focuses on Porfirian Mexico's presence in world's fairs, especially in the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1889 as a paradigmatic example of the national drive toward modernity. Mexico's presence in Paris 1889 was the largest and most expensive display Mexico had ever put on at a world's fair. Although Mexico participated in numerous American expositions, throughout the nineteenth century France was the cultural point of reference for Latin American elites, and this in part explains the Mexican effort in 1889. But Mexico also had pragmatic goals in Paris 1889: to show the progress of Mexico and to change the common impression of a violent, uncivilized, insecure, and wild country and present instead the picture of Mexico as "the promised land." These efforts, it was believed, would eventually attract foreign investment and Northern European immigration. To produce this image, the Por-