firian elite undertook to present in impressive fashion both the economic and the human resources of the nation for the world to see. Indeed, they consciously produced an ideal of what modern and progressive Mexico was supposed to look like. Mexico's involvement in world's fairs paralleled the process of political and economic consolidation of the Porfirian elite. Moreover, the accumulated experience, common interests, and international links of this elite made possible the emergence of a group of professional world's fair experts that I call the "wizards of progress," who were able to construct the image of the modern nation at all levels. Through analysis of the Mexican pavilion in Paristhe Aztec Palacepart 1 also undertakes journeys of inquiry into deep-rooted components of the Porfirian notion of a modern nation: history writing, science, arts, and irony. Part 2 contrasts the 1889 exhibition with an overview of Mexico's presence at two postrevolutionary fairs, Rio de Janeiro (1922) and Seville (1929). This examination depicts the enduring nature of Mexico's national image from the 1880s to the 1920s. The Mexican Revolution occurred in a context of global political, social, and cultural transformation. The nineteenth-century model of world's fairs was radically transformed from the prototype of the Crystal Palace and the Eiffel Tower to a Disneyland model. Mexico's presence at world's fairs after 1910 displayed the adjustments of a changing and dynamic national elite to both its national circumstances and the international situation. Hence, part 2 shows that the changes and continuities in the postrevolutionary modern image of Mexico cannot be understood without consideration of nationalism and modernism as global phenomena. The epilogue both advances tentative general conclusions and clarifies the use of concepts throughout the book. It is therefore presented in propositional essay-like terms, seeking to foster further research and to modestly challenge political and historiographical premises of the history of both Mexico and the modern world. Together, the introduction and the epilogue work as a brief historiographical and conceptual glossary of the bookthough at different levels of abstraction. This is, in sum, an account of histories that collided. Urged to incorporate the nation into the international circuits of capital, the Porfirian elite did notcould notaim to modernize a nation of nearly ten million people spread out over a vast territory. But it did create an ideal type of modern Mexico, constantly updated for its national and international acceptance. Pursued for so long, and with such intensity, this model eventually came to be the nation, the sole entity that not only the elites but also the growing middle class and urban sector could recognize as their own. Thus the image of the modern nation went from abstract, propagandistic form to quasiessence; an essence which was adapted and redefined by the post-1910 rev-