Image not available. 17. José María Velasco, La Cañada de Metlac (Citlaltepec) (1897). Source: Museo Nacional de Arte, Mexico City; reproduction authorized by the Consejo Nacional para la Cultura y las Artes, Instituto Nacional de Bellas Artes, Museo Nacional de Arte, Mexico. (Photograph by the Museo Nacional de Arte) his pictures of the American West: "to celebrate the technologization of wilderness" and to show "its availability to tourists." 76 He photographed railroads in exactly the same way that Velasco painted them.77 However great the effort to mirror reality, naturalist and realist paintings were inescapably ideal and subjective. The camera, in contrast, seemed to be "a near magical device for defeating time, for endowing the past with a present it had previously had only in memory."78 However, in the late nineteenth century, although photographs put past and present together in instant flashes easily and cheaply available, they were considered mere testimonies, not art.79 In 1889 the objectivity of the photographic image, though powerful, did not possess the authority of an artistic-scientific representation. A Velasco painting included what photography was able to produce, together with the subtleties of color and perspective that inspired his renderings (that is, aesthetic, nationalistic, and moral elements).80 Photography itself was used at this time to depict much more than railroads. The sculptures of the facade of the Aztec Palace contrasted with the numerous photographs of Mexican Indians that were displayed within the structure. For instance, the government of Colima sent various photographs of Indians from Colima; the photography studio of Valleto sent numerous