As with the entire Aztec Palace, the Mexican paintings were seen as laudable and valid, though not necessarily successful, attempts to emulate French models. Nonetheless, Mexico's exotic artistic display was also seen by some European eyeslike Van Gogh or Gauguin who saw in 1889 the architecture and culture of a primitive peopleas a potential source of renewal and spontaneity for Western art. But this last perspective was yet to be fully developed in 1889, 95 and Mexico had to wait for European tastes to change and for its French-trained Diego Riveras to emerge. Velasco himself, as chief of the arts group, wrote a report on Mexico's performance at Paris.96 He believed that the reason Mexico won so few awards in this category was that its art was not exhibited in the art palace, unlike the United States and other countries. Velasco's silver medal was put into perspective by Velasco himself, when he explained that grand prizes were conferred only on exceptional artists, such as Leopold Flameng. Mexico's awards were in the same category as such distinguished painters as Moreno Carbonero.97 In 1889 French painting was experiencingas we can acknowledge a posteriorithe last moments of the preeminence of neoclassical and romantic styles, which were widely displayed in official salons. These tendencies were embodied in J. L. Ernest Meissonier, who in 1889 was the president of the great art jury. He was a salon painter of famous historic portraits of France's greatest collective unspoken self-esteem: Napoleon.98 Although impressionist painters were represented, they would not obtain official recognition until the 1900 Paris fair. In effect, the germs of so-called modern art were present at Paris 1889for example, Monet and Degasas they had been in the 1860s' Salon des Refusés, but the 1889 fair was dominated by academic classicist tendencies. Velasco himself viewed those seeds of modern art with distaste. He admired the museum and the canonic exhibitions more than the streets of Bohemian Paris,99 but he did report favorably on some paintings he had seen in the French exhibition.100 Among the exhibits of other countries he especially liked the Spanish painter Francisco Pradilla (La rendición de Granada), but he pointed out the overall weakness of the Latin American exhibits. For him, very few Latin American artists were worthy of mention. The Mexican artists who came to Paris, Velasco explicitly agreed, were there to learn and copy the art of the citythe artistic capital of the world. But how did the models who were being copied react to this mimetic Mexican exercise? Mexican newspapers reproduced numerous favorable reports from the French media. Indeed, French art critics were officially invited to write about Mexico, and they interpreted Mexican art as functioning within an evolutionary line and thus as still rather childlike and immature. Those epithets, of course, served then (and now) to disqualify, artistic works.101 In this connection, Velasco reported to the Mexican commission on his per-