olutionary governments. There was no other choice, because indeed there was no paradise of pristine and absolute modernity, and it was impossible to stop the transformation, re-creation, and invention of traditions, either for Mexico or for Paris itself. This is, therefore, a history of Mexico and yet, at the same time, a report on Western modernity. Frederick P. Bowser made this work possible in all sorts of ways. I thank him for both his kindness and his critical respect for my work. To him go my profound gratitude and esteem. Helena María Bousquet Bomeny, David Brading, John Cowens, Jeff Fear, Stephen Haber, Charles R. Hale, Ramón Gonzalez Ponciano, Alan Knight, John Lear, C. López Beltràn, Seth Meisel, Jean Meyer, Sonia Moss, Paolo Riguzzi, Carmen Ruiz, Peter Stansky, William Summerhill, William Tobin, and Josefina Vázquez generously contributed their advice and comments. Professors Charles A. Hale and Richard Warren were especially helpful in the last stages of this manuscript, when their intelligence and patience were most appreciated. I value the support of all of these persons, and I am flattered by their friendship. I also wish to thank the Department of History and the Center for Latin American Studies at Stanford University for their invaluable support, as well as the Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económicas A.C. in Mexico City for granting me the time to make this manuscript into a real book. Finally, I thank both the anonymous readers of the University of California Press for their important critiques and suggestions and Sarah K. Myers for her invaluable help in the editing of my tropical use of the English language. Unless there is indication to the contrary, quotations are presented in my translation, though Lucia Rayas, José Gabriel Martinez, Cindy Avitia, Gregory Greenway, and Dale Yeatts assisted in the translation. This book is for Apen, Lilia, Leonor, and Arcelia, from whose wisdom I have not been able to flee.