Image not available. 20. Sketch for a geological map of Mexico, made for the 1889 Paris exhibition. (Photograph by the author) for the Paris exposition. Antonio Garcia Cubas, the most prominent geographer of nineteenth-century Mexico, was also represented in Mexico's cartographic display. 40 He exhibited his "Statistics and History of the Mexican Republic Comprised by Thirty-one Maps of the States, Territories, and a Map of Railroads with Texts in Spanish, French, and English," a revision of his work for the 1884 New Orleans world's fair.41 The general topography of the nation included more than maps and statistics; geology was also important in descriptions of the national territory. Therefore, another topographic effort was the Carta general geológica, undertaken by the Ministry of Economic Development for exhibition in Paris. Antonio del Castillo, with the technical expertise of the geologist José G. Aguilera, was in charge of this task.42 This map encompassed various strategic concerns of the Porfirian government. The study of earth science was tightly related to productive activities such as mining and agriculture.43 It was also associated with international anthropological and archaeological concerns about the origins of humankind in America, which in turn formed part of the national discussion of Darwinist theories and racist speculation about the backwardness of Mexican Indians. Thus, among the maps were the Plano geológico del Peñón de los Baños donde se encontró el hombre fósil prehistórico and the Carta general minera de la República Mexicana.44 One hundred copies of the geological and mining maps were distributed