Image not available. 21. Miguel Saldaña's henequenprocessing machine, an example of Mexican technology. Source: Patentes y Marcas, Box 34, Exp. 1435, reproduced courtesy of the Archivo General de la Nación, Mexico City. (Photograph by the Archivo General de la Nación) design a mask to protect against infection, which was actually exhibited as part of Mexico's display in the hygiene and sanitation class. 61 Despite some legislation on technology and the machine, the emphasis of Mexico's display of products at Paris was clearly on agriculture. By 1889 the Porfirian plan for national economic development was oriented toward strengthening Mexico's participation in the Industrial Revolution as a supplier of raw materials and as a consumer of international technology. To foster industrialization through native technological inventions was a rhetorical commonplace, but in fact the Mexican elite had already abandoned the idea of catching up with the rapid pace of industrial technology and aimed only to be a cosmopolitan and wealthy supplier of raw materials. In sharp contrast, Thomas Edison's inventions were of the greatest interest in Paris, and his concerns with patent rights were epitomized by the registration of his patents not only in Paris but in Mexico even before 1889.62 Of the new nations, the United States was definitely the technological master. By 1862 Jules Verne had already imagined that technology would develop until "[men are] swallowed up by their own inventions. . .. I bet the Yankees will have a hand in it."63 Realists that they were, Mexican authorities were well aware of the impossibility of finding a Mexican Edison.