Image not available. 22. Maximino Río de la Loza's machine to avoid railroad accidents. Source: Patentes y Marcas, Box 33, Exp. 1384, reproduced courtesy of the Archivo General de la Nación, Mexico City. (Photograph by the Archivo General de la Nación) ## Governing Statistics, together with economics, eventually became the fundamental support for administrative knowledge, a major component of modern nations. 64 Public administration was created to meet the needs brought about by modern society: increasing complexity, division of labor, demographic growth, urban expansion, professionalization, and rationalization of time and resources. By the late nineteenth century it was a mixture of organizational skills, written laws, accounting methods, and division of labor supported on two pillars: the liberal political philosophy and the scientific consensus of the late nineteenth century. Through the first, public administration was part of a longstanding philosophical and political definition of the role of the state.65 As such, public administration was linked to the particular ways in which each nation constituted a centralized power made into a state and to specific legal traditions that controlled power relationships. By being part of a scientific consensus, public administration became an arrangement of methods, techniques, and laws; that is, the science of modern administration.66 The politico-philosophical and scientific bases of public administration were threatened by three related ghosts: state intervention (fear of socialism), social control (fear of revolution), and corruption. In the French Third