## Nine ## Natural History and Sanitation in the Modern Nation Natural History In promoting modern Mexico, the efforts of the Porfirian elite to develop the nation's natural resources went beyond reports on mining and agriculture; studies of the flora and fauna of Mexico were also part of this concern. Natural history had been part of the Spanish process of colonization since the eighteenth century. By the end of the nineteenth century the study of nature was reinforced by the development of scientific chemistry, biology, and medicine within an evolutionist paradigm. Mexico had a well-established natural history tradition, 1 and naturalists persisted in their work during the second half of the nineteenth century, albeit within serious economic limitations. By the 1870s this tradition began to have large and impressive displays in Mexico's presence at world's fairs.2 At the 1889 fair Mexican naturalists had one of their best performances. In 1888 the newly created National Medical Institute had undertaken the task of studying and classifying Mexico's flora and fauna, as well as many other natural history studies that often were published in the institute's journal El Estudio (which in 1890 became Anales del Instituto Médico Nacional). In fact, the distinguished Mexican naturalist Francisco Altamirano, a member of the institute, was appointed by the Mexican government to classify all botanical collections sent to Paris.3 He presented a catalogue of 300 different plants with their botanical classifications according to the French scheme, which enabled him to point out various promising scientific or curative plants.4 He was the first to translate into Spanish Francisco Hernández's study of New Spain's natural history (the twenty volumes of which he sent to Paris). As early as 1884 the Comisión Geográfico-Exploradora had secured a place for natural history in Mexico's displays at world's fairs. For the New Orleans exposition of 1884 the modern classification of Mexican species began again, but just after the New Orleans fair, this collection had a tragic