foreign scientists because of its industrial and medical potential. 14 Francisco Rio de la Loza's trip to Paris was fundamental for the final design of the laboratory of the National Medical Institute. In 1889 he exhibited many documents and plans for the creation of the institute and sent back his analysis of European institutions. In 1891 the institute's laboratory was inaugurated with the objective of "[studying] the national flora, fauna, climatology, and medical geography."15 The institute was part of the Ministry of Economic Development, and one of its specific objectives was to recover the Mexican Indian medical tradition.16 Also included in the display of natural history were various paintings of native animals, many of them by José María Velasco. What most amazed visitors was the collection of dissected diminutive Mexican birds. In the enthusiastic words of La Laterne of Paris, that diminutive world of birds "would have overburdened Buffon himself."17 The beauty and utility of nature's gifts to Mexico were thus exhibited to satisfy both the economic interests of the nation's elite and the economic needs and cultural desires of Europe. This meant the appropriation of native beauty and productivity and thus the recuperation of a long-standing natural history tradition in Mexico, which was redirected according to the scientific trends of latenineteenth-century European sciences. Sanitation, Hygiene, and Public Health A truly modern Mexico had to be necessarily a sanitary Mexico. To understand the sanitary aspects of Mexico's modern image, a brief examination of nineteenth-century European (especially French) hygienic thinking is indispensable. If Paris was a stage of industrial growth, miasma, unemployment, epidemics, and worker discontent, then its fairs had to present the utopian and scientific solutions to those problems. Therefore, the Parisian fairs became idealized shows of the latest developments in social economy. For example, in the 1860s Fredéric Le Play founded the Société des Études Pratiques d'Économie Sociale, the ideas of which he applied to the organization of Group 10 (material and moral improvement of workers) at the 1867 Paris imperial exposition.18 By the 1900 Paris fair, Charles Gide and Alfred Picard had made social economy a domain apart from either liberal or socialist cooperativism. Social economy was part of progress, and as such it was considered a scientific enterprise.19 Since the beginning of the nineteenth century, the proponents of hygienic reforms and assistance discussed whether the state should be in charge of hygiene and sanitation. For the liberal paradigm, the state possessed well-defined areas of intervention (such as national security and public administration), but assistance and hygiene were not fully legitimized as areas of