state jurisdiction. By the 1880s social economy (with its Saint-Simonian overtones) and the idea of assistance had to deal with whether to sanction or oppose state intervention in the private sphere in the name of hygiene and sanitation. 20 In fact, the role of the state in assistance and hygiene remained a controversial issue until the beginning of the twentieth century.21 Another realm of debate was hygiene itself. World's fairs often displayed the scientific progress of hygiene and, above all, the emergence of a public hygienic consciousness. Jules Rochard, a distinguished hygienist and author of Traité d'hygiène sociale (1888),22 described the status of hygiene in Paris 1889.23 He delimited three main concerns in the 7,600-square-meter Parisian exhibit on hygiene: food, sanitation of cities and houses, and the water supply and sewer system. The fountain of the Greek goddess of health, Hygie, crowned this exhibit.24 Indeed, by the late 1880s hygiene in Europe was acquiring a scientific configuration, surpassing its utopian quasi-philanthropic emphasis in favor of a more clearly defined scientific and political role.25 The early-nineteenth-century utopian hygienists became the professional technocrats of the late nineteenth century, with complex and ambivalent relationships with the government.26 In turn, the medical profession passed from a corporate guild to an entity with clear connections and power within the state, owing to their scientific expertise.27 By the beginning of the 1880s, in the context of uncertainty about the way in which diseases were transmitted, such scientific tools as sanitation questionnaires were developed;28 these toolsagain, in a context marked by scientific uncertaintyserved as a way to incorporate statistics, geography, socioeconomic explanations, and microbiological Pasteurian theories in the understanding of the origins and transmission of diseases. The development of this type of technique eventually furnished the state with a scientific basis for justifying intervention in the private realm in the interest of improved sanitation.29 From the historian's point of view, however, one can argue that by 1889 the scientific transformation of hygiene was stalled. For hygiene to acquire its new political and scientific status, various related phenomena needed to come together, and this process was not yet complete in 1889. For their part, Mexican scientists were reading these debates on sanitation and hygiene. In the scientific realm, the development of statistical data and innovative scientific techniques was rapid (most especially the Pasteurian bacteriological revolution in hygiene that began in the 1880s). These factors eventually transformed both the scientific standing and the social role of hygiene. By 1889 hygiene had acquired a scientific status but had not yet fully gained the scientific authority and the political status that would eventually come by virtue of the Pasteurian discoveriesand also by the hygienists' own influential articulation of their scientific expertise as an essential component of