national security and nationalism. 30 In 1889 public hygiene in Europe, concerning most of the important diseases, was still being debated in a rather eclectic, pragmatic fashion that included not only Pasteurian microbiology but many others forms of explanation as well. The origin and transmission of diseases were studied by those who variously favored the contagionism, anticontagionism, and germ-theory approaches.31 In the end, from those who believed that the advancement of civilization would eventually bring about the end of diseases to those who used statistics to establish the relationship between misery and illness, almost all approaches had something to contribute to the explanation of diseases in a context of uncertainty.32 In the sociopolitical domestic realm there were two interrelated phenomena. First, European governments came to be dominated by a centralized bureaucratic technocracy that was eager to discover new areas for state intervention, among the most fundamental of which were public sanitation and health. Here hygienists finally found authority and power for their particular expertise. Second, as a consequence of these trends, by the 1880s in France and other European countries feeling was growing that a direct relationship existed between poor hygiene and national decline. If France lost markets and wars, it was because its population was sick and poor, whereas countries like England and the United States had improved the health of their peoples.33 Indeed, despite scientific maturity, what had been a matter of fact since the midnineteenth century was that civilization, good sanitation, and hygiene came together in the educated mind. A modern nation had to be a spotless and white nation.34 Regardless of the actual sanitary conditions of the country, Mexico's display at the world expositions echoed the modern basic concerns with hygiene and, to some extent, social economy. Representing a country and a capital city with grievous sanitation problems, the Mexican exhibit on hygiene attempted, first, to show and learn the methods and advances that European scientific hygienism had achieved. Second, Mexico's hygienists in world's fairs depicted not only the state of Mexico's hygiene and sanitation but also their own standing as a new technocracy of experts. Thus they showed the French experts and public, and also the Mexican authorities, the importance of their task. Finally, regarding the tension between statism and liberalism on the issue of hygiene, the Mexican exhibit at fairs underlined the nation's unmistakable statism, which reflected both the domestic power base of the elite and the need to modernize the nation, an undertaking in which the state was fundamental. In effect, through Mexico's presence at Paris 1889 we can see how the need for sanitation reforms became an important component of economic and political development and also of Mexico's particular nationalism. Mexico's official participation in world's fairs attempted to change the