country's long-standing image as an unhygienic and unsanitary place. During the first part of the nineteenth century the sanitary problems associated with endemic national strife had to be faced, and in 1841 the Consejo Superior de Salubridad (Superior Sanitation Council) was created to deal with the issue. The role of this agency was to advise the government on sanitation concerns and to regulate the practice of medicine by establishing examinations and licenses and by monitoring medical activities in Mexico City. 35 In this way the growth of hygienism was clearly related to the professionalization and consolidation of the modern medical profession in Mexico. In 1872 the council was reformed to give more emphasis to the issue of public sanitation, and in 1879 it was reorganized into a federal consultative group, with a federal budget, becoming a genuine scientific agency and also a modern sanitation police force.36 Until 1885 Dr. Idelfonso Velasco headed this medical corporation, and with his death Dr. Eduardo Liceaga became the director of the council, a position he held until the end of the Porfirian regime. Hygiene in Mexico was more than a mere scientifically determined necessity, however. Scientific hygiene emerged in Mexico as part of the politico-cultural transformation called modernization that the country underwent during the years of Porfirian stability. Scientific hygiene was of major importance for the betterment of the sanitary conditions of the nation, and it was also indispensable to achieving a modern urban culture. But the path to proclaiming these goals had not been a smooth one: hygiene as a scientific endeavor and as public knowledge was a difficult task to undertake in Mexico during the troubled years that preceded the Porfiriato. Before appropriate measures could be taken, Mexican physicians had to convince authorities and the general public of the utility of hygiene in the face of the manifold political and economic problems that beset the country. Public hygiene, as the director of the council observed in 1867, possessed an importance that was "barely known to the common people, but of high administrative interest in civilized nations even when its brilliance is not enough to dazzle the multitudes."37 By the 1880s, however, the significance of sanitation and hygiene were well recognized and fostered, both by the state and by private associationsthat is, the church, scientific associations, and social clubs. By 1889 the Mexican hygiene experts, headed by Dr. Eduardo Liceaga, the most distinguished hygienist of latenineteenth-century Mexico, were just beginning to decipher the scientific and political implications of hygiene and sanitation in a modern fashion. It was precisely in 1889 that Liceaga headed a team of hygienists who proposed to the Ministry of the Interior that a modern sanitary code be proclaimed for Mexico. This code was in fact publicized at the International Congress of Hygiene at the Paris fair.38 In it, hygiene in Mexico acquired its modern scientific connotations, and it