included a real inventory of the concerns of modern hygiene: air, water, dwellings, physical education, epidemics, management of residuals, food, and so forth. 39 Drainage in Mexico City became the main sanitary project of the Porfirian regime. For the 1889 exposition numerous sketches and maps of the Mexican drainage works were prepared by the two main sanitary engineers of late-nineteenth-century Mexico: Roberto Gayol and Miguel Angel de Quevedo.40 Quevedo wrote a report on the state of the works for distribution in Paris.41 In this fashion, Mexico demonstrated in Paris that sanitary engineering was also part of Mexico's modern image. As in Europe, in Mexico it was believed that the miasma of the valley of Mexico was the cause of several diseases (such as typhus, tuberculosis, and cholera). Potable water and a sewer system for such a valley as Mexico City's (surrounded by lakes and mountains) was the great solution. Hence throughout the Porfiriato the drainage of Mexico City became the most salient evidence of Mexico's modern hygiene, one that was continually exhibited on many international stages. The sanitation concerns of Mexico went beyond the miasma approach and its concomitant engineering concerns. In constructing a hygienic picture of Mexico in 1889, Rodrigo Valdés arranged a description of the army, the regular police force, and the rural police force. The description included photographs of soldiers and their uniforms, which were in tune with the general tendency to portray tipospopulares. This worked to attract Europeans who longed for the exotic and to depict the physical, nutritional, and civic advancement of those social classes that were often considered savage. In addition, in the hygiene and assistance class, Mexico's exhibit included various mineral waters from different regions of the country and a hygienic and antiseptic mask designed by Dr. Antonio Carbajal, as well as various plans for the construction of hospitals, mental institutions, and penitentiaries in Puebla and Mexico City.42 But Mexico's main display in this regard was in the professional education class. There, documents related to the creation of the National Medical Institute were exhibited, together with the memoir of the sanitary works of Mexico City, Dr. Flores's history of medicine, and the first medical geography of Mexico (by Dr. Domingo Orvañanos), as well as various other medical studies.43 In the medicine class, the military hospital of Mexico City exhibited anatomical models and replicas of infected arms and legs, together with the head of an Apache Indian. In addition, Mexico sent envoys to congresses on public assistance, dermatology and syphilology, mental medicine, and hygiene and demography.44 Antonio Peñafiel (a medical doctor), José Ramírez, Angel Gaviño, and Manuel Flores attended the hygiene congress.45 In regard to hygiene, Mexico was especially cosmopolitan: not only were representatives sent to Paris, they were also asked to travel around Europe distributing Mexican scientific works and learning new methods and theories. While Peñariel, Gaviño, and