Ramirez were in Paris in 1889, another distinguished hygienist, Ignacio Alvarado, was in New York sending reports for the preparation of Liceaga's sanitary code. 46 With all of this, Mexico displayed its strong interest in the methods of modern hygiene, which in turn was harmonious with the positivist bent of the Mexican elite in the late 1880s. Mexican hygienists also participated in the international debate on hygiene. For instance, while French and European hygienists were deliberating the causes of yellow fever and its means of transmission, Dr. Manuel María Carmona y Valle exhibited in Paris his Leçons sur l'étiologie et la prophylaxie de la fièvre jaune, with a preface by Eduardo Liceaga, published in 1885. In fact, the etiological microorganism that causes yellow fever was discovered by Carlos Finlay in Havana in 1881, but eight years later, the means by which it is transmitted were not yet clear, and Carmona y Valle's study contributed the vast Mexican experience to the international study of the disease and quoted Pasteur and Koch before the bacteriological revolution in hygiene was completely accepted.47 In essence, while Finlay isolated the microorganism micrococcus tetragenous febris flavae, Carmona y Valle isolated what he called a mold peronospora lutea, for which he claimed to have found a form of vaccine. However accurate the discoveries of Carmona y Valle may have been, the fact is that they were part of international debate on yellow fever.48 Leprosy was another disease the treatment for which attracted the efforts of Mexican medical men. In 1851 Dr. Rafael Lucio published his Opúsculo sobre el real de San Lázaro o elefantiásis de los griegos which was republished by the Ministry of Economic Development in 1889 for exhibition at Paris. In it, Lucio for the first time described a particular kind of leprosy called man-chada, which he found in Mexico.49 In the same way, Mexico exhibited in Paris a collection of articles in French taken from one of the most important medical journals of late-nineteenth-century Mexico, El Estudio, published by the National Medical Institute. In it the advances of Mexican hygiene, surgery, biology, and criminology were reported.50 In these articles, as in other short studies and books, Mexico's physicians and hygienists demonstrated that they shared the concerns of international science and that they were keeping abreast of its progress. These studies emphasized advancements in the etiology of diseases, in anthropology, and in an area of concern that dealt with the relationship between women and hygienico-medical science. This concern took various forms. At the same time that Rafael Lavista detailed in El Estudio his diagnosis of a clitoral tumor of eleven centimeters found in a syphilitic woman patient, in Paris Francisco Flores was displaying an impressive expertise in statistics and legal medicine in his book El himen en México. This was a study of the hymens of 181 women, classified according to complex formulas, demonstrating that the ring-shaped hymen was the