most common among Mexican women. Flores believed that this discovery would help forensic medicine to protect female virginity because, he affirmed, ''today virginity is one of the jewels sought so much by men. . .. What is more beautiful than that white flower of virginity still unaccosted by the vicious zephyr." 51 This was scientific study at its best, but it was conceived in the language and moral axioms of late-nineteenth-century Mexico. And it was yet another example of the type of comparative-statistical anatomical and anthropological work that sought to scientifically establish the particular anatomical characteristics of the Mexican people within universal science. In the same way, in 1881 Dr. Florencio Flores wrote a comparative analysis of the pelvises of Mexican and European women which concluded that "if the European pelvis as described in books should be held as the normal type, [then] the Mexican pelvis, in relation to it, should be considered as a physical defect." However, for Mexico, he argued, such a pelvis was normal.52 By the same token, La Gaceta Médica de México of the Academia Mexicana de Medicina, three volumes of which were exhibited at Paris, reported in 1889 a new reglamento for prostitution in Mexico City, drawn up by Domingo Orvañanos, Manuel S. Soriano, and Luis E. Ruiz. In it, the regulation of prostitution was considered important both from the sanitary point of view (that is, fewer men infected) and from the fiscal point of view (that is, more taxes collected). This meant, as historian Alain Corbin argued for the case of France, the triumph of regulationism over the political, medical, and economic aspects of female prostitution.53 Thus the particular Mexican version of the modern regulatory paternalistic treatment of women was displayed by Mexican officials at Paris through many medical, anthropological, and legal studies. These studies, in turn, echoed certain fundamental ideas found also in Federico Gamboa's famous novel, Santa (1903), in which it is said that Santa belonged as much to the police as to sanitation, or in the poem of the then renowned suicidal poet Manuel Acuña, La Ramera: "Poor woman, who abandoned and alone . . . instead of a hand to save her, finds a hand that pushes her to the abysm."54 Along similar lines, Mexican women were barred from the discussions of the very publicized (nationally and internationally) Congreso Pedagógico Higiénico that took place seven years before the 1889 fair. All of the hygienists who were in Paris in 1889 attended the 1882 congress, but no woman was present at either event. Thus, an Orvañanos or a Ramirez might speak at the Paris fair on the statistical control of prostitution and the sanitary police on the domestic role of women, but the congress itself had resolutely opposed the participation of women. Because hygiene in education involved the discussion of personal hygiene and sexual conduct, Mexican scientists, however advanced their scientific knowledge, did not want to break from las buenas costumbres (good manners) and speak to female teachers about these sub-