jects. There were a few dissenters. Carlos de Olaguíbel y Aristas, for example, supported the idea of female participation, not only because of the all-important role women played, especially in the education of girls, but also because of their need to emancipate women from domesticity. But the majority argued that because the congress was about science and not sentiment, women were not needed, despite general agreement that men and women possessed the same brain capacity. A vote was taken, and women were not allowed to attend the session. The doctors preferred that the subject of their discussionswomenremain at home. 55 The same rule was maintained within the medical establishment, which made it almost impossible for women to obtain medical degrees.56 Mexican doctors also took advantage of world's fairs to study these kinds of concerns. In August 1889 Dr. Alberto Aizpurul was appointed to travel to the exposition to study advancements in the treatment of female diseases and syphilis. He was asked to travel not only to Paris but also to London and New York.57 What best condensed the stage and concerns of Mexico's hygienists in the 1889 exposition, however, was Domingo Orvañanos's Ensayo de geografía médica y climatología de la República Mexicana, specifically published for the exhibition in two volumes with a prologue by Eduardo Liceaga.58 This was one of the main scientific displays of Mexico in Paris, and although it was not originally intended to be exhibited there, the exposition accelerated the research and the completion of the book. With the fair booming, in 1888 Orvañanos was tapped to undertake a detailed study of the nation's climates and diseases as part of the creation of the National Medical Institute and of Mexico's display in Paris 1889.59 Orvañanos quickly sent letters to the various states requesting detailed information in questionnaire form on climate and diseases.60 These were in fact the Mexican versions of the French enquêtes (questionnaires). Gustavo Ruiz Sandoval and Ramón Rodríguez Rivera designed a questionnaire to be distributed to local authorities and physicians. Among many other items, this questionnaire requested data on rainfall, climate, water conditions, general occupation of the population, home conditions, most common diseases (epidemic and endemic), race, and the existence of leprosy, yellow fever, and goiter. In 1886 José Ramírez and Rodriguez Rivera published Noticias climatoló-gicas de la República, recopiladas por la Secretaría de Fomento, para la formación de la Geografía Médica Mexicana. It was a preliminary study, which Orvañanos continued for the Paris exposition and published as an ensayo (a first-draft attempt) because it was indeed incomplete. In effect, the 1889 fair fostered this study as part of Mexico's construction of a national image because the work combined (as did the French questionnaires of the 1880s in the context of general uncertainty as to how diseases were transmitted) three forms