of knowledge, which were, in turn, three ways of describing the nation: social and geographical mapping, statistics, and various explanations of the origins of diseases (Pasteurian and non-Pasteurian). The book consisted of two volumes: the first contained Orvañanos's studies; the second, forty-six maps. Orvañanos's study was divided into three parts: a geographical sketch of Mexico's climates, a description of the main diseases in Mexico, and an appendix. 61 The appendix compared mortality rates in Mexico City with those for the entire country. Following a geographical textbook published in 1889 by Alberto Correa, Orvañanos estimated Mexico's population at 11.25 million.62 He divided the population into four races: Indians, Europeans, Blacks, and mestizos.63 Then he analyzed the atmospheric pressures and altitudes of Mexico in order to specify what he termed the air diet of the inhabitants of the various regions. He concluded that altitude anemia had not yet been demonstrated and that more research had to be done. This was a direct response to the common European notion that altitude had an effect on the inhabitants of Mexico City.64 Next, Orvañanos dealt with nutrition, following the studies by Samuel Morales Pereira,65 which discussed the malnutrition of the majority of the population, whose basic diet consisted of maize, beans, and pulque. Then he analyzed various diseases. Orvañanos's geographical and etiological study of diseases is emblematic of the way late-nineteenth-century Mexican hygienists interacted with the scientific methods of the international discipline. In fact, Orvañanos often quoted French, German, and U.S. studies, as well as reports sent from Mexico to other countries. For instance, in his treatment of leprosy, he first mapped the areas of concentration of the illness (mainly in Western Mexico) 66 and then discussed the etiology of the disease according to seven possible explanations that were addressed in detail. These seven explanations were a combination of old and new scientific ideas with traditional notions about disease origins. From the outset he accepted the idea of genetic causes. Regarding contagious transmission, he argued that there was neither a place nor a race on the face of the earth that had escaped leprosy; thus, he concluded, climatic and racial causes were less important than was transmission by contagion. Orvañanos supported the contagion thesis but nevertheless explained the counterargument. He believed that contagious transmission took place through sexual intercourse, and he argued that researchers who opposed the contagion thesis had been misled by leprosy's long incubation period. He identified the agent of the disease as the bacillus discovered by Hansen in Norway in 1874 and since internationally accepted.67 Then he disqualified various possible causes that were collected in the questionnaires (such as obstruction of perspiration, use of salted water, overconsumption of pork). Regarding the treatment of leprosy, Orvañanos was cautious, and