he proposed the undertaking of a real census of the districts in which the disease was epidemic. As we can see from his analysis of this malady, Orvañanos not only was aware of the bacteriological advances in late-nineteenthcentury hygiene but also shared the uncertainty and ambivalence about transmission and treatment. 68 Although he was prompt to point out the microbial origins of the disease, he could not come to a conclusion regarding the means of transmission, so he fell back on a combination of causes (genetic and social). Social causes were often called physiological misery, a polite way of saying poverty. Indeed, he explicitly located himself within the debate between contagionists and anticontagionists, and he clearly explained his position according to the data he had collected. Regarding the role that the state should play in hygiene, he called for more data before a final decision was made between more state interventions and more private care.69 Both the advanced methodology of Orvañanos and his uncertainty can also be observed in his examination of yellow fever. He located cases throughout the country and argued that what caused it was a microorganism: "an alga for Dr. Freire of Brazil; a fungus for Dr. Carmona y Valle of Mexico and for Dr. Finlay a micrococcus." But he wisely added that these explanations "contributed to affirming the ideas of the general medical world, that the essential cause of yellow fever is a microscopic being."70 In effect, Mexican scientists were active participants in the study of this disease.71 As I have argued above, the scientific display mounted by Mexican hygienists in Paris also aimed to consolidate their technocratic role within the state. The role of Mexican experts in international exhibitions, as well as in the political and scientific life of Mexico as a whole, has to be understood through the development of the medical profession in Mexico. Physicians were the most important receptors and disseminators of idealist, positivist, hygienist, and to a large extent, liberal ideas in nineteenth-century Mexico. For them, the Porfirian peace brought about the continuation of their professional associations, which functioned as centers of scientific and political education. Eduardo Liceaga, Porfirio Parra, Antonio Peñafiel, Domingo Orvañanos, Francisco Flores, José Ramírez, Angel Gaviño, Agustín Reyes, José L. Gómez, Jose D. Morales, Nicolás Ramírez de Arrellano, and Francisco Altamirano were all physicians and hygienists who occupied posts at the medical school in Mexico City, in various scientific institutes and societies, and in government agencies, especially in the sanitation council, which became their own source and space of power.72 By the end of the 1880s they had gained recognition by the state, and once the Científicos group was consolidated in the 1890s they became one with the political and economic elite, a position they retained throughout the 1900s and 1910s.