However, the achievement of this role for the medical profession was far from harmonious. Within the profession there were scientific and ideological disputes, especially regarding the involvement of the state. Furthermore, the number of influential doctors and hygienists remained rather constant throughout the Porfirian regime, revealing that a small and closed elite controlled the profession's influential political role. By the 1890s the elite members of the medical profession had acquired such direct links with the governmentin terms of control of the medical school, sanitary engineering contracts, and personal ties with politiciansthat other doctors complained about the unhealthy centralization. 73 There is good reason to believe that overall the Mexican elite hygienists were first-class scholars but most of them were also formidable politicians. Eduardo Liceaga, for example, was not only the director of the sanitation council during nearly the entire Porfirian period but also Mexico's envoy to important international conferences on sanitation, in addition to being the person in charge of the Mexican hygiene displays at various world's fairs. At the 1889 fair he was awarded a bronze medal, although he was not present in Paris. He had just left for Mexico to transport rabbits infected with Pasteur rabies vaccine in order to establish the Mexican antirabies institute.74 By the 1900s Liceaga was the acknowledged master of hygiene in Mexico, allocating to his colleagues and friends work on sanitation projects (such as campaigns against tuberculosis and yellow fever) and participation in congresses and fairs around the world.75 In 1900 the Diario del Hogar often criticized him for his servile attitude toward Díaz's reelection, for his ongoing leadership of the Superior Sanitation Council, and for having monopolized Mexico's international hygienic presence for himself.76 Hygiene had a different nationalist value in Mexico than it did, say, in France. In France, hygiene became an ingredient of nationalism as a matter of security and racial purity, whereas in Mexico hygiene became part of nationalism because it was crucial for two main developmental goalsforeign investment and immigration. Some people believed that if the image of Mexico were to change from that of an unsanitary nation to a healthy one, immigrants and capital would flood the country. Therefore, for Mexican hygienists, the bacteriological revolution, or the triumph of a particular version of conservative (that is, statist) liberalism, was important for their achievement of power within the state. Their command of the universal scientific language and their role as communicators and creators of the image of a sanitary country assured them of a significant role within the government. For instance, at the international hygiene congress in Paris, Angel Gaviño translated Mexico's sanitary reforms into the language of French sanitation measures by proclaiming Mexico's new sanitary code. He also furthered the Mexican government's desire to show that Mexico was a sanitary and