hospitable place by maintaining that Mexico was up-to-date in its sanitary knowledge and that it was joining the modern nations thanks to French advancements, especially to Pasteur's work. 77 Once hygienists had consolidated their role and power in the 1900s, they could scarcely distinguish between reasons of state and reasons of science. Accordingly, at the beginning of the twentieth century Liceaga wrote to his wife from an international sanitation congress in Costa Rica that "in sum, being healthy comes first; only then does one think of the rights of man, of freedoms, and moral improvement." In 1902 Liceaga was even more explicit in linking the interests of the state with those of Mexico and the hygienists when, in an international congress in Havana, he claimed that "to the state, man is priceless. The public wealth completely loses this valuable resource when a man dies. . .. The state has to spend money on assistance and in this way loses public wealth. . .. Those [illnesses] that cause his death are infinitely more costly than those that demand the greatest acts of reparation."78 Hygienists also had to lobby the government, both to further their scientific development and for their political and economic wellbeing. Contracts for sanitary engineering works were often disputed, and hygienists were always involved. By the 1900s many of the hygienists had interests in the development of Mexico's cities (in terms of transportation, sanitary services, and real estate), as well as in the new business of insurance.79 For instance, in 1907 the governor of Guanajuato wrote to Liceaga about the celebration of a Pan-American medical congress in Mexico, primarily to let Liceaga know that he was about to send the data required; in passing he mentioned to Liceaga that "our" streetcar business was doing wonderfully. He explained to Liceaga that "in the course of one year, your stock will be worth twice as much."80 Nonetheless, it is important to keep in mind that all of this was achieved only after political power based on scientific expertise was attained. In Mexico hygiene indisputably became a state matter. In a country in which the construction of a nationalistic ideology, industrial promotion, and integrity were based on state sponsorship, statism in hygiene was not an issue. Since the Mexican hygienic congress of 1883, various participants had recommended that a centralized national agency be created, beyond private interests and beyond the various state jurisdictions, for the handling of hygiene and sanitation.81 Along similar lines, in 1892 Liceaga, Manuel Septien, and Rafael Lucio argued that civilization and hygiene went together but that private initiative could go against the general well-being and should be controlled. In order that "the interests of capital are not to come before the rights of humanity,"82 Liceaga believed that the state had to control and sponsor welfare policies. For Septien, the solution was the creation of a Ministry of Sanitation (something that was not instituted until after the Revolution of