1910). 83 In a word, in a nonwhite, backward country the issue of hygiene was a duty of the enlightened caudillos, and not even radical liberals were opposed to state intervention in this area. The Porfirian hygienic image of Mexico was eventually held up to the mockery of public opinion in Mexico City (see chapter 10). In large part this was because even though knowledge of hygiene grew, the sanitary conditions of the city remained terrible. Despite the achievements of the Porfirian hygienists, in 1916 Alberto J. Pani called Mexico City the most unsanitary urban area in the world.84 It must be conceded that Porfirian hygienists produced the proper scientific hygienic image of Mexico for both national and international consumption. The actual sanitary transformation was, of course, most visible in places like Mexico City, but the vast territory and the general indigence of most of the population made the Porfirian achievements look insignificant to a close observer. Only Mexico's hygienic image was comprehensive and cosmopolitan. One issue undermined this image and frustrated the efforts of Mexican hygienists: race. Although this issue was properly the domain of experts in anthropology, archaeology, and the national epic, it had a direct impact on the hygienists' role in constructing the national image. How, in a nationalist and scientifically racist era, could a country of Indians be completely disinfected? The response of the Porfirian Científicos was to constantly look for, classify, reclassify, and adapt possible answers from international science, arts, and politics, but they found no final solution. How could they? The longstanding identification of the Indians with miasma and dirt was something that neither Western exoticism nor scientific hygienism could overcome. Nonetheless, hygienists knew that real modern nationalism needed modern hygiene, sanitation, and medicine. Whereas proof of Mexico's cleanliness could not be final because of its Indian and hybrid races, late-nineteenth-century hygienists knew that only through the constantly up-dated combinations of domestic uniqueness with international trends could they make their country look truly modern. That is precisely what, in 1889, the first issue of El Estudio maintained by making a call to create both a science of the nation and a national science: "A truly national medicine would be that which could boast facts discovered in this country, and possibly in some cases only applicable to this country. A Mexican pathology, a Mexican surgery, a Mexican therapeutics, a Mexican hygiene and obstetrics, these titles would give us the right to be respected in the scientific world beyond our seas and borders."85 Detailed analysis of the construction of the scientific components of the national image has shown us the complex texture of the allegedly positivist and Frenchified Mexican elite. That is, on one hand the Mexican elite possessed