## Ten Irony If the Eiffel Tower exhibition was a pocket picture of the modern world, then Mexico's exhibit was a reflection of that depiction. To conclude that the picture was false because it neither reflected the world as it actually was nor depicted the so-called real Mexico would be too simplistic. Of course, the harmony, well-being, and comfort on display at the exhibition were continually belied by the actuality of international conflicts, nationalism, urban poverty, and agrarian crisis. But the values and ideas that the fair mirrored were seldom rejected by most observers as the authentic and objective ideal of how the modern world ought to be if those values and ideas were pushed to realization. In effect, when it came to a belief in progress and the value of science, there was a general consensus that defied irony and contradiction. It was through such a consensus that irony was made possible, but as a denunciation of hypocrisy or distortion and not as a total negation. Nonetheless, there was a harsher sort of irony, one that indeed questioned progress, as was the case with Baudelaire's comments on the French exposition of 1855 or Henry Adams's insightful comments on the 1893 Chicago fair. 1 For Mexico and its historical image, the main source of contradictions came not from Europe but from within Mexico itself. In France, for instance, the national image that Mexico was at such pains to project was received either with indifference or with an ostentatious paternalism that is so often the imitator's reward. It is more important to examine how the trappings that supposedly went with modern nationhood (that is, a cosmopolitan yet exotic appearance, hygiene and sanitation, good administration, and economic and social stability) squared with daily life in Mexico, especially that of Mexico City, where an urban, literate middle class had created a confined and small public sphere.