By the late 1880s the growth of a significant public opinion in the modern sense of the term was contradictorily both encouraged and censored by the Porfirian regime. The technological advancements in communications and publishing, as well as the growth of an urban, literate middle class, fostered the emergence of many national and local newspapers, journals, magazines, and pamphlets from all sorts of clubs and organizations. 2 However, political dissidence was constantly repressed, and media opposition, though functioning throughout the Porfirian regime, suffered continuous setbacks.3 Nonetheless, the possibilities for wording subtle political and social commentary before reaching the point of repression were ample. In literary, artistic, political, and scientific media, therefore, a certain free public opinion was restrained only by the writer's capacity for allegorical innovation. Ironic commentaries on Mexico's modern image were expressed essentially in humor. Through humor, Mexico's modern national image, as depicted in Paris and other world's fairs, was used to make statements about Mexico's political and social problems. The irony was twofold: it was the confrontation of an ideal type with crude versions of Mexico's reality; and it was accomplished by sharing the values epitomized by Mexico's presence at world's fairs and by ridiculing the way in which the image of modern Mexico had been formed. Humor was not merely an escape but also a deliberate vehicle for a form of criticism that was rich, profound, and somewhat politically acceptable. Diverse aspects of reality in Mexico were arranged and highlighted in various ways, according to various world views. This produced not one but many versions of what Mexico was actually like, just as, say, there were many versions of how real Paris diverged from the ideal account represented by the various world's fairs. At this level of contradiction many ironies emerged and formed an endless source of humor. However, only rarely did those who used versions of the real Mexico to satirize the Porfirian ideal go on to challenge the larger myth that inspired that ideal. That is, the critiques of the ideal Mexico were direct and obvious, but the critiques that were directed toward the larger ideal picture of the modern world aimed only to prove the fraudulence of Mexico's image, not to challenge that larger picture. Mexicans referred to the larger idealized picture of the modern world only to praise it more by showing that other versions of Mexico were more fitted for the cosmopolitan parameters. Rarely did they refer to the other critiques of the modern image of the world articulated by Europeans. When they did, as in literary circles, it was only marginally, as when the modernists were condemned for following the critiques of modernity when the country was not yet modern. The first goal, it was argued, was to be modern; then the country would worry about the surmenages (mental strains) of modern times (see chapter 11). In the last analysis, what most critiques attempted was to show that the image of modern Mexico was indeed modern but only partially Mexican: it