had only the shape that the Porfirian regime gave it, without discussion and without considering the circumstances of the nation. Humor and irony in Porfirian Mexico also derived from other sources: the critique of specific circumstances, the ephemeral, everyday jokes, and, overall, from the sense of humor that prevailed during the erawhich the historian cannot fully recapture. That is, today's understanding of yesterday's irony is inevitably partial: time has erased from our understanding many aspects of yesterday's irony; and it has made other things more ironic for us than for those who experienced them firsthand. The official and semiofficial press reported on the events surrounding Mexico's exhibitions at all world's fairs by paraphrasing the official despatches and intentions. As we have seen, this press coverage was part of the total desired effect. Both the lack of democratic decision making and the presence of corruption in the creation of Mexico's modern image were aspects of Mexico's display at world's fairs to which the public was not privy, in exactly the same way as the working side of all exhibit paraphernalia was hidden underground. Accordingly, criticism of the official national image revolved around uncovering these seamier aspects and contrasting the idealized image of Mexico with what was seen as Mexican reality. The goal was to criticize the wizards of progress not so much for being wizards as for being charlatans: it was their illegitimate handling of the national image that made them open to criticism, not their attempts to perform magic in the name of progress. The newspaper El Hijo del Ahuizote, a remarkable example of Mexico's nineteenth-century critical consciousness, sought to reveal the hidden aspects of Mexico's national image. It did this by making ironic allegories out of the official allegories, while often sharing the same basic abstract and pragmatic official goals (for example, progress as a doctrine, and immigrants and foreign investment as a development policy). These ironies were commonly constructed out of political opposition to specific policies of the Porfirian regime. For instance, if Mexico's goal was to attract immigration, for El Hijo del Ahuizote the national image presented at Paris in 1889 was both unsuccessful andworseonly a way to cover up corruption: The colonization of the territory goes with these popes à la Juan Tenorio: I called settlers and they turned a deaf ear because they do not expect to grow fat here, for another voice and not mine responds to what Schnetz and Company do. 4 Similarly, if the country were to show a true version of the great universal