Porfirian period. Land concentration, corruption, propagandism, and caudillism were often addressed in this ironic fashion. A shorter, more efficient, and often less censoredperhaps saferstyle also appeared: the political cartoon. Visual, poetic, and humorous expressions communicated abundant irony and discontent in such an evasive and ambiguous way that repression was difficult. If the official style was a baroque, romantic, eloquent, and often tedious rhetoric, full of scientific metaphors, then the refuge of the opposition was the short, conceptually baroque, but rhetorically economical, instantaneousness of cartoons. By the 1884 New Orleans exposition, the cartoons of the Época Ilustrado used the fair as a source of metaphorical ironies for not entirely political purposes. Both the authoritarianism of the Porfirian regime and its aristocratic tendencies were then criticized by utilizing the different meaning of the verb exponer. 10 So the wealthy aristocracy of Mexico City was portrayed on trips to New Orleans, playing with the irony of a widespread Catholic morality and with the Porfirian aristocracy's need to show off, as in the double entendre of a wealthy man with his aristocratic daughter who asked: "Dad, now that there is an exhibition, don't you want me to be exhibited [or to expose myself]?" Along similar lines, the czar of Porfirian letters, Ignacio M. Altamirano, was caricatured in the act of pompously saying to what seems to be a farmer ready to exhibit his products: "I do not expose my literature [or I do not put my literature at risk]," referring to his unwillingness both to exhibit his writings in New Orleans and to put at risk his literary position. In the same way, the famous band of Mexican musicians that was sent to New Orleans by train appeared in a cartoon that showed it crossing the Nochistongo canyon. The vicissitudes of the trip and the endeavors of the Porfirian regime to exhibit exotic Mexican tipos populares were summarized in the caption to this cartoon, in which the musicians observed: "Indeed, this time we were exposed,'' by being exhibited at New Orleans and by being put at risk at Nochistongo.11 Along similar lines, in its 1899 coverage of the national exposition that preceded and heralded Mexico's exhibit at the 1900 Paris fair, El Hijo del Ahuizote again used the cartoon as a form of effective criticism. On that occasion, its first page carried a cartoon of the statue Doña Paz Trancazo,12 sculpted by "the caudillo from Tuxtepec, hero of La Noria" (see Fig. 23). The fat woman carrying a dagger, called "La Matona," was a savage allegory of the Porfirian regime and of another allegory, for the free republic was represented as a woman in countless nineteenth-century sculptures. The 1889 Paris exposition easily became an object of critiques and a source of metaphors for criticizing the policies and nature of the Porfirian regime. Parodying the allegorical obsession and cloying style of late-nineteenth-century European art, Díaz was held up as a symbol of dictatorship in an allegorical painting allegedly to be exhibited at the 1889 fair. In it, surrounded