commissioner for the 1889 Paris exhibition, to acquire for him a specific French biography of Napoleon. Díaz Mimiaga could not find the edition but sent instead a Belgian edition of Napoleon's life to serve as inspiration for Mexico's Napoleon des tropiques. 18 Along similar lines, the status of science in Mexico, as revealed by the nation's exhibit at the 1889 Paris fair, was satirized by EL Hijo del Ahuizote with the lines: "There is very little science. / Patience, to the contrary, / I believe, is more plentiful than it should be."19 This sort of ironic comment was expressed even better in a poem published by the same newspaper: Haven't we Dubláns with doubloons and Pachecos with checks? Haven't we in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Mariscals, Romeros, and Ramóns who can vociferously praise the contest and announce it, preach it, and claim it? Haven't we Peñafiels who can supplant the Eiffels, and the lighthouse of the Paseo de la Reforma, to which they can give more altitude and a different shape, so that as time goes by they embellish the exposition with their tower that colossally rises with arrogance and looks like that of Paris in France?20 The poem refers to Manuel Dublán, then minister of finance, and to Carlos Pacheco, minister of economic development and chief of Mexico's exhibit in Paris. In this satire, the lavish expenditures and personal opportunism of the two ministers were sarcastically treated, along with Mexico's pretensions about displaying itself in Paris. The modern image of Mexico was one that was controlled by the Porfirians to praise themselves. Moreover, Mexico's propaganda network was attacked with the reference to those who announced, preached, and claimed Mexico's image in Paris; that is, the officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Ignacio Mariscal, Matías Romero and the Mexican minister in Paris, Ramón Fernández). By the same token, by making fun of the natural history concerns of the 1900 Paris fair, El Hijo de Ahuizote criticized the corruption and authoritarianism of the Porfirian regime in the form of animals that were to be sent to Paris. If Mexico's natural history collections were to be an important aspect of its presence at world's fairs, then these fictitious animals ought to be sent to represent the real Mexico: a burra (female donkey) that had carried Diaz for sixteen years (that is, the country), Ignacio Mariscal's parrot that spoke English (referring to his pro-American tendencies), Bernardo Reyes's eagle (that is, his recent appointment to the Ministry of Defense), and José Y. Limantour's raven (the Compañía de Fianzas).21