The very organization of the fair prompted criticism of the high cost and the corruption that surrounded the whole event. For El Diario del Hogar, the wizards of progress had no other merit than being "very close friends of the Minister of Economic Development," 22 and the same newspaper complained about the astronomical expenses of Mexico vis-à-vis those of countries like the United States.23 In 1888 El Economista Mexicano commented on the need for better organization of the Mexican presence at world's fairs. It argued that at the 1884 fair there had been many problems: "That avalanche of commissions that come and go, that contest among employees, causes the loss of objects and the delay in the distribution of prizes."24 In June 1889 El Diario del Hogar was astonished by the sum already expended (2.5 million francs) and observed: "There is no doubt that Mexico has been splendid. However, in a few years we will starve to death."25 The same complaints were made about Mexico's organization in 1900. For instance, Federico Gamboa recalled the disorganization and unreality of Mexico's presence at the 1900 exposition. He received a diploma for his books exhibited in Paris. "Oh, farces, farces, farces," he observed, ''through Jesús Contreras I learned that all the boxes containing books were not even opened by the jury!!!"26 Nonetheless, he himself had previously proclaimed that his "most beautiful literary chimera" was "to be read in Paris."27 For him too, the problem was not with Paris but with those who were handling Mexico's image there. Along similar lines, a cartoon in El Hijo del Ahuizote portrayed Diaz throwing away posts, commissions, and money for Mexico's presence at the 1889 Paris fair. Behind Diaz a group of friends carried signs that read "To Pacheco's Friends." A poem explained the cartoon: Don't think of this as a waste of what doesn't cost us anything. . . . This is an opportunity to travel a lot (a trotemoche) on ships, on trains, and on carriages.28 In such fashion were the lavish expenditures of the wizards of progress held up for criticism. In addition, the personalities of the wizards of progress were ridiculed as part of the general criticism of the Porfirian regime. For instance, various Mexican newspapers sent distinguished intellectuals and politicians as their representatives at world's fairsamong them, Amado Nervo, Ireneo Paz, Carlos Diaz Dufoo, and even Angel' del Campo.29 They became part of Mexico's propaganda network. By the 1900 Paris fair, Ireneo Paz was already a convinced reelectionist and the representative of EL Imparcial. For his pains, he was caricatured as a Mexican Indian servant who, in the stereotypical Spanish language of Indian servants, said to French President Loubet: "Quesque dice mi amo Don Porfirio que comostasté, que cómo le vasté y que si querusté religirse no más me diga pa' que li haga yo un clu" ("Says my mas-