ter Don Porfirio, how are you, how are you doing, and if you want to reelect yourself you only need to tell me and I'll organize a club for you)." 30 In the same way, Manuel Flores's well-known taste for alcohol was ridiculed in a cartoon that combined his alcoholism with a critique of the Mexican pavilion at the 1900 exposition. Amado Nervo's hyper-Catholic moralism was a perfect object of mocking contrast with Bohemian fin-de-siècle Paris, and so is the cartoon depicting Nervo with a cancan dancer to whom he is saying, "You should enter a convent." Alas, this may have paraphrased Hamlet's statement to Ophelia: "Get thee to a nunnery."31 For the purist liberal press, however, the values epitomized by France and its fairs were unquestionable. The problem for them was with the Porfirian handling of the Mexican display, but France itself was considered the leading nation of Europe. France was all the more respected in view of the threat that the United States posed for Mexico. Thus in July 1888 El Diario del Hogar observed: "In Europe, France is the heart of the Latin race, like Mexico in America; both nations have suffered wars brought on by the invading spirit of northern nations; both are the vanguard of reason."32 This respect for French modernity was shared by conservative liberal statists in the Porfirian regime and by the more purist liberals of the opposition. Angel Pola in El Diario del Hogar was more explicit in the beginning of 1889 when he observed that Mexicans were both Mexican and French: "We make policy, feel, think, speak like the French and we are satisfied by France's beneficial influence, because it is a civilizing one that does not alter our nationality but perfects it."33 In politics and in sciences, he went on, "What are we? / Mexicans. / Where do we come from? / From Spain. / Where are we going? / To France."34 Other members of the liberal press shared the excitement for the great values epitomized by the exposition but made it a point not to attend owing to Mexico's circumstances. El Diario del Hogar observed in March 1888: "Despite the fraternity between France and Mexico, in all the republic there is a waning of enthusiasm that has no precedent in our history; the mistrust is general in every sense; no one responds with good will to the official calls." The newspaper concluded that "the people of Mexico are sensible; they will not take part in the great party of progress that the friendly people of France are celebrating."35 Mexican criticisms of the idealized image of Mexico were especially harsh regarding the essential ethnic and philosophical nature of the nation under Porfirian rule. Here all political tendencies had their own views: Hispanism, indigenism, liberal indifference, cosmopolitanism, and so forth. For some, Mexico's image was too Indian; for others, not native enough; for still others, too cosmopolitan. Therefore, both Mexico's attempt to be innovative in architecture and its exotic displays were seriously criticized. Peñafiel, one of the designers of the Mexican pavilion for the 1889 fair, was sarcastically criticized for his attempt to make Mexico as unique as