France through the bizarre combination of pre-Hispanic motifs and modern architecture, as epitomized by the Aztec Palace. For some critics, Mexico could never be France, and attempts to try would only produce an ironic amalgamation: The plains of Narvarte can easily be Champ de Mars. And the square ditch, if it fills with rainwater, will be the Seine. From Paris will be brought the Caja de Agua, as they call our palace there. 36 Of course, conditions in Mexico could hardly match Parisian standards, and the very contrast of Paris with Mexico City produced these ironic poems. Regarding those who would represent the country in an Aztec fashion, El Hijo del Ahuizote echoed the French criticism of the Mexican Aztec Palace as a Caja de Agua, to complement their mockery. In turn, El Diario del Hogar called the Mexican pavilion "a henhouse"37 and referred to its design as the "Mexican architectural style of the Peñafielistic system."38 With more democratic decisions, this newspaper argued, the Mexican pavilion would not have taken such a ridiculous form. Other newspapers defended the Mexican pavilion against this criticism, however. La Crónica observed that French criticism of the Mexican pavilion showed great ignorance: "[They do not] understand that if one were dealing with an artistic creation, there would have been numerous Mexican artists that could have sparkled their talent, but what the pavilion was about was historical accuracy.''39 In fact, many harsh words were penned about the very unfitness of native things and people to be modern and universal. El Diario del Hogar sarcastically observed that in Paris the Mexican products would be most unfavorably contrasted with French counterparts: "sugar-cane liquors and tequila . . . to compete with those products from Lyon, Champagne, and Bordeaux."40 Along the same ironic lines, the idea of an Aztec Mexico was severely satirized by the liberal opposition. Although by the 1880s indigenism was nothing new in Mexican intellectual and political discussions, some purist liberals criticized the prominence given to an official indigenism in Mexico's presence at the 1889 Paris fair. Moreover, they criticized the authoritarian form of this choice, observing that the Mexican pavilion had been decided on without even calling for a public contest.41 Catholic opinion was, of course, opposed to anything pre-Hispanic and constantly criticized any attempt to give the nation any image save that of a Spanish Catholic country. The underlying irony resulted both from the bizarre idea of an Aztec Mexico in the Parisian belle epoque and from the authoritarian decision to give strong pre-Hispanic features to the national image. Therefore, not only did the Aztec Palace become an object of mockery, so did the display of exotic