Mexican people, foods, and art at Paris. In fact, if we were to judge this discussion by the indigenist standards of twentieth-century postrevolutionary Mexico, we would have to conclude that by the late 1880s the official Porfirian indigenism was much more progressive than were either the liberal or the Catholic critics. Be that as it may, at the time the regime's critics had a field day with Porfirian indigenism. For example, El Hijo del Ahuizote ridiculed the idea of Mexican nativism in Paris: "President Carnota [sic] was very pleased last night upon seeing us eat with utensils and drink champagne as if it were water. Ramoncito presented us with some cans of mole poblano, hot memelas [oval corn tortillas] made right there and some jars of pulque." The sarcastic report concluded, "Carnot toasted the absent and present Aztecs." 42 Here, the irony not only skewered Mexican Francophilia combined with commercialized nativism (processed Mexican products) but also aimed a subtle insult"present Aztecs"at the Mexican wizards of progress for whom, we may be sure, any adjective having to do with Indians was no compliment. By 1899 a cartoon in El Hijo del Ahuizote showed Minister Gilberto Crespo appointing wizards of progress for the 1900 exhibition and other Científicos suggesting to him that Mexican envoys ought to be exotic but "[Europeans] shall see that we are indeed Indians, but refined ones."43 Moreover, both Porfirian indigenism and Riva Palacio's new role as official historianwith his México a través de los sigloswere satirized by El Hijo del Ahuizote in a cartoon: an ''Aztec picture for the history book México a través de los yankees." In such a way, orthodox liberals criticized the official histories, indigenism, and rapprochement of the Porfirian regime with the United States.44 The cartoon entitled "Our Facade in Paris: Sketches of the Universal Exposition" was even more revealing in this regard. It was a complete satire of the allegorical efforts of the Aztec Palace's facade (see Figs. 26 and 27). Instead of the original columns upholding the facade that represented Indian gods, in the cartoon two Indian-like figures of Diaz represent the Tuxtepec Plan and Díaz's reelection. These columns sustained the "palace" which, in the cartoon, is the Porfirian regime. At the right, instead of the original Indian burner, we see a burner with the face of Diaz Mimiaga, the director of the Mexican commission in France. At the left was a burner with the face of Minister of Economic Development Carlos Pacheco. In such fashion, the two main personalities behind Mexico's presence at the 1889 fair guarded the totemlike columns of Don Porfirio. On the architrave, six figures symbolized ironic motifs. One of these images, plancarteo, was the bust of the Catholic priest Antonio Plancarte, then controversial abbot of the Guadalupe temple who was lobbying for the Vatican crowning of the Image of Guadalupe. His image on the Aztec Palace symbolized the new rapprochement of the Porfirian regime with the church, which went against the Jacobinism of purist Mexican liberals. Ignacio Mariscal, minister of foreign affairs, was the figure