Image not available. 26. Facade of the Aztec Palace at the 1889 Paris Universal Exhibition. Source: José Francisco Godoy, México en París (Mexico City, 1891). in yancomanía, which referred to his links with U.S. interests. The medal called empréstitos was a bust of Francisco Z. Mena, fellow general and friend of Diaz who, as Mexican minister to Germany, negotiated a German loan for Mexico in 1888. Minister of Finance Manuel Durán was portrayed in the medal entitled niquel because of his policies of circulating coins of nickel instead of silver or gold. Joaquín Baranda, minister of justice, was psicología, a sarcastic reference to the repression of the media in Mexico City. Tío Pedro represented Gen. Pedro Hinojosa, the war minister. The six images were supported by the two columns personifying Díazan allegory of Porfirian power. On the right, in a pre-Hispanic outfit but imitating the dress of a matador, was a figure that seemed to be Gen. José Ceballos, then governor of Mexico City. 45 On the left, imitating Jesús Contreras's sculptures, was Interior Minister Romero Rubio in an Aztec-Roman outfit. Crowning the cartoon were two imitations of plumed serpents: a German lender and a Yankee businessman. In this way, the entire Aztec Palace was made a strong, oppositional, political statement. The scientific aspects of the national image were also caricatured. Although science had become a public culture, its abuse at the hands of the Porfirian elite who monopolized it were criticized by liberals and conservatives, although the value of science was never questioned. What was especially an object of mockery were the efforts to portray Mexico as a hygienic