Image not available. 27. "Our Facade in Paris" (detail). Source: El Hijo del Ahuizote, 4 August 1889, 4-5. and sanitary nation. Statistics and complaints about the lack of sanitation, insecurity, and high mortality in Mexico City were constantly published by the free media. Newspapers reported on the need for annual killings of dogs and on public expenditures for monuments and fancy suburbs but not for sanitation. 46 In September 1888 EL Diario del Hogar complained about Peñafiel's mortality statistics and argued that the mortality rate was in fact growing in Mexico City: "In 25 years the population would disappear if it weren't renovated by births."47 The following May the same newspaper, in a wild exaggeration, argued that owing to the high mortality in Mexico and the low rate of population growth, in four years and three months Mexico City would be depopulated.48 These complaints continued into the 1910s. The free media could not resist contrasting Mexico's hygienic display at the Paris fairs with the reality of conditions in Mexico City and the indifferent behavior of the Superior Sanitation Council. The irony of a hygienic image vis-à-vis an unsanitary city was joined with criticism of the political involvement and privileges of the members of the council, such as Eduardo Liceaga. In 1900 EL Diario del Hogar observed that "the year 1900 began yesterday with the farce of ballots, an odd invention by Dr. Liceaga that has as its goal, according to what he explained in his last manifesto, to strengthen even more the un-