conditional adhesion to the reigning Caudillo." 49 In the same vein, while the wizards of progress prepared hygienic statistics to be sent to Paris in 1900, El Hijo del Ahuizote published a "dialogue" between two microbes, one from the miasmas of San Lázaro and the other from Peralvillo: Speaking in the serious style of all epidemics the stink here is that of corpse combined with cemetery. To no one is it a secret that this slovenly place is fertile ground for typhus that here acclimates itself for smallpox that hearths for cholera that is contagious and for measles that kill.50 The role of Liceaga and the Sanitation Council was caricatured in a cartoon that depicted Liceaga as the owner of a funerary agency, saying that with the influenza epidemic of Mexico City, "my business is doing very well."51 Dr. Carmona y Valle was also ridiculed for his constant search for microbes: "so many microbes he found / that with microbes he constructed the support of his fame."52 The much-publicized drainage system of Mexico City was ridiculed by El Hijo del Ahuizote as work begun "during the reign of the illustrious Chichimec Emperor Nezahualcoyotl" and "by mere chance completed under idem idem Zapoteca Porfioyotl."53 By 1901, in view of yet another Mexican hygienic display at the Buffalo exposition, a cartoon satirized the usual street exhibits at world's fairs. The "Rue du Caire" in Paris 1889, and the "Streets of Mexico" in Buffalo 1901 were ridiculed, together with the customary exhibit of the drainage system in Mexico City. A clown, Díaz, is shown introducing Mexican "Drainage with All Its Odors,' on "Escape-If-You-Can Street" (see Fig. 28).54 The public character of science is worth noting. For the growing middle class, which was both literate and urban, science had become a common form of knowledge. Both the logic and rhetoric of science became a form of common sense for this group. The phenomenon was part of the modern image, but it also created contradictions. The critiques of the Porfirian regime often took a scientific shape, an indication that the presumed scientific nature of Mexico's national image was accompanied by public consumption of scientific ideas and language. But the popular consumption of science backfired against the official image in the form of parodies of science used for political opposition. The public nature of science was present in the media and literature of the last part of the nineteenth century. World's fairs were important sources for popularization of the sciences, and news and commentaries about them