Image not available. 28. "Escape-If-You-Can Street." Source: El Hijo del Ahuizote, 2 June 1901, 308. accelerated the public consumption of scientific ideas and rhetoric. In 1887 Emilio Rabasa parodied science in La gran ciencia as the corrupt maneuvers and violence required to stay in power, and he utilized biological, mechanical, and evolutionist metaphors to develop his plot. So did such famous writers as Angel del Campo, Manuel Acuña, and even Amado Nervo. In the same way, the news received about the scientific displays in world's fairs produced criticism and increased the interaction of scientific production and public opinion. The science of geography, popularized in school and through political decisions that sought to form an accurate picture of the nation and its people, was identified with Garcia Cubas. In fact, such geographical references as those represented by Garcia Cubas were commonsensical in the era. Rabasa began his novel La bola by observing, "I do not know why this district capital does not appear either on the geographical maps of Mr. García Cubas, or in the numerous Mexican geographical treatises that have been published up to now." 55 In world's fairs, the geographical sciences were rapidly popularized, and García Cubas's books were translated and widely distributed. By 1891 a cartoon in El México Gráfico ridiculed the bureaucratization of Garcia Cubas as the official geographer of the Porfirian regime. A poem observed: Without making any stops or even moving for a second