he knows the entire world at least by map. He happily spends his life encrusted like a mollusk into a grayish desk in a section of [the Ministry of] Economic Development. 56 Nonetheless, the overall faith in science was shared by the literary urban elites, and they showed an avid interest in news about great discoveries and new advancements, such as when the famous poet Manuel Gutiérrez Nájera wrote in his weekly chronicles of the "sad toys that the new wise man invents . . . the magician of Menlo Park [Edison]."57 For them, the new technology promised comfort and a seemingly endless supply of therapeutic devices, from the "electric belt of Dr. McLaughlin" and the tonic "for impotence, the energizing San Germán wine," to ''Dr. de Garay's spa."58 As we have seen, critiques of the Mexican presence at world's fairs, however sarcastic, nevertheless shared the same basic assumptions about the modern world and its future. This consensus was expressed in another realm: the private uses in Mexico of the prestige furnished by world's fairs. Like the Mexican government, private Mexican companies transformed their success at world's fairs into domestic legitimacy. Once a cigarette factory, or an artist, or a scientific association was honored at an international fair, domestic credibility became indisputable. Within a consensus on the supremacy of modern values and production as epitomized by France and its fairs, the recognition granted by the ideal picture created tangible superiority within Mexico. Mexican cigarette companies, along with those of Brazil, were especially well received at world's fairs, and it became a commonplace for them to list the honors received at fairs on their cigarette packets. In an emerging mass-consumption society, to display these recognitions through publicity became cashable legitimacy. For instance, EL Valle Nacional earned a gold medal in the 1889 Paris exposition,59 and by 1890 all its publicity mentioned the award, including a reproduction of the medal. Similarly, the company of Ernesto Pugibeta Franco-Mexican entrepreneur who exhibited both machines to manufacture cigarettes and the cigarettes themselvesdecorated its boxes of El Buen Tono, Mascota, Ideal, and Judic cigars with a woman dressed in Paris fashion with a French diploma in one hand and a cigarette in the other and with the legend "Universal Exhibition of Paris 1889. The highest prize for the manufacturing of cigars." The Noriega cigarette company advertise-