ments contrasted the Eiffel Tower with the Mexican pavilion (see Fig. 29). After all, this was the company that had made an Eiffel Tower out of cigarettes in the halls of the Aztec Palace. The media often questioned the official propaganda of the Mexican government. The numerous books and pamphlets sponsored by the Mexican government were nationally criticized for their lack of objectivity and their inadequacy. In 1900 EL Diario del Hogar announced the publication of yet another propaganda book by Zayas Enríquez to be sent to the 1900 Paris exposition. It observed: "It is a pity that the basis on which such a beautiful monument of our progress rests is false and deplorable." It argued that books such as Zayas Enríquez's demonstrated "a shameful degree of backwardness in democratic practices, which make the Mexican people seem like a meeting of ignorant imbeciles." 60 No one was more critical of this propaganda than Francisco Bulnes, the enfant terrible of the Porfirians. In El porvenir de las naciones latinoamericanas (1899) he devoted a section to what he called "jauja y reverso" (opulence and its other side), an analysis of the propaganda books published by Mexico and other Latin American countries. "After reading the books that explain our riches, Europeans are convinced that the wage laborers in Latin America are great gentlemen who plow the land with English demi sang horses, have a balcony at the opera, look eye to eye a la Patti, whose wives need but to shatter gravel in order to bejewel themselves, and that on filtering the water of our rivers enough gold dust remains for children to play with."61 Bulnes explained that Mexico was indeed promising for immigrants, but because of foreigners' competitive advantages, not the country's tropical wealth. Bulnes believed that Latin America offered no commercial and industrial competition for Europeans. However, Mexico had to compete with other countries to attract immigrants. In 1889 Ireneo Paz, in his articles for El Diario del Hogar, compared Mexico's performance with that of Brazil and of Argentina because, he believed, those, not the United States, were the countries with which Mexico was competing.62 Paz's underlying assumption was that the United States, because of its industrial development and socioracial configuration, was unbeatable as a pole of attraction for European immigration. But in 1899 Bulnes did not hesitate to blame political chaos and hypocritical international propaganda for Mexico's failure to attract immigrants. His pragmatism and irony are worth quoting: The pure and respectable truth is that in Latin America nothing is given for free to any foreigner, no gold dust, no gravel full of diamonds, no rubies for the handles of hoes and pickaxes; among us, every foreigner has to work, and very hard if he is to make a fortune, but if he works hard, we neither want to nor can compete with him. To acquire real value, our resources need large capital investment, which in turn requires true government, whether democratic or dictatorial, it does not really matter, as long as they are governments