# Image not available. 29. Tobacco advertisement depicting the Aztec Palace. Source: AGN, Centro de Información Gráfica, Teixidor Collection; reproduced courtesy of the Archivo General de la Nación, Mexico City. (Photograph by the Archivo General de la Nación) in the full sense of the word, and not a hideous parade of petty politicians in the constant act of robbery and in the anarchic task of black beetles. 63 He then compared the data presented in Mexican propaganda on immigrants with that of Switzerland, showing the immense advantages of Switzerland in terms of salaries, cost of living, security, sanitation, and general development. The Mexican wizards of progress in charge of writing the nation's propaganda (or employing others to write it) were dismissed by Bulnes as lay priests. Bulnes, a master of irony, painstakingly dissected the general format of those books and made fun of their different parts: "territory: double the real one," "customs: those of Arcadia," "rain: whenever the farmers ask for it,'' "public hygiene: that of a rock crystal," "administrative morality: that of a Druid virgin," "proletariat: opulent," while in regard to crime, cost of hospitality, abuses, judiciary deficiencies, people's vote, and so forth, there was "sepulchral silence."64 In sum, the irony of Mexico's modern public image vis-à-vis Mexico's actuality endured as part of the general criticism of the Porfirian regime. But the constant confrontation of the ideal and real visions of Mexico never weakened either the propaganda attempts of the Porfirian regime or the grad-