## Eleven ## Toward Revolutionary Mexico The images of Mexico displayed in world's fairs after the Revolution of 1910 prolonged the Porfirian symbolic infrastructure, along with its contradictions. In this part of my analysis, however, historical continuities and breaks are seen within the specific limits of the creation of a homogeneous, dominant national image in the immediate postrevolutionary period. Nationalism is too much of a universal and long-in-the-making phenomenon to be explained solely, for example, by the Mexican Revolution. And the Mexican Revolution itself is too much of a many-sided happening to be reduced to the formation of a national image by various intellectuals and politicians in changing circumstances. Before jumping to the 1922 Exposição Internacional do Centenario in Rio de Janeiro, it is necessary to briefly examine the development of Mexico's image at international fairs up to the 1900s in order to understand the changing nature of twentiethcentury world's fairs in comparison with their nineteenth-century counterparts. 1 ## The Finale of the Aztec Palace? In January 1890 Parisian officials began to demolish the structures of the 1889 world's fair. The facades came down, and what once seemed to be a complete, universal, and harmonious cosmos vanished in a matter of weeks. Paris, however, maintained the great monument to industrial architecture, the Palace of Machines, until 1910, along with the Eiffel Tower, which endured to become the very symbol of Paris. While the French went about their demolition, the Mexican exhibition team was deliberating the destiny of the Mexican Aztec Palace and also planning the next performance, analyzing the best possible scenario: Glasgow? Madrid? Chicago?2