The Aztec Palace was dismantled and shipped to Mexico by the company of Furet and Rousseau. 3 At the same time, portions of the Mexican government's exhibit were sent to libraries, museums, and permanent exhibitions throughout Europe. The original plan had been to make the Aztec Palace into an archaeological museum, and, in fact, Antonio de Anza purchased heavy machinery to reconstruct the palace in Mexico.4 But the palace, though shipped home, was never rebuilt, either in Mexico or anywhere else. It returned to its beginnings as assorted stage props for the drama of the Mexican image of a modern nation. All of its components were subjected to the vagaries of Mexico's political, social, economic, and cultural life, in addition to the corrosion of time. Explaining why the Aztec Palace was never completely reassembled provides a clue to the dynamics of Mexico's modern nationalism. Many explanations can be posited. First, by the 1890s the discussion about a national architecture had moved toward a more radically cosmopolitan fashion, and it was simply impossible to keep alive the aesthetic experiment that was intrinsic to the Aztec Palace. Furthermore, even from a technical standpoint, reassembly of the Aztec Palace would have been difficult, for evidence indicates that major parts of the building suffered irreversible damage during the trip from Paris to Mexico.5 Or possibly it was just because the pavilion was imprisoned in the cage of bureaucracy, left to corrode until it was impossible to reconstruct.6 The Aztec Palace was not destroyed, however; ostensibly it was only stored for a better use. By 1895 Contreras's sculptures were located in the main patio of the Museo Nacional de Artillería, where Cuauhtémoc, Itzcoatl, Netzahualcoyotl, Totoquihuatzin, and Cuitláhuac remained as the patrimony of Mexico's military strength during the Porfirian era.7 But history is ongoing, never past. In 1940, during the heyday of postrevolutionary official indigenism, some of Contreras's sculptures that had graced the Aztec Palace were refurbished to crown Luis Lelo de Larrea's monument to La Raza in Mexico Citya postrevolutionary pyramid to honor Mexico's Indian origins, a symbolic break from the old regime's Francophilia and history of Indian exploitation (see Fig. 30.)8 Ironically, the monument utilized both the symbolism and the actual material created by the Porfirian years of experimenting in modernity, and nationalism. In the same way as the indigenist anthropologists of the 1930s and 1940s obtained their training and basic research from the Porfirian anthropological infrastructure, a concrete pyramidal monument to La Raza adorned the intersection of the freeways of a hypermodern Mexico City. This time around the city claimed to have reached the final version of modernity and nationalism. The monument borrowed not only Contreras's sculptures but also the eagle originally designed to crown the Porfirian Opera House designed by the Italian architect Adamo Boari.9 A replica of a pre-Hispanic pyramid