crowned by late-nineteenth-century figures of the Aztec rulers in Roman garb and a quasi-imperial eagle, the monument achieved an irony comparable only to imagining French kings rising from their graves and using guillotines as elegant shelves on which to store their crowns and capes. 10 ## Porfirian Images from Chicago to Saint Louis The type of nationalistic symbolism and ideological infrastructure found, for example, in Philadelphia 1876, New Orleans 1884, and Paris 1889 was recreated by the wizards of progress for many international expositions during the 1890s and 1900s. For Mexico, the most important exhibitions of these decades were Chicago 1893, Paris 1900, Buffalo 1901, and Saint Louis 1904. Although Mexico planned an extravagant exhibition for the monumental 1893 Chicago Columbian Exhibition, the economic crisis of the 1890s forced the wizards of progress to lower their sights (see Appendix 2). In contrast, both for the 1900 Paris universal exposition and the 1901 Buffalo pan-American fair, Mexico constructed important but makeshift buildingsthe first in a neoclassical conservative style, the second in a Spanish mission style. In Chicago, Mexico won 1,195 awards;11 mining and agriculture were once again especially welcomed. The Mexican artists were not so successful, however; it was later argued that the poor locations in which Mexican paintings and sculptures were placed were the cause of such meager response. In addition, in Chicago, as in other American fairs, Mexico had some presence at the women's exhibit. In the same way that the American women's commission for Chicago exhibit was headed by the daughter-in-law of the president of the United States, the Mexican women's commission was headed by Carmen Romero Rubio, Porfirio Díaz's wife.12 But of course the Mexican government was not truly interested in the modern social concerns with women. The aristocratic women's groups of Porfirian Mexico were part of the exhibition team, especially in the American fairs, where women had an important role to play. Generally Mexican women were represented only through their traditionally assigned domestic work. Nonetheless, one of the most significant aspects of the Mexican art exhibition in Chicago, according to the Mexican delegate M. Serrano, were the paintings by Gertrudis Gar-cía Teruel.13 In addition, José María Vigil prepared a collection of Mexican women's poetry, in order to show that Mexican women's poetic capacities were compatible with those of American and European women.14 The Mexican mining exhibit in Chicago was, as it had been throughout nineteenth-century exhibitions, very impressive and included an elaborate display of gold, silver, copper, steel, lead, opals, onyx, granites, and marbles. In addition, a Carta estadística minera de la República Mexicana was created and exhibited. Once again the Comisión Geográfico-Exploradora displayed natural history samples and scientific work; the Comisión Geológica Mexicana