presented a collection of fossils and maps. 15 The newly created Ministry of Communication exhibited replicas, designs, and miniatures of monuments (Columbus and Cuauhtémoc), architectural plans, and improvements for the National Palace. Mexico's presence in Chicago was especially notable for its ethnographic views. In the department of ethnology, numerous Mexican antiquities were exhibited, both by the Mexican government and by American anthropologists and ethnographers, together with pictures of ruins and models of tipos populares, Indian cloth, and Indian skulls (see Fig. 31).16 In addition, reproductions of the architecture of exotic countries were constructed near the Dairy Building. These were replicas of the ruins of Uxmal, the House of Nuns, and the Labna group.17 All of these replicas were made of papier-mâché and were the result of research conducted by the American archaeologist and diplomat E. H. Thompson, American consul in Yucatán, and of scientific studies by the American anthropologist F. W. Putnam.18 This was part of the so-called Midway Exhibit that was, as historian James Gilbert has described, "a unitary exhibit of ethnic variations tied together by concepts of evolution and movement through stages of civilization."19 In terms of architecture, Chicago was destined to be an important point of departure. In general, the architecture of the Chicago exhibition was dominated by the aristocratic neoclassicist, Beaux Arts style of the Eastern architects. However, such innovative architects as Louis Sullivan constructed modernist buildingsthe Transportation Building, for exampleat the edges of the fair.20 More importantly, the exhibits of exotic architectural styles nourished the emerging modernist architecture. Hence Frank Lloyd Wright, Sullivan's student, first saw Japanese and Mayan structures in Chicago, and from that inspiration he developed ingenious modern, functional buildings with Maya and Japanese influences (sometimes combined) in the modernist 1910s and 1920s.21 That was the case, for example, with the Imperial Hotel he constructed in Tokyo in 1916 (a structure that combined traditional Japanese architecture with Maya motifs). In 1929, Mexico followed the same steps in its pavilion for the 1929 Ibero-American fair in Seville (see chapter 13). After Chicago, and before 1900, Mexico participated in various American fairs, most of which were of regional importance and to which Mexico's private exhibitors and government sent the customary displays of raw materials, antiquities, and archaeological pieces. Two of these fairs were the 1895 Cotton States International Exposition in Atlanta and the 1898 Trans-Mississippi International Exposition in Omaha. Special envoys of the Atlanta exhibition traveled to Mexico to encourage participation in this rather modest fair,22 and more than 160 Mexican exhibitors eventually attended. The Mexican commission for this fair was headed by Gregorio E. González, who eventually sent to the Ministry of Economic Development a list of American entrepreneurs interested in investing in Mexico. He also reported his diffi-