# Image not available. 31. Maya ruins in Chicago. Source: Hubert Howe Bancroft, The Book of the Fair: An Historical and Descriptive Presentation of the World's Science, Art, and Industry, as Viewed through the Columbian Exposition at Chicago 1893, vol. 4 (Chicago, 1893), 633. culties with the Mexican Village Company, which was negligent in paying the salaries and return tickets of the people from Tehuantepec who had been brought to the fair to make up the human circus of the "Mexican Village." 23 This exhibit was described as a village that "included many of the characteristic types of that country, with much of the local color for which Mexico is famous."24 Ironically enough, although exhibiting people from Tehuantepec in what amounted to a human zoo (and not paying their salaries) caused no problems, the organizers of the "Mexican Village" were forced to cancel the originally planned ''bloodless" bullfights after popular protest in which it was argued that "the terror of the horses would be cruelty in its worst form."25 The 1898 Omaha international fair was an echo of the 1893 Chicago fair for the states west of the Mississippi River. In it, Mexico occupied 3,000 square feet, exhibiting agricultural products and raw materials. In addition, "in one section historical articles were displayed showing articles and implements in use during Aztec days."26 As in many other American fairs, Mexico's display in Omaha was directed by Albino R. Nuncio of the Ministry of Economic Development and the main member of what might be termed a second group of wizards of progress. This second group was often in charge of Mexico's displays at the many small American world's fairs, such as Atlanta 1895, Omaha 1898, Nashville 1897, Saint Louis 1904, Boston 1908, and San Antonio 1909.