phenomena of the modern world were perceived most of the time with admirationbut some of the time with terror or nostalgia. Technology and progress made it possible to appreciate present time as the best of all feasible worlds, and universal expositions were the vivid confirmations of the greatness of the present tense. The understanding of the present was composed of a specific recapitulation of the past and exceptional previews of the future. In the 1900 Paris universal exposition, for instance, a pamphlet argued that "the expositions are not only days of leisure and gaiety in the midst of the toils of the people. They appear, at long intervals, as the summits from which to measure the course we have traveled. Mankind goes out from them comforted, full of courage and animated with profound faith in the future." 7 Along similar lines, a commentator on the 1904 Saint Louis world's fair observed that "expositions accentuate the deficiencies of the past, give us a realization of our present advantages, predict the developments of the near future, and equip the arm and brain alike of the mechanic, the engineer and the philosopher for further and immediate advances into the realms of the possible."8 Although the notion of progress had achieved visible manifestations and an extensive theoretical corpus by the 1880s, to sense that the final stage of history had been achieved was not necessarily to share in the optimistic industrial view of the world. The feeling was also expressed in what world expositions overlooked in their enthusiasm and pompositythe sensation of decadence, a weakening of the moral and intellectual strength of the times; the sense that the "events experienced during a lifetime" could seem to be not in the present but in the past.9 In fact, for some late-nineteenth-century modernists, all that seemed familiar and secure was disappearing, and there was neither an assurance of future progress nor anything by which to teach individuals how to live in what appeared to be a weightless present. As Baudelaire said in commenting on the 1855 Paris world's fair, "but where is, I ask you, future's guarantee of progress? . . . Within the realm of imagination, the idea of progress . . . appears to be a gigantic absurdity, something so grotesque it reaches the horrendous."10 Thus, in their affirmation of a Panglossian world of progress, latenineteenth-century world's fairs were bright lights that did not enable one to see the shadows beyond. Hence world's fairs encompassed and confronted two contradictory connotations of modernism. Expositions were capitals of modernism informed by industrial optimism. But they were also unintended stages on which to view the achievements of the age while deploring the accompanying degeneration of the spirit. In this sense, world's fairs furnished images and pretexts for quintessential modernists such as the young Eliot, whose early work, "The Man Who Was King," was inspired by his observations of the Philippine village displayed at the 1904 Saint Louis world's fair;11 Dostoyevsky, who was sarcastic in the face of the "halcyon days" of the 1851 Crystal Palace, which