After the Saint Louis fair Mexico sent minor exhibits to such fairs as the 1908 food fair in Boston and the 1909 San Antonio fair. 33 But no new comprehensive performance was staged until 1922, and even then the extravaganzas of the nineteenth century were never repeated. ## The 1900 Paris Universal Exhibition Mexico's presence at the 1900 Paris universal exhibition was almost equal to its participation at the 1889 Paris fair.34 Sebastián B. de Mier, the director of Mexico's exhibition at the 1900 fair, estimated that whereas Mexico had spent nearly 1.3 million francs just in the construction of the Aztec Palace, the cost of the 1900 Mexican pavilion was around 600,000 francs.35 The 1900 Paris Universal and International Exhibition was larger than that of 1889; in fact, it was the grandest of the entire nineteenth century. Accordingly, Mexico planned an enormous presence, but a monetary and agricultural crisis kept expenses under control. From the outset the Paris exposition had neither a clear justification nor an implicit theme. The 1889 Paris world's fair had an unparalleled leitmotiv: to celebrate the centenary of the French Revolution. In contrast, the 1900 fair had as its only excuse the need to conclude the century with yet another universal exhibition, one that would "reflect the refulgent genius of France and show that, as in the past, we now stand at the vanguard of progress."36 The 1900 Paris exhibition was a diagnosis of the state of modern culture. Above all, it echoed three characteristics of fin-de-siècle modernityoverall grandiosity, cultural retrogression, and what we know as fin-de-siècle spirit. That is, the exhibition took place at almost the same site as the 1889 fair. It was larger, occupying all of Champ de Mars, Trocadero, the Esplanade des Invalides, the Cours de la Reine, and the banks of the Seine River between the Pont de l'Alma and the Place de la Concorde: nearly 5 million square feet of exhibition space. Over seven months, 39 million people visited the fair, three times the entire population of Mexico. Seventy-five foreign pavilions were constructed, mostly along the Quai d'Orsay, including those of the United States, Denmark, Austria, Portugal, Bosnia, Herzegovina, Peru, the United Kingdom, Spain, Bulgaria, Greece, and Mexico. Three traditional Latin American fair participants were absentArgentina, Brazil, and Chile. As in the case of most nineteenth-century world's fairs, the 1900 Paris exhibition was an expression of the conviction that the ideals of modern times could be represented only through grandiosity. The 1900 exhibition displayed a particularly retrograde tone: a return to conservative cultural features. Whereas the 1889 universal exhibition was characterized by the technologically innovative architecture, as epitomized by the Eiffel Tower, the 1900 exhibit had as its main attractions the massive use of electricity such as in the Chateau d'Eau palace and in a building known