as "The Hall of Illusions." 37 In addition, two symbols of architectural innovation housed grandiose exhibitions of modern painting and sculpture (the Petit Palais) and French arts and crafts (the Grand Palais). Art nouveau has often been linked to this architectural innovation, but overall the fair was marked by neoclassical forms and canonic art. What also marked the 1900 fair was a pompous new bridge over the Seine that was inaugurated to honor the Russian Czar Alexander II, marking the rapprochement of Russia and France in the context of growing hostilities among European powers. The political arena was characterized by conservatism and retrograde nationalism after the Dreyfus affair. Above all, the 1900 Paris fair, with its merging of retrograde art with art nouveau, of Bohemian Paris with the optimism of a modern ideal of city and world, was a prototypical fin-de-siècle event: a snapshot of ambivalence expressing both enchantment and disenchantment of modernism. The fair concluded not only the nineteenth century but also the "era of greater exhibitions."38 The exhibition was, like the famed Rodin sculpture that was exhibited there, at the "Gates of Hell," at the entrance of total modern uncertainty. It enacted modernity at the "Gates of Hell," first, because it showed "the persistence of the old regime"; that is, despite progress and innovation, the fair showed that, as Arnold J. Mayer has maintained, "in form, content, and style the artifacts of high culture continued to be anchored and swathed in conventions that relayed and celebrated traditions supportive of the old order.''39 The 1900 fair showed that modernity was tradition tamed. Second, a posteriori we can acknowledge that the fair was indeed at the gates of the hell of radical uncertainty, violence, and destruction that swept Europe after 1914. It was the final edge of what George Steiner called the "imagined garden of liberal culture. . . the myth of the nineteenth century"the fair was held at the brink of "a season in hell."40 Third, it represented a sarcastic naming of the unnaming, as in Rodin's gates: cultural gates crowned by the Thinker-Poet "poised at the edge of the two worlds. . . the spectral no-man's-land where 'certainty dissolves into mystery.'"41 That is, it was a conscious self-defeating, an awareness of progress, and a selfrumination about an ongoing cultural shift. These are the characteristics we assign to the notion of fin-de-siècle culture, and that is precisely why 1900 was the first and only fin de siècle in Western history.42 Mexico's presence at the 1900 Paris fair showed, on one hand, the increasing proficiency of the wizards of progress, who articulated a more selective and efficient modern image of Mexico, and, on the other hand, how Mexico adapted to the trendy nature of modernity: Mexico selectively echoed the grandiosity, retrogression, and, to some extent, the fin-de-siècle spirit of the fair. Sebastián de Mier explained that, following a long process of learning