about international fairs and owing to economic difficulties, Mexico's display in 1900 was bound to be less comprehensive than that of 1889 had been. In 1889 Mexico's display "was exhaustive and extended to all. . . human activity, in an attempt to demonstrate Mexico's potential. By contrast, Mexico's presence at the 1900 fair needed to be limited to assert what we have accomplished in practice." 43 Specific products and aspects were therefore emphasized: mining, tropical fruits, coffee, tobacco, cereals, fibers, wood, textiles, medical substances, paper, arts, liberal arts, and education.44 Overall, Mexico's presence at the 1900 fair was better organized and involved fewer people and less money. Instead of one director for each group of exhibits, individuals were in charge of three or more groups. The display included fewer exhibitors but earned more awards51 percent of the 1,088 exhibitors won prizes.45 One of the greatest moments in Mexican art was the grand prize awarded to Jesús Contreras's sculpture Malgré-Tout. Many exhibits, including those of the Comisión Geográfico-Exploradora, of tobacco, mining, and textiles, and of the Superior Sanitation Council, were essentially the same as those used during the previous twenty years. What best exemplified Mexico's adaptation to the changing nature of modern times, to the fairs' renewed conservatism and spirit of fin de siècle, was the discussion about the pavilion to be placed along the Quai d'Orsay, near the palaces of War and Peace. Although no public contests were held for a construction design, throughout 1899 and 1900 two perspectives prevailed and conflicted: the officially supported project of engineer Antonio de Anza, and various projects supported by Jesús Contreras's artistic view. De Anza seemed to have the support of Minister Fernandez Lealwho had substituted for Carlos Pacheco at the Ministry of Industrial Promotionand Porfirio Díaz. Contreras was favored by the Mexican minister in Paris, by the French authorities, and, apparently, by de Mier. In coming to a final decision, Mexican artists, bureaucrats, and architects took into considerationas usualthe internal balance of power of the wizards of progress, economic and technical limitations, and the maxims and tendencies of cosmopolitan nationalism, as these last were expressed in the 1900 Paris fair. By 1900 Contreras had consolidated himself as the master of the statuary needs of Porfirian Mexico. He was an influential personality in both political and intellectual circles (see chapter 7). His lobbying to obtain the contract for the 1900 Mexican pavilion was overwhelming. Contreras hired French architects, and thus, once in Paris, de Anza proceeded to undo Contreras's contracts.46 French organizers argued that de Anza's design was unharmonious with the nearby buildings, though in fact they were trying to put pressure on Mexican authorities to respect Contreras's French deals.47 In response, de Anza's design was modified to match the standards of the nearby palaces of War and Peace (see Fig. 34).48