Image not available. 34. The Mexican pavilion at the 1900 Paris Universal Exhibition. Source: Gustave Gostkowski, Au Mexique: Études, notes et renseignements utiles au capitalistes, a l'immigrant, e au touriste (Paris, 1900), frontispiece. (Photograph by Carlos Contreras) Two of Contreras's sketches of a Mexican pavilion were especially elaborate. The first was formed by two buildings linked by a modern, French romantic style, "the triumphant arch of peace." 49 The two structures merged various architectural styles in an attempt to depict the national history: the bottom part in pre-Hispanic Mitla style, the main corpus of the facade in Spanish colonial fashion, and the frieze in modern French romantic style. The second design added two allegorical compositions in the lateral facades of this intricate blueprint: on one facade, figures representing Mexican independence; on the other, La Reforma (Mexico's liberal reforms of the mid-nineteenth century). The second design also included a tower that encompassed what were, for Contreras, the priorities of modernity in natural order: "figures in the arts and industry that serve as bases for the symbol of science, which in turn ends in the tower of peace" (see Fig. 35).50 The collage of architectural styles comprising these designs aimed to depict the mature awareness of the evolution of the nation from pre-Hispanic times (the basement) to a Spanish colonial era, and finally to peace and cosmopolitanism (the frieze in romantic French fashion). This iconoclastic endeavor was a hazardous venture in such a retrograde fair as the 1900 Paris exposition. Instead, the wizards of progress decided to be cautious by con-