environment and that set of circumstances that today are finally surfacing and that hopefully will become a favorable environment." 52 In view of the conservative nature of the 1900 Paris fair, it seemed adequate for Mexicans to search for classicism in their own country. Thus the works of architect Ramón Rodríguez Arangoity, who had died in 1884, were rediscovered. Rodríguez Arangoity had taught various Porfirian architects and had traveled to Italy and France to study the classical forms of Rome and Pompeii. In fact, he had some experience in world's fairs, for he participated in the 1859 French imperial world's fair. In 1864 Emperor Maximilian appointed him as director of the works for the Chapultepec Castle. His works often combined modern iron structure with classicism.53 The classicist conservative architecture was revived by the 1900 world's fair, which prompted de Anza in Mexico also to rely on a classicist architect who had served Mexico's ephemeral, Frenchsupported empire. Thus he resorted to Rodríguez Arangoity, the architect who, according to de Anza, had brought the "neo-Greek" style to Mexico (see Fig. 36). This style was canonized as the Napoleon III style and had already been represented at the 1889 Paris fair by such architects as Garnier and Formigé. It prevailed during the 1900 Paris fair, albeit with some innovative exceptions. Thus Mexico decided that because the country had no national architectural style that could represent its nationalityunlike Italy, Spain, or Norwayit needed to "adopt a serious style that could reveal the character of the government that rules Mexico's destiny. . . . The neo-Greek style, which fulfilled these conditions, was therefore adopted."54 A truly modern national image had to be parsimoniously modern, as if modernity were a natural gift. Accordingly, Mexico's national image in Paris 1900 was epitomized in a building of "notable sobriety."55 Mature modern nations used cosmopolitan forms and avoided lavish displays. The neo-Greek pavilion included allegories of Mexico's historical eras (Independence, Reform, Peace). Fully illuminated with electric light,56 it was built, as were all pavilions, of iron, plaster, and material that could easily be demolished.57 During the fair, almost one million people visited the building. Mexico's presence at the 1900 Paris fair also aimed at putting an end to the tortuous path of Mexico's nineteenth-century history. As a modern nation-state ruled by an enlightened authoritarian government, Mexico sought to participate in the spirit of fin de siècle in order both to prove Mexico's universalism and to end its uncivilized past. The nineteenth century was over, and so was Mexico's past chaos and instability. However, Mexican intellectuals and artists were ambivalent about what the spirit of fin de siècle actually symbolized. The debate that surrounded the construction of the 1900 Mexican pavilion was part of a wider debate of modernism as a suitable trend for Mexico. The decision to echo the return to classicism was a safe cultural