36. Construction of the Mexican pavilion in the Quai d'Orsay, Paris, 1900. Source: EXP, Box 31, Exp. 9; reproduced courtesy of the Archivo General de la Nación, Mexico City. (Photograph by the Archivo General de la Nación) decision in an exhibition that was at the "gates of hell," but Mexican intellectuals and artists were nonetheless experimenting with the enchantments and disenchantments of modernity that the fair both displayed and tried to conceal. With a neoclassical pavilion, in a fair organized in the "Remington" era, 58 Mexican intellectuals in Paris and Mexico debated all of the directions modernity could possibly take. Latin American intellectuals were experiencing their own modernism, which in a way echoed that of European intellectuals. The guru of such a movement, the Nicaraguan poet Rubén Darío, like Yeats in Europe ("Many ingenious things are gone. . ."),59 expressed his awareness at the end of the century of the radical and sudden change that characterized modern times: "Yo soy aquel que ayer no más decía / el verso azul y la canción profana. . . y muy siglo diez y ocho y muy antiguo / y muy moderno; audaz, cosmopolita; / con Hugo fuerte y con Verlaine ambiguo, / y una sed de ilusiones infinita."60 The Mexican fin de siècle had to be as experimental and innovative as the European one, but less tragic. It was revolutionary and retrograde at the same time. It brought together the group of thinkers that was represented in La Revista Moderna, and it signified a return to Hispanism, spiritualism,