antipopulism, and strong anti-Americanism in view of the 1898 Spanish-American war. In La Revista Moderna, where Nietzsche, Tolstoy, Kipling, Wilde, and Japanese poets were translated, the poet Jesús E. Valenzuela could claim: "La Ciencia ha hecho bancarrota! Un grito / del siglo moribundo lo proclama, / hay que empuñar de nuevo el oriflama / del ensueño en el tér-mino infinito." 61 But was Mexican modernism to reach the radical standards of European disenchantment? A Mexican literary critic and journalist, Victoriano Salado Álvarez, believed that modernism was a decadent literature which was at odds with a country that was not yet modern. The poet Amado Nervo, then in Paris reporting on the 1900 fair, rejected this idea, because in fact "all good things that we have in the nation are artificial and antithetical in relation to the environment, and thus everything has been accomplished without considering the people's criteria."62 In effect, by 1900 the debate over Mexico's national image included even the modern reactions to modernity itself. And although the nation epitomized from the 1870s to the 1900s seemed to be consolidated, the idea of a Mexican nation was still an elite collective aspiration and had yet to be fully implemented. ## The Persistence of the Wizards of Progress The 1915 San Francisco world's fair can be seen as a transition between the great nineteenth-century exhibitions and the new twentieth-century fairs. After 1910 the new revolutionary government attempted to take part at various international fairs, most notably at the 1915 San Francisco world's fair. Mexican preparations for San Francisco can be seen as evidence of postrevolutionary adjustments in handling the national image.63 Although the construction of the Panama-Pacific exposition started in 1911, the newly elected president, Woodrow Wilson, did not finally sanction celebration of the San Francisco world's fair until May 1913. Only then were invitations sent to foreign nations. The United States encouraged the participation of Latin American countries in part to smooth over its hitherto rather harsh relationships with that bloc. This effort, combined with the Mexican government's interest in obtaining official U.S. recognition, made Mexico's great effort to join the 1915 Panama-Pacific exposition inevitable. At the beginning of 1913 Madero's government attempted to contact the Porfirian exhibition team in order to organize Mexico's participation at San Francisco. Madero's regime needed U.S. approval, and the Porfirian wizards of progress knew how to organize a performance that would demonstrate Mexican progress and stability. But the assault on the presidential palace by Felix Diaz and Bernardo Reyes and the consequent alliance with Victoriano Huerta, which ended in Madero's overthrow and assassination, ended the Maderistas' attempts to organize Mexico's presence in San Francisco. During the first months of the Huerta regime the counterrevolutionary