covered everything with calculated reasoning but also (in his view) with boredom and desperation; 12 that cunning observer, Henry Adams, who saw the 1893 Chicago Columbian Exposition and, full of amazement, said, "After this vigorous impulse, nothing remained for a historian but to askhow long and how far?"13 From the great openings to the colossal closings, world's fairs epitomized a full cycle of the linear and progressive realization of time. And yet they were ephemeral, passing moments of selfcongratulation and self-deceit. Each exhibition was like a succinct epilogue for history, because the life span of a fair was as evanescent as it was complete: modernity's "eternity in an hour." They were, as a U.S. senator noted in 1889, "the flash photograph [s] of civilization on the run."14 Their short existence certified the infinite power of their creators: technology, industry, and capital. Therefore, on one hand, it was possible for them to become moments of reconciliationall nations together despite past troubles and advancing increasingly paranational interests. On the other hand, rather than mere futurist theaters, they were able to amalgamate past and present promises. They included the future, but only insofar as it was an inevitable outcome of present greatness. Consequently, the concept of great ends constituted the historical consciousness of modern progress and the control of the discernible future. Thus the fairs were occasions for reviewing the Western past and its contrasts and for evaluating the antique and the different, by rewriting the past and by gaining and governing the exotic. In this sense the colonial exhibits in French world's fairs were the archetypical expressions of a blend of exoticist, economic, and imperialist desires. These displays lasted until the 1940s, when colonies were neither politically nor economically profitable, as if a nation could not be modern or cosmopolitan without its beloved colonies. Confidence in the superiority of the Western presentand thus of the inferiority of any other past, present, or futurewas achieved through sciencesanthropology, scientific history, ethnology, criminology, archaeology, economics, sociology, medicine, architecture, engineering, and so forth. Furthermore, the goal of world's fairs was to assure that only one future could be derived from their revision and reinvention of the past: that of inevitable progress. Mexico's presence at world's fairs shows how Mexicans were capable of enjoying the grand finales while presenting themselves as part of them. But it also shows how Mexicans' self-positioning in the last stage of evolutionary time made them the most fit to exercise the power they already had domestically. In fact, Mexico in nineteenth-century world's fairs shared Europe's orientalist and exoticist concerns and in turn undertook an "autoethnography." It fed the hunger of these exhibitions for exotic objects and people. Mexico thus offered indigenous food and drink, dresses, and tipos populares (popular characters) at the fairs; in the same way, it exhibited the head of