The various factions of the constitutionalist cause were about to enter Mexico City to start negotiations for a new balance of power, and U.S. troops were still in Veracruz. There was no way for Mexico to attend the festivities in San Francisco. Mexico's aborted attendance at the Panama-Pacific exposition constitutes one of those untaken paths with which history is replete. However, the very attempt exemplifies the construction of the national image in troublesome times. It shows how, regarding Mexico's national images, there are deeper continuities in the past. An official historian of the San Francisco exhibition observed: "It was an ambition of the Panama-Pacific International Exposition management to produce in San Francisco a cosmos, so nearly complete that if all the world were destroyed except the 635 acres of land within the Exposition gates, the material basis of the life of today could have been reproduced from the exemplification of the arts, inventions, and industries there exhibited." 68 If the world had been destroyed, and if the only world and the only Mexico that could have been reconstructed had come from the ruins of the fair and from the records of Mexico's failed participation, what emerged would have been a picture of idealized progress and order, a world to which the whole fair belongedas did the nineteenth century. ## From the Eiffel Tower to Disneyland Between the 1890s and the 1930s world's fairs underwent a fundamental transformation in their very essence as comprehensive pocket pictures of the world. In 1893 Henry Adams visited the Chicago exhibition, where he "found matter of study to fill hundreds of years, and his education spread over chaos." For Adams, "The exposition itself defied philosophy. . . . As a scenic display, Paris had never approached it, but the inconceivable scenic display consisted in its being there at all. . . . No such Babel of loose and ill-joined, such vague and ill-defined and unrelated thoughts and half-thoughts and experimental outcries as the Exposition, had ever ruffled the surface of the lake."69 Along similar lines, in 1900 the acclaimed Mexican poet Amado Nervo described the 1900 Paris exposition as the great ending of the nineteenth century. For him, to visit that fair was "like entering the country of miracles and of the ineffable." For Nervo, the Gallery of Machines was "large enough to contain two tempests."70 Decades later the Russian-American novelist E. L. Doctorow related the experience of a first-generation New York Jewish boy at the 1939 New York world's fair. Commenting on one of the main parts of this Great Depression fair, the so-called Futurama, and on the whole fair as a perfect representation of an ideal world, Doctorow's main character observed: "In fact, this is what I realized and that no one had mentioned to me. [The fair] was a toy that any child in the world would want to own. You could play with it forever.''71 In effect, world's fairs had passed