from absorbing universal amazement to conscious material amusement that could be possessed; from a symbolic and spatial, if ephemeral, universe that seemed to contain all visitors, to conscious, purchased entertainments; from the Crystal Palace and the Eiffel Tower to Disneyland; from pictures of a utopia to a "degenerated utopia"an ideology clothed as a myth. 72 I examined the nature of this global change in my introduction. The nineteenth-century type of world's fair changed because the essence of the nineteenth century had dissipated along with its chronological passing. By the 1920s the production of forms, values, tastes, and ways of life of a large portion of the population of European cities had changed radically. The change was both qualitative and quantitative, and it affected the forms of social organization, the action of governments, the poles of cultural development, and the fashions and tastes of the Western world. By the 1930s, efforts to organize a world's fair along nineteenthcentury lines was supported by new economic and symbolic bases. On one hand, tourism, mass consumption, and corporate power had become the basic economic supports of world's fairs. On the other hand, the pragmatic goals of fostering recovery from economic depressions, or just imperial hangovers, resulted in nostalgic appeals to the ideal expressions of a mythical golden age of modern times: the nineteenth-century world's fairs. For Mexico, the chronological, political, and cultural border between the nineteenth century and the twentieth century seems all too obvious: the Revolution of 1910. But Mexico's presence at sundry international fairs after the revolution was marked by this comprehensive historical mutation that included world's fairs, the Western world, and Mexico itself.