## Thirteen The 1929 Seville Fair One who follows blindly in a past generation's footsteps plunders that generation. One who creates a doctrine to be followed plunders future generations. Revolutionaries plunder the revolution. Nationalists plunder the nation. The avant-garde plunders its epoch. The exoticists, and the Mexicans among them, plunder what they find picturesque. JORGE CUESTA, 1932 ## Seville and Imperial Nostalgia Between 1929 and 1930 a twofold Spanish exposition took place at the same time in Montjuic in Barcelona and in El Parque María Luisa in Seville. Whereas Barcelona's exhibit focused on industry, Seville's fair was fundamentally cultural and artistic. Only European nations sent significant industrial and technological displays to the Barcelona exposition. In common with the 1889 Paris world's fair, which displayed a "History of Habitation," Barcelona's fair also included a display called "The Spanish Town," a collection of exact replicas of traditional towns from all Spanish regionsa major exercise in modern autoethnography. 1 In contrast, despite some controversies, Seville's fair was named Exposición Ibero-Americana and thus was joined by almost all Latin American countries, the United States, and Portugal.2 On the inauguration day, José Cruz Conde, general commissary of Seville's exposition, said to King Alfonso XIII, "Certainly, Sir, since October 12, 1492, there has not yet been a single day in the history of America of more importance and spiritual significance than today, when the great Ibero-American Exhibition begins."3 The fair was in fact the stage for the last act of the drama of imperial nostalgia and nationalism that characterized Primo de Rivera's era. Plans to celebrate a world's fair in Seville had been in the making since 1905. In addition to interests of urban developers in Sevillewho from the outset supported the idea of an exhibition in order to foster investment in urban transformation and sanitationimportant ideological aspects favored the possibility of a world's fair in that city. This was an era of "decadent historical reality,"4 and to commercially and spiritually reconquer America was one of the main goals of the exposition, especially after the war with the United States and its consequence, the loss of the last Spanish American