colony, Cuba. Originally planned for 1911, and then for 1927, for numerous national and international causes the fair was deferred until 1928, and even then it was once again postponed to 1929. By then, the urbanistic needs of Seville had completely merged with the interests involved with the exposition. But "Ibero-Americanism was what motivated the central Spanish government itself to support the exposition in Seville." 5 In truth, Seville's exhibit was, as a Mexican observer argued in Revista de las Españas, "an objective expression of Spain's wish to reincorporate the Hispanic spirit into our ethnic family."6 La Plaza de España, designed in baroque Spanish style, was the center of the exhibit. In addition, there were galleries and pavilions from the various Spanish regions. Portugal, Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, Peru, Chile, Uruguay, Santo Domingo, Cuba, and the United States constructed original pavilions designed by their own architects. Colombia, Venezuela, and Guatemala hired Spanish architects to build their buildings.7 Some maverick structures contrasted with the prevailing Spanish styles, and all shared a common goal: to honor the Madre Patria (motherland). In those days, the favorite metaphor was the image of the madre piadosa (clement mother) who was visited by her grown daughters; no hard feelings, no rancor, no guilt, but all warmly united in the arms of the Hispanic spirit. Seville was organized in the fashion of the great fairs of the nineteenth century. Not only did its architecture follow the structure of the great French world's fairs of that period, but it also used a similar classification of exhibits. The exposition was divided into eleven sections: history, agriculture, mining, heavy industry, paper and graphic arts, light industry, communications and public works, education, sanitation, sociology, and statistics. As in the 1900 Paris fair, Seville's history exposition included anthropology (that is, skulls), archaeology, and ethnology. But the ethnology exhibit was subdivided into "Aboriginal Ethnology" (samples of the various primitive races, their habitation and crafts, and their daily life) and "Colonial Ethnology" (historical racial types, buildings, costumes, and arts). Within this ethnological classification various Mexican items were exhibited. In turn, what in 1889 the French fairs had started to call social economy was now laid out in the section of sociology, which included displays on social economy, workers' conditions, "conflicto capital trabajo," and salaries.8 However, the aim of Seville's exhibit was not to portray the entire modern world but to modernize the idea of Hispanism, to give it a commercial and industrial connotation without losing its spiritual meaning. Therefore, in 1908 it had been proposed that the Americas' participation be limited to the "nations which were born into the world of civilization through the general collusion of conquistadores."9 Nonetheless, and in spite of serious resistance, the United States was finally invited, as was Cuba.10 Indeed, Seville's exposition was a fiesta of Spain in every minute detail, from architecture to