Elías Calles, the "jefe máximo" of postrevolutionary Mexico. Of course, José Vasconcelos was a noted advocate of Hispanism, and in 1929 he included this ideology in his campaign for the presidency. But the strong Catholicism intrinsic to Hispanism, together with the uses of this ideology by Primo de Rivera's conservative and pseudomonarchist regime, made of Mexico's government an open, if soft, opponent of both. In 1929 Emilio Portes Gil's administration (1928-1931) finally gave official recognition to October 12 as the "día de la raza": the commemorative day not of mere Hispanism but of mestizaje (miscegenation), the day to honor both Columbus and Cuauhté- moc. 19 In turn, the crisis of the Spanish dictatorship was followed with great interest in Mexico. The poet Enrique González Martínez, then Mexican ambassador to Spain, eloquently described the situation: "I was blessed with the fortune of witnessing Spain still adorned with monarchic and traditional forms while republican sentiments spread among intellectuals and the Spanish community in general. These were moments of crisis which are convenient times for the awakening of popular feelings."20 In 1930 Primo de Rivera resigned and left Spain, and the struggle to consolidate the Spanish republic began.21 This turning point was saluted in Mexico even by a popular singer who composed a tune: "Spain! Spain! Your valor has crushed the monarchy / Spain! Spain! Your ancient history now has another glory thanks to your bravery.''22 ## Mexico and Seville, 1929 To this exposition and to this Spain, and despite its distaste, Portes Gil's administration dispatched a relatively large exhibit. Needless to say, the precarious political and economic environment that hampered Mexico's presence at the 1922 Rio de Janeiro exposition had scarcely improved in the intervening years, and, in fact, 1929 was a critical year in Mexico's postrevolutionary history. The more or less stable political status quo achieved by Obregón and Calles seemed to have been consolidated by Obregón's victory in the 1928 elections. But his assassination in the same year restarted the realignment of the revolutionary elites. During the provisional government of Portes Gil, Calles's growing power had to confront and negotiate, politically and militarily, with different factions. It was in this context that in 1929 Callistas and Obregonistas founded the Partido Nacional Revolucionario (PNR), direct antecedent of the long-lasting postrevolutionary Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI). However, when the rather obscure minister of Mexico in Brazil, Pascual Ortiz Rubio, and not Aarón Sáenz, who seemed to be Obregón's natural successor, was nominated as the PNR's candidate for the presidency, Calles's authority became all too evident. In 1929 the revolution made clear who was to be the caudillo who would form institutions.