But 1929 was also the year when the Cristero rebellion reached a critical point and forced the establishment of a new status quo between the Mexican government and the Catholic Church. Furthermore, it was the year of the Escobarista rebellion that put Calles back on the battlefield, while Vas-concelos began his quasimessianic struggle for the presidency. All of this took place in an economy that had not yet recovered from the debacle of 1914 and 1915, aggravated by Mexico's recognition of its debt to American banks and by the international financial uncertainty that came to the surface in the black October of 1929. In such a context, it is rather amazing that the administration of Calles and, later, Portes Gil, joined Seville's fair, collecting Mexican products and manufactures, constructing a permanent building in Seville, and expending at least U.S.\$125,000. 23 Mexico's attendance at Seville's fair could, of course, be justified by the customary excuse of diplomatic reciprocity. Spain had sent delegations both in 1910, to the centenary of Mexico's independence, and in 1921, to the centennial celebration of the consummation of Mexico's independence. More importantly, in joining Seville's exposition Calles's government saw a chance to change the image of Mexico as a violent and chaotic country. It was also an opportunity to promote Mexico's products and art and to gain international prestige as an economically well organized and peaceful country. Most of all, the fair was an occasion to exploit curiosity about, and to foster favorable international opinion of, the Mexican Revolution. In effect, among some activists and intellectuals in Europe and the United States, the Mexican Revolution had become an example to watch. To be sure, there also seemed to be what an official Mexican book at the fair called an attempt to "discredit. . . the Revolution by the international press and capitalist propaganda" (for its violence and antipathy toward foreign capital).24 But among some progressive international intellectuals and politicians the Mexican Revolution was seen as one of those rare moments when people seize control of their destiny. This was so in the arts, literature, and political militancy.25 The Mexican government was willing to foster this body of opinion with new ideas and information. For instance, in 1929 González Martínez explained to the Spanish media: "While our sister countries in Latin America alternate periods of work with periods of rest, the Mexican people are obliged to designate half of their daily work to productive labor and the other half to the fight for liberty."26 These were the ways (it was thought) to nourish the international romanticization of the Mexican Revolution that was beginning in the late 1920s. All in all, considering the size and ideological scope of Seville's fair, and considering especially Mexico's circumstances, one may wonder what it was about world's fairs that made them so appealing to the Mexico of Calles. Perhaps this decision was the result of historical inertia that makes things move the way they have always moved, or perhaps it was caused