by a succession of ill-considered decisions that eventually made Mexico's presence in Seville inevitable. In any event, from 1925 to 1927 there was a vigorous debate within the Mexican government about whether to take part in Seville's fairand how. Among the participants were close advisers to President Calles, the Ministry of Foreign Relations, and the Ministry of Industry and Commerce. Finally, in 1926 the Mexican government accepted Spain's invitation, and the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, then headed by Luis N. Morones, was put in charge of all affairs related to Mexico's participation in the Seville exposition. Thus, at the beginning of 1926 the Mexican government made a call for design proposals for a Mexican pavilion in Seville. It was established that it had to be a provisional freestyle pavilion at a cost no greater than 90,000 pesos. 27 In April the winners were announced: first place went to Ignacio Marquina and Agustín García's design; the second, to the designer of the Mexican pavilion for Rio de Janeiro's world's fair, Carlos Obregón Santacilia; and the third to Alberto Mendoza. The fifth prize was awarded to a design made by a young Mexican architect from Yucatán, Manuel Amabilis, who eventually became the architect of the Mexican pavilion in Seville.28 Marquina's design was for a pre-Hispanic style building that combined various parts of Uxmal's and Zayi's archaeological ruins.29 The Calles government soon realized that more money would have to be spent, and it was originally reluctant to assign new resources to Mexico's performance at Seville. However, once an affirmative response was given to Spanish authorities, Mexico had little choice, for it would be awkward to withdraw from participation or not to follow what other countries were doing. In this connection, González Martínez confidentially informed the Mexican government of the expenditures other countries were undertaking for their pavilions at Seville. He claimed that Argentina had assigned a budget of one million Argentine pesos30 and that it was rather ridiculous for Mexico to spend only 90,000 pesos. Thus, by the end of 1926 the Ministry of Industry and Commerce had appointed three commissions in charge of Mexico's exhibit in Seville. The first commission was put in charge of the building and the exhibit itself; the second, of publicity and propaganda; and the third, of industrial promotion. In addition, a budget of 750,000 pesetas (U.S.\$125,000) was approved,31 and a new call for proposals for a building design was made in the beginning of 1927. The new building ought to be, it was established, a permanent, freestyle construction costing not more than 300,000 pesos. Amabilis's design of a Toltec-Maya building won this contest. The jury and the Mexican government decided to favor a pre-Hispanic building instead of, for example, the original neocolonial building proposed by Obregón Santacilia.32 Hence, by the beginning of 1928 Amabilis was in Seville constructing his Maya-like building in El Parque María Luisa (see Fig. 40).33 Before examining Amabilis's building, let us consider how the officials in