Image not available. 40. The Mexican pavilion at the 1929 Seville exhibition. Source: SRE EMESP 523; reproduced courtesy of SRE. charge of Mexico's display functioned. It is important to recall that, during the Porfirian period, world's fairs were considered important parts of industrial, commercial, and immigration promotion. By the 1920s, as we have seen, world's fairs had lost their nineteenthcentury value as great showcases of the modern world. Therefore, a professional group of exhibition experts was not needed by the revolutionary governments. Nonetheless, in the early twentieth century, world's fairs were still an important way to promote a national image, something very much needed by the new revolutionary government to gain international acceptance. To produce this image at fairs for consumption abroad, the government did need in fact a small group of relatively professional bureaucrats, and the Callista governments sought to field such a team at Seville. Originally the Mexican delegation was formed by Francisco A. Sáenz as president, Amabilis as chief architect (joined by the painter Victor Reyes and the sculptor Leopoldo Tomassi), and Rodolfo Ramírez, José M. Ramos, J. Montiel Olivera, and Luis R. Herrera as secretaries of the delegation. 34 In addition, the Mexican minister in Spain, González Martínez, was a fundamental part of this team. He was a modernist poet recycled in the revolutionary government, a bureaucrat who upheld, as the hypercritical Vasconcelos of the 1930s described him, "the diplomatic legation with modesty and grace," before he became "a militant callista, a revolutionary, and even