a Bolshevik." 35 In mid-1929 Sáenz was removed from his post as president, and Rodolfo Ramirez provisionally headed the delegation until October 1929, when Francisco Orozco Ramirez assumed the presidency. The causes of these changes are unclear, but it is very likely that they reflected the harsh electoral processes which Mexico underwent beginning in March 1929, when Pascual Ortiz Rubio was nominated as the PNR's candidate for the presidency.36 This delegation had a rather inefficient and unorganized structure and functioning. They did not have a clear plan of actionhow could they?and hence they worked on a daily basis constantly consulting with the Mexican minister in Spain and directly with the various Ministers of Industry and Commercefirst Luis N. Morones, then Ramón P. Neri, and later in 1930, Luis L. León. Political and economic uncertainty prevailed throughout 1929 and 1930. Improvisations, overlapping of functions and changes of mind were all too common. There were constant communications with Amabilis asking him to take great care of the budget. In turn, Amabilis seriously complained many times of the economic restrictions he was living under: "I earn less than the most unskilled laborer," he complained in July 1928.37 In addition, serious internal problems made evident the existence of corruption and political frictions. This even caused some problems with Spain's legal authorities: at a country banquet organized by the Spanish contractor for the construction of the building (the Casso engineers) to celebrate the completion of the pavilion, Amabilis and Reyes resolved their disputes with alcohol and a brawl that concluded with the intervention of the police and the arrest of both.38 Furthermore, in July 1930 a Mexican employee of the Mexican pavilion denounced to the Mexican government various irregularities apparently committed by the president of the delegation. These included robbery, fraud, and the hiring of a lover as an employee in the Mexican pavilion.39 In effect, it seems that not only because of the officially indigenist pavilion but because of its administrative and political functioning, Mexico's presence in Seville was indeed a preview of the lasting postrevolutionary ideology and modus operandi. ## The Mexican Pavilion In 1929 Manuel Amabilis (born in 1883) was an obscure architect from Yucatán trained at L'École Speciale d'Architecture, in Paris.40 During the progressive administration of Salvador Alvarado in Yucatán, he was in charge of public works, and from this position he constructed the building La Casa del Pueblo in Mayan style. In addition, together with Colombian artist Ró-mulo Razo, he designed the Monumento a la Patria in Mérida. This was an indigenist monument that honored not only Mexican nationalism but especially Yucatecan nationalism. The monument summarized the entire his-