tory of Mexico, including pre-Hispanic times when, as Razo explained, "the land of the Mayans was a paradise." 41 For the Seville fair, Amabilis made a conscious effort to synthesize pre-Hispanic styles with modern construction techniques and uses of space. He wrote an explanatory book that was not only an architectural description but also, in fact, a historical, sociological, and artistic interpretation of what Mexico was and how it ought to be.42 In it he aimed to explain, as he himself observed, why "Mexico presents itself to Europe through a shroud of ancient American tradition" and why this tradition "although scorned by the rich, bestowed worldwide recognition to the Mexican art scene. It is the Mexican Revolution that has had the honor of rescuing this tradition for the country."43 According to Amabilis, the triumph of the revolution had brought "an unknown national blossom, full of joy and well-being." The new Mexico needed a real Mexican art that could encompass its unique spirit. Although he realized that the search for the Mexican spirit had not ended, he observed that "while our philosophers may someday unravel the mystery of the spiritual ideal. . . we as artists are dedicated today to recording all aspects of this ideal, which has been revealing itself to our conscious minds." Thus he believed that his only role for the moment was "to achieve and recognize this communion of a native race, the love of an autonomous country."44 Amabilis maintained that pre-Hispanic architecture could be adapted to modern standards of comfort and construction. Above all, to represent Mexico in pre-Hispanic native style, he asserted, was to express "in Mexican" feelings and thoughts that belonged to Western civilization: ''This is our small contribution [óbolo] as Mexicans to the gestation and growth of the universal art that already influences contemporary European culture."45 The building was formed of two concentric squares. From each side of the smaller square a gallery was projected and crossed the sides of the larger square.46 The two-storied structure had eight exhibition halls. The entire facade, surrounding fences, and a fountain in the outside gardens, were replete with sculpture in the same Maya-Toltec style (see Fig. 41). These were the work of Tomassi, a young sculptor and urbanist also from Yucatán. Among the pieces were two copies of Toltec stelae, placed to symbolize work and spirituality.47 Both were conceived in materialistic terms: spirituality was understood not as ethereal but as the almost anatomical "synthesis of all positive functions of the human heart and mind." In addition, at the top of the building a sculpture of five figures expressed "the solidarity of all social classes for the progress of Mexico, which is one of the ideals of the Mexican Revolution."48 These figures were represented not in pre-Hispanic fashion but in contemporary style. Thus, Amabilis argued, "the group symbolizes today's Mexico: emerging from a remote past that encompasses it, Mexico, a nation of Western civilization, actually arises to meet the modern day as in the symbolic sculpture; that is, surrounded by Toltec rhythms."49 At the