Image not available. 41. Sculpture and fountain of the 1929 Mexican pavilion in Seville. Left to right: Victor Reyes, Leopoldo Tomassi, and Manuel Amabilis. Source: SRE EMESP 523; reproduced courtesy of SRE. main entrance, two giant, plumed serpents served as columns. There Vasconcelos's dictum, "Por mi Raza Hablará el Espíritu" (For My Race the Spirit Shall Speak), was engraved in the frieze. Ironically, official indigenism was thus merged with Vasconcelos's Hispanism, and this in 1929, when the Mexican Ulysses was threatening the new revolutionary status quo with his presidential campaign. In its interior, Amabilis's pavilion combined colorful decorative motifs, stained-glass windows, mural paintings, and bas-reliefs. The colorful decoration of murals and walls was part of the effort to make the pavilion look truly pre-Hispanic. The stained glass depicted Mexico's natural resources and tropical beauty with such titles as El Papagayo, El Plátano, and La Palmera. The bas-reliefs were four sets that the architect called jambas: allegorical representations of various historical topics. The most interesting of these jambas was that of the Guerreros, which portrayed both a Mexican and a Spaniard warrior because "our nationality is a product of their battles," and the Jamba de la Fusión de las Razas, which depicted Cortés, Malinche, and a child, "the first little mestizo." 50 Other bas-reliefs represented agriculture, sciences, traditions, and customs. The most important mural paintings inside the buildingall by Reyes