Image not available. 42. Victor Reyes and his mural in the 1929 Mexican pavilion in Seville. Source: SRE EMESP 523; reproduced courtesy of SRE. were located in the stairwell of the building (see Fig. 42). 51 There Reyes tried to do what Rivera was then doing in the National Palace. "Don Diego Maria Rivera," Amabilis explained, was the first to see "the profound sense of exile experienced by the Mexican people. Rivera awakens Mexico's joys and sorrows from this bitter indifference, in order to teach how to love this people so that through this love this nation can be directed toward an emancipation which is spiritual rather than material." By 1929 Rivera was becoming the prototype of the socially committed artist, the head of the Mexican revolutionary school, and although Amabilis shared Rivera's revolutionary populism, his argument was articulated in spiritual rather than in political and racial terms. Along these lines, Reyes painted a mural that covered the entire stairwell. The mural was in two parts. In one, out of the image of a Mexican woman, various motifs were depicted in a sequence of images, as Amabilis explained, like a film clip. In the other, the same effect was achieved with a male image. The female aspect of the Mexican race, one learns from Amabilis's description of the Reyes mural, represented opportunism; the masculine image stood above all for thinking and rationality: "from the representation of the masculinity of our race arise concepts and activities that attempt to implant ideals, create beauty, and perfect the human species. Conversely, from the female representation are derived practical, immediately obtainable concepts. . . [because] those ideals of immense scope but dif-