to her daughters, now mature women, was sufficient" for them to come. 59 The general tone of Mexico's exhibit was that of veneration for Spain, but in a supposedly "mature" relationship. "Spain, upon inviting and receiving us, demonstrates a generosity beyond rancor. In attending her noble exhibition, we affirm our Spanish ancestry and take pride in our spirit and blood line," González Martínez maintained.60 In fact, Reyes had drafted more legends to accompany the various allegories throughout the interior of the buildingallegories of the national culture, the male and female races of the nation, and the legislators' instruments (that is, the constitution, land reform, and labor laws). One of them read: "Three beacons illuminate the culture that Mexico imparts to her childrenthree foundations nourish it: European civilization, Christianity, and Mexican traditions." These legends were never actually used in the building, but they epitomized the ideological aspects that Mexico wished to emphasize. Reyes's inelegant prose was not considered appropriate, however, and the idea was dropped.61 Nonetheless, the Spanish government was pleased with this Mexican Hispanismso much so that the mayor of Seville wrote a letter of gratitude to the Mexican delegation that expressed not only Spain's gratitude but also Andalucía's pride, in an even more pompous rhetoric: "Certainly: Spain illuminated American lands with the brilliance of her culture. However, the creative vigor emerged from the fertile lands of Andalucía and from the no less fertile lands of Extremadura. . . . Indeed, Spain has also illuminated Mexico's soul with the lamp of her devotional spirit, but this lamp was nourished by Seville's holy oil."62 Oddly enough, as late as the 1992 Seville world's fair, the phrase was still recalled with great pride by a local historian of Seville.63 ## Exhibiting Revolutionary Mexico Framed in indigenist architecture, with an overlay of Hispanist rhetoric, Mexico displayed exactly the same agricultural products, pictures, books, and crafts that had graced the preceding fifty years of its presence at world's fairstropical fruits, coffee, cocoa, cactus, hats, and gaudy ornaments, together with the same seemingly eternal products of industry: beer (Cervecería Cuauhtémoc), cigarettes (El Buen Tono), and canned food (Clemente Jacques). All of these industries had been part of Mexico's displays since the 1880s. What was new about the industrial exhibit were the displays of petroleum companies (Huasteca Petroleum, El Águila, and so forth) and the bas-relief of Plutarco Elías Calles, made by Julio Sosa, which replaced the bust of Porfirio Diaz that was always displayed in nineteenth-century world's fairs.64 However, as discussed above, the Mexican display in Seville appealed not only to the imperial Hispanism of the fair but also to the international fascination with the Mexican popular revolution. As such, it was extremely well