received by republican Spanish intellectuals. This receptionand Mexico's use of this favorable opinionwas especially visible during the week of the exposition that honored Mexico in June 1930. By then the Mexican exhibit was directed by Orozco Ramírez, who organized a set of events that featured Mexican and Spanish intellectuals and artists who were favorable to the Mexican Revolution. 65 The Mexican musical folklorist Ignacio Fernandez and the poet Luis G. Urbina were the only official Mexican participants during this week (although it was also attended by the poet Jaime Torres Bodet). Thus a radio session of poetry reading (once again with verses by Nervo, Díaz Mirón, and Gonzalez Martínez) was combined with talks by the Spanish intellectuals and activists Luis Araquistán and Fernando de los Ríos. Araquistáin spoke about Mexico's social evolution and was extremely favorable to the social transformation produced by the Mexican Revolution. He characterized it as the first real Hispanic social revolution, and he added, "Politically, Spain has never been truly European, but Asian or African." Thus, in the Mexican Revolution "not only is the historical credibility of a nation pledged, but also the credibility of an entire race."66 For his part, de los Ríos delivered a paper titled "En Torno a la Tierra y el Alma Mejicana, Impresiones y Recuerdos." Both were socialists in the struggle against Primo de Rivera's regime, and both used the Mexican Revolution as a cosmopolitan symbol of modern social politics and development.67 Mexico promoted those ideas with its exhibition in Seville, without damaging its pro-Hispanic conservative tone. Thus began Mexico's official policy of making the revolution its passport to the modern cosmopolitan world. As always, Mexico organized a good propaganda network that consisted of national and international journalists and writers paid by the Mexican government.68 What was new about this network was the massive use of cinema for propaganda purposes. The United States impressed the Spanish public with its film Hoover in Spanish America, among many others,69 but the Mexican exhibit showed at least ten movies with titles such as El Museo Nacional, Yucatán: La tierra del afamado henequén, Industria de la plata, La industria del petróleo en México, San Juan Teotihuacán, and Ruinas de Yucatán.70 A specially produced movie about the economic and industrial development of Mexico was also shown,71 and numerous photographs that portrayed Mexico's beauty and progress as well as its exoticism were exhibited. Old and new masters of those images were present: Hugo Brehme, Guillermo Kahlo, Tina Modotti, and Manuel Álvarez Bravo. Some people opposed the exhibition of the same exoticism that had been featured in the past. For instance, the Mexican consul in Berlin, F. R. Serrano, wrote in 1925 to Aarón Sáenz, then minister of foreign affairs, that Mexico ought not to send "pranks," by which he meant huaraches, tequila, pulque, and Indian textiles: "I find it contradictory that on the one hand we try to expunge the white cotton trousers and leather sandals [guaraches] of