the Indians from our nation, while on the other hand we make an effort to exhibit these articles in foreign countries." 72 Nonetheless, the pictures and figures of tipos populares, Indian cloth, huaraches, furniture in Aztec and Maya styles, and traditions were displayed just as they had been in the nineteenth century.73 Despite this opposition, Mexico's efforts were rewarded. The nation won a total of 137 grand prizes, 23 honor diplomas, 368 gold medals, 462 silver medals, and 286 bronze medals.74 In general, the winners were those items that reflected Spanish expectations of Mexico. Mexican authors such as Vas-concelos, Federico Gamboa, Urbina, José Juan Tablada, González Martínez, Jesús Galindo y Villa, and Antonio Caso were granted grand prizes and honor diplomas for their books. A collection of tipos populates made in wax by Juan Lechuga was also awarded a grand prize, as were the architect, the painter, and the sculptor of the Mexican pavilion. But books dealing with colonial Mexican art were especially welcomed: Dr. Atl's book on Mexican churches, Manuel Toussaint's on the Mexican cathedral, and Manuel Gómez Morin's España Fiel. The new Mexican literature earned some acknowledgments but no grand prizes. José Gorostiza won a silver medal with his Canciones para cantar en los barcos, Ortiz de Montellano won gold with El trompo de siete colores, and gold was also given to Julio Jiménez Rueda, Salvador Novo, and Xavier Villaurrutia. But best received was the romantic popular music of Mexico, which was already acquiring a nostalgic nature: Alfonso Esparza Otero, María Greaver, and Manuel M. Ponce were awarded grand prizes and honor diplomas. They represented Porfirian high culture transformed into a popular romantic sensibility. ## Welcome to Twentieth-Century Mexico Mexico's presence at the 1929 Ibero-American Exposition in Seville was a debut for the postrevolutionary official notions of the Mexican modern nation. Although the Mexican display was not essentially different from those Mexican exhibits at nineteenthcentury world's fairs, it highlighted some aspects and included some new elements of the nation's image. There was neither the liberal-positivist consensus nor the loyalty to the supreme caudillo that had given coherence and order to Porfirian displays. Neither was there the prevalence of a single point of view shaped by the virtu of a personality that intrudes into history, as was the case with Mexico's attendance at the Rio de Janeiro world's fair. Undoubtedly the idea of Mexico depicted in 1929 was intellectually contradictory and ambivalent about its own identity, as well as unclear in political and administrative terms. Notwithstanding, culturally one could see itof course from the historian's advantageous point of viewas displaying the basic milieu in which notions such as nation, progress, and modernization would be discussed throughout the twentieth century. This