is a realm constituted by a set of old and new ingredients, combined with old and new tactics. In brief, I would argue that Mexico's presence at Seville can be seen from two perspectives: from the continuity of intellectual and cultural tendencies that, though long-established, had acquired special cohesion during the Porfirian peace; and from the view of the emergence of new languages, strategies, and elements that both reinforced and changed the traditional continuities. After all, I am dealing with snapshots of modern Mexico, and hence whatever fluctuation I notice may be irrelevant before the full sweep of Mexico's history. Yet in these flashing instants (that is, world's fairs) changewhen presentis nicely perceivable. The continuities were noticeable in the focus on the nation's natural wealth and beauty, as well as in the glorification of the Indian past of Mexico. They were also in the artifices used to achieve both the impression of natural wealth and the historical glorifications; that is, in the use of artistic, scientific, and rhetorical devices that were as cosmopolitan and modern as possible. Thus Mexico's tropical fertility and beauty were represented in stained-glass windows, in statistics, in samples of exotic fruits, or in photographs and murals. The overall aim was to highlight the possibilities for commerce and investment and to appeal to the twentieth century's new industry: tourism. In contrast, Mexican industrial exhibits changed scarcely at all in composition from those of the 1890s. 75 All in all, Mexico's presence at Seville did not put particular accent on this issue. In this regard, and from what it is possible to perceive, Mexico's exhibit in Seville was carried on as a rather old-fashioned policy of commercial and industrial development. Continuities were especially evident in the cultural aspects Mexico highlighted in an exposition that dealt above all with ideology and culture. In addressing issues such as race, national spirit, and modernization, Mexico's presence at Seville made use of a warehouse of the nation's basics, and it included scientific, symbolic, artistic, and intellectual utilería (assorted stage material). As I have maintained throughout this study, when considering nations, nationalism, and modernism, what is essential are forms, styles, and experiments; in these regards, history is our main instructor. To illustrate these continuities, Amabilis's pavilion was a curious amalgamation of Indian styles with modern construction techniques and requirements. On the one hand, it was inspired by the expanding anthropological and archaeological studies that were heavily promoted during the administrations of Obregón and Calles. Miguel Othón de Mendizábal, Moisés Sáenz, and even Manuel Gamiothough he had a profound disagreement with Calleswere fundamental in this advancement of anthropology and archaeology, which eventually fed the artistic and populist official indigenism. Most of these archaeologists and anthropologists believed in the need to incorporate Indians into modern national development. Their works