and research were a continuation of the aim to reach an autoethnology acceptable and useful both for the nationalistic needs of the Mexican elites and for the demands of the modern scientific perspective of the Western world. This aim had a long history in Mexico, but it was especially developed within a modern scientific framework during the Porfirian peace. 76 In Seville, for Mexican officials there was no other language in which to talk about such topics as race, acceptable evolutionary paths that proved Mexico's adequate racial shape, and potential for the future of a hybrid race, than that furnished by the long-established processes of trial and error and discussion of the last part of the nineteenth century. In this sense, the very fact that the Mexican pavilion was above all about race underlines the deep-rooted continuities. These tendencies were expressed in Amabilis's pavilion. But in so doing he was only, as he argued, trying to propose a tentative combination of styles that could eventually form the national style.77 Just as the Mexican colonial building in Rio de Janeiro favored one of the various profound cultural and intellectual historical tendencies, Amabilis's building favored another kind of deep-rooted national trend. For its tentative character, for its indigenism, as well as for the official decision to introduce it as a symbolic summary of the nation, the Mexico display at Seville was a continuation of how modernity and nationalism had been culturally constructed in Mexico since the 1880s. Features of this continuity were, first, constant and conscious internal negotiations and disputes regarding symbols and epic; second, constant reading and rereading of prototypical recent Western conceptions of modernity and nationalism (from Europe or from the United States), searching both for arms to fight the national discussion and for an edge as to where to insert the national debate into the course of modern cosmopolitanism; and finally, by means of all the above, an endless trial-and-error process led by elites, who adjusted and maneuvered the image of the nation according to new domestic and international circumstances in favor of their oxen interests. What best illustrates this continuity are the other pre-Hispanic building planned for Mexico's presence in the 1889 Paris fairthe Aztec Palace, another attempt, another set of goals, another world, but essentially the same recipe and identical ingredients, so to speakand the building constructed by Lázaro Cárdenas's government for the 1937 Paris international exhibition. If in 1889 the Porfirian government opted for Peñafiel's building, it was because of the coherence with which it epitomized the official historiography. But in the very feat of erecting an Aztec Palace at the 1889 Paris world's fair, the Porfirian elite showed its decision to favor pro-indigenist national tendencies in view of the European cosmopolitan demands for the exotic. They thought such a building would give them the best opportunity, to acquire presence and visibility at Paris, "capital of the nineteenth century."