It was a trial they rejected afterward. In the same way, Calles's decision to construct Amabilis's building favored the indigenist national tendencies, but it was based also on the perception of the potential effect it would have on both European exoticism (important for tourism) and on the international artistic and political rediscovery of Mexico after the revolution. 78 Furthermore, it was combined with a pro-Hispanic rhetoric that made the exotic building both attractive and acceptable. In sharp contrast, for the 1937 Paris international exhibition of "arts and techniques of modern life," Mexico constructed a Functionalist-style pavilion. That fair would be remembered for its avant-garde architecture and massive, fascist, and socialist arts, as well as for the display of Picasso's Guernica. Among Mexican officials and intellectuals, a long debate took place regarding whether to join the 1937 fair, and how. Finally, Lázaro Cárdenas's government decided to attend. Of course, a regime with a socialist rhetoric, with indigenist and nationalist policies, and, more importantly, with severe economic difficulties did not aim to present a Porfirian-like display in Paris. However, money was expended in constructing a pavilion, and despite the fact that the exhibit emphasized arts, the Mexican government sent the repeatedly exhibited official propaganda of statistics, maps, exotic products, and proofs of Mexico's beauty. In 1937, once again, Mexican officials and intellectuals debated about whether to build an indigenist structure (as in Paris 1889 or in Seville 1929) or a colonial structure (as in Buffalo 1901 or in Rio de Janeiro 1922). Manuel Chacón, engineer in charge of the construction, argued that archaeology should not be confused with architecture. Although it seemed natural for Cárdenas's government to favor an indigenist style, Chacón explained that a pre-Hispanic national architectural style was impossible because it was hopeless to try to reconstruct the old structures and their utility, which were understood only by their original creators. For him, a colonial style was also an "archaeological style."79 Nonetheless, as in 1889, in 1900, or in 1929, the Cardenista government used the old rules of trial and error and showed that it had learned its lesson. That is, in 1937, using the tired and long-in-the-making artistic infrastructure, Mexico constructed a building in the most avant-garde cosmopolitan style in order to publicize new and old pragmatic goals (tourism and foreign investment) (see Fig. 43). In addition, Mexican officials clothed in an international fashion what they had made into Mexico's most cosmopolitan product: the Mexican Revolution and its social and cultural surroundings. Therefore, they constructed a cosmopolitan, if small, Functionalist-style building at the Trocadero, with a giant sculpture of a campesino with a sickle and a worker with a hammer. Conceptually and architecturally, the building was far from the Aztec Palace of 1889, from the neoclassical building of 1900, or from the Maya pavilion of 1929, but it was close, physically and conceptually, to the giant