expositions in the last part of the nineteenth century did not significantly decrease during the first decades of the twentieth century, the more or less stable crystallization of European national identities transformed the general symbolic displays. Museums, scientific exhibits, sporting events, and, especially, the emergence of radical nationalism and massively destructive wars fulfilled the symbolic functions that had been entrusted to fairs. Ironically enough, the nationalistic ideologies that had emerged during the second half of the nineteenth century radicalized in the 1910s and 1920s, thus making partially obsolete the nationalistic uses of world's fairs. Moreover, by the beginning of the twentieth century modern capitalism had produced what thereafter would become the mainstays of world's fairs: great corporations, tourism, and mass consumption with its inherent propaganda. Throughout nearly a century of world expositions, the liberty they epitomized gradually conquered unimaginable economic and ideological frontiers. International corporations started to emerge. With them came sophisticated advertisements disseminated by the latest technology and a massive appropriation of popular taste and consciousness. Still, today's or tomorrow's universal exhibitions will follow their nineteenth-century counterparts because, as William McKinley, the U.S. president who was assassinated during the 1901 Buffalo fair, noted, "Expositions are the time-keepers of progress." 22 In the late twentieth century, world exhibitions seek to continue this role because the belief in universal truths, in productive freedom, in progress, and in national symbols, however dispersed and weak, remains alive. Yet the modern world picture has suffered numerous cracks. What would the paradise of modernity look like if we were to delineate it in these overwhelmingly disenchanted times? The great future imagined by past visionaries is not in the present but in the past, in the great late-nineteenth-century universal expositions. They were the "futures of the past," and today, because of their very attempt at totality and progressivism, they appear to be part of modern capitalism's nostalgia for a golden age. Late-twentiethcentury world's fairs are themselves less an endeavor to continue to portray the modern world than an effort to duplicate previous attempts: the nineteenth-century universal expositions that have become modernity's archetype.23 In effect, Disneyland has become the model of twentieth-century world's fairs, a "degenerated utopia" that was a particular ideology materialized in the form of a myth.24 As such, late-twentiethcentury world's fairs reflect the era's supports (international capital and mass consumption) and enduring obsession (nostalgic faith in progress). They are as modern as the Quixote who finally realized he was insane; but they are Quixotic efforts to continue the delirium, as if Alonso Quijano would decide, once aware of his madness, to play again the role of Knight for the sole sake of nostalgia. Nonetheless,