Image not available. ## 43. The Mexican pavilion at the 1937 Paris world's fair. Source: AGN, Centro de Información Gráfica, colección presidentes, Cárdenas; reproduced courtesy of the Archivo General de la Nación, Mexico City. (Photograph by the Archivo General de la Nacién) Nazi building of Germany and the no less enormous and modernist building of the Soviet Union. It also appealed to international concerns with the Mexican Revolution. To return to 1929, Mexico's presence at Seville can also be seen as depicting the transformation experienced by Mexico and the world in the 1910s and 1920s. In brief, by 1929 the revolutionary governments of Mexico had not yet radically transformed the social and economic shape of the country. What the popular movements of the Mexican Revolution had done to the image of the nation was, on one hand, to radically change the balance of political and economic power and thus of the nation's symbols and metaphors. On the other hand, these movements had fostered the emergence of a new language to describe new situations but also to rephrase old circumstances. In terms of cultural and intellectual creation, the decade of the 1920s represented a creative looseness of authority: fertile creative ground to take advantages of disorder, to abuse alliances, and to merge ideas. 80 In Mexico's presence at Seville, therefore, former leading intellectuals of the last part of the Porfirian modernist movementsuch as González Martínez and Urbinawere working together with technocrats trained in the best fashion of the