Porfirian erathat is, Amabiliswith new iconoclast artistsReyes and Tomassiand with the revolutionary bureaucracy, particularly sensitive to the political movements in Mexicothat is, Francisco A. Sáenz and Orozco Muñoz. From the beginning, the entire exhibit was organized by the more radical faction of Obreristas through the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Workthat is, first Morones and later Neri. This combinationin the last analysis inevitable for any revolutionary government wishing to establish a stable regime facilitated the amalgamation of various tactics and views of the image of the nation. It was possible, thus, to portray the country as experimentally indigenist, with great concern for the solidarity of all classes in the national reconstruction but also universally Hispanic. This Mexico was above all inclusionist: it merged Porfirian symbols of order and progress and Porfirian indigenism with Vasconcelos's focus on race and spirit and with Gamio's type of indigenism, all combined with a more or less radical populist rhetoric. The new language forged for the revolution was a synthesis of the many revolutionary demands by the various groups during the violent struggle. It was also made of the striking experience of the urban intellectuals and political elites: the city taken by Indians and mestizos, all poor, threatening the Mexican belle epoque. Now it was possible to refer to the history of the nation as preparing the real great event: the revolution. Everything else became antecedent. Now it was possible to name them with pride: our Indians, our popular classes. It was also possible to talk about class struggle, but not without mentioning the existence of solidarity of classes in the common will of national reconstruction. And all that acquired an acceptable aesthetic representation in the 1920s and 1930s. This was Amabilis's building. In 1929 it was impossible to control all of the various aspects involved in this new language and to see where it might go. Thus some sort of socialist radicalism, Catholic philanthropism, social realism, and romantic idealism had to flow freely in what seemed to have an unclear structure. In Seville, Mexico's symbolism acted like a shotgun: it was a rain of bullets aiming to hit all perspectives in order to miss no opportunity. Yet it already included what eventually became a centralized, officially imposed image of Mexico: a selective anthropological, archaeological, and political indigenism, a rewriting of the national history to change the moment of emergence of the country's golden age, a strong tendency toward both homogenizing and mythologizing revolutionary symbols, and reconstructing the understanding of the nation by decree. Mexico was tropical, fertile, beautiful, fundamentally virile, statist, and populist. This was not so much a new image of Mexico as a redefined one, fabricated with longestablished ingredients and tactics. This redefinition would not have been possible without yet another revolution: the crisis of Western politics and thought during the 1910s and 1920s. A new aesthetic and political language was created with the avant-garde move-