ments in Paris, with the Russian Revolution of 1917, and with World War I. In fact, the Spanish fair sought to be for Europe the proof that there was a not fully European option to revitalize Europe: Spain. The Russian Revolution and the international socialist movement, as well as workers' general discontent, had made socialism appear to be the twentieth century's greatest hopeand Mexico's redefinition of its image appealed to these transformations. Of course, Mexico's presence at Seville's exposition did not display its avant-garde facade, not because there were no Mexican innovative intellectuals who could have helped to modernize the image of the nation in this direction but because Seville's fair was already anachronistic. Eventually, world's fairs would be held in which Mexico would be able to camouflage the same nationalism in avant-garde art and architecture (for instance, Paris 1937). But Mexico did display its new social concerns at Seville, which was, after all, a rather imperialist and conservative exposition. It seems to be that for the image of the nation, Mexico's social revolution had to be exploited as Mexico's best chance to be accepted in twentieth-century modern terms. In effect, the Mexican Revolution was being transformed not only into a national unifying myth but also into a patrimony of the truly modern world. In the last analysis, during the 1920s and 1930s very few minds foresaw the powerful ideology that was in the making. But how can anyone ever interpret the hints of history when the past is present?