## EPILOGUE From the 1880s to the 1920s an enduring nationalistic infrastructure was created in Mexico, one whose development has been examined here through a study of the traces left in world's fairs. The development of a Mexican national image in modern times included a historical cornerstone (the Indian past and an epicmythical foundational structure), racial definition (either criollo or mestizo), natural appropriation (the beauty of land and its productivity), economic position (protection of a national bourgeoisie, search for foreign investment, immigration, and economic recognition), and the pursuit of cosmopolitan culture. These aspects were only specific expressions of the global phenomenon of modern nationalism. Some final remarks are needed, both to clarify my approach and to offer some general propositions. ## The Limits of the Approach In modern times nationalism became both anational and unavoidable. In essence, nationalism was neither a purely domestic output nor a culturally productive force. It constituted an intricate global phenomenon, a molding power that, rather than giving rise to new and original cultural phenomena, reoriented, revitalized, and rearranged existing cultural features and tailored a comprehensive ideology that was assumed to be a unique and natural historical production. That is, modern nationalism emerged as a sculptural will that recast its appropriated raw materials: traditions, customs, social and scientific ideas, and history. As a result, we live in a world of nationalistic nations, in which each appears to be an exceptional and inimitable product of the same sculptor. But I have examined only a small, though emblematic, part of the complex issue of modern nationalism and its particular unfolding in Mexico (see