the introduction), namely, national images. Accordingly, I have considered modern nationalism in this book essentially as cultural and political centralization, homogenization, and constant adaptation to new ideas, technologies, and circumstances. Once developed, nationalism became a quasi-ontological requirement of modernity. This homogenization generally occurred within (or aimed to create) the physical and historical boundaries of modern nation-states, so nationalism is linked to state formation. I am fully aware of the limitations of my approach and also conscious of the areas I have left untreated. Therefore, one way to clarify what I hope to be the significance of my project is to lay out a clear picture of this book's explored as well as unexplored terrains. Although the picture of a modern nation is always presented as a homogeneous, natural, dominant, civilized, and genuinely historical outcome, in fact it is a particular expression of the continuum of interactions of modern nationalism's main components: the interplay between tradition and modernity, non-Western and Western trends, popular and elitist expressions and interests. Thus modern nationalism can be seen as the arena, historically constituted, in which each new and old nation-state tries to develop a synthesis of history, culture, and traditions that can be presented as unique yet universal. By the late nineteenth century the universal parameters were dictated by the predominant model of a modern nation that has been in ascendance in Western history since the Enlightenment. Nonetheless, modern nationalism is far from a homogeneous and stable dominant ideology. It is the complex arena in which all nations define each other by affirmations or negations and in which modernity and tradition, popular and elitist interests, inside and outside, lose their clear distinctions. I study that arena through a very delimited analytical window: national images created for world's fairs from the 1880s to the 1920s. But although my analysis is narrow, it is also, I believe, revealing because it has moved freely in the very manufacturing arena of modern nationalism. Accordingly, my approach has centered on the elite's making of nationalism, on the interaction of the global model of nationalism and its particular transformation, adaptation, and rejection by the builders of a new nation. One vast terrain I have left unexplored is the realm of the fragmented, domestic, traditional, and popular; the zone in which local senses of belonging interact with central notions of nations; in which alternative cultural views enter into conflicts and negotiations, most of the time in relation to universal parameters set by modern nationalism as a global phenomenon, 1 but also at times rejecting and/or influencing the particular definition of the nation. This crucial aspect deserves to be studied in depth. It deserves another book. The fact that I have left this terrain unexplored should not be considered as either a political or a theoretical disdain for alternative approaches. As