this study has shown, the dissection of the making of a modern nation involves an elaborate tissue of histories. I have not, nor could I have, treated them all. On the other hand, I have shown where and how national images have been debated in modern times, and I have thereby exposed the fragility, artificiality, and contingency of modern nationalism. But in doing so I have not sought to disclose the route toward a solid, genuine, and real nation. The ''real" nation, whatever that might be, is neither at the central arena where modern nationalism is debated nor at the local popular level in which various ideas of the nation may interact (very often sharing references to the central arena). Power for inclusion, exclusion, and centralization has been at play in the historical composition of nationalism. But I am unable to arm myself with absolute truths about the essential principles related to nationalism; I cannot aim to kill the "dragon" of power with the sword of the "real nation." My aim has been more modest: to expose the "dragon's" entrails. ## Clarifying the Sources of Modern Nationalism in Mexico What or who made the global idea of modern nationalism possible? I have addressed this complicated question only briefly. Scholars debate the origins of nationalism, but its final genealogy is unattainable. Elucidation of the issue is beyond the scope of this book, but I have dealt with a special sort of nationalism: postcolonial nineteenth-century nationalism. For this kind of nationalism, to talk about pristine origins is misleading because this type of nationalism is a product of imperialism and globalization. What is generally accepted is that nationalism is an inherent part of modernity and that by the nineteenth century it was a comprehensive phenomenon whose real center and original focus were diffuse and obscure. 2 As a modern product, I have contended that a nationalistic ideology, especially in its depiction of a national image, is engineered primarily within the web of power. In each country the creation of a national image was undertaken by those with power in reference to other national images, because only through this globalization did these images make sense. A relatively clear "standard" of nationalism thus emerged. In the late twentieth century, to be French, German, Mexican, or American has profoundly popular connotations, but the ways in which the symbolic, lexical, and scientific bases of nationalism were created were only marginally popular. This is not to say that popular customs, beliefs, and claims were not included in nationalist ideologies; but a national image is inclusive and linked to often centralized (socially and/or geographically) particular interests and can interact or oppose localized, popular senses of belonging. Alternatives to the established national image were and are present throughout history, and they influence the creation of a national image depending on their economic or military strength as well as on their coherent articu-