lation and social and political resonance. But modern nationalism is fundamentally not about authenticity but about efficiency, defined as two mutually dependent goals: the maximization of domestic economic and political gains (always historically defined) and the achievement of and contribution to nationalism as an international, global phenomenon. ## On Identity and the Leviathan's Limits Local, regional, or even, to some extent, today's national identities are as undeniable as they are difficult to define. 3 For us, latetwentieth-century citizens of nation-states, to fully dissect the components of our nationalism would be like trying to remove from our bodies the clothing bequeathed to us by our modern nationalistic education. The difficulty arises because it seems that when this kind of garment leaves our bodies, it takes our skin with it; to be without a national image is to be naked, identity-less, which is to be either insane or a traitor. This should be clear: this book is not about identity; at no point have I tried to scrutinize the sense of belonging of the people. Nationalism is only partially related to the overly discussed issue of identity.4 On one hand, inasmuch as homogenized, centralized, and powerful notions of a nation are presented as official and exclusive syntheses, various identities are affected. On the other hand, nationalism requires the constant influence, transformation, destruction, and reinvention of local traditions and identities. The destinies of the various identities within a nation are constantly being negotiated in the framework of modern nationalism. But until the emergence of comprehensive hypermodern mass production and industrialization, national identity remained an oxymoron: if the identity of a people was to be reflected by a nationalist ideology, the idea of a single nationwide identity was itself the negation of almost all identities included in what we now understand as a nation-state. Power is needed not only to create the national image but also, as the psychoanalyzed Marxists of the 1970s used to say, to introject this image in the people. Before the appearance of the printed media, education, and electronic media, the main lessons of civic religion were epitomized by capital cities, monuments, and national histories. In Mexico these methods were only effective for the urban middle classes. As in nineteenth-century France or Spain, in Porfirian Mexico the model of citizenship applied only to those who rejected social anonymity. In the Middle Ages theocentric morality, though inclusive and rigid, could not contain everything. It left various geographical and cultural spaces untouched and free for the rich and sinful popular culture of the era. Modern nationalistic ideologies reached their impressive comprehensiveness in recent times, and the late-nineteenth-century ideologues of nationalism could have not imaged the proportions their ideological offspring would eventually acquire in a mass industrial society.