Nonetheless, because of its particular approach, this study may seem to insinuate that a national image is merely a Leviathan's matter. The focus of the book has been on the specificities of the creation of the national image, and that is why the power of Mexico's Leviathan might have appeared distorted. 5 Indeed, in regard to the creation of a nationalist ideology, the power of the Mexican Leviathan was both absolute and insignificant. That is, the Porfirian state's source of strength was in its role as the administrator of wealth and power and as the custodian of peace. Precisely because of its success as arbitrator of peace and wealth, the Porfirian state won exclusivity in the management of Mexico's modern national image. But there its power ended. In other countries the nation was made essentially to be taught, to be learned by the majority of the people. Instead, in Mexico the nation created in the nineteenth century was made primarily to be exhibited, and only then did it becomerestrictivelyteachable. In the nineteenth century Mexico was a set of largely rural, illiterate, dispersed, and heterogeneous societies. In such a context, the Leviathan's power to impose a nationalist ideology was not only limited but also self-consciously confined. Therefore, the nationalist power of Mexico's Leviathan resided in its control over the national image to be exhibited, in its narrow capacity to teach the nation to a small but influential urban middle class, and in its very self-awareness of the impossibility of spreading the idea of the nation to the whole country. In making the nation by exhibiting it, the agents of the Mexican state made possible that, domestically, the nation was understood as a show, as a uncommon occurrence. The nation was not an individual feeling but a collective, if ephemeral and exceptional, celebration. Gradually Mexican cities and towns began to create a nation by acting it out in countless local and regional exhibitions, parades, and gatherings. In doing so they showed an essence that did not actually exist: the nation. Industrial homogenization of the population, educational and technological transformations, and social conflicts and confrontations eventually made those performances a commonsensical world view. The nation was then made possible because it was a shared and comprehensive drama, not because it stopped being a performance. It would be difficult, on the other hand, to claim that the articulation of modern national images by elites possessed a class character in the strict sense of the word. Doubtless nationalism was maneuvered and reformulated according to the particular interests of those with political and economic power. But more than being the pure reflection of the character of a single class, nationalism was marked by the conditions of negotiations among and within the classes that articulated it. That is to say, modern national images required diverse domestic mediations among competing economic interests, political aspirations, intellectual views, cultural perspectives, and local social circumstances. Furthermore, these bargains always remained part of a larger