discussion with international circumstances, pressures, intellectual influences, and cultural implications. The results of this process were both intricate (as was the whole negotiation) and provisional. Nations were always in the process of being created, consciously aiming to extend themselves beyond particular interests. Other aspects of the conditions of negotiation of the national image are stamped in the image, particularly the regional identity of the articulators and their unquestioned assumptions that are rarely negotiated. Therefore, the national image of Mexico was dictated by the collage of victorious economic and military elites that had Mexico City as their final destination. As Paris became France, or New England the United States, Mexico City gave shape to the nation by ignoring or selectively appropriating features of other regional and social identities. In addition, the images of each nation included various issues that were taken for granted: gender, racial, political, and cultural features that were rarely negotiated. In the case of Mexico, thus, from the 1880s to the 1920s nationalism as a global, coherent, comprehensive reshaping of the country's image was managed by elites. As David Brading has so lucidly been pointing out since the 1970s, the criollo nationalism of the late colonial period and early nineteenth century could rely on a truly inclusive and popular worldview to articulate a patriotic explanation of the existence of their nation. This was a real lingua franca among criollos, mestizos, and Indians, and it was made possible only after centuries of one of the most successful conquests of souls in the history of humankindan ideological triumph that encompassed cities, towns, and the most remote sitesthat is, Catholicism. Doubtless the Virgin of Guadalupe became a syncretic popular symbol of a nationalistic ideology during the independence period. But this unifying myth was created in the place of popular myths and through the conscious willas don Edmundo O'Gorman showedof both clerical authorities and intellectuals. 6 In the same way, although Abraham Lincoln became a popular national hero in the United States for northerners and southerners after the Civil War, the cult and justification of his heroism were calculated by a political and intellectual elite that, for example, discussed down to the last detail the characteristics of a monument to the slain president in Washington during Reconstruction.7 Modern Mexican nationalism nonetheless gave rise to a civic religion that was (had to be) not only secular but also laden with some Jacobin hints donated from a history of popular-religious rebellions and of conservative-versus-liberal encounters marked by foreign interventions. The constitution of this civic religion could not encompass overnight the geographical and social map of the country. And it need not have done so. The makers of the new nationalist doctrine were urban elites whose common socialization was not a product merely of secret societies. They were a restricted, close-knit