group that ruled the country as if it were their patrimony; they did business together, married each other, and were buried together. In fact, the civic religion required not that all persons in Mexican territory be Mexicans but that they become so only when they were incorporated into the real environment of late-nineteenth-century national citizenship: the cities and the market. Throughout the nineteenth century, foreign interventions and wars of liberation, together with local cultures and senses of belonging, gave rise to various popular patriotisms. 8 In wars and in discourses, the articulators of nationalist ideologies used and abused those popular patriotisms. People opposed, adapted, readapted, and learned to cope with the national image. The real Mexico has never existed: the national image officially created was indeed fake, but neither could popular patriotisms conform to the real nation. However, we late-twentieth-century historians tend to talk in these terms because we have assigned ethical value to the idea of nation, and we may never finish doing so. It might already be past the time, as the German writer Robert Musil suggested back in the 1920s, to come out with a new moral that would not consider either the nation or the state "as ideals, but simply as objects that have to correspond to their ends."9 ## Nationalism and Peripheral Modernization In countries like Mexico, which came out of a process of decolonization and arrived late at modern industrial development, nationalism acquired a specific feature epitomized by the inseparable link between nationalism and modernization. For Mexico, nationalism is especially anational because it has been historically linked to modernization. That is, for an economically peripheral country, nationalism was above all an economic dictum, both a requirement for and the main consequence of modernization; this is a historical formula grounded in the idea that modernization came from the outside. To be a modern nation meant to follow, ambivalently but constantly, the paradigmatic model of Europe or the United States. Modern values, capital, and technology were not inside but outside the country. Therefore, nationalism and modernization became interchangeable terms, and whenever one or the other had to be negotiated, there materialized the dichotomy of a traditional, backward, and obstructing inside versus a progressive, modern outside. The notion of a modern nation is introduced as a cosmopolitan model to which all modern nations adapt their own uniqueness. That uniqueness is itself a fundamental requirement of global nationalism, but it is not the only requirement. What I have sought to show is that even those who arrived late participated in and contributed to a gathering that in fact had no clear hostess, a party that was randomly organized and in which no one knew what it was about and when it was to conclude.