Certainly, there were dominant cultural trends monopolized by certain regions, but nationalistic and modern ideas were never complete, static, harmonious historical entities; instead, they were dynamic, ambiguous, and in the making. All modern elites wished to share those ideas, so the gathering of modernity, rather than being a by-invitation-only cocktail party controlled by a few selected ones, was a bacchanalian feast, a promiscuous orgy of ideas and trends of all sorts, which nonetheless was dominated by the nouveaux riches who were anxious to procure all sources of economic and cultural capital. However, the dichotomy between a traditional inside versus a modernizing outside has been expressed differently in the various postcolonial nation-states. These differences derived, first, from each country's particular history and, second, from the moment of independencein the case of colonial countriesor from the moment of acceleration of a nation's drive to the "West." Mexico's or Latin America's nationalisms are nineteenth-century phenomena of colonies that were dominated by "peripheral" Western countries. Their nationalist elites articulated a view of the inside-versusoutside dichotomy that was different from, say, that held by the elites of twentieth-century India, for whom the nationalisms of the Americas were an inherent part of modern Western nationalism. To twentieth-century anticolonial Indian nationalists, it was clear that "the greater one's success in imitating the Western skills in the material domain . . . the greater the need to preserve the distinctness of one's spiritual culture.'' 10 For late-nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century Mexican nationalists, the goal seemed to be what a 1940s Brazilian poet expressed in a line: to be "submerged in the past, every day even more modern and more antique."11 They aimed to modernize both the present and the interpretations of the past in order to acquire not just a national epic but a modern national epic. Mexico, like the rest of Latin America and the United States, was an intrinsic ingredient in the making of modern Western nationalism.12 The independences of the Americas were historical experiments of liberalism, nationalism, and republicanism. Europe and the Americas mutually shaped modern nationalism. But the new countries of Latin America were not sufficiently Western to duplicate the West and not sufficiently non-Western to be taken as the West's radical other. They were the forgotten side of the West. Therefore, Mexico vis-à-vis the West appeared to be traditional, backward, and not fully Westernized. Mexican and Latin American elites have seen nationalism, democracy, and modernity as a whole as mirror images. Modernity is outside, so the country needs to reflect the large image reflected by Western modernity. But that large image is already made up of various mirror reflections of Europe's own historical playing of tradition-modernity, progressbackwardness, self-other. The mirror effects do not end there: what is considered Western modernity, reproduced by the elites of countries like