Mexico, is in turn superimposed in the colonized country on many domestic mirrors that reflect both local images and also their own versions of the large image of modernity. These diverse interactions of mirrors shape the nationalism of a country like Mexico, so this type of nationalism is simultaneously cosmopolitan, parochial, modern, traditional, and, especially, illusory. Nationalism in Mexico has been, thus, a process of trial and error aimed simultaneously at modernization and at nationalism, all within the inescapable global scope of modern nationalism. The inside and outside became increasingly illusory. From the historian's point of view, it appears to be that at some point in history all national images began to be forged and experienced together. ## Mexico: The Persistence of the "Old Regime" I have aspired to show how, in the specific context of the creation of Mexico's national image, the maze of continuities and breaks between the prerevolutionary and postrevolutionary periods is much more labyrinthine than often thought. There exists the widespread belief that the ideology of the postrevolutionary government was above all nationalist and that if there is a term that best defines Porfirian ideology, it would be modernization. To say that the Porfirians were also nationalists and that the postrevolutionary elites were indeed modernizers is to say very little. As explained above, nationalism and modernization in countries like Mexico are linked in a historically established union, within which both prerevolutionary and postrevolutionary thinkers functioned. Each of their nationalist statements related to modernization; and all modernization efforts brought about discussions of nationalism. We can conclude from this study that, at least for the specific phenomenon of the creation of a national image, there are different levels of goals. 13 At the epochal-teleological level, so to speak, there is indeed great continuity between the goal sought by the prerevolutionary and the postrevolutionary elites, inasmuch as there is continuity in the global beliefs in progress, modernity, and nationalism. Both the Porfirian and the revolutionary elites aimed to create a workable balance between domestic particularities geared to fulfill universal patterns of economic and cultural nationalism and general modernization. Hence, to say that the corporatist system established by the revolution was neo-Porfirian in the sense that it meant authoritarian modernization is to argue at a high teleological level in which we all can agree. At a second level of goals, there are significant differences in the creation of national images. This is the level of historical specificity. First, to put it simply, the late-Porfirian model was gradually leading toward a modern, cosmopolitan, urban nationalism in the style of French universalism. In this sense, the nation was presumed to be a homogeneous Westernized construct,