oriented toward the international market and scientifically ruled and organized. White immigration and foreign investment were key components of this concept. Despite the fact that American institutions were considered models for national development, the image of the nation was created following the example of French universalism. The United States likewise looked to the French. However, the United States found in the idea of frontier, nature, and rampant industrialism a source of uniqueness that made the American nation both original and universal. Mexican elites, in contrast, appealed to the raw material from which all nationalisms are made: history. Reorganizing, inventing, and reinventing the past epicespecially through a peculiar recapitulation of what Brading calls criollo patriotismthe Porfirian elite rearranged the national graphic representations and rhetoric that had been in the making since colonial times. One might liken modern nations to giant warehouses that store the paraphernalia demanded by modernity and nationalism. There one could find, in overlapping piles, the various understandings, sundry experiments, and constructing side of today's nationalistic common sense, all awaiting possible new uses. Indeed, as long as modern nationalism continues to prevail, whatever lies in those warehouses may find new uses again and again. Porfirians used and abused their pre-Hispanic past, and this reinforced a Porfirian indigenism. To consider such indigenism as merely an insignificant trend of purely aesthetic consequences would be like contending that Lázaro Cárdenas's land reform had only geological and botanical implications. Porfirian indigenism was fundamental in the construction of the national image not only because there is no way to understand the culture of Mexico's fin de siècle without it but also because it was not a domestic but a cosmopolitan component of nationalism as a whole. Porfirian indigenism was located at the junction of aesthetic, anthropological, archeological, sociological, and medical universal discussions. Never before was the national epic so much a part of Western civilization. It was therefore as scientific as it was racist; it was as laden with social and philanthropic concerns as with exoticism and orientalism; it was as much an ethnography as an autoethnography. At this second level of objectives, the Porfirian national image differed from the postrevolutionary image in its directly pragmatic aims. The nation imagined by Mexican elites in the late nineteenth century was reminiscent of a family patrimony. An internationally acceptable image (which included the recognition of Mexico as a secure, sanitary, free, sovereign, liberal, republican, and democratic country) translated into internal legitimacy and economic benefits (investment, migration, and commerce). The main concerns were internal negotiation between national elite and foreign interests and the administration of peace and order. Beyond their internaland importantconflicts, elites had no interest in political and social forces. A